P2118 12657390 65406
THE Revengeful Queen.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near the Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet∣street. PYrrhus King of Epirus, a Tragedy; Acted at the New Theatre in Lincoln's-Inn Fields, By His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Hopkins. Love's a Jest, a Comedy, &c. Written by Mr. Motteux. A Plot and no Plot, a Comedy; as it was Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. Written by Mr. Dennis. The Novelty, Every Act a Play; Being a short Pastoral, Comedy, Masque, Tragedy, and Farce, after the Italian man∣ner; as it was Acted at the New Theatre in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. Written by Mr. Motteux. The Intrigues of Versailles, or, a Jilt in all her Humours, a Comedy; Acted at the Theatre in Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. The Provok'd Wife, a Comedy; as it is Acted at the New Theatre in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. Twenty Five Select Allusions, to several places of Horace, Martial, Anacreon, and Petronius Arbiter. Written by Mr. Dilke. The Pretenders, or the Town Unmask'd, Acted at the Theatre in Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, By His Majesty's Servants. Writ∣ten by Mr. Dilke.
THE Revengeful Queen: A TRAGEDY. As it was ACTED at the Theatre-Royal, BY His MAJESTY's Servants. Written by WILLIAM PHILIPS, Esq LONDON, Printed for P. Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near the Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet-street, 1698.
To His GRACE The Duke of ORMOND, &c. IT is an old Observation that one Misfortune always at∣tends another. I have sufficiently experimented it; and I may as justly say the same thing of my folly, in the Conduct of my Life, and in what relates to this Play. It was folly in me to Write at all, greater to Write no better, and chiefly to Print what I have Writ. If in any thing I have acted with Conduct and Prudence, 'tis in begging Pro∣tection for this from your Grace, who are so able to shield both this and its Author from their Enemies. And indeed, I may say it is natural in me, to claim this from you; because your Family have vouchsafed to be the Patrons of mine for several Generations. Nor shou'd I doubt your proving so to me, since you are replete with Goodness, and inherit all the Virtues of your Ancestors, had I the least Pretence to say so of my self; but I can only boast the same Zeal and Affection for your Service and Interests. I perceive that the Characters of Alboino and Rosamund are not agreeable to the present Taste of the Town; the best defence I can make is, that I have follow'd the truth of the Story, as any one will find, who will take the Pains to read it in the Fourth or Fifth Page of Machiavel's Hi∣story of Florence: There are, without doubt, other faults in it, I wish, those who have the Wit to observe them, wou'd have the Candour to inform me of them, that if ever I am
Idle enough to write again, I might indeavour to avoid them: And tho' this shou'd abound with more, yet I fancy, there are many in this Town, who will have good or ill Nature enough to acknowledge, there are great Allowances to be made to a Man's first Play, and to a Man of Ireland. A considerable time after this was Writ, I was inform'd, That Sir William Davenant had made a Play on the same Story; I knew it not before, nor have I yet seen it: It was very unhappy for me to happen on the same Subject with so Ingenious a Person; I suppose no one will think me design∣edly guilty of such Confidence; that is a Vice, I hope I shall never be justly tax'd with; and yet I have now insensibly slid into it; for it does not argue greater assurance in one so weak as I am, to write after him, than to write to you. And therefore tho' I allow the Errors the Criticks may please to find in this Trifle, and tho' I slight no one's Opinion or Censures; yet they must excuse me, if I declare, I dread not those so much, as that your Grace will not Pardon this Presumption in, May it Please your Grace, Your Grace's most Obedient and most Faithful Servant, WILL. PHILIPS.
PROLOGUE. AS a Pale Virgin coyly do's refuse, To grant the Favour which she longs to lose; Faintly contending, that she may remove The actual Consummation of her Love; Fain wou'd she have her Dreams unridled to her, Yet bashfully resists him, that wou'd shew her: Seems to desire no farther Prosecution, Yet wishes for the Hour of Execution; At length she understands the full Intent, Partly by Rape, and partly by Consent. So this Day's Author between Hope and Fear, Hopes to succeed, yet trembles to appear. He struggl'd long against his Muse's force, (Jades are more headstrong, than a Well-bred Horse) His Phillis first, by Songs, he try'd to move, Two curst Diseases, Poetry and Love! And having once giv'n loose to her dull Rage, She now has Impudence to mount the Stage. Just so the Nymph, no more by Honor aw'd, She turns Pit-Whore, then Gallery, then Bawd. Too like are Poets to a common Whore, As being much despis'd, and very Poor. No better Evidence can I'm sure be found, Where there are some kind Masks, where Wits abound. How happy were't wou'd both leave off in time! Scribling and Loving quit, while in their Prime. But being pleas'd at first, they still go on, And never leave, till they are both undone. Till one is swing'd, and till the other's damn'd. Oh Jove avert from both what I have nam'd!
Dramatis Personae. Men, Alboino, King of Lombards, very Brave, but Rash, Opi∣nionated and Cruel. Aistolfus, His General. Desiderio, His Friend, in Love with Angellina. Almachild, A general Admirer, very Rich, Dissembling, Cowardly. Odoacre, Treacherous and Splenetick. Avaro, a Covetous, Rich, Old Fellow. Clefi, his Son. Longinus, The Roman Exarch. A Roman Embassador. Women, Rosamund, the Queen, Haughty, Proud, Revengeful. Cleanthe, one of her Attendants, in Love with Almachild. Angellina, Avaro's Daughter, Vertuous and Discreet, pri∣vately in Love with Desiderio. Flora, Odoacre's Daughter, Affected, Proud, Mercinary, Jiltish. Guards and Attendants.
THE Revengeful Queen. ACT. I. SCENE Verona, An Anti-Chamber. Enter Alboino, followed by a Roman Ambassador, Aistolfus, Desiderio, and Guards. Alb. HOW has Longinus dar'd to offer this Affront? Have I, by any Action of my Life, Done ought, which shou'd encourage him to this? Ha'nt I, by Deeds surpassing all Belief, By stedfast Honor, and by noble Daring Purchas'd a Crown, and many Victories? And shall I, for a haughty, bloodless Summons, Shamefully sully, poorly abandon all? Rom. Emb. Think not, that in contempt of you, I'm sent; All own you brave; Longinus knows you so: And in Regard to that, wou'd not your Ruin. For can your single Valour, or your Arms Prevail against the dreaded Roman Pow'r? Besides the Offers I have brought are such, That any other gladly wou'd accept. Alb. Accept! Look here, my worthy Soldier, Who in the Heat of Battle can advise; [To Aistolfus. Who wisely acts, when Fear, as well as Death, Prevents the trembling Coward's shameful Flight, And roots him to the Earth. My temperate, bold Friend, learn thou his Errand, Then judge, if I shou'd tamely hearken to't. Aist. Sure Alboino so well is known, that none Dare rashly strive to injure his Renown. Alb. Yes, spight of my Fame, Virtue, Glory, all, Spight of the Conquests which these Arms have won; Tho' this Place (impregnable of it self) Is by an Army back't, flush'd with Success, And headed by the Man, whom Victory
Attends, whom Fortune follows as his Slave; Yet rash Longinus, the Roman Viceroy, Sends here his Envoy to demand this Town, And by Recital of his Master's Titles, Thinks to awe me to a tame Surrender. Gods! that the Man, who singly in the Field Shuns me, as the dar'd Lark, the tow'ring Hawk, Shou'd yet nourish such presumptuous Hopes; Because he has a mighty Crowd of Slaves, Who thrust themselves between cold Death and Him. While He, ghastly and pale behind his Troops, Shrinks at my Blows, he at a Distance sees. Rom. Emb. Since you refuse to hearken to our Terms, A little time will shew, how much you wrong Not brave Longinus only, but your self. Since we by friendly Offers can't prevail, We must use Force, and that can hardly fail. Alb. 'Tis Force indeed must make Alboino stoop. Not Jove's Command, without his Thunder too Shou'd bend my stubborn Mind from this Resolve; That to the utmost I'll defend this Crown, Which by my single Valour I have gain'd. Desid. Caesar secure in Africk may Command His Soldiers on such desperate Attempts. The Blows we give can't reach so far; he's safe; And therefore slights how many Thousands fall Only to glut his mad, ambitious Mind. Aist. Princes shou'd scorn to owe the Crowns which they possess To any other Merit but their own. And not, when Glory calls them to the Field, Commit their Armies to another's Charge, And only serve to be his Councellor. Rom. Emb. It is Unjust thus to degrade— Alb. No more. 'Tis in requital of your Thoughts of us. Go, tell Longinus, that this happy Day I Yearly Celebrate, in Memory That on this Day, I fought, and won this Crown. Nor shall his vain Attempts obstruct our Mirth. While he for Business and for War takes Care, I, straight for splendid Triumphs will prepare. [Exit Alb. and Embass. severally. Manent Aistolfus and Desiderio. Aist. Well Desiderio, how relish you this? You hear we shall have Business now again. This base corrupting Peace is at an End,
War, and it's chief God our Prince, now once more Summon us out to Glory and to Arms. Desid. I thought to my General I had been known So well, it might have spar'd that Question. Aist. Mistake me not, my Gallant Friend, I know There is so much Fire lodg'd within thy Breast, That it requires an Alloy of Years To temper thy youthful, boiling Spirit. But Peace has spread its ill Effects on you; And tho' she cannot win thee to her Side, She wou'd rebate thy eagerness to War; And makes a Woman Pimp to her Designs, Thou art a Soldier, but a Lover too. Desid. 'Tis true, Cupid has shot a sharp and bearded Dart Into my Breast fixt and rooted here't lies. We Soldiers are not mov'd with ev'ry Face, Like the vain, giddy Courtiers of the Age. 'Tis hard to make a Conquest o'er our Hearts, But that once gain'd, 'tis easily preserv'd. As Metals which require the longest time To melt them down, remain the longest warm. Aist. How comes this God ne'er had a Dart for me? Have War and Business frighted him away? Till thou, my Friend, wer't grown his Votary I own, I always lookt on Love to be Th' Effect of Idleness and pamper'd Luxury. Desid. Have you forgot, when from the War return'd, That tedious Bloody War, which won this Crown. Your Spirits were by Famine almost sunk: Your Blood was so exhausted by your Wounds, That you had scarce enough to nourish Life. Yet those few Drops by Rosamunda warm'd, New Life and Vigor spread o'er all your Limbs. I mark'd you when the Beauteous Queen arriv'd In Mournful, Solemn Pomp, to ask her Life, And for a Father and a Kingdom's Loss Dissolv'd in Tears; 'twas then, what Blood you had Sprung to your Cheeks, and strait retreated thence: Your Eye-Balls fix'd, and tremblingly you mov'd; 'Twas then, your alter'd Looks declar'd you lov'd, Aist. Some odd Distemper seiz'd me, I confess; Some short, unusual Qualm came like a Flash Of Lightning, and as soon it disappear'd: 'Twas not Love; a Face alone ne'er moves me, Desid. A Face alone! Now by my Life, in forming her, Nature
Has been profuse, and shewn her utmost Art: For her she has been at such a vast Expence, Futurity can never hope to see Another perfect Beauty; in ev'ry Motion, what wondrous Majesty appears, Her Shape is Graceful, and her Looks Divine. Aist. It may be that the gods were so intent Upon her Form, that they forgot her Mind. And while they admir'd the Creature they had made, Some sooty Angel stole into the crowd, And shuffl'd in a Soul of his own stamp. Desid. You're too severe. Aist. I know to whom I speak. Pride and Revenge rule chiefly in her Breast; There's not a Vice so foul she'd not commit, Where either might be fully gratified. She is so fir'd, upon the least distaste, Hell's not so hot, and might be sooner cool'd. Pray Heav'n her Passions may not work our Ruin. Desid. We may fear so furious a Temper Will not long agree with Alboino's; Who is himself ungovernably fierce. His Virtues too have a Compound of Faults; He's rigorously Just, brave to Rashness; So Generous, he would bestow his Crown, Rather than Merit should not meet Reward. But he delights too much in Death and Blood; Vast Destruction still attends his Conquests— Aist. No more; this is no place for such discourse; For tho' we both mean well, yet should some Sly, Insinuating Courtier over-hear, This to our Ruine would be soon improv'd. And look yonder comes one, who would rejoyce To have all worthy Men destroy'd. Desid. My Rival, Almachild, with Flora, Odoacre's Daughter. Aist. Yes, and every Man's as well as thine, Who has a handsome Wife or Mistress. Desid. He courts each Woman that he sees, and few In vain, for he's a successful Lover. Has all the Arts, and Charms which please that Sex: Young, Handsom, Rich, an exact Dissembler, Has Wit, and Prodigal of Pains and Wealth. Aist. To corrupt Virtue, or to reward Vice; To bribe a Pimp, or to procure a Whore, Lavishly he'd give an Hundred Talents: But to assist the Brave, the Worthy Man,
To save from Ruine his King and Country, He would not part with one single Drachma. He has that Tinsil Wit which Women like, Can Fool and Toy, and idly prate with them, For it is Words, not Reason, they regard. For's Cowardice he'll be the more approv'd, 'Tis so agreeable to their Nature. Desid. I would Angellina were to see How busily he Courts another Face. Aist. Nay, fear not her, she'll not be won with Noise And Equipage, what e'er her Father may. Desid. However, Let us retire, here let him freely Love; All his Intrigues, but one, I wou'd emprove. They pass carelesly by Almachild and Flora as they enter. Flo. Who are those? Alma. Aistolfus the General, and his Friend Desiderio. Flo. They might have paid more Respect to a Lady; but Rudeness is so Natural to a Soldier. Alma. They fancy they express their Courage by that, and their Wit by Fighting. 'Tis their way to hector the Women into a Compliance, and think to win their Mistresses, as they do Towns, by rudely Storming them. Flo. For my part, I prefer you Men of Breeding to all others; who know when to express your Courage and Civility; and I think exceed Soldiers in all places; for they are neither so Brave as you are in Courts, nor so Civil in Camps. Alma. Rudeness is not their only Vice; they are subject to a much worse, want of Money. Flo. But yet they have the confidence to address themselves to us; tho' a poor Lover is as ridiculous a Creature as an Eunuch Lover; and I'd almost be courted as soon by the one, as the other. They are both odious to a Lady of Quality especially. Alma. Were I a Woman, I should be apt to suspect want of VVit, or want of Truth in that Lover, where there was want of VVealth. For, supposing me in his circumstances, what greater Madness can there be, than for Poverty to Court Beggary: To have a whining Couple sigh out their Necessities, in∣stead of Love: And had I Riches, I should conclude, he courted my Person only to be Master of them. Flo. VVell, your Lordship has all the necessary Qualifications of a Lover, as Generous, as Rich; and truly, I think, there can be no greater Proof gi∣ven of Love, than Generosity. And I should never think my self Mistress of any one's Heart, till I were of his wealth. Alma. You know you command mine, and I hope the small Present I made you Yesterday, was some demonstration of it. You receiv'd it— Flo. I vow you make me blush; it was great and noble: but I could not better discover my Esteem for you, than by my acceptance of it; for my Re∣putation
runs a great Hazard, should it be known. But if I could get a few more such, he would be glad to marry me, to recover them again. Aside. Alma. Secrecy is my greatest Virtue. You have promis'd to trust both your Reputation and Person to that—when must I receive the Reward of all my Services—my Love, will admit no more delays, and my Passion no more disappointments—is not this the promis'd day—and is not Opportunity favourable— Flo. But could you find in your heart to Ruine the Woman you love? Alma. But can you count it Ruine, to taste the Joys, and have the Wealth, which I can give? I'll fly into thy Arms all Gold, Jove rain'd not half so much in Danaes lap, as I will into thine. Flo. Nay, 'tis Love alone can Conquer me: and if you love as you pretend, why do you refuse the last great Proof, Marriage? Alma. 'Tis the last indeed, for Men seldom give any after. Marriage is no more a Proof of Love, than a Security of Constancy. Do not I daily vow Fi∣delity; the rest is no more but Ceremony, and whatever consists so wholly of that, be assur'd has little truth in it. Besides, you'll lose the greatest Tye upon my Vows, my Honour, which a Lover may forfeit by Inconstancy, but a Husband never does. Flo. But still my Reputation. Alma. Nay, now you suspect my Honour again: But tho' it should be known, I'll place you above Censure; fear not that, while I'm your Lover. Poverty and Disrepute are always join'd, the Rich are never scandaliz'd. And Wives now a-days run a greater Hazard of being kept Poor, than Mistresses, and con∣sequently are more contemptible. Flo. You have my heart, methinks that should content you. Alma. The best Answer I can give to that, is the Song I made on you. Flo. You will oblige me, by letting me hear it again. Almachild Sings. I. No more, Aminta, say you love, Or I'm the object of your mind; While still you fear, and disapprove To do, what will declare you kind. Fill'd with suspicious thoughts, my heart must be, Till with your words, I find your Acts agree. II. Ah! Can you hear me thus complain, And see me rack'd with fierce desires, Yet will do nought to ease my pain, Nor will fulfill what Love requires? If Truth you spoke, you'd not thus Cruel prove, You may pretend, but cannot hide your love.
Alma. For we Men never believe Women give their Hearts, till they do their Persons. And as you think Generosity, so I think Enjoyment the only infallible sign of Love; and I can no more credit yours, while you deny your Person, than you would mine, should I with-hold my money. Flo. And the only way to have our hearts esteem'd, is to refuse you our Persons. For should I yield, Contempt will as certainly follow on your side, as Repentance on mine. The greatest Blessings are disesteem'd by long Pos∣session; nothing makes us put so true a Value on them as misfortunes. Alma. They render not Life a greater Torment, than Despair does Love; and no brave Man should live Unhappy, nor wise One Love without Hopes. You have given me so much, that your Reputation will be in greater danger, by denying me, than granting. Come, 'tis too late to Capitulate for the Fort, after a Promise of Surrender—let us retire—Such things are so oft Practis'd in Court, 'twill be regardless. Flo. Well—since you will have it so, I'll meet you an Hour hence— Alma. The Old Reply, and I shall find the same Usage, why not now? Flo. Oh! Heav'n! my Father! I must begon e're he sees me. He's ignorant in Love, who hopes to find That Gifts, which I have got, will make me kind; [Aside. 'Tis those which are to come, must bend my mind. [Exit.] Alma. Farewel, thou Mercenary, Jilting, Errant Woman; I never was so Fool'd by any in my life, she has cost me more Money and Pains than any of her Sex; and yet I believe she has no more Vertue; for I never knew one who was a Jilt to many, but was a Whore to some body. Her continual Disap∣pointments have vex'd me, but I'm resolv'd I'll have her; for she shall not have it to boast, I courted her in vain. The Nymph seems coy, in hopes to raise our Fire; Too long delays do rather cool Desire. And we pursue, not out of Love, but Pride, Scorning to have it said, we were deny'd. Enter Odoacre. Odoa. So thoughtful, my Lord, you whose Perfections make you the Men's Envy, and the Women's Admiration. You shou'd leave melancholy Resle∣ctions to the Unfortunate, as I am. Alma. Your Daughter's unkindness only has Power to discompose me. Odoa. I do not find her averse to Marriage, and I suppose you do not intend to disgrace our Family by any other Design. Alma. By no means: But— Odoa. Nay, my Lord, there can be no Objection but her want of Fortune; 'tis true, our Family has prov'd more durable than our Estate; for Fate has maliciously encreas'd the one, and impair'd the other. Alma. She has made you amends, by so beautiful a Daughter. Odoa. Handsom Daughters seldom prove Blessings to their Parents. I am so us'd to Curses, that I suspect every thing. Fortune uses me, as Rooks do their Cullies, if ever she suffers me to be a seeming Winner, 'tis only by my credulity to make Ruin surer.
Alma. Your Misfortunes are wholly owing to your Fancy, as 'tis to that I owe my Joys. Scarce any thing has truly in it self Pain or Pleasure, it only bears the Image our wild Fancy stamps upon it. At least, hope for better Fortune. Odoa. I can no more hope for future Good, than fansie I now have any; neither the Expectation of what's to come, nor the Reflection on what's past, can please me. I'm weary of the Drudgery and dull Repetitions of Life. If e're to Morrow comes, to Morrow will tediously be consumed just as to Day; to Day will be as Yesterday, and Yesterday has been as Ages past. And were not you more oblig'd to your Youth and Wealth, than to your Fancy, you would think as I do. But since you have so vigorous a Fancy, you need not my Daughter, to compleat your Happiness. Alma. The Hopes of having her mine, gives me Pleasure; but it cannot be compleat, till she is so. Odoa. It must be then in the way I have mentioned. In short, my Lord, Marry her, or quit your Pretensions to her. And the next time you Visit, bring a Priest with you; or you shall find colder Treatment from your Mistress, and rougher from a suspicious Father, than possibly you expect: And so I leave you to reflect upon it. [Exit. Alma. This would discourage any Man, who had such an aversion for a Wife, as I have; and did not know Woman so well as I do. He thinks his Daughter, by his Care, secure; I know, no Woman will Restraint endure: To shun Confinement, they from Fathers flie; And Cuckolds make themselves, by Jealousie. That others they'll obey, why should I fear; Since sure to do, what they themselves forswear. [Exit. ACT II. SCENE continues. [Enter Almachild.] Alma. WEll, I shall see most of my Mistresses here to day; they'll all come to this Entertainment. I am the most indifferent to Angellina, because that is a dull, Matrimonial Love; yet I must marry her, since she will be very rich, and her Fortune will enable me to debauch other Women. For Cleanthe, my Court Mistress, I think her pretty secure, not∣withstanding her affected Coyness. But I must use dispatch with Flora, or that Old, Treacherous Father of hers will spoil my Design: If I could but meet her singly now, I have got that here will tempt her; [Shewing a Jewel. Ha! yonder she comes: Now Bribes and Dissimulation be my Friends. [Enter Flora.] Flo. Ah, my Lord! I know not how you entertain'd my Father, but he came home in a strange Humour; he says you only design to ruine me, and vows this shall be my last day of liberty. Alma. Then let us use it with the best advantage. Gratifie me to day in my Pleasures, and to morrow I will you, with your Freedom. You shall not
owe your Support to your Father; then why should you be confin'd by him. For most Children obey their Parents, as Most Statesmen do their Monarchs, only out of Interest. Flo. Oh, I abhorr the very Name of Interest! I wou'd no more pay Obe∣dience, than I would give my Love, for so base a Reason. Alma. Yield to my Embraces, I'll not ask the reason; and will neither suspect your Love, nor— Flo. Nor value it; 'twill soon be contemned: therefore mention it no more, I will not so much as hear of it. Alma. How, Madam! Flo. I confess I made some return to your Love, while I thought you would have been my Husband; but since you deny that, I must all Favours. Alma. Then I am not to hope for— Flo. Any thing but what I can lawfully grant. Oh, Heaven! that ever I should hear an unlawful, dishonourable Passion professed to me. Alma. Very fine: And you are resolved to recall your Love, tho' you have confessed it; and will not yield, tho' you promis'd it. Flo. I know not what I have said; I made those Promises inconsiderately, and therefore they are not binding. Alma. 'Tis very well, Madam: Your Servant; I have no more to say. I shall quickly find out a Mistress who will make me a more grateful Return to my Services; and who will gladly accept this Jewel, design'd for you. Flo. How's this! Nay then I must alter my Carriage. [Aside. Not the Riches of the Earth should procure a kind Look: were all the Jewels of the East, were an Empire proffer'd me, I could contemn them all. But alas! who can be insensible to your Love? You have won my Heart, and I fear will make me grant too much. Alma. You cannot give too much to Love, to Truth like mine. Flo. I confess you have given me great Demonstrations of them. Alma. They are but Trifles, to what I design you after— Flo. Ay, but shou'd you forsake me after—and shou'd expose me to Infamy and Want. We Women run mighty Hazards, when our Reputation must depend on our Lovers Discretion, and our Support, on his Generosity. Alma. I have not opportunity now to make a Settlement: however, this shall be yours, and but retire a moment into my Apartment here. Flo. Nay, not for that neither. But why so hasty? Alma. I fear we may be interrupted again; and there comes old Avaro, I would not have him see you here. Flo. Nor I, for the World. I have not promis'd that I will comply; But to conceal my self, I'll thither fly. [She runs off. Alma. In vain you fly from me, in vain you hide; I may be sure to find, since Love's my Guide. [He follows her. [Enter Avaro, Angellina, Clesi.] Ava. Well, Daughter, to please you, I have brought you to Court; and to secure you, I am come along with you: where you will meet a great many
Admirers, and I a great many Debtors: But if they are no better Paymasters of Love, than they are of Money, the Devil may have their Custom for me. Angel. Yet you'd have me marry a Courtier, who is— Ava. No Debtor. You shall not have one, who only makes the Court his Sanctuary; one who mortgages his Estate to every crediting Banker, and his Heart to every handsom Women. Angel. Had Almachild as little Wealth, as he has Truth, you'd dislike him as much as I. Ava. If you get his Person and Estate in possession, no matter for his Truth. But I know for whom you dislike him. 'Tis true, were Almachild's Dependance wholly on the Court, as Desiderio's is on the Army, I should value neither: But you shall no more have one who lives by his Sword, than one who lives upon Court-Promises, nay, than one who lives by his Wits. Angel. Marry a Coward! Ava. He'll live the longer. A Pox o' those fighting Madmen; there's some hopes of recovering one's Money from a peaceable, quiet, passive Man: But a Soldier, forsooth, runs into your Debt, and then into the Army; there gets an unlucky Blow, which chops off his Head, and cancels his Bonds; and has no way of getting our of our Books, but by getting out of the World. Cle. Ay, Do, Father, make her marry Almachild, and then the less Por∣tion will serve. Ava. Clefi says true, therefore dispose your self to it. Angel. You will not force my Inclinations. Ava. Force my Inclinations. Why there's it now: A pretty Excuse for Disobedience. Death! that we should beget their Persons, and cannot their Inclinations. Pray, from whence had you any Inclinations? I declare them illegitimate, and will your Person, if you obey not my Will. Cle. Nay, if Money will not bribe her, she's not your Daughter, and I disown her to be my Sister; and yet 'tis very advantageous to have a Handsom Sister. See what it has got me this Morning: [Shewing a Purse. All this did Almachild give me, only to speak in his behalf. I wonder when your Hero will make me such a Present: Perhaps, after the next Battle, he'll send you a Load of shatter'd Legs and Arms, and broken Skulls; tho' one would think they were crackt before they went to fight, or else they wou'd ne'er be so mad to go. Angel. He scorns as much to give, as take a Bribe; his Worth and Ho∣nour plead for him. Cle. His Worth and Honour! Ha, ha, ha: Where do they lie? in his Sword, or in his ghastly Scars? Better he could prove his Honour by the depth of his Pocket, than by the depth of his Wounds. His Honour is more likely to send him handsomly out of the World, than maintain you so in it. And I'll justifie, that tho' there were a Standing Army, this Purse has more Honour, and more Worth in it; and shall procure much more Respect, than all the Swords in the Army. Ava. 'Tis a powerful Purse indeed; let me see, and a very weighty one too. This is it that makes the Fool pass for a Wit; the Ugly, handsom; Cowards,
brave; this sets Nation against Nation, and Family against Family; makes Friends treacherous, and Lovers false; makes Guardians betray their Charge, and Parents and Children rob each other. I will not rob thee, Boy; but since it is so dangerous a thing, I must secure you from its Effects, by keeping it my self. [Puts it in his Pocket. Cle. Why, what do you mean? why sure you won't take it from me, will you? Was the Devil in me, to shew it him! [Aside. Ava. Take it: no, no; I'll only put it to Use for you, that's all. Cle. Ay, but look you, Sir; if it makes Parents rob their Children, Adad, it may make Children quarrel with their Parents. Ava. Why Sirrah, why you Villain, you Unnatural Rogue, what you won't Murder me, ha! Cle. No, no, I am no Killing Man; but I wou'd not be cheated of my Money. Ava. How cheated! What Sirrah, dare you call me Cheat? here's an Im∣pudent Varlet. Hark ye, Angellina, now I think better of it, I do not care for forcing your Inclinations. Tho' Desiderio has not so great an Estate as Almachild, yet he is in great Favour with the King, and has good Employments; and if I settle all my Fortune upon you, you may live pretty Comfortably. Angel. I make a freer Confession to you, than ever I have to him, by owning I shou'd think my self happy in him, with your Consent. Cle. Hey brave! here's like to be fine doings. [Aside. Why sure, Sir, you are not in earnest, are you? tho' you are no Courtier, yet by coming here, I hope you will be influenced so far, as not to mind what you say. You will not be so singular as to keep your word at Court? Ava. Keep it; yes, so firmly, that no Entreaties, no Persuasions, no Sub∣mission shall ever alter it. Angel. Heav'n continue him in that resolution. [Aside. Ava. How much such another Purse may mollisie me, I can't tell. Angel. So I find 'tis who bids most, will have me. Hard Fate of Chil∣dren! to be not only cruelly debarr'd, perhaps a worthy Choice, but in Obe∣dience forced to throw themselves away on some inglorious Wretch. [Aside. Ava. Let me see, who are those? a whole Cluster of my Debtors: here I have their Names. [Pulling out a long Roll. Why, what a numerous Catalogue of gawdy, empty things, have I got here! I'll accost them; what a Pox tho' a Man may not Arrest, he may civilly Dunn in Court. D'ye hear Clefi, do not leave your Sister; and remember, I have hinted to you, how I may be pacified. [Exit. Cle. Ay, ay, I am likely to obey you indeed, when you take my Money from me. What will you give me now, and I'll leave you to your own Management. Angel. You may stay, if you please, I have no private Business. Cle. No, I'll be gone however to look out Almachild, acquaint him with your being here, and get somewhat for my Intelligence. [Exit. Enter Desiderio. Desid. Angellina here and alone! I am almost as much surprized as pleas'd, to find you at Court.
Angel. 'Tis the Novelty of it, may do both. Desid. Always indifferent. Whate're satisfaction I may receive by your Sight, I am not likely to have much from your Words. Angel. Suppose you had, you'd hardly stop there; they wou'd encourage you to ask for something more, and I will never give such a Proof of Love, as Disobedience. Desid. I fear you pay this great Obedience, not only out of Duty to a Fa∣ther's Will, but out of dislike to me. Angel. You have no reason to imagine that. But you cannot wonder if I am cautious in the disposal of my Heart; for when e're I give it, it shall be for ever. I can no more love twice, than die twice. Desid. Be not cruel too; let Pity to the Torments I endure, let Gratitude to so sincere a Flame prevail. Angel. Gratitude, whoever loves may plead the same; am I oblig'd to love, because I am belov'd? were that a Plea, you had put in yours too late. Desid. I confess, I have no Right, no Merit to offer but my Truth. Angel. That too is a general Pretence; how shall I distinguish it from Af∣fectation. Desid. I never cou'd dissemble. I cou'd no more affect, than I can conceal my Love. But if I can love with so much Zeal, when my Breast is fill'd with as much Despair, as yours is with Indifference; how shou'd I love, how doat, how be transported, wou'd you afford me some Return! Angel. Then you wou'd triumph in my weakness; and scorn to keep your Conquest o'er my Heart, tho' you wou'd take Pride to win it. Desid. The Pride of winning it, wou'd not be so great, as the Pleasure of preserving it, to a grateful, generous Mind. Angel. All Arguments are as weak where we dislike, as our Defences are, where we love. I am unwilling to avow either; an Indifference to you, or a Regard for my self, silences me. Desid. Either is Unkind, I dare not say Unjust: But since you do not declare a Hatred, may I not hope. Angel. To bid you hope, were to declare I love; Yet something may be granted to so much seeming Truth. I do not bid you hope, nor wou'd you shou'd despair. But see the Court begins to fill. I am so much a Stranger, I shall want a Guide to the Presence Chamber. Desid. May not I be honour'd with the Employment. Angel. Since my Father has not stay'd to be my Guardian, I may be allow'd to chuse one. [Exeunt. Enter Flora, Almachild following her. Flo. Oh, I shall never have the Confidence to look my Friends in the Face again! you have ruin'd me, and all the World will see it in me. Alma. Fear not; keep but your own Counsel, and you are safe; betray not your self by your Words, and none will discover it in your Face. Flo. I can never appear Innocent there, while I have so much Guilt in my Breast. Alma. You'll find no such great difficulty in dissembling.
Flo. I shall do it so awkerdly, so faintly, that the Cheat will be obvious to all. Alma. Rather, have a Care of over acting; for Women render their Virtue suspected, as Men do their Courage, when they pretend to it, too much. Flo. No, 'tis you alone have Power to preserve me from the Censure of the World, and distracting Thoughts. Alma. Pho, Pow, she begins to grow troublesome now; how shall I get rid of her. [Aside. Flo. And will not Love prevail with you to do that for me, when it has made me grant so much? Alma. What wou'd she be at now? Aside. Any thing, my Dear, to satisfie you. Pish! this is so nauseous. Aside. Flo. Then you may easily do that, only by marrying me. Alma. O fye, my Dear! that you shou'd expect that after Possession, when I refus'd it before. Flo. But I am more sensible now, that it is necessary to preserve my Re∣putation. Alma. A Husband, indeed, is a pretty necessary Instrument to botch up a Reputation; and under that Disguise, Women are allow'd to take many Li∣berties. But never let that Man be a Repairer of your Honor, who has rob'd you of it; you'll lose a fond Lover, and only gain a jealous Husband. Flo. But I must never expect one, if you refuse it. Alma. Yes, yes; there are Fools enough designed by Nature for that Em∣ployment. See, the Queen moves this Way to the Presence-Chamber, there is one follows her, Clefi, Avaro's Son, who is as we cou'd wish; he's rich, and I have an Ascendant over him; what think you of him? Flo. Can he be acceptable to my Arms after you, or can I be to yours after him? Alma. Ay, ay, we shall relish each other the better. Come retire awhile▪ and leave him to my Management. Flo. You know you can perswade me to any thing. This is the Fate which over Women rules, We yield to Men of Wit, then catch at Fools. Exit▪ Alma. If I can work him to it now, I think I shall behave my self like a Man of Honor and Prudence, to provide a rich foolish Husband for a cast Mistress. Enter Rosamund, follow'd by Cleanthe, Clefi, and Attendants. Rosa. Go tell the King, that I attend him here. Why should dull Custom thus impose on us Slavish, uneasie Duty to a Man? He has a Mind to revel, and rejoice— That on this day he won some Victory; That he has butcher'd Crowds of harmless Men; Triumphs in Blood and Ruin, and I must join, Must listen to his Vanity and Boasts, Seem pleas'd and flatter him.
How the Court thickens! what Swarms of Gazers! Are you, my Lord, too fond of Pageantry? [Seeing Almachild. You who inhabit sure come not to look; Monarchs grow cheap, by being often seen. Alma. Monarchs, for being so, we must admire; But when they are adorn'd with such a Form, When so much Beauty's join'd to Majesty, We wou'd for ever gaze, and still be pleas'd. Rosa. Monarchs and Women are us'd to flatt'ry; Nor can our Vanity distinguish Truth: Nay, tho' we know we're flatter'd, we are pleas'd. Alma. Your Crown not more exceeds a Peasant's State, Than your Triumphant Beauty the whole Sex. The most admir'd She, when you're in View, Like Pebbles plac'd by shining Diamonds seem. Enter Alboino, Guards, and Attendants. Alb. What means that secret Conference with Him! By Heav'n she smiles upon the worthless Wretch, And now he bows, and seems to give her Thanks That Starting and Confusion fit thee now, Going up to her. Well mayest thou blush to be so entertain'd. Hast thou cull'd out the Man I most despise, To grace him with thy Smiles, and private Talk? But I disdain to be disturb'd by him; Jealousie wou'd but disgrace my self. Shall I, whose Actions have exceeded Faith, And by my Deeds am rank'd in Honor's Form With Alexander, or the first Caesar? Shall I, who oft have triumph'd over Kings, And been the Theme of Envy and of Praise? Shall I, seem jealous of a reptile Slave? Rosa. I started at your Frowns, not at my Words; I must confess I'm pleas'd with his Discourse, You were the Subject, he was praising you, Not Men; nay, not gods cou'd be more extoll'd. What cou'd I else have list'ned too from Him? What but your Praises cou'd oblige a Smile? Alb. I want not Praises, my Fame's establish'd. But yet, if that were all, excuse my Thoughts. Now move we forward to our Room of State, Where Wine and Musick, Pleasures shall create. There we'll enjoy the soft Delights of Peace, And all Domestick private Jars shall cease. [Exeunt Omnes, Praeter Almachild & Clefi. Alma. Clefi, A word; Have you persuaded your Father to let your Sister come here to day?
Cle. I have; and came to find you out, and acquaint you, she is already here. Alma. I am oblig'd to you, and you shall find me grateful. Cle. Well, I am a faithful Sollicitor; I have said more sine, moving things to her, on your account, than ever I could say to any Woman, for my self; and the truth on't is, I believe, shou'd prevail sooner for you, than for my self. Alma. That's only because you think it not worth your while: Women are Trifles beneath your Consideration. Cle. Why that's true too; Ha, ha, ha! I do contemn them indeed: tho' If I could find one, who had Wit enough to value me as I deserve, I should not be ungrateful. But I hate to speak witty things to a Fool. I reserve my self, till I meet with a Person of equal Endowments. Alma. Then you should be always silent. Cle. And that is the reason the Women think me dull: Now I am a Person the farthest from that in the World; for how can any one be accounted dull, ho is always laughing and talking? Alma. It may be they are angry, you intrench so much on their Privileges. Cle. Ay, they are envious of me, without doubt, because I say so many more witty things than they: And therefore let me break ne'er so many Jests, they do not so much as smile; nay, though I give them an Example they won't, and shew them when they shou'd, by laughing my self, and treading on their toes, nay, if I repeat it fifty times, they ne'er mind it. Alma. I perceive the Fool is acquainted with Women of Sense. [Aside. Cle. So that since I cannot bridle my Native Heat so much, as to be altoge∣ther silent, I suit my Discourse to their Capacities, and can now talk a whole day together, and yet not say one word to the purpose. Alma. That's no great Constraint: [Aside. However, all Women are not insensible of your Merits. I know a Lady of most surprising Beauty, who as far excels Men in Wit, as her own Sex in Vertue; I have heard her say such kind, such tender things; with so much Passion, yet with so much Modesty— Cle. What, of me? Ha! Ala. I ought not divulge a Lady's Secrets: but—you are my Friend, and her, I honour; and it may be a kindness to both, to acquaint you with her Thoughts. Cle. Ay, Come, Prithee do, out of pity to the Lady. Adad, I'm strangely pleas'd at this. Alma. She says you have so much Grandeur in your Countenance, one wou'd judge you born a Monarch; yet you have so much Sweetness there, and of so delicate a Complexion, you might be suspected to be a disguised Woman. S'Death, can he be such a Fool to believe this? [Aside. Cle. I am amazed, I am transported, I am confounded, I am extasy'd, I am, I am— Alma. That you are of an easie Shape; graceful and free in all your Mo∣tions; that— Cle. Hold, Hold; I cannot contain my Joy; I am convinced she loves me; there can be no doubt of it; nay, I have been told such things before now;
but then it has always cost me so much Money: Out of pure Gratitude, I have been forced to reward them so highly. Alma. This is a Lady of Quality. Cle. Lady of Quality. Adad all the difference between Ladies of Quality and other Women, is, that they set a greater Price upon their Favors; and by their Titles, often make false Jewels pass for true ones. But who is this enamour'd Lady, for amongst her other good Qualities, you have forgot the chief, is she very wealthy? what is her Name? Alma. I am oblig'd to name her now, to justifie her; it is the chast, the beauteous Flora, Odoacre's Daughter. Cle. Hum—Odoacre's Daughter. I was afraid, indeed, it was one, who admir'd my Money, as well as my Person. Alma. Oh! you wrong the Lady. I must confess, the World frowns a little on her Father; but his Fortune is not contemptible: and Flora, by her good management, has gather'd considerable Riches, and has Jewels inestimable (to my Cost I'm sure.) [Aside. Cle. Say you so; But how shall I be assured of this? Alma. Dare you take my Word? Cle. Ay, ay, your Word is sufficient. Alma. Then you have it, that she is very Wealthy. I saw her pass but this Way now, follow her and make your Addresses; she cannot resist one so accomplisht as your self. Cle. Nay, if it be so, I'll marry her instantly; and if I do once set about it, there is no Woman can resist me, tho' I say it. Tho' may be I shall find it difficult to persuade her to marry me at first sight. Alma. Try; I'll accompany and assist you. If she seems coy, I'll own I have discover'd her Love. Cle. Ah my dear Lord! how shall I be able to requite this Favour! I, on her Wealth and Virtue may depend; Since I'm assur'd of both by such a Friend: [Exeunt. ACT III. The SCENE Draws. And shews Alboino and Rosamund seated. Desiderio, Almachild, Odoacre, Cleanthe, Angellina, &c. Guards and Attendants. Alb. THus we possess in War, the Joys of Peace; And scorn the vain Efforts of Roman Arms. And while our Foes prepare for rash Attempts, In Pleasure waste your time, secure by me. Rosa. We do not fear Success where you command; But yet when we reflect upon the Toils Of War, and various Deaths all aim'd at you; I tremble at your approaching Danger.
The Brave, no more than Cowards, are exempt from Death; Else both your Life and Conquest were secure. Alb. I scorn the utmost of my feeble Foes: They dare not hope Success, where I Command▪ For if, when by Ambition urg'd alone, I have surpass'd Belief, and the Reports Of Fame; what mighty Wonders shall I act, Both to preserve a Crown, and her I love! Rosa. I have a Soul which scorns Danger; 'tis not For my self I fear: Wou'd my Sex permit, Fearless I wou'd into the Battel rush, And share your Hazards, Tho' I can't prevent. Alb. Your Merit, Rosamund, shall wing Conquest: I'll haste to conquer, sooner to return, That I may place fresh Lawrels on my Brow, And on your Head fix a more splendid Crown. There's he who taught me first the Art of War. [Enter Aistolfus. Where hast thou been loit'ring, my old Friend, While we were drinking to our Arms, Success? Come, Retrieve your lost Time; Fill me a Bowl, And give my General one, to pledge me. Aist. I'm not good at this; 'tis out of my road: I'm as awkward a Drinker, as Lover; They both are Foes to Bus'ness, and to War: But in Obedience— [Drinks. Alb. I know it well, War is thy whole Delight: But on a Day so memorably Great, A Day of Triumph and of Joy, whereon I fought, and won a Battel, Queen, and Crown, We may exceed the strict Bounds of Temp'rance, And gives our selve a Loose: Fill me agen; Then let the Musick that's prepar'd, begin. [Drinks. [And then Enter Mars, attended by Warriors.] Mars Sings, Entring. I. TO Arms, the God of War commands to Arms: Heark how the lofty Noise of Battel charms! Fearless, into the thickest Hazards run: Death's to be sought, where Glory's to be won. II. Who's he, has Courage to express his Fear, Or dare a Coward seem, when I appear: While such I fright to Danger's disregard, Honour's the Brave Man's Motive and Reward.
Chorus. See how we appear at thy dread Voice, Prepar'd to conquer, or to die: In Victory we do rejoice, Or pleas'd in Honour's Bed to lie. Mars. I. Vnmov'd, our Army bears the Foes Attack; See with what Vigour now, they force them back: The Brave, like th' Innocent, no Danger dread; Follow resolv'd, where Fame and Vertue lead. II. Timorous Wretches meanly do survive; In Horrour, and in fear of Death, they live: While the Bold Man freely resigns his Breath; Vndaunted dies, without the fear of Death. Chorus. Now, now we triumph o'er the Plain, Joy, our Hearts so much distends: We've not leisure to mourn the Slain, The Living grow much dearer Friends. [Enter a Troop of Virgins, one of them Singing.] I. Do not your Youth thus Misemploy; Let me possess your vig'rous Prime: For Youth alone can give me Joy,; You're fit for War, tho' old as Time. II. If Death you seek, then let me reign, To be alone Votaries: For he who Loves, thinks Life a Pain, And with Excess of Pleasure dies. [Enter Bacchus attended, &c. He Sings, Entring.] No more of War, or whining Love; I come, your Empires to remove: To me, your boasted Palms resign, To me, the mighty God of Wine. [A Drinking SONG.] I. THE Toil of Life will soon be done; Perhaps, before next Rising Sun: Tho' it, by chance, should longer last, It will with Sorrows be o'ercast:
Life is uncertain, Ills are sure, They will come, should that endure; But Drinking, all our Griefs will cure. Then let this Glass end all our fruitless Care▪ We'll Drink, till there's no room left for Despair. II. It's not Time, that gives the Blessing, But 'tis wisely Time possessing; Therefore nought past, shall torment us; Whate're's to come, shall content us: Nay, it the present Bliss destroys, Should we reflect on absent Joys; 'Tis this alone our Thoughts employs. We slight the Bottle, whilst in Caella's Arms; But when we Drink, Caelia has then no Charms. Alb. So, 'tis enough; Be gone, and leave us now. Aist. I hate these low effeminating Sounds; Such Musick which softens while it pleases: I'd hear none but the lofty Phrygian Airs; Timotheus alone shou'd play to me, Who might Inspire me, like Alexander, With so much transporting Warmth and Courage Cou'd force me, think, Tho' o'er my Cups, I were at th' Army's Head, And from the Table leap, to shake my Spear. Alb. Twas Wine inspir'd the Hero, not his Notes; And we will try, how that will work on us. Another Bowl—Not that we want an Edge, To go where Glory calls. Desid. He warms apace; Wou'd he cou'd be persuaded to forbear. [To Aistolphus. Rosa. I can be no Assistant to this Sport: I'll retire. Alb. Stay; I will have none depart. What, do's my Mirth prove tedious to you? Thanks to the Wine, it has refresh'd my Thoughts; Awaken'd Jealousie, that seem'd to sleep: It may be, she'd retire, to talk to him. S'Death! how that Thought has stung me to the quick! Apart. But I will first discover that, which shall As much disquiet her. Wait a moment, I'll bring a Bowl shall tempt you too to drink. [Exit. Aist. I have not known him so much mov'd with Wine. By Nature he's too fierce; and heated thus, I dread some Inconvenience may attend.
[Re-Enter Alboino, with a Goblet in his Hand.] Alb. I prize this Goblet far above my Crown; 'Tis the Trophy of my noblest Conquest. Dangers and Death I seem'd to court, yet scorn'd And triumph'd over both, to purchase this: And when my ambitious Aim I'd won, Victory and Empire attended it. Rosa. Some Magick Cup, which you may well admire, Since it portended so much good to you. For me, I have an aversion for it; If I but look on'it, I faint away, Tho'I'm not able to ascribe the Cause. Alb. There's Mystery in my Discourse: Some Wine; Pledge me, then I will unfold the Riddle. Come Rosamund, Here's to the Memory Of that Bloody Day whereon I won this. Desid. What can the meaning of this be? [Aside. Rosa. I wou'd be excus'd—But since 'tis your Will— An unusual Horror seizes on my Mind; My Blood runs cold, and stagnates in my Veins. I tremble too, as if I saw a Ghost. If I must drink, give me some other Bowl. Alb. Nay, drink out of that. Rosa. You must be obey'd. Alb. For 'tis but fit, that on a Day of Mirth, [While she drinks, he speaks So happy, memorably great as this, That you shou'd drink one Cup with your Father. Rosa. With my Father! I understand you not. Alb. I'll explain my meaning to you. Know then, That on this very Day, which now I celebrate, Your Father fought a Battel, and with it Lost his Life. Rosa. Dismal Day! I know, indeed, My Father fell in Battel; but by whom He lost his Life, I never yet could learn: The Day too was conceal'd when he was slain; I judg'd some nobler Cause, why this was kept. Aist. Now, on my aged, faithful Knees, I beg You wou'd not own by whom her Father fell; Apart to Alboino. But rather lay the fault on me, or him; Say any other did it, but your self. Alb. What, wouldst thou deprive me of my Glory? By Heav'n, I'll own and boast a Deed so great. Away; Disturb me not. Aist. I've seen the Day, When your Renown, your Empire, and your Life,
Have in one dreadful Battel all been stak'd, All had been forfeited by one false Step; Then I have been listned too. Alb. To the Camp, Retire; There Preach where Sense is drown'd by Noise▪ An honest Man shou'd never do an Act He is asham'd to own. Had I been of that bold Gigantick Race, Who durst aspire to storm even Heaven, Tho' Lightning blaz'd, and Thunder roar'd around My Head; I'd own the brave, tho' rash Attempt. Rosa. Lives he yet, who rob'd me of my Father! Alb. The Sun had scarcely Crimson'd o'er the Morn, When the two eager Armies in the Field Appear'd; One was by your Father headed, The other was by me. Rais'd by my Merit to so great Command; Not by a lucky accidental Birth, Or by blind Fortune's Power. Each quickly saw Success depended on the other's Death. Like Lions fighting for their Prey, we met; Each Army paus'd to see our mightier Blows; Long he resisted my impetuous Force: Till summoning my whole Pow'r in one stroke, I sent his Body headless to the Earth. Rosa. What was't from you my Father had his Death? And do you own the cruel, bloody Deed? Alb. Own it; I boast it; I've not yet own'd half. Shall I disown what purchas'd me a Crown? His Crown and you, were by the Conquest mine. And that an Act so fortunately great, Might never wither in my Memory, I straight alight, and seiz'd upon his Head, And of his Skull I made that Drinking Cup. Rosa. Oh Horror! Oh Barbarian! Unnatural Tyrant! What, of my Father's Skull to make a Cup To assist your beastly, drunken Frolicks. Give me the Sacred, the Prophan'd Relict, Let me adore the dear, much wrong'd Remains; Let me weep in't, till t'deluge with my Tears, Till it be purg'd from such vile Pollution. Alb. Take her away, This suits not with our Mirth. Rosa. I'll take my self for ever from your sight. Rather than you, I wou'd a Tyger meet,
Rob'd of her Young, or hunting for her Prey: Thy barb'rous Temper cancels all my Love, And fills me with a nobler flame, Revenge. Come then the haggard Furies, start from Hell, Lodge all your Venom in my Breast, here dwell; With Spite and Rage distend my swelling Heart, Thro' ev'ry Vein your snaky Tresses dart. Statesmen disgrac'd, and tender Maids betray'd, All Womankind, I summon to my Aid. If all too weak; urg'd by my self, such things I'll do; That for Revenge, to me, the injur'd World shall sue. [Exit. Alb. Revenge, but ill becomes a Woman's Mouth; Revenge, tho' 'tis Heaven's chief attribute In Mortals is a Vice; But 'tis a noble one; 'tis boldly to retort An Injury, and can they dare to do An Ill, who have not Courage to do well? Who threats, but feebly do's intend an Harm, His Enemies do's with Precaution arm. While vainly, Ill to us, our Foes intend, In Sports as we've begun the Day, we'll end. [Exeunt Omnes. Praeter Odoacre. Odoa. This is, as I cou'd wish; I'm never pleas'd, But when the World's discontented, like me; The Queen's dissatisfied, and vows Revenge; A Powerful Army is at our Gates; May not some Mischief be collected hence? I've turn'd with ev'ry Change of Government, Not out of Love to another, but Hate to the present; But never yet cou'd meet destin'd Reward; And till I do, I'll still turn, and Plot on. Here comes the Queen, and seems as much disturb'd As I cou'd wish; I'll make bold to observe. Enter Rosamund. Rosa. Revenge I vow'd, and I will keep my Vow: But the means; can Woman's malicious Wit Be at a Loss, to give Destruction? I must have help, yet know not whom to trust, The surly old Gen'ral ne'er was my Friend, Desiderio's his, and both love the King, They're brave and honest, not for my Purpose; Odoacre wears Villain in his Face, And such, are seldom honest in their Hearts; Treachery shall be his Business: Officious Hell has sent him to my Mind.
Odoacre come near; I've long observ'd Your Discontent; your Looks, your Speech, your Gate, Do all betray some inward weight of Grief. It ought to be a Monarch's greatest Care To relieve, and to redress; Impart your Griefs to me, and you will find Speedier Relief than from Alboino. Odoa. My whole Life has been consum'd in Sorrows; But now my face bears double Marks of Grief: Th' Injury has been offer'd you this day, Sits heavier on me, than my private Ills. Rosa. Is 't possible, art thou so much my Friend? Odoa. I know, he meant it to disquiet you, Why shou'd he else expose the barb'rous Deed? Nor can you more resent your Father's Wrongs, Than I do yours. Th' Affront which warm'd but you, set me on Fire. Rosa. Then sure you'd Join in my design'd Revenge. Odoa. Join! my Head to counsel, my Hands to act; Not Thunder flies more swiftly from Jove's Arm, Than I, to execute what you command. Name your Design, think it already done. Rosa. I dare believe you true, and will reward Your Services, beyond Ambition's Hope. But as thou'st edg'd my Rage, tell me, how Shall we proceed to make his Ruin sure? 'Tis hard, for by the Army he's ador'd? Odoa. I know it; the desperate thoughtless Madmen Love him, 'cause he leads them into Danger. Howe're 'tis an easie Task, by one Blow To end his Pride, and his Ambitious Thoughts. And to secure the Deed, let the Romans Who lie encamp'd, near the Ravenna Gate, Be privately admitted in the Night. Rosa. Thou speak'st my Thoughts, but who is 't I dare trust With such a Secret, but your faithful self. Send to invite 'em strait, and be't your Care To betray the Gate to 'em this very Night: In the mean time, I'll Plot the Tyrant's Death. Odoa. I go to execute what you command; Secure, That our Designs not only will succeed, But you'll remember who advis'd the Deed. [Exit. Rosa. So, here's one noble Mischief well contriv'd. And now, Murder must next employ my Thoughts,
For nothing less will satiate my Revenge. More Company! 'Tis strange I have not time to think on Ill. I must listen too; how conscious is Guilt? How curious am I, since my design'd Plot? If I but see two whisper, 'tis of me I think they talk. [She retires Enter Almachild and Cleanthe. Alma. Your disbelief of my Passion, my Cleanthe, afflicts me as much, a your Refusal to gratifie it. It argues a meaner Opinion of me. Have I declar'd my Love so long, and vow'd its Truth so often, yet without making any impression on your Mind, or gaining any Credit? Cle. You are but too sensible you have done both. And I fear this is your universal way of Entertainment; you think you cannot be complaisant, with∣out making Love. Alma. I have rally'd sometimes, fool'd away an Hour; but never lov'd before. 'Tis not a greater Wrong to my Love, than to your own Beauty, to suspect me; let that confirm the truth of what I say. Every Part, every Motion charms and surprizes; there's not a Feature in that Angel∣lick Face, but would adorn Deformity, and render it agreeable. Cle. I must confess, I shou'd be pleas'd you had such Thoughts; but why do you take such Pains to persuade me to be so opinionated of my self? Alma. Because you will then the more readily credit my Love? for how can you know, you possess so much Beauty, and believe me insen∣sible? Cle. Injustly you tax me with Indifference, you know I am not so; but you are obstinately Blind, and will not see my Love, till I have given too much. Alma. Did you love, your self wou'd think you cannot give too much; nor do they love, who think they love enough. I long have thought my Passion was so great, it cou'd admit of no Encrease; but each succeeding Mi∣nute heightens so much my Flame, I think I did not love before; and can you refuse Love so great, ever Young and always Growing. Cle. I shou'd not stay to listen to your Arguments. Who hears her Lover, is more than half won, Let me be gone, before I'm quite undone. Alma. Not till you have promis'd to meet me in my Appartment here, an hour hence. Come the Back-way, 'tis most private. Cle. You appoint Time and Place, as if I had already promis'd. Alma. Your Looks discover your Consent. Cle. What, meet you in the Dark—I must not, dare not— Alma. It shall be Dark too, my Life; I will not see your Blushes. Cle. I shall disappoint you.—
Alm. You will not sure— Cler. Indeed I fear I shall not—but be gon now, for Sir the Queen if she has overheard me I am undone. [Exit Almachild. Re-enter Rosamund. Rosa. Yes I have heard your dishonourable intent, how didst thou dare to entertain such thoughts, and yet attend my Per∣son? Cler. I only seem'd to yield, to get free of his importunity I did not design it. Rosa. 'Tis false, your Eyes did then declare you spoke a Truth, And now a lye. Be gone, out of my sight—yet stay I'll Secure you first and spoil your Assignation. A suddain, huddle, indigested thought Rowls in my Brain—'tis the safest Method— But is't not base and wicked—no matter, I'll stop at nothing that is base or ill, So I the hated Tyrants Blood may spill. [Exeunt. ACT IV. Enter Almachild and Rosamund vailed. Alm. NAy this is unkind my Dr. Cleanthe, Why is that beauteous face hid now, why vailed? Thou hast deprived me of half my pleasure, By covering the face I so admire, That face to which I am so much oblig'd. Rosa. Y' are more oblig'd to me, than you conceive; More than to Cleanthe, for 'tis not she, You'll scarce believe who 'tis, when you have seen. [Vnvails herself. Alm. The Queen! incredible indeed! 'tis well I knew not, that from you I had the joy; The mighty pleasure sure wou'd then have kill'd. Oh! let me throw my self beneath your Feet, Let me adore such Love! that has prevail'd With you, to yield thus freely to my Arms. Rosa. Love, no I scorn the foolish, childish Flame. Know, 'twas a nobler cause prevail'd on me. Alm. Not Love! Rosa. You've heard Alboino boast to day, 'Twas by his salvage hands my Father fell; And by his barb'rous Temper urg'd
Made of his sacred Skull a drinking Cup. For this I wou'd Revenge, and thus far I've proceeded. Alm. 'Tis a pretty step towards it truly, can she go any farther? (aside.) I have happiness beyond addition To have assisted you in this Revenge. If you propose some other, I'd be proud to serve. Rosa. Thou shall't. For I've resolv'd the haughty Tyrants Death. And tis by you, that he must lose his Life. Alm. By me! what, kill the King! I dare not do't. Rosa. Hast not Courage to murder in the dark? A Coward Villains fittest to murder. But if thy fear delays my just Revenge One short moment, I'll strait to Alboino, And with my deepest dissimulation I'll weep, I'll vow thou forc'd me to thy lust. Think how his boundless Rage will use thee then, A Death so lingring, painful he'll inflict, The Torments of the damn'd will come far short of thine. Alm. Hold Madam, allow me a Moments thought. Rosa. But if thou dar'st perform, what I command, Rewards, great as his punnishments, are thine. Think when thou strik'st the Tyrant to the Heart The lucky blow gives thee his Crown and Queen. Alma. Now you've named the most prevailing motive, Unmov'd thus Paris heard the Rival Goddesses But when the Queen of Love proffer'd herself She quickly won the Hero to her side: Rosa. Lose no time then, 'tis now the dead of night, The prop'rest Season to commit such deeds. The Town will to the Romans be betray'd, But Alboino must be dispatch'd before, See where his ill stars send him to his Death, Undress'd, unarm'd; bless'd opportunity! I leave you to the Execution. You'll sure strike home, since you already know The great rewards that will attend the Blow. [Exit Rosamund. Enter Alboino. Alb. Yesterday's Ryot sits heavy on me; My Fancy, Spirits are so much opprest. By the dregs of Wine, I cannot freely think. Alm. Now is my time, while his back is to me—but Then 'tis too sure a way, I must by one stroke secure his death (apart, Alb. Business and action must employ this day. The Romans shall repent their daring soon;
And where they hop'd submission, find their Death. I'll strait give orders that my Army moves, And at the approaching of day, I'll fight them. Alma. First let me warn you of impending Ills. Before you do a Foreign foe attack, From a domestick one secure your self, A black Conspiracy against you's form'd; By discontented Slaves, and seeming Friends. Alb. Lives there the Wretch who dares attempt my Life? Who can complain of Wrong, since I was King? Some Men may tax me with severity; But 'tis the heigth of Justice to reward Virtue, and rigorously punish Crimes. None wish my Death, who wou'd be safe themselves. Alma. Were your whole Court compos'd of honest Men, Wou'd Heaven grant their Prayers alone, you'd be Immortal, and wou'd reign secure as Jove. But ev'n Heav'n has not been free from Vice; Pride and Ambition boldly enterd there, And even there conspiracies were hatch'd. Jove hurl'd from thence those Vices to the Earth, But still permitted such to swarm in Courts. Alb. This from thee! this speaks thee brave and honest. Thy Character was misrepresented; Thou hast been wrong'd, and I impos'd upon. But Monarchs are the last who hear the Truth: If thou are half so honest, as thou seemst, Relate this black design against my Life. Alma. Were I less honest silence were more safe; Mine is a dangerous piece of Loyalty, Who rashly against Favourites informs, Gains with his Prince unwilling slow belief, Where he expects Rewards, meets with Contempt, And by their greater interest, is crush'd. Alb. Doubt not severest Justice on my Foes; I'll punish them, and thee I will reward. Let this Embolden thee to utter Truth, Be thus near me ever. [Embraces him. Alma. Then I impart The secret thus. (stabs him.) Alb. Oh treacherous Villain! Oh barbarous, inhumane, bloody Slave! That I cou'd reach thee, with my dying gasps, I'd force thee with me to my Grave. Alm. Now I can safely hear thee threat and rail, And that the thoughts may give the paineful Death,
Kow that I pass'd last night with Rosamund. To murder thee was the reward she ask'd, And by this deed, she and thy Crown are mine: Dye with that Thought. I'd stay to plague thee more, But I must haste away to seize on both. Exit. Alb. 'Tis a tormenting, dismal thought indeed. Which racks me worse, than even the Pangs of Death, Woman! Woman! how endless are thy ills! They know not when to leave, when they have once Begun, but boundless in all their Passions. Was't not enough to wrong the Marriage Bed, But must my death compleat thy Crimes. Shall my Crown, the Crown which I have purchas'd At the expence of so much Toyl and Blood, Be the Reward of Murderers and Whores? Ebb faster out ye dull remains of Life, That death may free me from such tortering thoughts. Enter Aistolfus, Desiderio. Aist. Can it be certain that the Towns betray'd, Can there be a Villain so besotted, So blindly led by Passion or disgust, Who wou'd betray his Country and his King To Foreign Power to gratify himself? Desid. What urged the Traytors to an act so vile I know not; but one of my Officers Who was posted at the Ravenna Gate, Came to inform me of the Treason, and by His Wounds confirm'd the Truth of his Report. Let's lose no time then, but haste to the King: Try if his presence can reedeem the Town. Aist. Ha! is not that the King, stretcht on the Ground? What can that sad dejected posture mean? Alb. Shall I thus tamely, thus poorly perish, And is there none, who will revenge this Murder? Aist. What! murder'd! Ha! Oh curs'd nefarious deed! [both Running up to him. Desid. Murder'd! nay then our Ruin is compleat. But what is Life or Power when you are gone! Alb. Surely ye two are honest, and my Friends, And for numberless Villains may attone. Else Heav'n may blush at Monsters it has form'd, Disown creative Power, and lay the work on Chance. Aist. The infernal God of Malice and Revenge Contriv'd this horrid Act, and watch'd his. Time To rob us of you, when your unhappy, Your betray'd Kingdom did most require.
For tho no ills like this, this is not all; The Romans have by treachery got the Town, Already they are masters of the Gates, And now pour in unresisted Forces. Alb. Oh for a moments strength! that my weak Limbs Cou'd bear me, only to my Armys Head! That like a King and Soldier I might fall; And some brave Foe might glory in my Death. But I sink, and have only strength to wish. Aist. Oh tell us first, e're you leave us ever, Who was the Wretch, who impiously durst strike The Man who represents his God on Earth, But who wou'd kill his King, difowns the Gods. Alb. My Wound gapes wider with the racking Thought, And my blood faster gushes out, that I Who have so oft brav'd Death, bred in Battles, Inur'd to dangers, and have still o'recome; Shou'd by a Cowards stroke thus meanly fall. For Almachild by Rosamunda urg'd, Brib'd with the enjoyment of the Prostitute, Seem'd my Friend to be the blacker Villain; And while I took the Viper in my arms, He basely plung'd his Dagger in my breast. I wou'd not live so long to think this or'e, Farewell—Revenge my Death, and wear my Crown. [Dies. Aist. Ah! what's thy Crown now its support is lost Or what thy Kingdom since its Soul is gone? Tis now an headless, dull, unactive Lump. But to revenge is nobler than bewail; 'Twas thy Command, and thou shall't be obey'd, Or may I have the Plagues of Regicides, To live despairing and dye presumptuous. Desid. Monsters! 'tis they then have betray'd the Town. Oh fatal proof of Anger and Revenge! Passion works strongest still in weakest minds. What's to be done to satiate our Revenge? The Queen has many Friends, Gain'd by affected low humility; For proudest Minds are the most abject too. And backt by Rome, she may maintain a War Which will protract, perhaps evade our just intent. Aist. We'll try t' effect it then by other means. (Trumpets are heard. Hark they come triumphant in their baseness. Longinus has a noble generous Soul, Which must abhor this black, tho gainful deed, By honourable peaceful Terms I'll work my end,
For force should always be attempted last. And if I can revenge my Masters Death, Twill please me more than to possess his Crown. But let us have his body first remov'd Dead Kings should not be seen by vulgar Eyes, For Monarchs we ought never to despise. But the dull Rabble ignorant, and bold, Think him no King, who was born of common Mold. [Exeunt, the Guards bearing off Alboino. Trumpets. Enter Longinus, Rosamund, Almachild, Odoacre, Guards. Rosa. When I contriv'd barbarous Alboino's Death, Twas not Revenge alone that mov'd me to't. I knew the World of right belong'd to Rome. Justice prevail'd with me to kill the King, And lay my Crown at brave Longinus Feet. Long. The generous Gift does more secure your Crown, Then vain Alboino's best Resistance cou'd. Tho by our Arms, it had been forc'd from him, Your conqu'ring eyes had won his Kingdom back; For Heav'n design'd you Mistress of the Earth, And made you Queen of beauty, and the World. Such wond'rous beauty gilds o're all her faults. None can see that and yet reflect on them. (aside.) Rosa. But by me alone the War's not ended, He too deserves a share in the applause. (pointing to Alma. Who boldly from a Tyrant set me free, And Rome from an invet'rate Enemy. Nor cou'd I less, than bestow my Person, As some Reward for services so great. Long. 'Tis a reward as far above desert, As your Heavenly Form's above description. No Tongue can give to that sufficient Praise, No Service can presume to merit you. 'Tis reward so vast, that shou'd Justinus Lay the whole Roman Empire at his Feet, He might contemn the mean, the worthless Gift. Alma. Words have not Force to say how well I love, And Gratitude's as hard to be exprest, My future Acts will best discover both. But their remains some yet to be dispatch'd, To make us more securely blest and great, Old Aistolfus and Desiderio. Rosa. He counsels well, my Lord; were they remvo'd, Their Army then would moulder and disperse. Long. They both are worthy and experienc'd men;
'Twere well that we cou'd win them to our side. Howe're they may be still within the Town. Let us then haste and issue orders out To have each Gate secur'd, and stop their flight. Exeunt omnes praeter Odoacre. Odoa. And is my hop'd Reward then come to this? Am I thus slighted, after what I've done? No thanks paid, no notice taken of me. Death and Hell! have I betray'd my Country, Lost my Honour, and Peace of Mind for this? God nothing but a distracted Conscience? And stript of all my hopes by Almachild, Because he has acted a greater ill. Int'rest made me plot before, now Revenge: I'll either work his Ruin or my own. And by Longinus am'rous looks, I guess And Praises of Rosamunda's Beauty, He'll joyn with me in my design. Soft Love will urge as far, as fierce Revenge. As he is going out, Enter Flora. My Daughter here! Flora, what business brings you to Court? Flo. I came to find you out, and on my Knees to ask you forgiveness. Odoa. You cou'd not have taken a worse time; I was Meditating on Revenge, and am but in an ill humour To forgive. But what is your offence? Flo. Tho you might have consented, had I acquainted You with it; yet concealment is a Crime. Odoa. Well, what is it? Flo. For nothing can excuse my disposal of my self without Your knowledge. Odoa. Disposal! what is't you mean, I say? Flo. I am privately marry'd. Odoa. Marry'd! promis'd I suppose you mean. For Almachild is otherwise engag'd. Flo. 'Tis not to him, tho 'twas by his advice I marry'd Clefi, Alvaro's Son. Odoa. Ay his advice! why shou'd he advise her?—he has Enjoy'd her first himself, then thrown her on that Fool. I'll know the bottom. aside. Base and unworthy! you ask forgiveness, not that you repent your Crimes; an unfeign'd sorrow wou'd acknowledge all; but you Confess a fault, you know you can't conceal. Flo. Acknowledge all! I won't invent to try your Goodness, 'Tis well if I am pardon'd this. Odoa. To try your Hypocrisie, I have thus long pretended Ignorance; but I can bear no more, and your denyal
Will be vain, after Almachild has openly told all. Flo Told it! oh ungrateful, perfidious Man! What Has he told! Odoa. So, now 'tis plain, but I'll smother my resentment of her baseness, to be the surer reveng'd on him, and now I have a double cause. (aside.) Yes he tells it publickly, and triumphs iu your undoing, and in disho∣nouring my Family. Flo. What! already declare my weakness, has he taken so much Pains, been at so great expense of Time and Wealth only for the pleasure of talking? can Men delight so much in publishing their Vices and Women's Follies? but I have not more reason to be en∣rag'd against him, than you against me, What must I do to pacify you, and be reveng'd on him? Odoa. Cou'd I undo him with the Queen, 'twere noble mischief, I have it, make her jealous—right—that can't fail. (aside.) You cannot appease me, nor demonstrate your repentance but by punishing him. Flo. Instruct me how; I'll hasten with a more eager joy, than I did first to his Embraces. Odoa. Being a Man of great quality and wealth, he has been allowed an apartment in Court, I think that door leads to it; I sup∣pose you are well acquainted with it; contrive to get admittance there, and be ready to answer when I call; leave the rest to my ma∣nagement. Flo. I have still the fatal Key he gave me, which opens a private back-door. Odoa. That's lucky; convey yourself into it; I'll acquaint you farther with my design as we walk. Successful Ruin will attend my Plot, Since I've the assistance of a Woman got. Exeunt. ACT V. Scene continues. Enter Longinus, Aistolfus, Desiderio. Aist. Hmd we to your Army design'd to fly, We have convinc'd you how secure 'twou'd be. But we intend not to prolong the War, Let Alboine's Murderers be punish'd, And of his Crown dispose as you think fit. Desid. Our zealous duty to our dead Master
Is not more concern'd in't, than your Glory. To protect such Wretches, approves their Crimes; Think how they'll be abhorr'd by honest men; How black they'll seem to all posterity; And wou'd you with such Miscreants be rank'd? Long. I'm not byass'd by the gainful Treason, Nor so much blinded by Rosamund's Face; As to approve or justifie the Deed. But since they've thrown themselves on me for aid, It were meanly done, shou'd I desert them. Aist. Heaven winks at Crimes for reasons it best knows. And by a long sorbearance oft seems pleas'd, Nor with injustice must we tax the Gods Tho Vice thrives, and Virtue is afflicted, Unsearchable, yet just, are their Decrees. But Man is judg'd by outward, present acts, Our Fame is irrecoverably lost, Shou'd we seem vitious, for a real Good; W' are branded with Hypocrisie at least. Long. Then let the Guilt be wholly Almachild's, Let him be punish'd, and excuse the Queen. Perhaps to remove th' Odium from her self, I may prevail with her, to give Consent, Desid. Impartial Justice will pardon neither, Shall he suffer for the Murder only, And shall she escape who urg'd him to't? There can be no sufficient Tortures found To rack the impious, sacrilegious slave Who durst imbrue his Hands in Royal blood. But she had a double Tye of Duty, And sacred each, her Husband, and her King. Aist. And one she ow'd her Life and Freedom to, When he had conquer'd by a lawful War Her Fathers Kingdom, he shar'd it with her, And from a Captive rais'd her to a Crown. Long. That matchless beauty, which mov'd Alboino, Now strongly pleads in her behalf with me. VVho ever looks on her must be her slave. 'Twere arrogance in me to censure her; Whate're she does I cannot think a fault, The Property of Vice by her is chang'd; She stamps a beauteous form on all her acts, And makes destructive Mischief pleasing seem. Aist. So Men Do fatally in Calentures mistake, And for firm Ground the liquid Waters take.
Or tho she's varnish'd o're with what men Beauty call, Yet look within you'll find her black as Hell. No Syrens voice has more enticing Charms, Nor gives more certain Ruin than her Face. Long. Be not so violent in your Revenge, Let Almachild first fall your Sacrifice. Have Charity for her, as she's Woman, And give her leisure to repent her faults. Aist. 'Twere rather Charity in killing her, Let her not live to taste such Misery, T' endure the Tortures of such fierce Despair, As must gnaw her Soul, when she sees her Crimes. Long. Reason and Justice strengthen all you say. I'll strive to conquer this impetuous God, That wou'd controul my Honor, and corrupt my Sense. An hour hence expect me in that Room, Where one at least shall fall your Sacrifice. Exit. Enter Avaro, Clefi, Angellina, Ava. Oh my Lord, luckily encounter'd, I have often Forbore Court, to avoid you, now I am come purposely To find you. But my Rage at present overcomes my Intended Kindness. Do you see that sheepish Rogue there, Look on him, do you not perceive what he has done? Cle. Nay, the truth on't is, I must confess that— Ava. Confess, no, no, you need not, you need not confess; Whoever looks on you may see it. Come, come hither I'll refer it now to all this company, if without Thy Confession, they wou'd not know thee, by that Miserable, simple, mortisy'd Countenance, to be Marry'd. Aist. Come Sir, let us mediate in his behalf: Pray be Pacify'd; if he is marry'd, I'll undertake he is Sufficiently wretched, without your anger. Ava. Why he has marry'd a Beggar; would you have An hungry man fill'd without Victuals, wou'd you have Me pacify'd without Money; he may be fill'd with Wind indeed, and I with Rage, but never satisfy'd. Cle. I did not think but— Ava. Few in thy condition ever thought; nor did I when I begot thee. No, I dare swear thou didst not think; Why I can see that too in thy countenance; truly thou Hast a very foretelling Face. Come, I'll read thy Destiny in it. First, there's Matrimony; no, first There's Cuckoldom, for thou were't a Cuckold before Thou were't marry'd; next there's Poverty, next Repentance, next Despair, then Death and the Devil.
Cle. Lord, Lord, you are so cholerick, you won't hear a Body speak. I would no more have marry'd her, than You would, if I had not been perswaded she was Rich, and I though that so good an excuse, that you Would even be pleas'd with me, for my disobedience. Ava. If she had been so, I had never enquir'd how she Became so: but do you think I will pardon you, Since you were deceiv'd. Go, begon out of my sight, Try how Matrimony and Poverty will agree. Go, see, Now you are poor, whether people will mistake your Laughing for good humour, and your much talking for Wit. Aist. A little of your kindness will make 'em happy, And agreeable to each other: for fools are generally Fonder of each other, than wits. Ava. Ah, my Lord, I know you speak only out of good Nature; but I believe 'twill please you more to Bestow my Daughter on Desiderio. What say you, Sir, Will you pardon all my former denials, if I now give You my consent? Desi. Most readily; I could pardon thee hadst thou been One of Alboino's Murderers, to purchase her. But tho I am so desirous to have her mine, I would Not owe it wholly to her obedience; rather let Love Prevail with her, let her give one proof of that, she Has many of Duty to you. Ang. I have already confess'd my Love to my Father, tho Perhaps I never should to you, without his consent. Believe not my Love to be the less, or that I shall make The worse Wife for my Obedience. For who pays it Not to a Parent, never will to a Husband. Desid. Be mine at any rate, I must be happy. Ava. Well, take her, take her, and with her you shall have All my Wealth; but then you must stay till I am Dead, I cannot for the blood of me part with it, And live. Desi. I never requir'd that, nor do I want it to encrease My happiness. And you, Sir, [To Clefi.] tho You have not been my friend, yet since you are Angellina's Brother, I will provide for you. Cle. Ah, ten thousand thanks upon my knees; well I am not the First man has rais'd his fortunes by a handsom Sister. Aist. Well, Desiderio, I have had patience thus long, To see your happiness confirm'd. And now Alboino's blood calls for Vengeance. I will delay no longer my Revenge. If Longinus consents not, I'll force him.
But be not vain, because she says she loves. Believe me friend, 'tis owing all to fate, 'Tis not for Merit that we love or hate. Exeunt. Enter Rosamund, Longinus, Odoacre. Longinus speaks entering. (aside.) Long. All my designs are baffled by her eyes; I am so much her Beauty's slave, So aw'd, I dare not have the man destroy'd Upon whose ruin depends my happiness; For fear it should offend, and raise a frown. Rosa. Is then Alboino so much lamented? Could such invet'rate cruelty and pride, Gain him a lasting popular applause? Odo. When Monarchs fall by an untimely death, The people colour commonly their faults; Their virtues then are only nam'd and prais'd. Cruelty is call'd impartial Justice, And pride, a noble carriage fit for regal state. Long. He tells you true. Never was man so pittied and belov'd. The people mourn his loss in lowder cries, Than Soldiers Io's for their victories. Their loss of liberty and life they slight, His death alone engrosses all their Grief. Rosa. Let the unthinking Rabble bellow on, I scorn their censures, they're ne're in th' right. They hate one day what they'll adore the next. Colour the most abominable wrong. With Liberty's deceitful specious name, And you may gain them to what ill you please. Odo. That way I try'd, almost to my ruin. The Mob attended calmly my discourse, While I harranguld in praise of Liberty; But when I said, by Alboino's death 'twas purchas'd, Had I pronounc'd their deaths, they had rag'd less; Down with him, flea him, burn him, was the cry; And then they hurl'd against me Stones, Forks, Staves, And all the Rabbles instruments of War. And had the Guards not quickly interpos'd, I soon had been devour'd by their rage. Long. Nor can I awe them to more mild resolves, Than punishing the murderers with death, So they call them. Rosa. What, am I not secure By my own Guards, and by the Roman power? In my own Palace shall I dread the crowd?
I slight the weak many headed Monster, Nay Life I scorn rather than owe it them. Long. They're of themselves giddy and impotent, Yet they are oft employ'd, as great Mens Tools, Who work their ends by their impetuous Force, Secure and secret they encrease the Flame, And loo them on to desperate mischief. Odoa. Their number gives them courage to attempt. They rashly enterprize what they resolve, Before they've leisure to reflect on fear. Nor from their fury can you long be safe But by deliv'ring to them Almachild; Which may divert their charge of guilt from you. Rosa. 'Tis thou shou'dst be deliver'd to their Rage, Who prompt'st me thus, to such ingratitude. Wou'd'st have me so unworthily desert The Man, whose act obedience was to me? Long. I must advise the same, but I am mov'd To wish his Death, by those inticing Eyes, I burst with Envy at the joys he reaps, And yet those awful Eyes secure his Life; Did I not dread their Frowns, his Rivals Sword Shou'd soon remove the bar to all my hopes. Odoa. And yet 'tis strange, that such Victorious Eyes So us'd to Conquests and preserve them too; Shou'd be so suddainly contemn'd by him. That such refreshing charming Sweets shou'd cloy The stupid Animal in one short Hour. Rosa. Take heed, mock not me, nor vilify him▪ My anger will prove as dangerous to you, As my enrag'd jealousy wou'd to him. Odoa. He was my Friend, and still he shou'd be so, Had I not seen his perfidy to you. And proof of that within this Hour I had, If sighs and vows to others may be Proofs, And if embraces and appointments are. Rosa. 'Tis only Pride with hinders jealousy; Meanly we think of others, of our selves too well But proceed. (aside▪ Odoa. A Vail conceal'd the Lady he admir'd, But in this Room I overheard the Intrigue. He prest her hands, and on it swore his truth; My Life! he cry'd, in an Hour I'll return, I'll but pay the Queen a formal Visit, And haste to thee, my Soul; here take this Key And wait so long in my apartment there.
Rosa. I disdain to show how much I'm enrag'd, I'll keep my fury collected within, Till at once I pour it all on him. (aside. Perhaps she still is there, force open the door, I'll see this powerful Beauty. Odoa. Best stay, I'll knock and counterfeit his Voice, My Love! my dear! here is your Almachild. (knocking at the door. She speaks as she opens the Door, and runs to him. Flo. Where hast thou been loit'ring so long, my Life? Seeing them, she pretends to shriek and run back. Odoa. [holding her.] Nay Madam, do not believe you shall retreat We've discover'd the amour, and must your Face. Rosa. Approach nearer thou presumptuous Fool, Unvail thy self, that I may see that Face Which dare admit his Love, whose Heart's my due. Flo. Where shall I fly, who will protect me now? What can I hope from an offended Queen? And Death I dread from an enrag'd Father: [lifting up her Vail. Odoa. Damnation, what do I see! my Daughter! On unworthy, infamous Prostitute! Have I thus labour'd to prove him Villain But to publish my Families disgrace, But with my Sword I'll wipe the stain out, thus— Long. [holding him.] Hold, moderate your Passion, pity her, And shew more respect in the Queen's presence. Rosa. Dost thou pretend to rage? 'tis I that ought: What's scandal or disgrace, to jealousy? But furious words are Cowards Resentments, And weak Womens, who cannot right themselves. Monarchs in acts not words shou'd shew their Wrath. And by one blow thus I procure Revenge. (going to stab her.) Flo. [kneeling.] Ah do not kill me! and I'll confess all. Odoa. Confess! interpose or we are ruin'd. (to Longinus. Rosa. Confess! dost thou think that will excuse thee. Dost believe I'll listen, till thou repeatst The Arts he us'd, the Vows he made to win thee; That will encrease my painful Rage too much, Delay thy death, and my Revenge too long. Long. Give me leave to interceed for her Life; Forgive her for her faithful Fathers sake; Tho now he'd joyn with you in your Revenge, Nature will soon move him to pardon her, And wish to have her stain'd, rather than Dead. Rosa. To his services let her own her Life;
But, hence, I can no longer bear her Sight. Why, this exceeds Alboino's Crime! I burst with rage. Tho 'tis not that I love the fickle wretch, For Wives are jealous, tho they do not love. Odoa. I beg I may obtain one favour more, That I may punish him, for both our wrongs. Then if I may advise, take Longinus, A worthier choice, and which secures your Crown. Rosa. Merits like his may hope for any thing. But I'll please my self in the Traytors Death, Ha! behold he comes to his appointment! How every circumstance agrees! Retire, and leave his Punishment to me. [Exeunt Longinus and Odoacre Now let me play the Woman to deceive: Enter Almachild Pensive. Alm. Was it a dream? have Dreams such wondrous power▪ Vast Prerogative of Sleep, Thus to insult our thoughts when w'are awake. Other Men sleep, and so forget their Pain, But one Hours sleep robs me for ever of my rest, The Murder was as great, the Sin as great before; Yet was I easy in my Mind, calm and at peace. Do Sense and Judgment clearer work in Sleep? Business and noyse diverted them before; Sleep has awak'ned them to my eternal Plague. Rosa. What mean those Sighs, har'd Looks, and heavy Gate. (a side.) Alm. Oh my Rosamund! I have been seeking you, To try to ease my Griefs b'imparting them: For oh! I bear a load within my Breast Enough to sink me to the lowest Hell. But I'm so filled, so choak'd with black dispair, I well may burst, but have not breath to speak. Rosa. What can this mean? sure 'tis to colour his design. (aside. Alike we should relate our joys and griefs, 'Twill improve the one, and lessen t'other. As Winds imprison'd in the Earths Cavernes Then rage and storm with greatest Violenc, And seem to shake the basis of the World, But when they've forc'd a Vent, they quickly waste. So sorrow stifl'd in our breasts racks most. But why dost thou complain of Griefs and Pain, Cannot a Crown and Queen compleat thy Joys? Alm. Are you to ask the Cause of my despair?
You who compell'd me to the cruel deed. Art thou so hardned in impenitence, Or dost thou only ignorance affect? Think on Alboino, my murder'd Master. Think on thy wrong'd Husband, think on our King, And then be happy; doest not stattle thee? Do's not despair and horror seize thy Soul? Rosa. Nay then 'tis time to kill the Tender Fool, And end his idle superstitious Fears, Else such disquiet Thoughts he'll raise in me. (aside) Alm. Confess the gnawing fortunes of thy Mind, And with severest words accuse thy self, That I may have a clearer Idea Of my Sin, fill me with raging despair Till it distracts my distemper'd senses. Oh wretched State! oh tormenting Crime! When I From Madness only can expect a Cure. Rosa. Some melancholy dream has rais'd these thoughts. Thou feest I am quiet and undisturb'd, Nor can repent what Justice mov'd me to. Alm. See where the Royal, sacred Ghost appears, (starting.) See where he stands, and bodes me certain Hell. And look this cursed Hand is stain'd with Blood. Rosa. You but create this anguish to your self, There's no such thing, these are idle fancies. Alma. My Conscience sees him plain; and tho he's gone, His dreadful Image is fixt ever here. Break, burst my Heart, why shou'dst thou thus endure Such cruel Torments, as admit no Cure? From time it self, thou canst not hope for ease, No action past, none to come can please. Friendless without, distraction all within, Obdurate made▪ as Punnishment for Sin. Rosa. These sad thoughts, Musick and Love shall banish, Retire with me to my Alcove, and try their Force. Alm. Lead on, and dispose of me as you please, But much I fear, there can no Art be found To heal my Minds envenom'd desperate Wound. Exeunt.
SONG. I. OH Love how mighty are thy Joys! Who can bear th' Extasy, Joy so great my Life destroys, In Rapture now I dye. II. But that I ever might partake Of such transporting Bliss, I wou'd in t'ether World awake, As I expire in this. After the Song is ended, the Scene draws and discovers Rosamund and Almachild sitting, she with a Cup in her hand. Rosa. Here's what will end his care; 'tis a Poison Of such force, three drops destroys him in a moment. aside. Still you appear disturb'd, my Almachild; Have my tender Embraces no effect? Shall all my Arts and Love be try'd in vain, Will nought dispel your melancholy thoughts? Alma. Nothing can ease me while my Mem'ry lasts. Music heightens and improves our passions; It encreases, but never changes them. The pleasant it transports with Mirth and Joy, But fills the sad with a more fierce Despair. Rosa. If Love and Music can't prevail, try this. Here I've prepar'd a Cordial for my Love. Alma. Wine for the present may allay our Griefs, But they'll return, and rack with double Force. Howe're give it me, I'd leave nought untry'd. (He takes the Bowl and Drinks. A Cordial is it? 'tis strangely nauseous. I cannot force my Stomach, to receive One drop more—what means this sudden coldness Near my Heart, and this swimming in my Head? Rosa. I find it begins to work already, Half he has drank, will send him strait to Hell. (aside. Alm. Now 'tis plain, by all my fears 'tis Poyson, But she shall not triumph in my Death too. (aside.
Here my Rosamund, I find its Virtues To be so excellent, that you must pledge me. Rosa. I need it not, I have my health intire. Alm. Oh thou bloody Monster! worse than Woman! How have I deserv'd this barbarity. Thy refusal, as well as my Torments, Discovers thy baseness But I'll not fall alone. Here drink this, while I have strength to force thee. Rosa. Help! Murder! help! where are my Guards? Murder! Alm. Thy resistance is vain, here take thy choice, Drink or I'll strike this Dagger to thy Heart. Nay delay not one Moment, if thou dost— [offering to stab her. Rosa. Hold, give it me, Death looks less dreadful here. She drinks, and then Enter Longinus, Aistolfus, Desiderio, Odoacre, Guards. Alma. So, now let them come to her assistance. I dye pleas'd, since time was for this deed giv'n, And by this Justice I may merit Heav'n. Dies. Long. What does this mean? Whence proceeds his Death and your fainting Looks? Rosa. Ah! you are come too late, he has forc'd me To share the Poison, I prepar'd for him. Odoacre there! then dread thy Fate next. Justice has overtaken the Murder I contriv'd, and will soon thy Treachery. T' Enemies your Country you betray'd, While I a Plot to kill Alboino laid. No Art can thee from divine Justice guard. And I in Death and Hell shall meet Reward. (Dies.) Desid. Were't thou the Villain, who betray'd the Town, Thus Traytor I'll fulfil her Prophecy. (They fight. Long. Hold, part them. (Odoacre falls. Odoa. I have deserv'd this end, and shou'd rejoyce. I've liv'd long in misery, my Conscience Plagu'd me so much, I cou'd no more bear Life. My Fate is just and kind, I'll not complain, And Death may end, but can't encrease my Pain. (Dies. Long. I will not blame what Justice bid thee do, Nor for interest will protect Villains. (to Desiderio. But her I must lament, not all her Crimes, Not death can deprive her of her beauty. [looking on Rosamund. Aist. Be pleas'd, and thankful for Heaven's Justice, Which has wisely freed you from the Love, Which would else have sully'd all your Renown.
Long. Time may perswade me to mind your advice. But that I may pay the Regard that's due To the noble Alboino's Memory; Wear the Crown▪ which he bequeath'd you; and be Assur'd, Justinus will confirm the gift. But only promise to remain his friend, And quit all pretensions to Verona. Aist. I'll readily agree to any terms, So I may preserve Longinus friendship. The greatest businss of my life is o're, Alboino's death is now fully reveng'd. Yet for his fall, grief still my breast distends, Crowns cannot recompence the loss of Friends. Exeunt Omnes.
EPILOGUE. Spoke by Miss Dennis Chock. OF all the Actors you have seen this day, Our Scribbler culls out me, t' excuse his Play, I cry'd I was too young; be said, he knew The likeliest way to please, was to be new. I cou'd not choose but laugh, to find the Fool Shou'd think Ine're was try'd, bred in this School: And therefore, to remove his gross mistake, I told I'd been us'd before to speak. But since I was't address to you, he swore, It was no fault, to have been us'd, Before. Tho he has taken after all wrong measure, Either to give the Men, or Ladies Pleasure. Gladly he wou'd divert yon beauteous Row; In vain he strives, for by my self I know, They hate, what they admir'd an hour ago. Yet, since they are not always of one mind, Some, at some minutes, may perhaps be kind. One tender look from them will please him more Than when the Pit applauds, or Gall'ries roar. And for the Men, I m told there was a time, When nothing mov'd like Virgins in their Prime. But Time alas is chang'd; now 'tis not so, Nothing will please the Beaux now, but a Beau. They come not now with Masks to keep a pother, But from Side-boxes ogle one another. But I forget for what I am come here. Well, 'tis not yet too late, because I hear, For all your forward boasts, you love the Rear. I come, to beg for Mercy for the Play, Yet do not think, I'll for your Judgment stay. No, I'll be gone, because such gen'rous Youths, When my Back's turn'd, will speak the kindest Truths. FINIS.
