P3175 10440437 45023
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE OBSERVATORS First Volumn. OR, THE ANSWER OF MILES PRANCE, To Several of those Papers, Wherein he finds himself most Traduced and Slandered. With some Notes to be added to Observator Numb. 8. of the 2d. Volumn. Psalm LII. Thy Tongue imagineth Wickedness, and with Lies thou Cuttest like a sharp Razor. Thou hast loved to speak all words that may do hurt, O thou false Tongue. Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy Dwelling, and Root thee out of the Land of the Living. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by R. Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Pater-Noster-Row. 1684.
TO THE LOYAL Protestant Readers. HAving made so long an Apology in the first pages for the Necessity as well as Justice of my appearing now in Print, I intended not to have troubled my self or you with any particular Address, till finding new Scandals dayly sprung upon me, the Refuting whereof, Rendred these Papers more tedious, then at first designed, I must therefore begg pardon for their Bulk; But, why all this stir and so many Sheets? What is it to us, you'l say, whether Prance be a Cheat, or the Obser∣vator a Lyar! Not much perhaps to you, but of great Importance to me, I'le assure you Gentlemen; since I perceive my Dayly Con∣versation is beset with Spies, and no man (though never so ho∣nest and Loyal) That comes into my Company, but is presently in danger of being exposed as a Phanatick, and markt out (right or wrong) to the fury of the Rabble, and destruction of his Fortune and Family: And Considering that this usage may be any other mans Case to morrow, as well as mine to day; whenever the Observator for his own Glory, or on any secret design, shall think fit to proclaim War against him; I thought it high time to give all the World satisfaction of the Truth of the Case between Mr. L'Estrange and my self; That all persons of this Age, and such as shall write Histories in the next (which I find our Observator much values his Numerous Sheets upon, as the just Standard for them to take measures from) may have the Cognizance as well of the Defence as of the Charge; For he that has a Tongue to Condemn, before he imploys both his Ears to hear either Party, deserves to be Appeal'd from, as an incompetent Judge. The Observator makes large Professions, that his Engage∣ment is for the Government, and the Establisht Church; But I humbly Conceive, 'tis no Honour or Service to either, That he Intermixes so much his own Personal Piques and Animosities,
& takes Liberty meerly on the Tales of his Busy Emissaries, to Ex∣pose any Honest Loyal Subject, that gives not up all the Faculties of his Soul, to a Blind Admiration of, and Acquiescence in his Pa∣pers, which are in many Particulars (For I Speak only as to what I am Concern'd in) as False and Malicious, as Triffling and Illogical. The Gentleman has Liberally bestow'd on me the Titles of Cheat, Rogue, Rascal, Blasphemer, almost always Drunk, &c. But I thought it below the Gravity of a Citizen, or any Moral Man, much more of a Christian, to Reply in the Scurrilous Lan∣guage of an Oyster Boat; and therefore as far as the matter would possibly bear, I have Abstained from any Vndecent Terms; how much soever deserv'd. Nor dare vye with so great a Master in the Mysteries of Buffoonery and Fooling: Soft Words and hard Ar∣guments, as little Droll, and as much Reason as may be afforded, is the best method for all Controversies. Yet to divert the Reader; I have now and then descended to answer the Gentleman a little in his own way, to shew that what some men so highly Admire, is no such Transcendent Quality, but it might be Imitated. A Little Wit, joyn'd with a Vast Ill Nature, And qualify'd for Lyes, as well as Satyr; May easily Commence an Observator. But not to enlarge the Porch to a building which is already too bigg—The whole matter, Loyal Readers, is before you, and ha∣ving first considered impartially, you are at Liberty to pass your Judgments as you find Cause. If any object the following Leaves are not all of my own Composing, It shall readily he granted; Nor can I find any body will swear, that all the Observators are wholly of Mr. L'Estrange's own handy work; Let it therefore suffice, That there is nothing here said on my behalf, which I do not ap∣prove, and know to be true. And therefore am Ready to justify every Tittle; Witness my Hand, Miles Prance.
A POSTSCRIPT, &c. THE Noise Mr. L'Estrange has laboriously (and even to many of his own Admirers, nauseously) made about Brass-Screws, &c. was in it self so improbable as well as false; and his naked Suggestions (unconfirm'd with the least proof, or his being able to vouch any Authors or Witnesses for so heinous a Charge) having been already refuted by the positive Affidavit of an uninteressed Person, and a Romanist too, disproving the same; That, as I doubt not, but most sober considerate Persons, are long since satisfied of the Injustice of that Accusation, so I had the Charity to hope the Observator himself, however at first Misinform'd, might e're this be asham'd on't. But finding that Gentleman, in his Observators, Numb. 470, and 471, Challenging all the World to Instance wherein he has misreported, or partially represented any one matter of Fact, and particularly reviving this Thred-bare Story, as one of the Trophies of his At∣chievements, and consigning the same over, as a matter undeniable to the Belief of Posterity: I should be wanting to Truth and my own Innocency, if I should not publickly Check, and yet further Detect those Scandals, which tend not only to the blasting of my Reputation, spoiling of my Trade, and Ruin of my Family, (which I can prove, Mr. L'Estrange with his own Mouth, most unchristianly own'd to be his Design) but also (which I conceive the first Forgers of this Scandal principally intend) the Discrediting that Evidence, I have faithfully given touching the manner of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Murther: That indelible stain, which all the Popes Holy-Water shall never be able to wash off. I foresee under what Disadvantages I appear, and am sorry I cannot avoid a Contest, with a Gentleman of known Abilities, and reputed Loyalty, so high in Popular Esteem, of so large an Invention, and taking Expressions, and one who will be sure to have the Last Word; nor do I forget his Character, as now qualified, a Magistrate; but Truth is Truth, even in the Courser Language of a Silver-Smith: And Falshoods and Calumnies are no better than Lies and Devices of the Devil to be abhorr'd by all Christians and honest Men, though dressed up in never so rich Embroideries of Craft and Oratory. And though God and Nature have not endued me with equal parts, nor Fortune with so liberal an Edu∣cation, (which the Loyalty of my Father to his King, was the chief occasion that disabled him to afford me) so that I may not be so useful; yet I am bound to be, and by Gods Grace, will never fail to approve my self as Honest a Man, as Faithful and Obedient a Subject, and as Hearty and Dutiful a Son of the Church of England, by Law Establisht, as the Wittiest Observator in Christendom. The Veneration I have for His Sacred Majesty, my Soveraign, guides my willing Duty to pay all JustRespects to every Person (though never so much my particular Enemy) that is vested with any subordinate Authority under him. 'Tis not with Mr. L'Estrange the Justice, but L'Estrange the Observator my Dispute lies; if he send out a Legal Warrant, I will readily obey; but if he publish things false and scandalous of me, I see not, why I may not Answer it, without being Taxt as guilty of any Disrespect to the Government. His Gracious Majesty imploying any in the Commission of the Peace, does not, I am sure, thereby intend to priviledge Him, to injure the meanest of His Subjects. What I attempt is no more than all Laws Divine and Humane allow, viz. The liberty of an unblamable Defence; to wipe off Dirt (or rather Venom) causelesly thrown upon me: In doing which, if any of it shall, by the Beams of Truth, be reflected back on the first Author, who can help it? For whatever Service Mr. L'Estrange has done the Government and the Church, against the Factious, or the Enemies to either, I Cordially applaud and thank him. Nor do I Repine at his (reported) Presents and New-years-Gifts of a 1000 (nay, were they ten
sand) Guineys, since for ought I know, he has deserved them; for in this Close-fisted Age, People are not apt to part with their Money, but on good Considerations. Howe∣ver I am pleased to hear that Charity or Gratitude (call it which you will) is so great and General amongst Protestants, and hope we shall hereby silence the Papists, upbraiding us for neglect of Good Works: I like a Chedder-Cheese (to borrow the Metaphor from a well known Author) never the worse for being made Great by the Milk of the whole Parish; nor shall I ever envy any Mans growing Fat on the Alms-Basket. In a word, I have as good an Esteem for the Active and Ingenious Squire L'Estrange, as I ought to have. And if (as the Author of The Pacquet of Advice from Geneva, A Pamphlet lately suppressed, by the Order (as I am informed) of the Right Honourable and Reverend, my Lord the Bishop of London, as Scandalizing the whole Reformation, under pretence of exposing Presbyterians. The Author of which was one Mr. Pratt (that calls himself Doctor) one that heretofore was always not only a professed, but viru∣lent Papist, and I never heard of his Conversion. Numb. 2. p. 10. affirms. He be one undoubtedly sent from above to Act here in his Generation, for the great Good of his King and Country, and to be vere Malleus Rebelli∣um & Phanaticorum (which, I am told, signifies, a Mawler of Rebels and Fanaticks) I only wish, he had kept altogether to that work; let him Mawl them O' Gods Name, as long as he lift, till his Observators out∣swell the Volumes of Bellarmine; and scourge them more severely than ever he did (as himself has told us) the Wicked Cats that haunted his Bird-Cage, that is, till he has made them leave off their Rogueries. But if he will abandon his Province, and pull me Head and Ears out of the Church of England, and not only make me a Phanatick in spight of my Teeth, but also point me out as a Rogue, one that have for sworn my sef against him: And that I cheated Her Majesty with Brass Screws; and design'd to defraud a Man of a Tankard, and made away my Servant, and sent for him, the said L'Estrange, to the Old Dog-Tavern, and then dnd it, with such and such horrid Oaths, when not a word of all this is true; I hope I may have leave to say—Your Worship in these particulars is mistaken; and to disabuse the World therein, even in like publick manner; since, as himself says, Observator, Num. 473. No∣thing but Print can answer Print. Besides, I have his own Allowance, Observator 470. You are at Liberty to shew the World my Errors. Now therefore to the matter—And first, the old Job of Brass-screws—That which Mr. L'Estrange affirms, is— That I being imploy'd to make an Antependium to the Altar of Her Majesties Chappel, did fraudulently either make Brass-screws and reckon for them as Silver, or having made Silver, and being paid for them as such, did purloin the Silver ones, and put Brass ones, with only Silver Heads in their stead—Here's no less than Cheat, and Felony, and Sacriledge, all Charg'd in a Lump, but where's the Proof? As for that, you have only the bare Suggestion of the Observator: Now, though that Authors Opinion, when he talks of the Politicks, may (for ought I know) be indisputable; yet as to matter of Fact, if he shall tell us, it Rains Butter'd Par∣snips, and that the Thames is turned into a dish of Clouted Cream, when we see nothing but Snow falling, and Ice under-foot, he must excuse, such as wear Eyes about them, if they demur a little to the Belief of those Miracles. For the Readers satisfaction; who possibly may not be so well skill'd in Chappel-Furni∣ture, as an Observator, that owns, he has been forty times at Mass: I must here first de∣scribe what an Antependium is, viz. An Ornament set before the Front of the Altar, of which there are several sorts, some more Rich for Great Festivals, some more Mean, for Ordi∣nary times; some Mourning ones used, when Mass is said for Souls in Purgatory, which (if I do not mis-remember) is every Monday; and accordingly these Antependiums are frequently remov'd, as occasion requires. That which I was concerned about, was a very Rich one, to be used on High days; And Doctor Godden, Treasurer of Her Majesties Chappel, by the means of Father James, (who was then my Confessor) imployed me, it being proposed to me and Mr. M. (a Ro∣man Goldsmith in Fleet-street,) and both of us made Draughts or Models, which, the Doctor told me, were presented to the Queen, and Her Majesty was Graciously pleased to approve of mine, and so I was pitcht upon to do it; the rather (as I believe,) for that the same Doctor told me, Mr. M. ask'd a 4th part more per Ounce, for Work and Fashi∣on, than I offered to do it for. Being thus imployed, and having made a punctual Bargain at fixt Rates and Prizes, to make an Antependium, and steps to the Altar, and two large Flower-Pots; I was furnished with a quantity of old broken Silver belonging to the Chappel, which I
spent several days time and labour, in taking off from the Wood, &c. Which Sil∣ver was intended both to supply matter for the Work to be done, and with it's over∣plus to pay me for doing it, and was all exactly weighed when delivered to me; which was as near as I can remember, about the Moneth of September, 1674. And I was en∣joyned to smish against the Feast of our Saviours Nativity, so there was a necessity to imploy more hands, (in so large a piece of work) than my own and my Servants (yet the Observator objects as a Crime that I did not do it all my self, whereas had I design'd a Cheat, I should my self have endeavoured to do it all.) But I caused the old Silver to be melted down by others, (who might be able to attest it) which, tho' I confess I did not do out of any foresight, yet 'twas happy for me, since otherwise I might now have been liable to a far greater scandal of Embasing it, (a more tempting bait to nibble at, than this pedling business of a few Brass Screws.) Having thus caus'd it to be melted, and several Assays to be made thereof at our Hall, (whereby it appeared not to be worth above four Shillings an ounce) and shew'd them to Doctor Godden, (who I must tell Mr. L'Estrange, was a person so Faithful to Her Majesties Interests, and in himself so Curious, Exact, and Sagacious, as not easily to be imposed upon) He thereupon by a note under his hand, (which I have yet to shew) dated September 28, 1674. Allowed the overplus to me, towards my payment at four Shillings per Ounce, expressing the Reason in these words—The coursness of the Silver, and waste (which was not small) considered. The work going on, and Screws to fix the Silver to the Wood, which was to support it, being requisite, some few of those Screws were at first made of Silver, but per∣ceiving the Silver allow'd, was not like to hold out to be enough to finish the work and to pay me, as was designed, I acquainted the Doctor and Mr. Plum (his Man) and Mr. Coupledyke, one of Her Majesties Servants, therewith, withall advertising them; That I thought Screws of Brass would be altogether as serviceable, and so that Silver might be spared if they thought fit, only on the outside to affix to them thin Sil∣ver Plates for heads to answer to the rest of the Work, which they readily consen∣ted to, and so those few Screws made, were melted down and imploy'd in the Work, and all the Screws made of Brass, or if any one were left in by over-sight, 'tis more than I know. The Work being done, Mr. Plum saw it all weighed and set up, and some of the Screws being found to be too long, Mr. Smith (a Workman employed by me, and who made at least several of these Brass Screws) did cut off the ends to shorten them, and soon after came Doctor Godden himself, and would have it weighed again, say∣ing, though he doubted not my word, and his Mans Relation, yet he could with more assu∣rance satisfie Her Majesty, when he had seen it weighed himself, and so it was taken a∣sunder again, and weighed in parts, (the Brazen Screws being apparent before him, but not weighed, only the Heads of Silver reckon'd for, which were weighed before they were put on, and being very inconsiderable, were not disputed) and so the Work was sent home to the Chappel; and tho', the surplusage of the Silver falling short as aforesaid, I was not fully paid according to the Bargain, yet considering how good a Mistress I had of Her Majesty, from whom I had almost work continual∣ly; and not doubting but in time I should be satisfied, it rested all the years, 1675, 76, 77, and 78. Towards the latter end of which last year, I having given a dis∣covery of Justice Godfreys Murder, most of the Romans began to be very much my Enemies, and several Libels, As the Compendium, &c. were th  abroad; reflect∣ing amongst others on me; but still not a word of this matter, nor any hint of my being an unjust or dishonest man, before I forsook their Church. But, (almost eight years after the work done,) viz. the first of April (the day Fools are wont to be sent on Errands) 1682. Mr. L'Estrange the first of all mer∣living (as far as I can learn) broacht this story in Observator, Numb. 117. very ten∣derly (forsooth) at first by way of Quaere or Advertisement, but afterwards, as some Witty People, by heat of fancy, invent pretty Tales, and tell them so often, that at last they themselves begin to believe them, so he grew more positive in the business; and now, Observator 471, is pleased to scoff at all thoughts of Repentance for it, which yet I hope God will give him, e're he goes out of this World, or else his account is like to be very dreadful in the next, for if for every idle word we must answer, much more for forging and promoting Lies and Scandals, designed to Ruine our Neighbour▪ and all persisted in and boasted of.
In the mean time, I shall first shew the unlikelyhood of the matter thus charg'd upon me; which against Nude Averments (tho' never so confident) is a sufficient defence. Secondly, I shall disprove his suggestions by Testimony upon Oath, and undenia∣ble demonstrations? When a man is falsly and maliciously attacqued with Calumnies, that which other∣wise would be insufferable vanity, becomes necessity; and on that score, I must crave the Readers excuse for mentioning some Truths, which without such a forc'd putt, I would have been far enough from relating of my self: As, 1. That having now been a Trader towards twenty years, I dare appeal to all, that I have had Dealings with, (Papists or Protestants) if they can justly say, I ever wrong'd them, or can instance in any particulars, wherein they found me addicted or inclinable to little sharking Tricks, Injustice, Fraud, or Over-reaching? Nay, whether on the other side, it be not true, that amongst the Roman Catholicks, (with whom my chief Dealings lay, untill I left them,) I were not generally call'd by the Name of Honest Prance? If any such ill Practices could have been proved, as Mr. L'Estrange has not been wanting by his frequent Proclamations to invite Ac∣cusers, so I want not Ill-willers, who would be glad of the opportunity, and you would e're this, have heard of some other Pranks besides the Brass Screws, yet no such thing has appeared. But on the contrary, even since I have renounced their Religion, Father Lewis the Jesuit, and Father Hanslipp the Monk (upon my hap∣pening into their Company, when brought up to Newgate,) did declare before se∣veral Witnesses, that they always lookt upon me to be as Honest a man (speaking as to my dealing) as any in the World; and this was spoken on a long experience too, for with that Father Lewis (afterwards Executed upon a Conviction of Priesthood in Wales) I had very considerable dealings in the way of my Trade, now 'tis very strange, that I, that had managed matters so squarely with all the rest of my Custo∣mers, should so basely begin my Cheats upon Her Majesty, who was the best Mistress I had, or could ever hope for, and whose Work (which was a considerable part of my Lively-hood) I must certainly expect to lose, as soon as the Cheat should be disco∣vered, which (as I shall prove presently) 'twas impossible (had it been so) to conceal for a day. 2ly. Further, as to my Integrity, and Scorning to grow Rich by Unlawful and dis∣honest gain; I might give several Instances; but I shall trouble the Reader only with Two; viz. Several years ago (about the time, as I remember, that I made this Antipen∣dium) my Lady Gage lost a Jewel, and long after, near half a year, when the Bills gi∣ven out, on the first missing it, were forgot, and the Lady despaired of ever hearing of it, this Jewel was proffered me, and I knew it worth about 45 l. and might have had it for 10 l. but reflecting on the Parties readiness to part with it on such terms, and there∣upon calling to mind the Bill, I stopt it, and restored the Jewel to the Lady. Now here might have been a secure Prize of 30 l. for the Reward in the Bill was but 5 l. (to the best of my memory) and if I had bought it for 10 l. I might have made above 40 l. of it, and having taken out the Stones, there would have been little fear of its ever being discovered, but I detested any such lewd design. And of this, that Honourable Lady, a Roman Catholick, and whom I suppose yet living, will, I doubt not, afford me the Ju∣stice of her Attestation to any that shall enquire. Since that, having an Accompt with one Mr. Ridge, upon our Reckoning I perceiv∣ed he had forgot to harge me with some Ounces of Gold, amounting to about 12 l. and was so far from calling the same to mind, that he allow'd himself a Debtor for about that Value; and so it must have pass'd, had I not voluntarily shew'd him his mistake from my Book. Now, that I, who used so much tenderness in these Cases, should thus impudently attempt to defraud Her Majesty, will I suppose need some proof be∣fore it be credited by Impartial men. Especially, if they consider me then a strict and zealous Catholick; for, that so I was, I appeal to all that know me, being as Bigotted therein as any, and meerly on that score, the Priests Kelly, &c. had the confidence to trust me with their Wicked Intrigue against Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey. Now being thus Principled, tho' I had been so Immoral, as to have wronged Persons in other Cases, yet 'tis hard to think, I should do it here, where fraud must become Sacriledge, and no less impiety than Robbing that very Holy Altar, before which I so constanlty pay'd my Devotions, wherein the thoughts of the present instances of my Cousenage, must continually upbraid and torture me.
All this severally and jointly considered, may amount at least to a Violent presumption, of the falsity of the Observators simple Allegation, to any man, whose prejudices or inte∣rest have not made him resolve to believe any Scandals, tho' never so unreasonable, of Prance, and blindly to swallow, without chewing, any thing he meets with in an Observator. For nothing can be more absurd, than to imagin, that I, thus circumstanc'd, should be guilty of the Grand Cheat he would now fix upon me, so contrary to the common bent of my Inclinations, as well as justice, and so highly against all Gratitude as well as the apprehensions of Religion, and attended with such apparent hazards and under a certainty of being discovered, and all this for so paltry a profit, as could be expected from such a business; and also when I had not the least Temptations of want to prompt to it; for 'tis well known, that, by her Majesties favour and the interest I had with the Roman Clergy, and Gentlemen of that perswasion, I had a very Competent Trade, and tho' I always liv'd freely for a Person of my condition, yet I may justly averr that when I fell into my troubles in 78. I was worth a 1000. l. And no less was attested (as I have been Credibly Informed) to his Majesty and Council by a worthy Gentleman, still in the Commission of the Peace, on his view of my Shop, and House, when I was first seized. But the Observators suggestions are not only Improbable, but Notoriously false, which if I make appear by sufficient Testimony upon Oath, and reasons necessarily Conclusive (than which two, I know not amongst men any stronger proof) I hope I shall convince Mr. L'Estrange, or at least, the rest of the World, that I am grosly abused and stande∣red by him in this Matter. First, therefore, be pleased to read the following Affidavit; and withall, Note, that the Person, that made it, is of the Roman Catholick Communion. Sarah Billing, wife of Robert Billing, of the Savoy, in the County of Middlesex Gold∣smith, maketh Oath; That she this deponent about eight years since, did Board with Mr. Miles Prance Goldsmith, at his house in Princess-street near Covent Garden, for the space of a whole year and upwards. In which time, she this deponent, knows and does well remem∣ber, that the said Miles Prance was imployed to make an Antependium for the Altar, with steps to the said Altar, at her Majesties Chappel (then) at Sommerset-house; and she, this de∣ponent did diverse times see and observe the several parts of that work, and see the Screws made thereunto, which were of Brass, onely on the heads there were silver Plates sodered un∣der. And this deponent saith, that the making of the said Screws of Brass in that manner, was with the knowledge and Consent of the persons concerned; for she, this deponent, did know Mr. Plum and Mr. Coupledyke, who were some of the persons, as she then understood, that im∣ployed Mr. Prance above that worke, and she hath seen them viewing the said work, and having the said Brass Screws in their presence, looking on them, and heard them discoursing Mr. Prance about the same: They saying, that the said Screws being of Brass, would do as well as if they had been Silver, or words to that very effect and purpose. And also she hath seen Doctor Godden (as she was then told that was his Name) viewing the same: And the Screws were Brass, and that only the fashion, or making, and Silver on the heads of them Reckoned for, was Notorious not only to Mr. Prances Servants and Workmen, but to the Gentlemen before named, and several others or Her Majesties Servants, who frequently came to view the same, being a very fine and extraordinary piece of work, which (together with her being continually about the house and shop) caused this Deponent to take the more particular no∣tice of, and better to remember the same. Sarah Billing. Jurat. Coram me 10 die Aprilis, 1682 John Frederick. The Observator, Numb. 129. undertakes to comment after this manner, upon this Affidavit, and says, the Gentlewoman was imposed upon in the wording (which is a Civil way of telling her, she was perjur'd) for says he, she declares since, that by seeing the Screws made, she only meant after they were made—Now whether she did ever so declare, I know not, but however if she did, 'tis nothing to the purpose, the question in dis∣pute not being whether she stood by, all the while every one of the Brass Screws were
making, nor is it to be imagined she could, since they were made at several times, and perhaps by several hands. But whether I made, or caused them to be made clandestinly, and without the Privacy or Consent of Doctor Godden and his Man Plum, and Mr. Coupledyke, who were the lookers after the Work; or chang'd them, after they were reckon'd for as Silver; now to this she swears positively, that they all saw them, and that she heard Plum and Coupledyke say, those Brass-Screws would do as well as Silver ones. But to take this off, Mr. L'Estrange Observator, Numb. 126, tells the World, That Plum and Coupledyke had drank many a pot of good Ale with me.—And what then Sir? The Excise was paid, and the good Wife that draw'd it, had a License; and there∣fore your Worship had nothing to do with it. Ale, especially good Ale, is the old Catholick drink of England, had we Carouz'd in other Puritanical Liquors, you might have been offended, and cryed out with little Doctor Edwards. —There's Heresy in Hopps, give Calvin Beer. But without fooling, who can think, but the Observator (who trades much in Hints and Innuendo's) intends by this Reflection to possess his Readers with an Opinion, that this Plum and Coupledyke were Confederates with me in this business of the Screws, so that to support the Scandal, here's two dead men must be exposed as Drunkards and Treacherous Cheats to their Mistress the Queen. But says he, they were no Orderers, as I assure you,—Now one would wonder, this Gentleman who vows and swears so bloodily, that he never was at Sommerset-Chappel, since His Majesties Restauration, should become so intimate with these two Men, as to know what Liquor they lov'd, and be able to aver so positively, that he can assure us, they were no Orderers—But against ten thousand of his Assurances, I tell him they were Orderers, as well as good Ale-drinkers; for they have several times given me Orders, and brought directions for Work, and particularly about this An∣tependium. Mr. L'Estrange proceeds and says, That she knows nothing, who imployed Prance, or that Brass Screws were consented to by the Persons concern'd; all which is utterly false. She swears the just contrary, and names in particular Doctor Goddin, Plum, and Cou∣pledyke, and tho' she says, that she then understood Plum and Coupledyke, were SOME of the Persons that imployed Prance, 'tis not the least blemish to her Oath; for so they were mediately under Her Majesty and Doctor Godden; and seeing them frequently coming to enquire after the Work, and give directions about, and weigh it, &c. how could she then think otherwise? Yet she says only, that she understood them to be some of the Persons, and presently adds, that she also saw Doctor Godden view∣ing the same Brass Screws. The Observator alledges further, that This Affidavit was drawn from her upon pretence, that she was to be a Witness in a suit at Law, against a Woman that had Scandaliz'd me. To which I answer, 1st. That this is another contrived falshood, there was no such pretence; 2ly. 'Tis absurd, for all the World knows, that Affidavits are not allowed in such Suits, where the Witness is living and at hand, able to testifie viva voce. And 3ly. 'Tis impertinent, for had it been so, it concerns not the Truth of what she deposes, whatever use I intend to put it to. And I cannot fathom the Gentlemans reach in this Objection, unless it be to signifie, that the Gentlewoman being a Romanist, might needs have such a kindness for him, that she would not have testified the Truth, if she' had known it would turn to his prejudice and confusion: But if he had any such thoughts, I must do her the Justice as to acquaint the World, he was grosly mistaken; for the Gentlewoman soon after, went to him, the said Mr. L'Estrange, and expostulated with him about the Abuses put upon her in subsequent Observators, and amongst the rest, his affirming that she had been my Servant (which had it been true, had nothing impaired her Evidence) but the same was altogether false, for her Father honestly paid 15 l. a year for her Board, whilst she lay at my House. In which discourse of hers with Mr. L'Estrange, another passage happened, that might give some indications of that Gentlemans Temper: For she rounding him up for broaching such false Stories against me, which tended to the Ruine of my Family: He answered (as she has declared) That he did it on purpose to Ruine me, and wondered that SHE [he un∣derstood her to be a Roman Catholick] would appear in the behalf of such a Raskal. But besides this full proof on Oath, the Circumstances of these Brass-Screws, unde∣niably evince the impossibility of any intended Fraud: For first, had I designed any such thing, I must have been a Conjurer, (which I suppose the Observator does not
take me for) before I could have effected the Cheat, and cast a Mist before Peoples Eyes; for besides that, 'tis not pretended these Celebrated Screws were Gilt or Silvered over, but plain, open, visible Brass, only Silver heads to them on the out-side; And besides, that they were made abroad by my Work-men; you are to note, that the use of them was (as aforesaid) to fix the Silver Work to the Wood that upheld it, through which they came; and were there made fast with Nuts, and the Antependium being a Moveable, on∣ly used on Solemn Festivals, and then set aside into the Sacrastry, for which purpose, there were on the back-side two large Iron Handles to bear it away by, as often as the same was so removed from the Altar; these Brass Screws were to be seen on that side, as plain as the Iron Handles, or the very Nose on the Observators Face: And I question, whether I owe it not to the Gentlemans forgetfulness, that (when his hand was in) he did not also Charge me with Transubstantiating these Handles into Iron, as well as the Screws into Brass. The Gentlewoman, as you have heard, Swears, that the Screws being Brass, was no∣torious, not only to my Servants and Work-men, but to the Gentlemen before Named, (viz. Doctor Godden, Plum, and Coupledyke) and several other of Her Majesties Ser∣vants—Now, though, in my Confinement in 78, and the Hurry and Confusion of my Family on that Account, I had the unhappiness to lose a Shop-Book, which would more fully have demonstrated it; yet by good Providence, I have one old Book still remaining in my Castody, which enough Corroborates her Testimony; there being entered a Me∣morial in these Words, viz. For a Brass Screw for the Holy Ghost, [A Figure in the An∣tependium] 10—6, that is weighing a Halfpenny weight and six Grains, being the Hand-writing of Thomas Evely, then my Servant, and since Porter to his Grace, the late Deceased Duke of Norfolk; and though a Roman Catholick, yet I have that Charity to believe, he will not deny his own Hand, which is ready to be shewn for any Gentlemans satisfaction. Nor do I doubt to Appeal to Doctor Godden himself, who I hear is still living, tho' he cannot be presumed to have now any kindness for me; yet I so much confide in his Ge∣nerosity, Veracity, and Morality, as to believe, he would do me Right herein: Nor is it credible, though I know not where that Doctor is, but that the Observator, who could with a wet Finger, bring Certificates from Salamanca in Spain, and has shewed his Correspondence at Roan, and with a Foreign Minister of State about Hubert (legally Executed for Firing London in 66) that he was not Guilty of that flagitious Crime, for which he Suffered, or was a Protestant, or Distracted, could not but as easily have found means to procure a Testimonial from Doctor Godden, had he not despaired of any relief from that Learned Gentleman. Let me add to this, That, when after the Antependium had been a considerable time in the Chappel, some of the Nuts were lost; Her Majesties Servants have brought the Brass-Screws to me, to make and fit new Nuts to them, which I think demonstrates the Brass-ness of the Screws could be no such new thing, as that Monsieur Coquus (the Man the Observator means) should with such surprize, like a second Archimedes, magnifie his Discovery, and cry out—Here's a damnable Cheat, Brass-Screws, &c. As you will find Romanc'd, Observator 127. The Gentlemans talk about Sodering of Brass unto, or upon Silver, and noise of Felony, or a Pillory, is altogether Impertinent here. 'Tis true, to incorporate Brass, or any base Metal with Silver, or to Soder it to Silver, where 'tis not visible, as in the Han∣dle of a Tankard, or the like, is justly Criminal; but to adjoin or affix an Head of Silver open and visible on a Screw or Pin of Brass, or the like; as it carries nothing with it of a Cheat, so neither is it in any way punishable; but daily practis'd, as in Looking-Glass-Frames, the Hafts of Knives, and a thousand other things,—And so much for Brass-Screws. Another matter the Observator would seem willing to have believed, is, That a Tan∣kard which I lost out of my Shop, being brought to me to have some Bruises beat out, was, after I had pretended the same was Stoln, found in my Wives Trunk. This is likewise absolutely false, and all the proof brought for it, is, The Observator, Numb. 120, says A Person being questioned by me for this Scandal, did upon his Oath declare, my Servant said—I thank God, the Tankard I was suspected for, was found in my Mistresses Trunk, amongst other Plate: Now what Evidence such an Hear-say from an idle Boy amounts to, is left to Consideration.
The very same Observator acknowledges, that I did in the year 1678, give out Bills of Notice, That this Tankard, mark'd at bottom R. B. and of such value, was taken out of my Shop; with an offer of Reward to the Discoverer, which is true, and therein was also promised, That if any had bought it, I would reimburse the full value; and in getting these Bills Printed and Publish'd, and otherwise about it, I was out of Pocket above 20 s. Now to what intent I should do this, if indeed the Tankard were not Stoln, is a Riddle: For the Tankard was brought to my Wife at my Shop, by a Servant of the Horse-shoe Tavern in Drury Lane, and so the delivery easie proveable; consequently stoln or not stoln, lost or only concealed, I was compellable by Law to make Satisfaction for it; therefore so to hide it up in a Trunk, and yet to be at the Charge aforesaid in Bills, must be Madness as well as Dishonesty. But, so far were both I and my Wife from any thoughts of defrauding the People of their Tankard, that nothing was more upon her Mind and Endeavours in the highest Disorder of our Troubles, than to make satisfaction; for, she, having upon my Sei∣sure, removed to one Madam Lees in the Pall-Mall, a Trunk wherein were Eleven Silver Tankards, and amongst them, Two bought of one Mr. Strickling, which were not paid for, and another second-hand one, which I had bought of a Gentlewoman living at a Dancing Masters in Duke-street, my Wife before Madam Lee took out the said second-hand Tankard, and two Tankards unpaid for, telling her, that a Tankard belonging to the aforementioned Tavern, was lately lost at our Shop, and she would not for the World, but it should be made good, and therefore she would allow them this second-hand Tankard for it, tho' it were of better value, and return Mr. Strickling his two Tankards again. But it being very late, Madam Lee perswaded her not to carry them that night, and so the business rested till after I had my liberty, and then I gave the Tavern another Tankard in lieu of theirs, which had been so stollen, and the beforementioned Tankard which had been in my Wifes Trunk, (and which must be the Tankard intended by the Boy, if he did ever talk at such a rate, for all the rest were new ones) I sold to one Mr. where the Owners of the other may easily satisfie themselves, whether it be the same. But the Observator, not content with buzzing this sensless Scandal, would insinuate further, as if I made away that Servant of mine; for thus he puts the question— But what became of this Prentice? And shapes an Answer thus—The report of the Neigh∣bourhood is, That (tho' he was not out of his Apprenticeship) they never heard of him since. 'Tis true, Observator 126, says, this imports no more than that he had left the Neighbour∣hood, and that by all the other Story, I was not accused of saying a Tankard was stoln, when it was not; But then I pray, to what purpose were these Stories told in Print? Is it not the usual Artifice of a Base and Cowardly Malice, to cast Scandals and Ca∣lumnies on those they have a spight against, by sly Hints and Insinuations, some∣times by seeming praise, sometimes by pretended good wishes, sometimes by dark Items, &c. All which wound as deep, and both more certainly, and irremediably, than the most broad fac'd Aspersions: Thus the same Observator Numb 127, affirms, he has not charg'd me with changing the Screws. Here I appeal to all serious Readers, if this be not the grossest shuffling and prevarication, for what then is it he would be at? Or to what intent has he amused the World with all this Bustle and Clamour? But I think Mr. L'Estranges Design herein is not unknown: And I am sure I have in my Trade deeply felt (tho' most causelesly and unjustly) the Effects on't. And I know no Man that can promise himself security from having his Reputation fly-blown with the most damnable Scandals, if he happen to fall under the Observators displeasure, and such lewd Practises be suffered to pass with impunity. And now to the Old Dog-Story, which as the Observator tells it, runs thus, That I, June 16. 1682, sent to Sam's Coffe-house for Mr. L'Estrange to that Tavern (which he will have to be with a design of some horrid Plot against him) and soon after, he being a Man of foresight, not thinking fit to come, but sending some Friends, I with most Wicked Oaths and Imprecations denyed that I sent for him—This he undertakes to prove by the Testimony of three Boys of the Wonder-Tavern; how they were in∣duced to give it, I will not enquire at present, but can prove some of them have since disowned it. But the Truth of the matter was thus, I and one Thomas Jennings a Cloth-drawer, a very Honest man, and Ingenious above most of his Quality, but frolicksome, and apt to Droll, went to the Old Dog Tavern, and having seated our selves in the Kitchin,
(no very fit Room for carrying on an Intrigue) Jennings having an occasion to speak with one, whom he thought might be at Sam's Coffee-house, ordered one Thomas Harris a little Boy in the House, (who has since own'd himself not to be above 12 years old, tho' Thompson advanced him to 20.) to go thither to Ask for him, and knowing, Mr. L'Estrange frequented that Coffee-house, and what a kindness he had for me, merrily added—If he be not there, Inquire for Mr. L'Estrange and tell him here are one or two would speak with him.—And tho' he spoke it with such an Air of Droll, that it might be easily known to be wholly Jest, nor was it imaginable a person of Mr. L'Estranges figure would on such a slight Invitation, without sending any Name, regard it, yet the Messenger being a raw Boy, not finding the Person he first ask't for there, very for∣mally (it seems) dispatcht the latter part of his Message, and Mr. L'Estrange being in the Coffee-house, and perhaps understanding from the Lad, I was in the Company, present∣ly after, several Persons came to us from Sam's, and began to quarrel with me for sending for Mr. L'Estrange; which I being wholly innocent of, as earnestly, as justly denyed, I having never had the least thought of any such matter; For as I had no Business with the Gentleman, so I had little reason to desire his Company; but that I used any such Oaths and Imprecations is false; And tho' of all mankind the Observator may be the unfittest to upbraid any body with swearing, I shall here subjoyn the Affidavit of the said Jennings, who sat close by me during all this time. Thomas Jennings, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, maketh Oath, that on Friday the 16th. of June Last about ten of the Clock in the Evening, this deponent went with Mr. Miles Prance to the Old-Dog Tavern within Ludgate, and sate down in the Kitching, with him, and this deponent sent one Thomas Harris (Servant to Mr. Allen, that keeps the said Tavern) to Sam's Coffee-house, to enquire for a friend of this Deponent, that he heard was there, and if he was not there, to enquire for one Mr. Roger L'Estrange, to tell him, there was one or two would speak with him, and some time after there came three or four persons from Sam's Coffee-house, into the aforesaid Kitching, where Mr. Miles Prance and this Deponent were, and began to quarrel with Mr. Prance, and using provoking words to him, to know his Reason, why he sent for Roger L'Estrange, which he denyed he did, but not with such Imprecations, as, by God's wounds, and by Gods Blood, and God dam' me, as this Deponent to the best of his knowledge heard, who was in the same Kitching with Mr. Miles Prance all the time; this deponent saith further, that he Enquired twice of the aforesaid Thomas Harris (that he sent) whether he ever heard Mr. Miles Prance swear such Oaths, who denied, he ever did, (as I, this deponent can prove by witnesses.) Thomas Jennings. Jurat. 8, die Augusti. 1682. Coram Job Charlton. For further Confirmation hereof, if the Attestation of a dying man may add any weight, this Mr. Jennings, being since dead in May 1683, during his sickness, he vo∣luntarily Endors'd the aforesaid Affidavit with his own hand, which is known to hun∣dreds, (for the man was acquainted with Persons of most Conditions, in this City) and ready to be produced, to any that desire it, in these words. March the 7th. 1682/3 I Thomas Jennings being in a weakly state of Body, not knowing whether I shall live a week, do Attest, all that I have sworn on the other side, before Sir Job Charlton is truth, witness my hand. Thomas Jennings. Written in the presence of John Horton. Robert Pimm.
And on this Issue, I must leave this matter (there's no sence against a Flail) 'tis plain we were in a Tavern Kitching, the Boys say, I sent for Mr. L'Estrange (the most impro∣bable thing in Nature) and then deny'd it with Oaths. Mr. Jennings swears, that he sent for him, and not I, and on his death-bed Confirms, that he, who sat next to me, heard me not Use such Lew'd Oaths, as they pretend, and that the Chief witness disown'd it af∣terwards, which is further probable, in that none of the Persons sent by Mr. L'Estrange, and whom I discoursed, who might sure have taken notice of it, as well as 2 or 3 Ubiquitary Drawers, have appeared to Attest it.—And this I think enough at pre∣sent for that Business. Another thing that Mr. L'Estrange often harps upon, is, That I should Swear he was a Papist, and this he makes to be the ground of his quarrel with me: Now, if I never Swore, nay, never so much as Said any such thing, 'tis then plain, that either Mr. L'Estrange has some other deeper and important design, in his continual Out-cries, and baiting me thus, or else, that he has troubled the World with so many sheets of Railing upon no Provocatiom, and to as little purpose. The words of my Affidavit were as follow. Midd ss. THe Information of Miles Prance, taken upon Oath, the 25th of October, 1680, before the Right Honourable the Earl of Clarendon, and the Earl of Craven, two of His Majesties Justices of the Peace, for the said County. This Deponent saith, That about three years since, he saw Mr. Roger L'Estrange three or four times kneeling at Mass in the Queens-Chappel. Miles Prance. Here's not one word of his being a Papist, for he might have come out of Curiosity to observe whether the Ceremonies here, were the same with those in other Mass-Houses beyond the Seas, where he acknowledges he has been at that Idolatry forty times, or, it maybe, being a Lover of Musick, he came only to hear the delicacy of the Voices; what∣ever brought him in thither, there he was, let him protest never so much, and write a thousand Observators to the contrary: He says, indeed, I could not say, I saw him re∣ceive; 'tis very right; and so I told His Majesty, and the Honourable Lords of the Council; for I saw no such thing, and therefore I Swore to no more than I saw; 'tis the fairer Ar∣gument, that what I Swore was Truth. But as I never Swore, so neither did I ever Say, he was, or is a Papist; for I must a∣vow, I do not know what Religion the Gentleman has been, is, or may be of, nor whe∣ther he have any Religion at all. I Confess, I have seen him sometime since he was que∣stioned about being a Papist, at his Parish-Church, and once met him at the Blessed Sacra∣ment; (to which he came, under such Circumstances as might justly make any sensible man tremble) but I have not met with any of the Parish that can say, That they ever saw him at Sacrament, or Church in times past; though he had liv'd, I believe, a dozen years before the Discovery of the Popish Plot, in that Parish. But it will be objected, There is a Book with my Name to it, and wherein this Affida∣vit of mine is recited, and the Title, L'Estrange a Papist; The Matter of the Book I own; but that Title was added by the Book-Seller; for all the Title I intended was, Depositi∣ons and Animadversions upon Roger L'Estrange, Esq; as evidently appears under my Hand, on the left-Hand Page of the Title, and in the first Page of the Book, and in several places of the Animadversions, and expresly, fol. 18. in these Words—Whether Mr. L'Estrange be a Papist or no, I will not determine. The other Affidavits there mentioned, are as follow. Midd. ss. THE Information of Lawrence Mowbray, taken upon Oath the 25th of October, 1680, Before the Right Honourable the Earl of Clarendon, and the Earl of Craven, two of His Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County. This Deponent saith, That about the first or second Sunday in June, 77. An Ac∣quaintance of one Anderson (which Anderson was Servant to Mr. Allabon in Grays-Inn) being with him in the Queens-Chappel, saluted, immediately after Mass, a Person, whom he told this Deponent, was Mr. L'Estrange, who Licensed Books. This Deponent saith,
that he hath once since seen the said Mr. L'Estrange at Mass in the Queens-Chappel, and saw him to be the same Man he formerly saw there. This Affidavit was voluntarily made by Mr. Mowbray, and I knew nothing that be would or could swear it, till he had done it. The Information of Richard Fletcher of St. Vedast alias Foster, London, Physician. Who saith, That about 3 years ago, he met Roger L'Estrange, Esq at the Half-Moon Tavern in Cheap-side, about Licensing a Book Intituled, The Works of Geber, an Arabian Prince, and Philosopher, and gave Mr. L'Estrange a Guiney for his License; and a Discourse hap∣pening about Religion; Mr. L'Estrange asked, of what Religion this Informant was? Who answered, A Catholick L'Estrange Replyed; Are you a Roman Catholick? This Informant answered, That was Nonsence; Catholick being Vniversal, and not to be Circumscrib'd. Then L'Estrange bid this Informant explain himself. I answered, That Faith, that wrought the Fear of God and to do Righteously, doth declare those that are of the Catholick Church, which I take to be the Church of England. Mr. L'Estrange then declared himself to be a Catholick of Rome, and to believe the Faith of that Church, and told this Infor∣mant, that his Definition was too large. This Informant then asked the said L'Estrange, Whether the Pope were the Head of that Church, of which he acknowledged himself a Member? Who answered, He was, and hoped e're long, many others would return to that Church, or to that effect, and further saith not. This Mr. Fletcher was to me altogether a Stranger, nor can I imagine, why he should come in to Testifie such a thing, if it were not true; but for my own part 'tis plain, I swore no such matter, as that Mr. L'Estrange was a Papist, nor will I trouble my self about it; at his own everlasting Peril be it. There is yet another Scandal brought, Observator, Numb. 226, with this Title—Prance Cures the Kings-Evil; where he tells a Story, That I, offering a Woman a Pint of Wine, should tell her, she had the Evil, and Sware by G—I had Cured several Fami∣lies my self of that said Evil, by the great Faith I have in the King, that I could do any thing at Court, and that if she had ever a Neighbour she would oblige, I would see it done. And then should say to her, Come, prithee let me stroke thee a little, &c. Now suppose it had been true, that I had play'd the Fool to talk at this rate, yet I conceive, it would not have been absolutely necessary to the preservation either of Church or State, that Mr. L'Estrange should take the pains to Print it. But the whole Truth was thus, I and my Wife and some Neighbours being at the Horse-shoe, a Woman that was also a near Neighbour, hap∣pening to come in, I askt her to drink, she began to complain to my Wife, how she was troubled with the Evil; I advised her to be touched by his sacred Majesty, which she said had been done, I replyed, then I doubted you have not Faith, but for my own part, I verily believe, that thousands by that means have received Cure, and thereupon told her, how once an acquaintance of mine, that was of a contrary O∣pinion, and had argued against me, as if there were nothing in it, but conceit; it pleased God soon after to visit Him, his Wife, and Child, all with the same Disease; then he was willing to apply himself to His Majesties healing Hands, and I was an instrument to facilitate their access, and they were all three in a very short time after Cured, which Relation is a known Truth, and the Parties still living to justifie it. Therefore I told the Woman she should have Faith; this was all that pass'd (my Wife and several others being all the while there.) There was no swearing, no boasting, that I had Cured seve∣ral Families my self, or that I would do any thing at Court, nay, nor no Kissing, nor no stroking in the case; so that here are at least five notorious Lies all on a heap in one Column, and yet the Challenges the World to instance his mistakes in 470 Papers. But it may be, the Informer was to blame; for a dull Tool of a Razor-maker happening to be in Company, tho' he drank most of the White Wine call'd for by the Woman, yet refusing to pay his Club, was taxt for spunging, who, in revenge, 'tis like, ran to Mr. L'Estrange with a Tale, and added as much as his sorry invention could furnish, and the Man of Observations the rest. Now, who can but blush, to see a Gentleman of his Parts and Figure, a man of the Age of threescore and ten or thereabouts, if not upward, a Person that besides Quevedo and Politicks, has read Seneca's Morals and Cardinal Bona, to see, I say, such an one spend∣ing the last minutes of his Life in blowing of Sope bubbles, in exercises more Childish, but only somewhat more mischievous than Taw and Span-farthing; and in making himself
a Common Pack-Horse to bring to Town two or three times a Week in Form and Method the idle Tales of every malicious Cockscomb, and in Printing Stories that carry neither Truth nor Salt with them, but would be a Disgrace to the very Conversation of a Gossiping. And now, I thought, as in pag. 35. I had done, and that the Screws, the Tankard, and the Old Dog-Story, &c. had been competently accounted for, and the first Volume of the Observators enough explained, as far as I am materially concern'd; for, as my protesta∣tion was before receiving of the Holy and Blessed Sacrament, (which I here again most so∣lemnly avow to be in all points true) I think it not necessary to repeat any thing further, since all that the Observator has replyed thereunto, will appear to every considerate Rea∣der, altogether sham and prevarication. And as I am not at leisure to play the fool with the Observator, meerly for Company, so I should lose by the Game, he getting Money (and perhaps Love and Credit with some people) for abusing of me; whereas I must de∣fend my self wholly at my own Charge, and have no small difficulty to get a few Inno∣cent Sheets printed, such is the dread of his Name, whilst he, besides the Elemosynary Gui∣nyes in abundance, makes a Revenue weekly, by flurting out Papers fill'd (amongst other things, with which I meddle not) which most egregious Scandals upon me, designed for the Ruine of my self and my Family. But still here's new Matter, an Observator of the Second Volume attacques me— I find I am to be made a continual Subject of Mr. L'Estrange's Wit and Malice, an ever∣lasting Incom to Madam Broom and her Author; And as a pleasant Lady defied her Gal∣lant to frame a Letter; barring him only the use of half a score Modish-Words [As Flames, Divinity, Passion, Stars, Darts, &c.] so I scarce know, whether it be possible for Mr. L'Estrange in his present mood, to Compose an Observator without mention of, or some squint-Reflection upon Oats or Prance. But let us review the Paper, and I think the fairest way will be, to Transcribe it, and only add a few Notes.—. Vol. 2. The Observator. Numb. 8. With the leave of Mr. Claxton the Phanatical Tayler in Exeter Court. This is Miles Prance's Observator? This is the Contents of the Chapter, after a new Fashion; the Parade to the Prize. The dreadful hundred-handed Gyant of High-Holbourn, arm'd with more Quills than a Porcupine, is setting himself in Battel Array against the Taylor of Exeter Court, and resolv'd to confound a man of Fashion. Behold how Indignation sparkles at his Eyes, like a Turky-Cocks at the sight of a Red Herring, How Grim Wrath, more fierce than a School-Master's, sits upon his storming Brow, and he breaths nothing but Fire and Tow, Then, wo to the Knight of the Thimble and all his Host? Fly Claxton! Fly, the Observator comes, Beating his Printers Balls for Kettle-Drums, And mounts at thee the Dead-doing Gun from Bromes. Why, Phanatical Taylor? The man I believe will be found as much a Church∣man as Mr. L'Estrange—But he must and shall be a Phanatick, for as you'l hear presently, he was such an impudent Heretick, as to talk against Transubstantiation, even over against Sommerset-House-stairs. Trim. Don't you know one Mr. Claxton, a Taylor in Exeter Court yonder by Exeter Exchange. Observ. Yes, yes.— [Hold, I am afraid this is a Whisker, for I believe, the Observator knows Clax∣ton no more than the Pope of Rome—but let's go on]—A great Crony of Miles Prance [no more his Crony, than the little Bodies-Maker, that carried this idle Tale, is to Mr. L'Estrange, whom he then affirmed to have seen but the day before] They were at the Grecian Coffee-house together, upon Saturday last, in Catherine-street against Sommerset-House-stairs, [very true] and they went afterwards to Hudsons Coffee-house in Drury Lane [right again; for I love to acknowledge all the Truths I find in an Observator, they are so Rare.] Trim. I heard 'em upon a discourse of Transubstantiation, [I told you why he branded the Honest Man for a Phanatick] one would not think, that Two plain Fellowes should
talk so shrewdly about Religion. [Your Worship must excuse me; for since I left the Roman Church, I have read the Bible, whereby I find not only Transubstantiation to be a meer Fiction, but also that back-biting and slandering are very grievous sins, and without Repentance damnable. Let me beg of you to read that Good Book, which, if well heeded, will profit you more than all your Collected Guinneys.] Observ. Oh! There's no body understands the Transubstantiating (as a body may say) [pray observe by this Parentheses, how tender the Gentleman is, lest he should pro∣fane that accursed word, which has been the occasion of destroying above a Million of Bodies, and God knowes how many Millions of Souls] of Silver into Brass, better than Prance. [This Scandal is already Answered] And then Claxton's Old Dog at the light within. But I'me afraid Prance's Religion will never carry him to Heaven; for he's almost always so damnable Drunk, that the narrow way will hardly hold him. [As to my being almost always Drunk, 'tis only an Observatorism, that is, a Scandal without proof or pretence; not that I will Pharsaically excuse my self from a Vice which in this Age is grown almost Epidemical, and not to take up one's Cups freely, is enough to brand one with the Title of a Phanatick. And those that shall peruse the Observators Writings, shall find him elsewhere Apologizing for such Debauchees; but as to my own Guilt or Innocence this way, I appeal to my Neighbours and those I convers'd with for five years past; in the mean time I doubt not but the Christian Reader will be astonisht to find Mr. L'Estrange whilst he's charging me with Drunkenness, at the same time wallowing himself in Profaneness, by such an unseemly and irreverent abuse in scurrilous Drollery of the words of our blessed Saviour—straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, &c.] Trim. Come, come, keep a good Tongue in your Head, [good advice, but I am affraid the Observator will never observe it] For Mr. Claxton I can tell ye is a rising man, Come to me at 8 a Clock to morrow morning, says Mr. Prance, (on Sunday that is) and thou shalt take measure of my Wife, my Daughter, and my Cozen; Miles Prance says it, and thou shalt have my Custom, Claxton, [this is Mr. Observators Dream, I never talkt of Wife, or Cozen, or my Custom, only I might perhaps bid the man come one Morning, and take measure of my Daugh∣ter, that being the only business I had with him; but since the Observator is become so great a Zealot for the strict observation of the Sabbath, I being a plain Fellow, and he so great a Casuist, would gladly be resolv'd, which is the greatest Sin—Suffering a Tay∣lor to take Measure at 8 a Clock, (and so before Divine Service) on a Sunday, or imploy∣ing (and upon the matter inforcing) a Printer to work the greatest part of that Sacred Day? And as to my own keeping thereof, I dare appeal to the Reverend Doctor Sharp (in whose Parish both I and Mr. L'Estrange dwell, and whose worthy pains in the Ministry, I can never enough acknowledge, and to the rest of that Parish, which of the two, Mr. L'Estrange or I have most constantly frequented Divine Service, or been oftnest at receiving the Holy Communion there?—But let us go on with the Observator.]—This was mighty kindly taken, let me tell ye, and if Mr. Prance goes on with a certain business this Term; Mr. Claxton will stand by him as far as 100 l. goes, for his Civility. Observ. And what may that Business be? Trim. He's resolv'd to try a touch with you about the Scandal of the Screws, you'd give an Hundred Guinneys Composition for it, with all your heart, he says, [This is still the dreams of the Observator, he first Charges Claxton with Champerty and Maintenaire, Crimes highly punishable by our Laws, and then Avers, that I should say, He (that is, the Obser∣vator) would give mea 100 Guinneys Composition. 'Tis most true, I believe that his Papers (I mean wherein I am Concern'd) are most justly Indictable for Libels, and besides the Author answerable on an Action of Scandal, but that I then threatned it, or had any discourse tending that way, is false; what if formerly, I declin'd suing him on Advice, of a good old Proverb, or what if I still have a mind, to be reveng'd on him by forgiving him, the Gentleman is not to prescribe to me, either the time or measures, I shall take for Righting my self. Observ. Yes, yes, I heard as much, [from whom I beseech you?] and that he had a Guinney for an Halter for me, ['twas ill husbandry, a Two-penny one, would serve as well] And so Prance and Claxton took their Turns at the Ribaldry, [and you and your Spies were nobly imploy'd, to make Observators on't,] while a splay-fac'd Animal that was there, made at third man, and gave a wry-mouth,-Amen to't: (This latter Clause may serve as an Index of Mr. L'Estranges Conscience, Respect to Truth, Honesty, and Common Civility, since
therein with an Vnmannerly Bussconry, bestows the Language of his oft Cited Authors; Western Barg-men, upon a Gentleman of as comely a Person, as good Quality (setting Commission aside) and I believe, I may say, as fair an Estate as himself, so over credulous he is to Reports, and so rash, in stinging abroad his Squibbs and Scandals in Print, without the least Colour of Truth, any appearance of Reason, or pretence of Provocation: For the truth of this matter was thus, Claxton and I did go into the Grecian Coffee-House, and sat Chatting there for some time, two strange Gentlemen in the Room, being officiously informed, (as I understand) of my Name, did, it seems, Eves-drop our talk, and at last Removed to us, and began to quarrel with me, about Mr. L'Estrange, al∣ledging that I should say, I would give a Guinney for an Halter for him: Tho'l do not know, nor to the best of my Remembrance, believe, that I said any such thing; hereupon words being mutually Bandied, and another matter (of which by and by) falling into debate, the Gentlemen grew so furious, that one of them threatned to Cane me, and I observing, he had never a Cane, and unwilling a Gentleman should lose his Humour, Civilly profer'd him mine, but he was not pleas'd to make use on't, and so Claxton and I went out of the House, as soon after the said two persons also did. And tho' they were, and are altogether Strangers, to both of us, yet by their Garb and Meen, I take them still to be Gentlemen, and consequently, do not believe, they were the Observators Mercuries, but rather think that the little dapper Boddice-maker, (who possibly had no better Imployment,) might be the Observators Intelligencer, only this is to be Noted, that whilst the two unknown, were Railing and Upbraiding me, with several stories, which I suppose, they had taken up, meerly on the Credit of an Observator, there hap∣pening to be in the Room, by Chance, one Squire Penny, (and who was, if he still be not a Roman Catholick) he was Generously pleased, to stand up, and say to this Effect— Gentlemen I have known Mr. Prance for 20 years and above, and never knew, or heard that ever he wrong'd Man, Woman, or Child: For his late Actions, I have nothing to say, I pity him; meerly for which Civil Attestation of truth, from a Gentleman, that had known me from my youth, Mr. Observator falls foul upon him with the slovenly Epithets of Splay-fac'd, Wry-mouth'd, &c. Now if this be sufferable, I know not any Gentleman that can be safe from being exposed at the like, or a worse rate in Print, if he do not quickly Fee the Observator with a Present. But Mr. Observator, that feigns so many things as said there which were not, omits one matter which was the chief subject of our Debate; which was, whether Mr. L'E∣strange did not hand the Paper, Intituled THE LORD PETRE's LETTER, to the Press (which no doubt his Informers told him of, as well as the rest, and I believe 'twas that put him into such an heat, tho' he prudently declines to mention it) for I did tell the Gentlemen, that I heard, and doubted not to prove, that Mr. Braddil in Bartholomew Close, who Printed the Letter, had declared that Mr. L'Estrange brought or sent the same to him to be Printed, but withall gave him instructions not to Print his (the said Mr. Braddils) name to it: Now if this should happen to be true, that Mr. L'Estrange was the occasion of publishing that Paper, wherein all our worthy Pro∣testant-Writers, (and amongst them, the most Learned KING IAMES, and the Right Reverend the present Bishop of Lincoln) who have charg'd the Church of Rome with holding and teaching the Doctrine of Deposing and taking up Arms against, and Murdering of Heretical Kings, are traduc'd as false Accusers, and therein to have been Malicious and Ignorant; Nay, a Paper which on the same score flyes in the Face of the whole Church of England, and directly gives her the Lye, who for many years in her Publick Establish't Liturgy, avow'd the Faith of the Church of Rome to be Faction, and her Religion Rebellion. I would demand of Mr. L'Estrange, or any of his Guinney-givers, whether the causing of such a Paper to be publish't, be to be numbered amongst the Good-services he has done for the Church of England. In the mean time, go on. But faith, Trimmer! [remember Mr. L'Estrange is a severe Magistrate against swear∣ing] when Prance's hand is in, he should do well to go through with his Work; and I'le give ye now a piece of History that is New to ye, [and yet this New-By-blow is of such a Ricketty feeble Constitution, that it has been four years crawling in the dark, be∣fore it could waddle abroad in the standing stool of an Observator] and puts down for∣ty of his Antependiums. [Some lies, 'tis acknowledg'd are heavier than others] For 'twere a thousand pities that a man that is so willing, should want Materials.
Trim. We shall have some tedious Tale now, but pray will you make it as short as the matter will permit. And without any Jesustical Equivocations, Shifts, or mental Reservati∣ons. [This Trimmer, I find, is an honest foresighted Fellow, he knows, this sly Gray∣bearded youth the Observator, is much given to tell meer Tales, and long ones, sea∣son'd for Fools-Palates, to make them to go merrily down, with Jesustical Sawce.] Observ. Why, then be it known to all men, That Miles Prance Silver-Smith, Screws and Nails-maker, Sacrament-protester, Old Dog Blasphemer, and Evidence for the cutting of the Duke of York's Picture. [Thes shews you the Rhetorick of an Observator; only as to the last words, 'tis fit to acquaint the Reader, that some time after the grand insolence committed in cutting the Picture of His Royal Highness in Guild-Hall, I be∣ing in company with several others, there happened to come in, one John Brooks formerly (if not still) a Papist, who in discourse own'd and avow'd more than once, That he cut the said Picture; now I appeal to all the World, what I could do less in respect of the Publick, and His Royal Highness my Soveraigns Brother, than to take notice of it, that the matter on a fair legal Tryal might be further examined and discussed? Accordingly I and another person present, gave Information thereof (viz. that such an one had to said and acknowledg'd) and thereupon Brooks was bound over, and I and the other person attended at Sessions to Evidence his Words, and a third Witness present, was ready to have deposed the Words, if it had proceeded to a Tryal. But when we desired an Indictment to be drawn, could not procure it. And so the matter was pass'd, tho' the party accused did not (as far as I could understand) deny the Words, but only pretended he was drunk when he spoke them. Upon which whole matter, whether I did any thing unbecoming a Loyal Subject, tender of the honour of the Royal Family, is left to Consideration.] Go on, Did, in February 1679, accuse Mr. Richard Fincham of being a Priest [he means Popish] which said Mr. Fincham was taken into the Custody of a Messenger upon that Information. [Here are several falsities; I did not accuse Mr. Richard Fincham of being a Priest, nor secondly, was he taken on my Information; but as he was apprehended upon suspicion, so I was examined whether I knew him? and what account I could give of him?] brought before the Council to an∣swer the Charge, and Mr. Miles Prance Silver-Smith there present to make good his In∣formation, The Council askt him how became to know Mr. Fincham to be a Priest, The Silver-Smith did there upon his Oath declare; That John Fincham the Brother of the said Richard told him so; upon this the Earl of Essex demanded of what Religion and what sort of man the said John Fincham was? Prance replyed, that he was a good Church of Eng∣land-man, and a very honest Gentleman, and a Justice of Peace in the Isle of Ely, whereupon she said Richard Fincham was continued in Custody. [This is a whole scheme of of untruths twisted up, and, to unravel it, I must rightly state the matter of Fact; The Question before the Council was, whether Richard Fincham was a Popish Priest? And I was examined to it, and tho' with a common-knowledge ground∣ed on the most violent presumptions, I did not question but he was so, as having made him a Chalice and other Priestly Utensils, and knew he was generally reputed amongst Catholicks to be my Lady Savils Priest, tho' passing (as 'tis common) under the notion of her Steward, yet, not being able positively to swear him to be a Priest, because I had never been present, when he officiated the Mass, I was so justly tender in a Case, where a man's Life was concern'd, that I only deposed as to my belief grounded on hear-say, and that his Brother acknowledged it to me, which is most true, and if the Gentelman have a bad memory, I cannot help it. And being hereupon interrogated by some of the Honourable Lords (that it was by the Earl of Essex may be true, but do not remember it) touching the said Brother Mr. John Fincham, I answered, That he was a Justice of Peace in the Isle of Ely; and 'tis possi∣ble I might add, a very honest Gentleman, as far as I knew. But whereas the Observator averrs, that I then deposed he was a Good Church of England-man; (though for ought I know, or ever said, he may be so) yet that I then swore it, is false; for how should I assert such a thing, that never had an opportunity to see him in a Protestant Church in my life? And besides, it thwarts that Evidence which I then truly gave, (and which I should not, but upon this provocation recite) for my own Vindication (not to cast any Scandal on the Gentleman) according to the Copy, as it was taken and delivered to me soon after I was examined by one of the Sub-Clarks, belonging to the Honourable Board, viz. That not long before the Plot was Discovered, I went to one Mrs. Halls in Ea∣gle-Court, about some business to Mr. Jeremy Jennings a Priest belonging to Mr. Ramsey,
living near Norwich, where I met with Mr. Fincham, a Justice of the Peace for the life of Ely, and one Mr. Poulton, a Jesuit, and some others, (whom I knew to be Priests though I knew not their Names) after Mr. Fincham was gone, I asked Mr. Jennings, what he came thither for, and how he durst trust himself with him, being a Justice of the Peace. Pough said he) he is acquainted with many Priests in that Country, as their Friend, and will do us no harm, but what good he can, being a Catholick in his Heart, and will shew himself so, if the times turn, but now cannot in respect of his Place; yet, says he, he does us all the kindness he can. Then speaking to Mrs. Hall, the Landlady of the House, thereof, she replyed, He comes often hither, when he is in Town. But whether Mr. John Fincham knew these Persons, that he then was there in compa∣ny with, to be Popish Priests, or whether, what they said of him were true, I know not, they being Men of Intrigue, who often love to cast Scandals on the most Zealous Prote∣stants, to render them suspected; all the intent I recite for, is to shew how improbable it was, that, at the same time I swore this, I should also swear (as Mr. Observator says) the same Gentleman to be a good Church of England-man; though still, as aforesaid, for ought I know, or ever said, he may be such. My acquaintance with Mr. Richard Fincham was ve∣ry intimate; for besides the work I had done for him, I have yet several Letters of his by me (though more or less) which I am ready to shew his Brother, or any Gentleman that desires it, Dated from Red-Hall in Yorkshire, Subscribed—Your Friend, Servant, and Country-man, Richard Fincham, and the like obliging Terms, and particularly one Dated January 25, 77▪ whereby having ordered me the Receipt of some Money, he has these words—I have by the bearer hereof (a Protestant Gentleman, and Neighbour of mine) sent you, &c. Which Parenthesis, Protestant Gentleman, will, I think, to any unbyassed understanding, signifie no less than an Item given me, that I should not take notice to him, of the Writers being a a Priest, or to call him Father Fincham, as amongst Roman Catholicks is usual, and with∣out such Precaution I might have done: Now this Gentleman that paid me the Mo∣ney, was, as I understand, a Justice of Peace near Leeds, though I have forgot his Name; if he be still living, he cannot but remember it. In a word, whether Mr. Richard Fincham be a Popish Priest or no, if Mr. L'Estrange (that seems so intimate with the Family) will be pleas'd to tell the World his Lodgings at present; 'tis odds, but somthing more may be said. In the interim, here his Apologist, the Observator, Mr. Richard Fincham immediately upon this proceeding, gave his Brother John Fincham an account of what had passed, by the very next Post, Who applyed himself forthwith, upon the receipt of the Letter, to Francis Bell Esq (a Justice of the Peace in the said Isle) before whom, he swore this following Affidavit. John Fincham of Outwell, within the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge Esquire, did upon the 5th of March, 1678, make this following Affidavit before Francis Bell, Esq one of his Majesties Justices of the Peace of the said Isle That whereas the said John Fincham, is informed that one Mr. Prance hath lately declared upon Oath, to the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council, that he the said Mr. Prance was told by the said John Fincham, that Mr. Richard Fincham, his Brother was a Priest. He this Deponent doth Swear and Aver, that the same is wholly false and untrue; and that he is, and hath been so far from ever saying so, that he doth depose, he doth not know any such thing, as his Brothers being a Priest; nor did he ever know the said Mr. Prance, or to his knowledge, ever see him in his whole life. This Affidavit being sent up to the Lord Chancellor, the King and Council there∣upon ordered Mr. Fincham's Discharge. As to this Affidavit of Mr. Richard Fincham's, as far as it contradicts mine, I avow mine still to be true, and if I am not misinform'd, by the Civil Law at least, a Domestick Witness, that is, one so near related, is scarce allowable, or at least lyes under suspicions —but leaving that, I shall only remark, That the Gentleman swears, he doth not KNOW any such thing as his Brother's being a Priest, which signifies no more than that he did not see him take Orders; now can it be imagined, (especially at such a juncture as that was) but the Gentleman, had he not believed his Brother to be a Priest, would have added—nor believes him so to be, or some such words? Note also, that the Observator says, what I deposed was in February 79. And this Affidavit of Mr. John Fincham's, he dates March the 5th. 1678, (almost a whole year be∣fore) which would intimate, that Mr. John Fincham swore prophetically, or by way of prevention. But the Observator Numb. 10. having recollected himself, pretends 'twas a mistake for want of a fraction; and if it were so, I believe it was the first Affidavit in
England, that e're was Dated with such a Fraction, as 1678/9, but since he is pleased to lay the blame on the Sot of a Compositor, as young Princes in Schools are whipt by Proxy, and perhaps old Authors have the like priviledge; let it pass. But whereas Mr. John Fincham Swears he never knew Prance (to his knowledge, or saw him in his life. I must remembe that Gentleman, besides my being in his Company at Mrs. Hall's afore-mentioned, and else-where in London, I once went to his House, at the Request of his Brother, the Goldsmith, then living in the Strand, to see a Child of his there, and was Civilly entertained by Mr. John Fincham, and did eat and drink there: and another time before that, he procured me a place at the Court holden at Wisbitch, to hear the Tryals and Proceedings there, where I stood just behind his back, as he sat on the Bench. Trimmer. Well-And here's one Oath against t'other. [Ay, and let the Readers impar∣tially Impanell'd give their Verdicts.] Observator. Patience, I prithee, in August 1679, Prance being in the Isle of Ely, and finding that his Credit was sunk from Silver to Brass, by the confounding a Deposition of Mr. John Fincham [of which Prance never heard word or syllable, till in this Observator, January 26, 1683.] he burst out presently into Invectives against the said John Fincham, and said, he was a Papist, and that he had a Priest in's House, and that he had sometimes 4 or 5 Priests and Jesuits; and that he had seen him in the Company of as many in London: All which he was ready to prove: And these words were made out by the Informations of two Gentlemen of the Neighbourhood, as they were taken before Francis Bell and Thomas Edwards, Esquires, Justices of the Peace within the said Isle, on the 11th and 12th of August, 1679. The Information of Edward Squire Gent. Chief Constable of the North part of the Hundred of Witchford, taken before us Francis Bell and Thomas Edwards, Esquires, Ju∣stices of the Peace within the Isle of Ely, &c. August 11: 1679. This Informant saith, That on Fryday the 8th Instant, he happened in the Compa∣ny of one Miles Prance, where discoursing about the next Election to be of Parliament∣men, Prance was very earnest for the Chusing of one Mr. Partherich, for Knight of the Shire for Cambridg-shire, declaring that he was a fit Man for that purpose: And pre∣sently after he began to discourse of one Mr. Fincham, a Justice of the Peace, and said that he would prove him a Papist, and that he hath a Priest now in his House, and sometimes he hath four or five; and that he the said Prance had seen the said Mr. Fin∣cham in the Company of as many Priests and Jesuits in London; and told this Infor∣mant, that he wondered, the Justices of the Peace should be so much Fools, or had so little wit, as to make him, this Informant, Chief Constable; and said he would have most of the Gentlemen in the Country up, with several other Reflecting and Scanda∣lous Discourses upon, as well the said Mr. Fincham, as the Gentlemen in the Coun∣try. Edward Squire. The Information of William Gent, of March, taken ut Supra, August 12, 1679. This Informant saith, that upon Fryday at Night, the 8th of this instant August, one Mr. Miles Prance, and another person, to this Deponent unknown, came into the Company of him, this Deponent. He, this Deponent, having then some Neighbours in Company with him, at the House of one William Phillipson, in March aforesaid; and after some familiar Discourse had passed, between him, the said Mr. Prance, and this Deponent, the said Mr. Prance being very intimately acquainted with him, this Deponent, he, the said Mr. Prance, did ask this Deponent, where one Mr. Fincham was? To which this Deponent answered, He liveth very near me in the Country; and thereupon he, this Deponent; did tell him, it was reported, that he should say he was a Papist; to which Mr. Prance replyed, He was a Papist, and he would justify him to be a Papist; and he believed that he had a Priest at his House at that time; and that he knew him to have been in the Company of four or five Jesuits at a time: And the said Mr. Prance did also give other reproachful Speeches, which he, this Depo∣nent, did not take any particular notice of. Francis Bell. Thomas Edwards. William Gent.
As to all this, I desire the Reader to observe, 1st. That these Informatio  not said to be sworn to, and truly for the Persons sake concern'd, I hope they are not upon Oath. 2ly. The two Informers (like the two Witnesses in the Story of Susanna) do not much agree. Mr. Squire says, that Prance was very earnest for chusing of one Mr. Partherich for Knight of the Shire for Cambridge-shire, declaring that he was a fit man for that purpose. Now, Mr. Gent (who was present all the time of our Cotloquy) says nothing of that, and so far is it from Truth, that I do protest I do not know, nor ne∣ver saw that Mr. Partherich, here mentioned, in my whole Life. And tho' possibly I might then have had some pretence to have concern'd my self in the Election of Parliament-men for that County, yet, I appeal to all the Inhabitants, whether ever I endeavoured to move any one of them (except only this worthy Squire, if he say true) to give their Votes for Mr. Partherich or any other person whatsoever? For in∣deed, I living elsewhere, never thought it fit to concern my self with any such matters. 2ly. Mr. Squire says, I said, Mr. Justice hath a Priest now in his House, but Mr. Gent says. I said—I believed he had a Priest at his House at that time. Now he that forgot so much, and took no particular notice of our talk, as he says, might possibly misremember all the rest. 3ly. Mr. Gent says, I askt him, where one Mr. Fincham was? To which the Deponent answered, he liveth very near in the Country; a likely business! as if I, that was born within five miles of Mr. Justice Fincham, and have been so frequent∣ly in that Country, I, that was so well acquainted with Richard Fincham, so intimate with his Brother the Goldsmith, and with another Brother of theirs the Sea-man, I that have visited their near Relation, Fincham in Wisbitch-Goal, besides my familiarity with the Justice in London, at his House at Well, &c. should yet be such an Ig∣noramus to ask the advice of this small Lawyer, where (forsooth) one Mr. Fincham was, and receive for answer, as News—That he liv'd near in the Country—Let all Mankind judge of the probability of such an Information. Fourthly, Mr. Squires own words (as here Printed, for if either of the Gentle∣men are wrong'd, they must seek satisfaction from their Over-officious friend the Observator) I say by his own words it appears, there was a fewd and something of Malice in the Case; for at the same time, he charges me (tho' falsly) with saying, That I wondered the Justices of Peace should be so much Fools, or had so little Wit, as to make him Chief Constable. And I might add, that Mr. Gent, the other Informer (as they are here styled) was not likely to be Guilty of any good will to me; retaining so this day a Bond of mine, about the surrender of some Land, the Condition where∣of is satisfied, and the whole Story of which I am not willing to tire the Reader with, unless further provok'd. These Remarks being premised, I shall next subjoin the Truth of the matter of Fact, not in my own words, but attested by the Person that was then with me, viz. Mr. Pask, a Citizen of London, one well known to be far from any suspicion of Disloyalty, who immediately after this bustle happened at March, did with his own hand, write down and deliver to me this following Attestation, viz. Memorandum, On the 8th day of August 1679. Mr. Miles Prance and my self were at the White-Heart Inn in March, asking for Mr. Gent, The Landlord answered, he was in the House, Mr. Prance went to the Company's Room, desired leave, if not bu∣siness, where he was received seemingly in kindness, and also desired me to walk in: Where presently Mr. Squire and Mr. Harrison asked him, if he was come to choose Esq Partherich Parliament-Man, intimating he was a dissaffected Person, and not fit to be chose. Mr. Prance made answer to Mr. Harrison he was an Ass, for to tell him such a thing, and he was not to acquaint him, what he came about. Mr. Squire and Mr. Harrison made answer, that Prance was a Rogue, and Esq Patherich a Phanatick Rogue, so was all that stood for him. They abused Mr. Prance with the Language of Rogue, a fellow not to be trusted, a murthering Rogue, and what he had said was all false, bid him make haste home, and give the King Confession. But further, most true it is, that this Mr. Squire, and one Mr. Harrison, did not only use ill Language to me, but pursued me to one Mrs. Walsomes House, threatned to knock me o'th' head, and throw me into the River, and afterwards offered to Assault me in my Lodging, so that Mr. Pask was forc'd to draw his Sword to keep them down. For which I did, as justly I might, tell them I would call them to an account, which it seems, he is pleased to express by the Phrase; That I would have most of the Gentlemen in the Country up. But whether this Titular Squire and Mr. Harrison the Tape-seller be Gentlemen, or most
of the Gentlemen of the Country, I leave to the Heralds. This is certain, I had sought Repa∣rations from the Rioters for the abuse, had not Squire Williamson interceded, alledging they were in Drink, and so I civilly pass'd it by, and never heard more of that matter, till now I found the Gentlemens Information in Print—Lets go on, the Observator next brings to light two other Papers, in these words. You shall now have Two Certificates of August the 12th, 1679, in Justification of M. John Fincham. WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do humbly Certifie, That we have known John Fincham, of Outwell, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cam∣bridge, Esq by the space of twenty years, during all which time, we have had a fre∣quent Converse with him, as being our Neighbour, and of whom we have observ'd a constant and dutiful Complyance with the Commands of the Church of England, of which we do believe him to be a true member. August 12. 1679. Francis Bell. Thomas Edwards. THis is Humbly to Certifie, That I John Leigh, Clerk, have been Rector of the Parish Church of Outwell, in the County of Norfolk, by the space of 27 years; all which time, I have had a personal knowledge of John Fincham, Esq and with whom, being one of my Parishoners, I have had, both in Health and Sickness, very particular Converse. And in all my Conversation with him, I have ever observed him to bear a great regard to the Commands of the Church of England. Of which Church I do with great Reason believe him to be a true and obedient Son. August 12, 1679. John Leigh. I question not the Truth of these Certificates; for neither do I know, nor ever said (with the leave of the Observator, and his Informers, be it spoken) that Justice Fincham was a Papist (and yet had I no value for an Oath (as the Observator pretends) I might as readily have Sworn that, and that I saw him at Mass; for Mass was frequently said in Mrs. Hall's House; but I did never see him so concerned, and therefore only deposed what I knew, and what I saw and heard) therefore I again Repeat it, that I never knew, or said the Gentleman was a Papist or Roman Catholick, or that 4 or 5, or any Romish Priests were in his House. But this I will say, That I conceive these Certificates might have been better worded in favour of the Gentleman, than only by these Terms of his, Complyance with, and Regard to the Commands of the Church of England, since it would have done well (especially at such a Juncture as that was) to have likewise expressed his Zeal in and for the Doctrines of our Church, and to have Certified his Active diligence in Discountenancing and Suppressing Papists, &c. Trimmer. And now we have done I hope. [Better never have begun.] Observator. Within a Trifle, Trimmer, July 13. 1681, It happened. That Prance and another with him, came into the House of one Greenwood in the Isle, where John Fincham, Henry Oxburgh, and Edm. Williamson, Esquires, were in Company: Mr. Williamson having told Mr. Fincham, which of the two was Prance; Mr. Fincham upon this, fell to talk with Prance at a distance, of his being in the Country, about two years before, which he owned. And he told him of a Neighbour of his▪ one Mr. Fincham, that complained of very ill Language he had given him. But Prance denied it, and desired much to know how the Story went: So Mr. Fincham up and told France the whole Business, according to the Informations; who Swore heartily, 'twas no such matter, and that he never spake an ill word of Mr. Fineham, but knew him to be a Protestant and a worthy man. This passed in a great deal of Company: But Prances Eyes are as bad by Day-light, as Oats are by Candle-light; and he knew Mr. Fincham no more than the Man in the Moon, till at last Mr. Fincham himself brought the Silver-Smith to a better un∣standing. I am apt to think Mr. Fincham will Con the Observator no thanks for this Paragraph, for sure the whole Town of March, who were almost all Alarm'd with this Accident, have not quite forgot it. However for their sakes, and the Justices, and my own, I must set the Story right. 'Tis most true, that about the time mentioned, I and another or two happened to come to Greenwoods House, being an Inn, where several Gentlemen, and amongst them, Mr. Justice Fincham, were (as I afterwards understood) about taking Horse to Ride away, but Mr. Fincham having, as I believe, some design to expose me, after they saw me come in, they staid, and Squire Williamson, who was one of the Gentlemen, came out, and in∣vited me into their Room; I excused my self at first, as being weary with my Journey,
but at last consented, when I and my Company came in, there were several Gentlemen in the Room, and some that I did not know. Presently some of them began to ask me what News? I told them, I seldome much minded any News, but my own business, and besides had been several days out of London, and so could tell them nothing, but what I believed they had already heard, then one of them askt me, if I knew Justice Fincham? To which I answered, yes, I do, and presently looking amongst the Company (for I was but newly come into the Room) I saw the Justice leaning on a Bench or Couch, with his Mounteer-Cap placed in an odd unusual fashion, viz. the corners not forwards and backwards, but cross his Head, sideways, looking in that posture somewhat like a Country Morrice-dancer, with a Cushion on his Head; but for all that I knew his Worship well enough, and addressing my self to him with the respect becoming me, said — Mr. Fincham, your humble Servant. At which all the Company fell a laughing, (and his Worships being deceived in thinking I should not know him in that posture, became soon after a frequent talk in the Town.) And then, and not till then, Mr. Fincham did speak, (for before I was come into the Room he had not utter'd a word, much less askt such questions, and had such discourse with me as the Observator pretends) but then indeed he did say, that he never saw mebefore in his life, that he knew of, nor never told me that his Brother was a Priest. But as I then to his face justi∣fied the latter, so as to the first, I gave him some tokens to refresh his memory, as my com∣ing to his House to see his Brothers Son, and his particular Entertainment of me there. But he spake not a word about my calling him Papist, nor was there any the least mention of these Informations, nor any swearing heartily or unheartily, as the Observator suggests. And I believe Squire Williamson will do me the right to justifie this to be in substance the truth of all that then past between us; and there were also present two other Persons, who will be ready to attest it. Novv since Mr. L'Estrange has the Conscience so grossly to pervert and falsifie a matter thus Notorious, vvhat esteem his Writings in other Cases (as relateing to me I mean, for I meddle no further) may deserve, let the World judge. In his Observator Numb. 10. of the 2d. Volumn he has some touches at me, and reck∣ons up several Affidavits of mine, and says, they took no effect, yes Sir, they took all the effect I desired, which was only to acquaint the Magistrates with the Truth of what they examined me about, as far as I knew and no further; and the tenderness I used, strongly argues the candor and sincerity of my Evidence, no way casts any disparagement upon it; if the Law in some Cases require two Witnesses, and for want thereof, some, I justly ac∣cused, were released, or if perhaps others were not prosecuted, what is that to me. The Author of the late Paper, pretending to be a Reply to the Observations on the Lord Pe∣tre's Letter, argues the veracity of the late Evidence, because so many that they accu∣sed are at liberty; Mr. L'Estrange for the very same reason, would render mine unworthy of belief. These two Authors should best consult together and reconcile themselves. But I fear I have wearied the Reader as well as my self, in taking so much notice of, and detecting the malice, the falsities, the shams and idle Tales, which the Observator has invented, or pickt up and spread about me; which of themselves sufficiently appear to every judicious Eye to be mere Calumnies and the effects of a cankered spleen. However to undeceive all the World, if they are not resolv'd to believe his Fictions, in defiance both of Truth and Reason, I have once for all, taken this pains, resolving never to trouble my self further with the noise he shall make about them; henceforth he may talk his plea∣sure, I shall take no more notice on't, than to hear a Serpent Hiss, or an Ass Bray. Only I desire all Persons to bind up this my Answer and Defence with their Observators, and that as oft as Mr. L'Estrange shall repeat the same Stories (for he has much of the Cuckow in him, and sings an hundred times over the same Note) they would be so just, as to turn as ofen to these Papers, where I doubt not, but every impartial peruser, will find a sufficient Answer thereunto. And so I take leave of Mr. L'Estrange, who being an Antient Gentleman, and by the Course of Nature on the brink of the Grave; I wish, he would better regulate his Conduct, and not spend his precious time, and abuse those Great Parts, God has given him, in such trifling, false, mischievous and scandalous Stories against a Neighbour, a Parishio∣ner, and a Member of the same Protestant Church (if he be really what he professes:) who, as I never wrong'd him; so I am ready, on his acknowledgment, heartily to for∣give him all these injuries: And pray God to give him the Grace to Repent, before he be called to that dreadful Tribunal, before which we must both shortly appear. Miles Prance. FINIS.
