R256 13335937 99092
THE Rape of EUROPA BY JUPITER. A MASQUE; As it is Sung at the QUEENS THEATRE, IN Dorset-Garden. By their MAJESTIES Servants. Mutatus formam tauri, mistus{que} Juvencis Mugit, et in teneris formosus obambulat herbis. Ovid: Metam. LONDON: Printed by M. Bennet, and are to be sold by most Booksellers. 1694. Price Sixpence.
The Names of the Persons that Sing. JUpiter. Mr. Bowman. Mercury. Mr. Magnus. Europa. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Herse. Two Nymphs. Mrs. Hodgson. Aglaura. Two Nymphs. Mrs. Cibber. Coridon. Mr. Doggett. Dancers. Mr. Doggett. Mr. Phillboy. Mr. Prince. Mr. Bray. Mrs. Knight. Mrs. Lucas. Mrs. Temple.
ARGUMENT. EUropa Sister of Cadmus, and Daugh∣ter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, was Sollicited by her Father to mar∣ry a Nobleman of Tyre. But She being a Nymph of Diana's train, was averse to the Importunities of her Lover, and commands of her severe Father; In vain was her Aversion, for he strictly command∣ed her to prepare her self for the per∣formance of his will. But Death be∣ing a more acceptable choice, she gets leave for a short time, (by the interces∣sion of her Brother and a promise of com∣pliance upon her return, to her Father's orders) with a few Companions to retire to the Country: Jupiter being cloy'd with the Fruition of his late Mistress Io, Re∣solves
upon a New Amour, and Descen∣ding with his Son Mercury, sees the dis∣content Europa, and loves her. But find∣ing her Inclination contrary to his De∣sires, transforms himself into the Figure of a Bull, and so by Artifice, Endeavours to Enjoy his Love. The Nymph being pleas'd with the beauty of the Metamor∣phoz'd Deity, Adorns the Beast with Rib∣bons and Flowers, and by degrees is En∣courag'd to get upon him, when the God taking the Hint, conveys her thro' the Hellespont, and ravishes her, and to Re∣compence her Lost Virginity makes her a Star.
SCENE, a Campaigne Country. Mercury descends in a Chariot drawn by Ravens. Mer. DRawn by Commanding Love, Imperiall Jove, Designs to Visit some New tempting fair There is no end of his Amours. No sooner one has quit the Feild, But others to his Godhead yeild, And so imploys my hours: See where the first of Gods descending. All Nature his known will attending. Jupiter descends on an Eagle. Jup. HAste, haste my Son, my Love admits of no delay In yonder Tyrian Grove You'll find my Love, Begon, and with your awfull wand prepare. All things for my reception there. They ascend.
The Scene Changes to a Spacious Plain, a Mellancholly Symphony of Musick. Then Enter Europa, Herse and Aglaura. Mercury appears above. Eu. PRest with my greifs who can my sorrows end? There's none. Mer. There is, Eur. Ah no. Mer. There is a Friend. Eur. Who is that Friend that will so Courteous prove? Mer. Your Greifs are pitty'd by the mighty Jove. Eur. When will that Potent God ordain my fate? Mer. With patience till the happy Minute wait. Mer. ascends. Herse. APpear all appear your kind Mistress to shew What wonderous things you can do. Let sorrow and care, Pale Cheeks and despair For ever Europa be strange to the Fair. Enter Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Coridon, who after some Musick joyn in a Dance. Cor. HOW passingly fine these Gay whimsies here dance. Come come my dear Malkin let us too advance, In spight of their frisks and their Capers so high, I'le shew what Buff Jerkin can do by and by. They Dance.
Herse and Aglaura sing this following Song in parts. STreams of Pleasure here abounding Make blest the Shepherds of this Grove, Eternal Joys the Nymphs surrounding Produce th' effects of Lasting love. Here no buisy heads aspiring Study the ruine of the great, But each swain his Lass admiring, Laughs at the turmoyls of the great. Chor. But each swain his Lass, &c. Euro. Still I'm Greiving Still Lamenting Still Complaining of my Fate, Still the Cruel Gods Consenting Add New troubles to my State. Agla. Give than Royal maid your sorrows o're Implore no longer Heav'n in vain, Since there's above no bliss in store Search here below your Joys to gain. Chor. Give than Royall Maid, &c.
Coridon and his Mistress Sing this following Dialogue. Made by Mr. Doggett, and Sung by him and Mrs. Hodgson. M. AT London che've been, at London che've been And c'have seen the King and the Queen'a C'have seen Lords and Earls, And many fine Girls, That turn'd up their tails at fifteen'a. Che've seen the Lord Mayor, And Bartholdom Fair, And their I met with the Draggon, That St. George that bold Knight, Fought and Killed outright Whilst a man cou'd toss off a flaggon. From thence as I went To see th' Monument, I met with a Girl in Cheapside'a, That for half a Crown Pluck'd up her silk Gown, And showd me how far she cou'd stride'a. Wo. What else I did see, Is nothing to me, For if she had such tricks as these be,
I'm sure she's a whore Therefore say no more, Nor think that I e're will be pleas'd with ye. M. Nay prethee now hold, And don't cry nor scold If you know what 'tis to be quiet, I went but to try If that I cou'd spy How I cou'd like Londoners diet. Wo. And for ought I see The're not like to we, M. Faith and Troth 'tis a folly to lye I think they are not Wo. No John not a jot M. Joan—I prethee come in and let's try. Wo. Na good now la-be Give an Inch I see You'l take—Pish-hie-what's the matter? Why sure John you wont M. I'm a Dog and I don't, Now I'm set on't, let what will come after. Enter Mercury. Mer. SLeep Close the Eyes of all that's here For mighty Jove will streight appear And Mortals must not dare to veiw What Jove on Earth resolves to do.
Cor. What whipster are you? that dares here resort, Adzooks to hinder our sport: Begon and quit the place Or Crab-stick here shall wipe you o're the Face 'Flesh and Bones do you laugh, I shall mawle. yawns. Mercury Charms him to sleep. Mer. Hail Royall maid? belov'd of Heav'n, Pattern of Chastity Divine A votary to Great Diana's Shrine, To you a present Jove has giv'n, Close by the Sea it stands Waiting to be receiv'd by your Fair hands. Eur. Blest be Jove. To him I'le dayly incense pay, And at his Altars Maiden off'rings lay Both for his Gift and Love. Exiunt. A Symphony of Musick, and they all wake. Cor. Adzooks I have had a most Notable Nap. But where is our Mistress, adsniggs she is gone, O dismal mishap. We're all quite undone.
The Scene draws and discovers Europa on a Bulls back in the Sea. Cor. Look She's on a Bull's back ith' mid'st oth' Sea. Ods flesh what will now become of poor me. They all run off. Eu. Is there no succour, help, are Gods too grown Ravishers, help help, oh Heavens is there's none. A Symphony of Musick. The Scene Changes to a Bower, and dis∣covers Jupiter and Europa, her Hair loose about her, as just Ravish'd. Eur. UNdone Europa by a God undone; Is then Astrea fled from Heaven, Oh whether is the Goddess driven? To the Infernal Cave she's gone. Confusion, Horror, Death, all come, For in my Ravisht Breast for you is Room: Who's there? Ha! 'tis my Ravisher! Oh let me fly the hated God. I feel I go To Shades below, My Last aboad. Swouns.
The Attendants place Europa in a Chariot. Ju. RAise her my Son, no more my Fair, Lament, for thou shalt be a Star, Sound Musick from the Sphears her mind to ease, And tune her Soul for th' Immortal bliss. Musick sound and as Jupiter and Europa ascend this Chorus is Sung, and after the Chorus they joyn in a Grand Dance. Cho. See where the God and Nymphs ascending, And Choirs of Spirits them attending, They Mount, they Mount the seats of rest Where Souls are with Immortal Pleasures Blest. FINIS.
