S2586 14153506 102124
RAILLERY DEFEATED BY CALM REASON: OR, THE NEW CARTESIAN METHOD OF ARGUING and ANSWERING EXPOS'D. In a Letter to all Lovers of Science, Candour and Civility. By J. S. LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible, without Temple-Bar; and A. Roper, at the Black-Boy, over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet-stteet, MDCXCIX.
TO His Adversaries. Gentlemen, ADdresses of this nature did use, hi∣therto, to be made to Great Per∣sons, for their Protection; or else, to Special Friends, to shew the Au∣thor's Respects: But, your Way of Ma∣naging this Controversie, has been so Pre∣posterous, that it has oblig'd me to tra∣verse those Usual Methods, and to pre∣sent this Defensive of mine to your selves, tho' my Adversaries. And, because I fear that, coming from my Hand, it will not please you, I will endeavour to make it as little Unwelcome as I can. Let me ask you then, What means all this Railing, and Libelling? Can any Man of Common Sense think, this is the Me∣thod to promote Truth? And, if not; pray, What was your Aim in taking this Way, so Ungrateful to Sober Men, so
Nauseous to the Learned, and so Un∣christian in it self? Does it conduce to prove TRUTH, or confute ERROUR? Or, rather, Does it not expose you to the Censure of all Lovers of Learning, and Civility; as Men, whose Reasons are at a Nonplus. I beseech you to consider, that Reason is our True Nature; and, therefore, whatever subsists by Reason, does naturally claim the Assent and Ac∣ceptation of Mankind: Whereas, PAS∣SION, if excessive, is never Wise; and, especially, in Philosophy, where Evi∣dent Arguments ought to be the only Ma∣nagers, 'tis a meer Folly. 'Tis Scanda∣lous to Truth, as well as to Modesty, that Brawling should usurp the Place of Demonstrating. Indeed, no Credit being got by Answering Squabbles, you could not have invented any better Way to make me lose mine: And, the best Compurga∣tor I can bring, to keep me fair in the Opinion of the World, for Answering Books that abound in Raillery, but are quite void of Sense, is, that I saw it was a great Good to the Commonwealth of Learning, to lay open, once for all, such Ridiculous and Unfair Methods; that
their Insignificancy being Expos'd, they may, for ever hereafter, he held Unwor∣thy of any other Answer, but that of Scorn, and Neglect. What I most fear, is, that my Reader will think, that, while I am Replying to Mr. Le Grand's CENSURA, I am rather framing an Idea of the Incredible Weakness of Per∣verted Reason, than giving him a True Account of his Real and Perpetual Fail∣ings: But, my Comfort is, his Book is extant, to justifie me. Philosophers use to say, that Nature abhors a Vacuum: I am sure, Rational Nature as much ab∣hors an Emptiness of Sense; yet, this is all he has allow'd me to work upon, or confute. Now, since to talk Incoherently, is, by all Mankind, held to be Folly; and, to do this in a High Degree, and Constant∣ly, is that which Men call Distracted∣ness, or Madness; which is a Total Dis∣abling of our Rational Faculty: 'Tis ma∣nifest, hence, that REASON, which is our Nature, consists in the Conjoyning our Thoughts rightly; and, that 'tis the Perfection of our Reason, to discourse Coherently, or Connectedly. Where∣fore,
my only Request to you, is, that, leaving off all those Foppish and Irratio∣nal Ways of Raillery, and Buffoonery, you would do your selves the Favour to pursue this Way of CONNEXION; so Natural to your Souls, so Honourable to your Credits, and so Beneficial to the Learned Part of Mankind. This Me∣thod, besides the doing a just Duty to Truth, will, over and above, make all Uncivil Language Impracticable: No such Stuff can find Place, while we are Laying Principles, and Deducing Le∣gitimate Consequences; which are all a Philosopher has to do: Nor, can Imper∣tinent Babblers find Opportunity to put in a Word, while such Serious Business is in Agitation. You have too much Disob∣lig'd and Scandaliz'd all Good Men, and no less Mortify'd me, in forcing me from this Solid Method, by your bringing the Controversie from Evidence of Arguing, to the worst sort of Drollery; since you neither brought against me any one Ar∣gument, the Terms of which you would undertake to be Connected; nor went about to solve the Close Connexion of mine; but, only huddl'd together a Med∣ly
of Rambling Cavils, tending only to blemish my Reputation: Which for∣ced me (it being expected I should say something, and you giving me no wiser Employment) to lose Time in laying open your Injuriousness, Weaknesses, and Falshoods; whereas, I do assure you, I should, with much more Joy and Satis∣faction, have commended your Learning, and Civility, if your Carriage would have permitted me to do it with Truth. I beg of you, that you would not (as Lawless Assassinates and Robbers use) thus disgrace your selves, by assaulting me with your Vizards on; but, appear Bare-fac'd. Why should an Honest Man, in an Honest Cause, be asham'd to shew his Face? Own your true Nature, Rea∣son: State your Cartesian Thesis; for, our Controversie begun about that; and, if you flinoh from it, and run to other Subjects, you quit the Field. Then, lay Determinate Principles, and bring De∣terminate Arguments to prove your As∣sertions; and, I will promise you to do the same. But, I beseech you, let not the least Disrespectful Word pass between us, under Penalty of being held to have lost our
Cause. If you please to take this Way, so Proper for Settling Truth, I shall Ho∣nour and Respect you, and civilly Ex∣cuse whatever may hap to be Defective. But, if you resolve still to continue these Untoward Methods, here laid open, I shall not think it worth my while to stand Bartering Angry Repartees with you; but, will let you Rail on to your selves. Resting confident, that all Learned and Sober Men will both Condemn your Prevaricating Incivility; and, will also hold me Excus'd, if I let you gratifie your own Genius, and apply my self to better Employments, more becoming a Scholar, and a Christian. Your Sincere, tho' Undeservedly Injur'd, Friend, and Servant, J. S.
RAILLERY DEFEATED BY CALM REASON: OR, THE NEW CARTESIAN METHOD OF Arguing and Answering EXPOS'D: In a Letter to all Lovers of Science, Candour and Civility. Gentlemen, 1. WHen Pretenders to Philoso∣phy, instead of producing Arguments of their own, or Answering those that are brought by others, do break in upon all the Rules of Decency and Civility, and betake themselves to Railing and Libelling,
'tis the Concern, not only of the Learned, but of all Mankind to declare their Abhor∣rence of such an Indirect and Senseless Prevarication. Invectives cast such a Sha∣dow upon the clearest Truths, and intro∣duce so pernicious a Precedent into Dis∣putation about Points of Philosophy, and those also of a more Sacred Nature, that, unless this absurd Carriage be discounte∣nanc'd, the best Efforts of Exact Reason will be turn'd into Buffoonery. That no∣thing but my Opposing Cartesianism, ei∣ther by Undeniable Matter of Fact, or by my Arguments, did force Mr. Le Grand and his Complice to this Hurry of Passion, and (as your selves will character it when you see their manner of Writing) Madness of Malice, will appear manifestly by a plain Stating of the Case; which is this. 2. Very many of my Learned Friends (tho' it was my Concern to name but one of them) had blam'd my Ignobile Otium, and had press'd me to write. To speak candidly, I cannot perfectly remember, that they desir'd me, in express Terms, to write Philosophy; but I am certain I un∣derstood them so, the Circumstances seem∣ing very Improper to publish any thing else. Being thus won, I cast about how I might make my Productions as Univer∣sally Beneficial as I was able. At first sight I Diseover'd, and had, (with many others,
who aim'd at True Science,) in my Thoughts, Bewail'd, that a kind of Scepti∣tism, or Despair of Certain Knowledge, had insensibly crept into the World; and I had experienc'd how it had corrupted ma∣ny excellent Wits, and made them turn Libertines. I saw that this dangerous Dis∣temper of the Mind was grown very Epi∣demical; of which, in my Preface to So∣lid Philosophy Asserted, I so heartily and feelingly complain. I saw that this Scep∣tical Humour did hinder the Progress of Scientifical Knowledge, and the Improve∣ment of Rational Nature; nay, that it brought a vast Prejudice to Religion it self: For, those who had only Wit enough to raise Objections against Christian Faith, but wanted Solidity of Judgment, and True Principles, enabling them to settle their Volatil Thoughts, were apt to think that the Mysteries it propos'd were altogether Repugnant to Reason, and Inexplicable. But, particularly, I had observ'd the In∣crease of Atheism, and (which is next to it) of Deism here in England. Which kind of Men, making a Scoff at Scripture, and disregarding Church, Councils, Fa∣thers, and all Authority, could no way be so properly and effectually combated, or confuted, as by REASON; to which, and which only, they appeal'd. Here∣upon, I resolv'd to bend my best Endea∣vours
to advance the Way of Exact Rea∣soning; and, thence, pitch'd upon the Writing and Publishing a METHOD to Science. 3. That the Regard I had to Christian Faith was the Chief Motive that prevail'd with me to write Philosophy, or that Trea∣tise, will appear hence: First, Because it is manifest that I took there all Occasions that could come in my way, to apply my Discourses to the Defence of Faith; and when I had establish'd any Truth by way of Reason, I did, upon the Spot, make use of it to confute some Heresie; or else some Tenet which seem'd not so well consi∣stent with Faith, but subcontrary to it. For Example; In my METHOD, p. 6. I argue against the Scepticks. Pag. 7. a∣gainst the Pre-existence of Souls. Pag. 32. I prove that Man is but One Thing, and not Two, as the Cartesians hold; of which more hereafter. Pag. 43. I conclude a∣gainst the Epicurean Hypothesis. I de∣monstrate, p. 59, 60. that the World had a Beginning of Motion; and, consequently, that there is some Spiritual Nature, which, either by its own Virtue, or by Power de∣riv'd from some Supreme and First Cause of Motion, did move Unactive Matter. I hint, p. 80. the Grounds which shew the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity conform∣able to Right Reason. I prove, p. 93.
that Angels are not properly in Place. I explicate, p. 97, 98. in what GOD's Attribute of Eternity, and the Aeviternity of Angels, do consist. I take care, p. 105, 106. that Weak Men do not mis-inter∣pret Scripture, by taking Metaphorical Ex∣pressions Literally, and Dogmatically, as Mr. Le Grand does frequently, and very rashly; from which proceeded the Here∣sie of the Anthropomorphites, and divers o∣thers. I explicate, p. 109, 110. how, and in what Sense, Religious Honour, or Respect may be given to Creatures, with∣out shocking any well-meaning Christian, or breeding Disunion amongst them. I shew, p. 112. the Incomparableness of GOD's Divine Word, the Holy Scriptnres, from its having or bearing many several sorts of Senses, and yet all of them True. I attempt, p. 137, 138, &c. by a Logical Medium, to demonstrate the Existence of a Deity. I shew, p. 153. the Way to per∣fect Souls in Solid Vertue. I demonstrate, p. 277, 278, &c. GOD's Providence in the whole Course of Nature, even to the very least Effect: That he cannot be the Author of Sin: How senseless a Sin Irresig∣nation is: How great our Gratitude to GOD ought to be: And, how Wise the Doctrine of Christianity is. I manifest, p. 286. how Ignorant Atheists are. Pag. 299. That the World had a Beginning;
and, that there are Spiritual Natures. I de∣monstrate at large, p. 302. that there is a Self-existent Being, or a Deity. I prove, p. 318. against the Origenists, how Ratio∣nal it is that there should be an Eternal Hell for the Devils, and wicked Souls. I I settle very largely, to the End of that Lesson, the Rational Grounds, previous to Humane and Divine Faith. And, p. 343. I shew, from a Logical Medium, the Un∣reasonableness of Opinionative Faith, which grounds Light Credulity, and Bigottery. I inform my Reader, p. 360, 361, &c. how to arm himself against being surpriz'd by Fallacies brought against Christianity. And, Lastly, p. 373. I demonstrate, that the Practical Judgment of a Sinner, and, con∣sequently, all Sin, is clearly Opposite to Right Reason; and an Evident Fallacy, ac∣cording to the Commonest Rules of True Logick. 4. I pursue the same good End in my Solid Philosophy Asserted; and take all Oc∣casions (even though not given me some∣times) to apply my former Grounds to higher Subjects. I will only touch upon some Instances. I explicate, p. 174, and 199. GOD's Immensity, and set it above those low Conceits fram'd by our Fancy. As likewise, (p. 202.) his Self-Existence, and (p. 211.) his Absolute Infinity. I shew (p. 223.) the Necessity of a Super∣natural
Doctrine, against the Deists. Pag. 225. How to conquer in our Spiritual Warfare. Pag. 227. That Man, pre-de∣termin'd by GOD, determines himself, or is Free. Pag. 229. Whence Sin springs. I lay open (p. 271, 272, &c.) the Nature of Solid Vertue. I shew (p. 303, and 391.) the Clear Distinction between Cor∣poreal and Spiritual Natures; which is of vast Concern, both to Philosophy, Di∣vinity, and Faith it self; and, is the best Rule of Interpreting Scripture in such Passages as concern Spirits, unless the known Faith of the Catholick Church has already establish'd the Doctrinal Point to our hand. I distinguish (p. 438, 439,) what is due to Reason, what to Divine Re∣velation. And, (p. 441, 442.) that Rea∣son is not to be rely'd upon in Things above Reason. Lastly, (p. 452.) I give a Cer∣tain Rule how we can never come to be mis-led by Authority, &c. 5. Secondly, That I writ Philosophy to maintain the Interest of Christian Faith, and not out of the vain Motive of being held a meer Philosopher, does farther ap∣pear hence, That in the Epistle Dedicato∣ry to Solid Philosophy Asserted, I did civilly challenge the Socinians, Deists and Atheists, that some Learned Men of those Sects would please to send me those Reasons which they, or their Leaders, do judge to be of most
Weight why they cannot embrace the Doctrine of the Trinity, or Christianity; which they may send privately, and unnam'd, to the Sta∣tioner who publishes this Book: Promising them, that I would give their Arguments their full Weight, and publish an Answer to them. Which manifestly shews, that my Design was, to apply my Books of Philosophy to the Explication and Defence of Reveal'd Faith. From some of those Sects I might have expected a Rude Opposition; tho' I do not think any of them would have thought it Prudent, or Creditable to them∣selves, or their Cause, to leave my Argu∣ments and my Books Unanswer'd, and let fly at me with Personal Reflexions; but, that those who bear the Name of Christians, should, instead of Answering my Reasons, fall to Decry, Traduce and Libel those very Books, and their Author, in the most Vile and Scurrilous manner, I could not have expected. This plainly convin∣ces all sober Men, that these angry Gentle∣men esteem nothing so Sacred as the Satis∣faction of their private Pique. But, no∣thing is so Fiery, and Furious, as Men too fond of Empty Fame, when they fore-see their Ignorance is in danger to be baffl'd. I dare presume, that whoever considers the several Particulars lately mention'd, to demonstrate which, in those Treatises, I have laid Grounds; (not to speak of ma∣ny
others I have omitted,) will acknowledge they are of no small Weight; and therefore, that the Writer who advances Positions which are so useful and service∣able to Christianity, ought (were it but out of respect to that Best Cause) to be ci∣villy treated, even tho' he had erred. Nor could my Adversaries have shewn a great∣er Kindness to those Sects above-mentio∣ned, than to bend their whole Endeavours to revile and blacken an Author, who, as they already saw, had enter'd the Lists a∣gainst those Men; so to fore-stall (as far as they were able) the Efficacy of all his future Labours to defend Christian Faith! Poor Men! What Service has either of them done for Christianity! They have spent their whole Life, or the greatest part of it, in contemplating Groundless Fan∣cies, coin'd by their own Brain; or, (as they call it,) in Eliciting, or Producing Ideas; and in talking Voluntaries while they explicate them, without either Prin∣ciples or Connexion; and that's the ut∣most of their empty Performances. And then, when they should defend their Cause by Arguments, if we will not allow their Explications for good Proof, they fall to Railing and Libelling. But Envy is of so froward an Humour, that it will neither do Good it self, nor let it be done by o∣thers.
6. I might add, as a Third Argument, to prove, that my chief Aim in my Wri∣tings, was, to do my Duty to Faith, that I have oppos'd all the Whole Way of Ideas; because I saw them very Unfit to Explicate or Defend it. Far be it from me to cast in a Suspicion, that the Authors who follow that Way are Unsound in Faith. What I affirm, is, That I can neither conceive how the Ideas of the Cartesians can well sute with some Points of Faith, (of which more hereafter;) nor that those of Mr. Locke, tho' his Simple Ideas being taken from the Things in Nature, his Doctrine is in comparably better grounded than that of Cartesius, do so clearly serve to explicate Faith, but that they are obnoxious to some Exceptions. I should be better satisfy'd with both those Hypotheses, could I once see a Body of Speculative Divinity; or e∣ven an Explication of two or three Points of Reveal'd Faith, manifesting the Agree∣ment of Faith with the Principles of Right Reason; so that we may see how the Su∣perstructure of that Divine Doctrine does accord with those Grounds; as it must with True Science. For, I cannot but judge, that since [Verum vero non contradicit,] Philosophical Truths, which are Inferiour ones, and lie level to our Reason, and therefore are Clearer to our Understanding than are those Sublime Mysteries, and are
more maniable by it, ought to lend their Assistance to our weak Capacities in Ex∣plicating and Defending them from being Contradictory to True Reason: Whence, I cannot think Tha Philosophy to be True, which, like an Officious Hand-maid, is not thus Subservient to her Mistress, Faith. And, if any Writer, or Sustainer of those Sects above mention'd, shall think fit to attack any Article of Reveal'd Faith, as contrary to True Science, I doubt not but to make it evidently appear by the Do∣ctrine I have settl'd in my METHOD, how far short their Arguments are from any Shew of Concluding. 7. Lastly, It was not in me any Fond∣ness of advancing Paradoxes, but my Zeal of pursuing the same Good End, which made me attempt to demonstrate in my Method divers Points which shock the Fancy of the Vulgar, and, perhaps, of some Learned Readers, till they well weigh their Grounds; viz. those of the Immutability of a Pure Spirit, and the Im∣possibility of Annihilation by GOD's Ordi∣nary Power. I had observ'd, that the per∣fect Distinction between Body and Spirit was Ill understood by most, and their Na∣tures Confounded by divers Ingenious Wri∣ters. Also, that very few did penetrate thorowly the Nature of their State, their kind of Duration, or their manner of Ope∣rating;
but conceited them to have a kind of Commensuration to Body, Time and Corporeal Operation. Which put, it was impossible to devest them totally of Cor∣poreal Predicates; or to evince clearly a∣gainst Atheists, that there were any Beings of a Nature truly and properly Spiritual, or Indivisible, unless we could prove they were Contradictorily Different from Body, and all that belong'd to it, excepting only as to their Genus, or Common Notion, Ens, or Thing. Wherefore, reflecting of what Im∣portance it was to clear this main Point, both for Philosophy, the Adequate Object of which these two Natures are; neither of which could be clearly understood, un∣less they be thus perfectly, that is, contra∣dictorily Distinguish'd: As also, for Theolo∣gy, which treats mostly of Spiritual Things, and Spiritual Natures: And, Lastly, for Faith; because, otherwise, Atheists, who deny all Spirituality, might take a Conceit, that we meant nothing by a [Spirit,] but only some more refin'd sort of Matter; and, thence, might come to deny also the Immortality of the Soul, (which is one of the main Grounds of all Religion,) if we ascrib'd to Spirits any Mode, or Manner of Operating, which appertains to Body; nay, would thence be apt to conclude, that there is nothing above meer Matter: Hence, I saw it fit to demonstrate the for∣mer
of these Theses, viz. their Immutabili∣ty, as the Best, and most Convincing Proof of their Immortality; and, at the same time, quite defeat Origenism, and the De∣nial of an Eternal Hell, which (tho' it be a known Point of Christian Faith) is now creeping again into Fashion in England. And, it was for the same good Reason, that I went about to demonstrate that Point of the Impossibility of Annihilation; because our Modern Socinians explicate the Spiritual Perdition of the Soul, by An∣nihilation. And, that the Reason why I advanc'd and demonstrated those Theses, was out of my Respect to Faith, appears yet more manifestly, because I apply them still to the Confutation of those Sects. 8. Hitherto, then, it is not visible to the Eye of any sober Christian, how I, or those Books of mine, could fall into the high Displeasure of Mr. Le Grand to that degree, as to revile my self, and degrade them to the lowest degree of Contempt. If he had dis-lik'd my Reasons which e∣stablish'd these Particulars in my Method, he might, in behalf of Truth, have con∣futed them; and he should not, in the least, have disoblig'd me; nor had it broke any Friendship between us. But, now comes my Crime: It was my necessary Duty, while I was writing my Method to Science, to confute those Methods advan∣ced
by others, which I judg'd to be False ones: Whence, I took notice of that of Malbranche, who pretends that all Science comes by Divine Revelation; and of that of Cartesius, who, (as the Writer of his Life tells us,) by endeavouring to bring himself to question all the Certainty he had receiv'd from his Senses, fell into Fits of Enthusiasm. I thought it a Duty I ow'd to Mankind, and to the Subject I was wri∣ting of, to forewarn Studious Men of fol∣lowing such Methods as might prejudice their Wits; and, withall, lead them into Errour; and to declare, that I could not think that God ever intended That for the only Means (as they pretend) for Men to get Knowledge, which might make them lose their Wits in looking after it. This highly of∣fended those Cartesians, and transported them into most Tragical Exclamations. But with what Reason? It lay directly in the Road I had taken; and, What Obli∣gation had I to either of those Authors, that I should dissemblingly favour them, against the Duty I ow'd to my Readers, and the Regard I had for Truth? It could not proceed from any private Pique a∣gainst their Persons, for they had never in∣jur'd me. Again; Had I wrong'd either of them, it had been easie to confure me, by shewing that I either falsify'd the Words I cited, or suppress'd their own Interpre∣tation
of them. But, both these being im∣possible, and Confutation by way of Rea∣son not being their Talent, another Way (tho' nothing to the purpose) was thought fit; which was, to rail at me aloud, and bespatter my Person. 9. I had brought also some Arguments against divers Positions of the Cartesian Doctrine, advanc'd by Mr. Le Grand; but I had not one unhandsom Word against his Person, but spoke respectfully of him: Which, from a Scholar, and a Well-bred Man, might have merited the like Return. If the Arguments against Cartesianism gave him too much Trouble to answer, it was too good a Fault to be sorry for it. It seems, there was no other Crime in them, nor me; for, could they have been An∣swer'd by Calm Reason, there had been no need to have Recourse to Passion and Inve∣ctive, which abounded in his Reply. A hundred Cavils, which were foreign to the Matter in hand, were hal'd in by head and shoulders; and fitted up by sinister Con∣structions, and false Representations, to lay an Odium upon me. Not one of those Questions were stated, or fully treated of, to benefit the Reader, by letting him see what was True, what not: But a few Words were snatch'd out of my Books, here and there; and then distorted, and perverted, to make them fit to be descanted upon with
Raillery. My Conclusions, against all Laws of Disputation, were stoutly Deny'd: The Proofs, by which they subsisted, were sti∣fled in Silence; at least, the Force of my Ar∣guments were scarce ever taken notice of: Whereas, the most puny Logician knows that a Conclusion, for which a Proof is brought, is to stand firm, and be allow'd, till the Proof for it be Invalidated. Do they think I would have taken it ill from any Man, if he shew'd me the Weakness of my Argument? I do assure them, I am so far from that Humour, that I should take it for a great Favour: For, by this means, they would either satisfie me, by convincing me of my Errour; or else, by Attempting to answer my Reasons, and not performing it, Truth would become more Victorious; which is all an honest Man ought to aim at. On the contrary, How civilly did I invite Mr. Le Grand, to take the Manly Way of Arguing becoming a Scholar, and to prove what he says? End∣ing with these Words, Id. Cartes. p. 12, 13. Nec peto à Te, &c. Nor do I require of you to Perform this; at least, Endeavour it, and you shall see with what Honour I will treat you, tho' you do sometimes, nay, often, fail. But I was not so Fortunate, as to meet with such a Candid Adversary. The Way of Invective was resolv'd on, as more favourable to their Cause; and all Over∣tures
that were handsome, and becoming Learned Men, were rejected. 10. Now, Gentlemen, since I have, in my Reply, shewn this Carriage of theirs Evident by Matter of Fact, judge how strangely Imprudent (not to say, worse) these Men are, who can persuade them∣selves, that this manner of Writing, never taken by any sober Man since the World stood when he is to answer another Man's Arguments, or to establish his own Thesis, does not perfectly convince every Intelli∣gent Person, that they are at an end of their Reason when they fall into such a high Sa∣livation of Passion; and this without any other Provocation, than what my Argu∣ments gave them? Can their pelting their Adversary with such abominable Slanders, (even supposing him guilty of them all,) either Answer his Proofs for his Doctrine, or avail in the least to prove their own? Were the Person they impugn a Profess'd Atheist, it could not justifie a Writer who is to defend Truth, to run away from the Question, and fall to Impertinent Brabbling, and bring in twenty Foreign Exceptions, and Personal Defamations, which are no∣thing at all to the Point. Nay, it would, in that Case, be far more requisite to take care to confute him with Pregnant and Solid Reasons; lest prudent Readers, who are sa∣gacious enough to see that Ill Language,
Bawling Exclamations, and Personal Re∣flexions, are certain Symptoms of Non∣pluss'd Reason, should be inveigl'd by those Passionate Prevarications, and by such a wild Management, to think that he has Truth on his side, and so come to embrace his Errours. But, will it not look like a Jest, that he who was formerly, by all that know him, held a good Christian, and had writ many Books for Christianity, should immediately, upon his opposing the Cartesians, be guilty of so many Impie∣ties, Blasphemies and Heresies, and be∣come as Black as the Devil; and his Books, which found such an Universal Accepta∣tion among Learned Men, (except two or three Maligners,) should, all on a sud∣den, become stark naught? Is it not pro∣digious, that Men who are at Age to have Common Sense in them, should so foolish∣ly and childishly hood-wink themselves, and then think none sees them? The World, whatever they think, is wiser, than to judge that any Credit is to be given to them who, by their Carriage, confess themselves to be piqu'd, and exasperated, even to an Extasie of Fury. Their Trans∣port of Passion too visibly discovers, that their Souls are not acted by the Spirit of Sober Reason, Charity, and Candid Love of Truth; but agitated by a violent Whirl∣wind of Fury, Envy, and Resolute Unchari∣tableness.
Their Demeanour being such, that, even tho' they had Truth on their side, they would disgrace their Cause by their Hot-headed Managery of it. 11. These unoccasion'd Contumelies being the most Disgraceful that could be laid upon one of my Quality, and Rank, did a little transport me in my Ideae Carte∣sianae, where I was to reply to them; and, made me use, now and then, some smart Expressions, more than were precisely ne∣cessary for my Defence; for which I ask Mr. Le Grand's, and my Reader's Pardon; tho' they were no more than such as every Prudent Man may discern that himself, as a Writer, had given himself. But I care∣fully avoided all Imputations of Irreligion, either in his Intentions, or his Writings. And, if I saw that, in any Circumstance, my Words might occasion such a Mis∣construction, I charitably and carefully defended his Credit in such Points, and declar'd him innocent. All the Reflexions I us'd, were on his Manner of Writing; which it was impossible to avoid, if I would do a Just Right to my self. But he liberally requited me, in his Censura; and gave me Pounds for my Pence: For, he tells me, in the Close of his Epistle to the Reader, that Non quicquam per integrum Re∣sponsum suum sine mendacio dixit; that I have not spoken any thing (that is, not one Word)
throughout my whole Answer, without a Lye. So that my Answer, which consists of two hundred seventy two Pages, is nothing but one continu'd Lye. Upon my word, this was shrewd, and home; and, if this Li∣bel of his, which usher'd in, and made way for the following one, be but capable of Immortality, my Name will be Eterniz'd for a Lyar, to the World's End. Certainly, these Men are the oddest sort of Writers, that ever were guilty of Ink-shed. Other Men, when they write, do entertain some Hope they shall be believ'd; but these Men never think on, nor regard that Obvious Consideration. They press on furiously, to attain their Beloved End; which is, to disgrace that abominable J. S. And this so totally possesses and fills their whole Fancy, that not the least Prudential Consideration can peep up there, to make them wisely pursue their own Design. What Man in his Wits, do they think, will believe that a Man of known Credit, who never in his Life was noted, or thought, to be a Lyar, should, in the Twinkling of a Bed-staff, (as their Noble Jack Pudding, in his Dialogue, p. 13. stiles it,) tell a Lye in every Line, for Two Hundred Seventy two Pages to∣gether. Logicians say, that an Argument that proves too much is naught, and proves Nothing at all. Such will be the Fate of their Ranting Fits of Passion; they so over∣strain
all Belief, that no Credit will be gi∣ven to any one thing they say; nor did I ever know that Maxim of Machiavell, [Calumniare fortiter, &c.] more untoward∣ly and aukwardly apply'd. Yet, I must say this in their Commendation, that they are Men of a most Magnanimous Courage and Confidence. Should I talk at this swaggering Rate, I should fear it would spoil my whole ensuing Book; and so ut∣terly lose my Credit, that not a Word I said would be believ'd. 12. Being heartily weary of this brawl∣ing Way of theirs, so contrary to my Ge∣nius, which, all who read my Books may see, does aim at Close and Solid Reasoning; I publish'd a small Treatise, settling the First Truth, or First Principle, fundamen∣tally on the Ideas in God's Creative Intel∣lect; for which Reason, I intitl'd it Non Ultra, it being impossible to go higher. Where also I demonstrated the Shallow∣ness of the First Principlè of the Carte∣sians. In it I begg'd of them but meerly to name, or put down Categorically, any one Principle of the Cartesian Doctrine, which they judge to be the strongest, or most Evident; and I would undertake to Demon∣strate, that, either it is no Principle, or else, that it has no Influence at all upon their Hypo∣thesis. I declar'd, that I did this, to put an End to this Controversie, and to settle
Peace. I propos'd there, p. 121. that we should confine our selves to Half a Sheet of Paper; and, that all should be transacted by pure Dint of Reason; and, that he who shall use the least Uncivil VVord to his Adversary, and falls into Passion, shall be held to have lost his Cause, and to be reduc'd to a Non-plus. Could any Proposal, or any Overture, be more Civil, Equal, or Welcome to Men who love Truth and Ingenuity; or be more Efficacious to Decide the Question, and stop the Way to all Possibility of VVrang∣ling. But that's the Fault of it; They have a great Talent in Brabbling, but they are not at all gifted for Arguing conclu∣sively, Demonstrating, or Laying Princi∣ples. More than this, I offer'd, that, If they can shew their Cause has any Principles to support it, (without which, by the way, none ought to hold it True,) that I would make them Satisfaction, by acknowledging pub∣lickly, that I had foolishly over-ween'd; and take the Shame to my self, for my Rash Pre∣sumption. By which candid and frank Of∣fer, I put my self upon the greatest Dis∣advantage imaginable; and gave them a greater Advantage against me, than they could ever hope to gain any other Way. Lastly, I did all this needlesly, without ei∣ther being Forc'd, or Desir'd, to do it; but meerly out of my own Voluntary Mo∣tion, and out of my sincere Desire that Truth should be made appear.
13. But, what Return, do you think, was made me, for this Fair and Candid Proposal? While I was expecting this Half-sheet of Paper, that was to consist of nothing but Calm Reason, and was likely to decide the whole Controversie; out comes a Dialogue, in English, under the Name of Mr. Merry-man, A-la-mode of our Bartholomew Fair Jack-Pudding; stuf∣fed with Ignorance, Impudence, Falsifica∣tion, Foul-mouth'd Railing, Scornful Jeers, and other Scurrilous Language: Which, for any thing I see yet, are all the Cartesian Principles I am to expect. The Reader will see how shrewdly he confutes me; For, he tells me over and over, I am an Ass, a Rare Fellow, and as Proud as Lucifer: That my Writings smell rank of the Fumes of an Intoxicated Brain: That I am a kind of Devil Incarnate; for, he says, he begins to suspect I have a Cloven Foot; and, that no body, but the Devil, set me on VVriting: That I run down Piety, Religion, and GOD himself; and forty such Good Morrows. Cer∣tainly, by this Description, I must have ten Legions in me at least: Yet, the Jest is this; this silly Fop, who would pretend great Zeal for Faith, and GOD's Honour, dares not appear bare-fac'd, to write a∣gainst such a Monster of Wickedness; but keeps a Vizard on, and masks his Name under that of Merry-man; which we must
suppose he does, either because he is asha∣med, and should blush if good Christians knew he took GOD's Part against Luci∣fer and his Imps, which is an odd piece of Modesty; or else, because under that Dis∣guize, he may lye, forge, and say or do any thing, and yet none challenge him with it, or call him to Account. He fal∣sifies the Places where he does not quote my Books; and when he does, he picks out a few Words, and concealing the Te∣nour of the Discourse, travesties them to any Sense he pleases. He is so impudent, that, against Matter of Fact, known open∣ly to great Multitudes, particularly, to the Right Reverend the Bishop of Madau∣ra, he objects very confidently, that some of my Pieces of Divinity were damn'd (that Word pleases him, and his Friend mightily) by the Sorbon Doctors; of which, more anon. He has a fling at the Bishops, for Negligence in their Duty; or at me, for printing my Books without their Ap∣probation: I beseech him to shew us, in in his Huge Wisdom, that 'tis an Episcopal Duty to approve all Philosophical Books; or for Philosophy-Writers to have Episcopal Approbations, ere they print them! Had Le Grand, had Cartesius any such? Or, did this Libeller ask any such Approbation for his Libel, which, by the Antient Ca∣nons of the Church, renders him liable to
Excomunication; nay, (by Conc. Arelat. 2. Canon. 24.) he is forbidden to Communicate till his Death: And, lest he should think a Provincial Council's Decree does not de∣bar him from the Sacrament, it is added there immediately; Sicut Magna Synodus, (that is, a General Council) did formerly de∣cree. His Ignorance is so profound, that he understands not one of the Questions he touches upon, and defiles. As, when I affirm that GOD is not the Immediate Cause of Motion, he runs to Creation, which is not perform'd by way of Motion, but In∣stantaneously: Whence, since Motion be∣ing Successive Quantity, and so Proportio∣nate Parts may be taken of it, (for exam∣ple, Half of it,) and Creation gives Being, by this Learned Doctrine of his, a Thing may half-be, half-not-be; and so his Mi∣raculous Stupidity has found out a Me∣dium between the two Contradictions, Est, and Non-est. 14. Who the Author of this Libel is, tho' he thinks he walks in a Mist, is well enough known. He was formerly con∣victed of slandering a Pious and Virtuous Ecclesiastick: And now, it seems, having the Ambition to take the Highest Degree in that Infamous Art of Calumny he took this Occasion to Commence Doctor-Libeller. But, too much of a Pamphlet so silly and ridiculous, that 'tis below Contempt.
15. And now, Gentlemen, is not this mighty Learned? Are not these most Pro∣found Principles? Does not every Man, who has but half an Eye, see plainly that Mr. Le Grand, and his Party, distrusting the Way of Laying Principles, so un∣friendly to their Cause, which has none, are forc'd to have Recourse to Railing; and endeavour all they can to bring our Philosophical Contest from the Way of Connected Reason, to Farce and Drollery? I discern, by his desire it should be told me what he says, he thinks I should set my self to answer his Libel: But he is mistaken. 'Tis too much Honour to him, that I take notice of it at all. Nor does it spring from any Desert of his, that I do even so much; but out of regard to some weak Per∣sons, amongst whom, I am inform'd, they spread it in hugger-mugger; and, to meet with the private Cavils of the Triumvi∣rate: For, I hear, they have hook'd in a Third Man, to strengthen their thin Party. 16. Notwithstanding, I must confess, I owe Satisfaction to every Reader of my Books, if in any place I speak obscurely; and to themselves too, if their resolute Ma∣lice would render them capable to receive it: For, I look upon Them too as my Bre∣thren; tho', at present, being piqu'd, they are much out of Humour; taking it to be
my Duty to use all the Effectual Ways I can, Lucrari Fratres meos. I must confess, it is not Fit that such High and Abstruse Points should be treated in English, in re∣gard they transcend the Fancies of the Vulgar; who are Incompetent Readers, much less Judges, of such Speculations; but, since they have thus forc'd me to it, let the Imprudence lie at their Doors, if I treat somewhat largely, in our Vulgar Language; of the main Points which they strive to render so Odious. 17. 'Tis to be noted, then, That the Perfect Distinction between Corporeal and Spiritual Natures was formerly unknown to many, even of the Antient Fathers; the Doctrine of Faith, (only which was their Concern, as Fathers,) abstracting from such particular Questions, which be∣long to Philosophical Speculations: In∣somuch that Joannes Thessalonicensis, in the Second Nicene Council, said, that the An∣gels were, indeed, Intelligibles, (he means, Intellectuales;) Sed non omninò Corporis ex∣pertes, verùm tenui corpore praediti, & ae∣reo, sive igneo: That Angels were not with∣out a Body, but had a Thin Body of Air or Fire. Nay, this Opinion of his was ap∣prov'd of by the Council. And, which is yet more, he says, that Catholica Ecclesia sic sentit; that is, 'Tis the Sentiment of the Catholick Church: Which shews, that this
Opinion was very Universal. Though it ought here to be observ'd, that he says not that the Catholick Church holds this as a Doctrine of Faith, or descended from Christ and his Apostles; but only, that the Church sic sentit; that is, thinks or opines so. For, no wise Man can doubt that the Fathers, in Council, being not only Witnesses of the Faith deliver'd from the fore-going Church, which they propagate, and trans∣mit to the Following Age, (which gives them, properly, and formally, the Deno∣mination of Fathers;) but, being also Phi∣losophers, and Divines; they do hence, sometimes, deliver themselves, (tho' not in their Decrees of Faith) as Men endow'd with these later Qualifications. 18. The Reason which made so many Holy Men fall into that great Errour, contradicted now by most of the Divines of the Christian Church, was, because, the World not having yet arriv'd to that Maturity of Science as to get above Fan∣cy, and therefore not distinguishing per∣fectly those two sorts of Substances, hence they were apt to take Metaphorical Texts of Scripture, (such as those generally are, where it speaks of Spiritual Natures, and their Operations,) to be meant Dogmati∣cally, and Literally: Nor, consequently, could they conceive otherwise, but that Pure Spirits were Passive; and therefore,
of their own Nature, Mutable, by Impres∣sions on them, as Bodies are; and, conse∣quently, Matter being the only Potential or Passive Principle, to have some Materia∣lity, or Corporeity, in their Natures. Yet were not all the Antient Fathers thus weakly grounded: For, one of the An∣tientest, Tertullian, was more Solid, and (Lib. de Animâ, cap. 2.) lays this for a kind of Principle: [Incorporalitas nihil pa∣titur, non habens per quod pati possit; aut si∣habet, hoc est Corpus: In quantum enim om∣ne Corporale passibile est, in tantum omne quod passibile est, Corporale est: An Incorpo∣real (that is, a Spiritual) Thing cannot suf∣fer (from another Agent,) having nothing in it, by means of which it can suffer; (that is, having no Matter in it, through which only those Things, call'd Bodies, are Pas∣sive:) Or, if it have any such, it is a Body; since, for what Reason every Bodily Thing is Passive, for the same Reason every thing that is Passive, is Corporeal.] Which Princi∣ple, so perfectly consonant to the Aristote∣lian Doctrine, was, I believe, the Reason why, speaking of those in the Interme∣diate State, he says, Non dimittetur nisi mo∣dico quoque delicto morâ Resurrection is ex∣penso: He shall not be pardon'd, till every little Sin be paid for by the Delay of the Re∣surrection. Nor is it hard to alledge ma∣ny other Antient Fathers, of the same Sen∣timent,
whose Works were never cenfu∣red for it, nor their Opinion condemn'd, but by such insignificant Triflers as Mery-man, and his Fellow-Banterer. 19. In process of time the Christian Schools embracing the Categories of Ari∣stotle, which contain all our Natural No∣tions, reduc'd into Heads; which they al∣so Divided with more Exactness than for∣merly; Men's Thoughts grew to be more Distinct, and Clear, which, if well pur∣su'd, and held to, dispos'd their Reason for Demonstration. I dare affirm, the for∣mer Words of Tertullian do contain in them a Metaphysical Demonstration; and I can as little doubt, but that (their Prin∣ciples obliging them to it) many others had held the same; but that Impressions from Bodily Substances, with which we per∣petually converse, had so possess'd their Fancies, that, tho' they might see it fol∣low'd from their Principles, yet they were startl'd at the Conclusion; and were afraid of the Consequences which they fore-saw would ensue from such a Position. As for my self, I shall content my self at pre∣sent with producing one fingle Demon∣stration, (omitting many others;) which I the rather pitch upon, because I preten∣ded it Unanswerable; and Mr. Le Grand has undertaken to Answer it. 'Tis this:
20. All Created Things are either Di∣visible, or Indivisible; which two Notions, as Differences, divide the Genus, or Com∣mon Head of Ens, or Thing, and consti∣tute those two Sorts or Species of Things, call'd Body and Spirit. Therefore, these two Kinds or Species of Things can agree only in the Genus, or Common Notion of Thing, and differ in every Consideration else, and this Contradictorily; Divisible and Indivisible, which are their Differences, be∣ing clearly Contradictory to one another. Wherefore, whatever is truly and pro∣perly Affirm'd of the One, must be Deny'd of the Other: But, of that Divisible Thing, or Substance, call'd Body, it is truly Af∣firm'd, that it is Successive in its Operations; Therefore, of an Indivisible Thing, or a Pure Spirit, (such as an Angel is,) it must be Deny'd that it is Successive in its Operations; that is, it must be Affirm'd of it, that it is Unsuccessive, or Instantaneous, in its Opera∣tions; and, consequently, all it can ope∣rate, is in an Instant. Whence follows, demonstratively, that it is Immutable: For, since to be Mutable, is, to have something in it, after another; that is, to have Part of what it is to have, after Part; and this belongs most manifestly to Body; the Con∣tradictory, or, to have all it is to have at once, must properly belong to a Pure Spi∣rit, or an Angel. Again; Since an Instant
is an Indivisible, and one Indivisible added to another, cannot possibly make any greater Quantity, Length, or (as we may say) Exporrection of Duration; or, (which is the same,) any Duration corresponding to any least part of our Time; 'tis mani∣fest that Angels can act as much in One Instant, as, in Two, or more; their being more, not affording them longer Leisure to Consider, or Resolve; whence, they are never the worse accommodated to act thus in one Instant, than in More. 21. The Reason for this seemingly strange Position is grounded (as was now shewn) on the Essential Differences of Body and Spirit; and no less on the Duration pe∣culiar to Angels, which Divines call Aevi∣ternity; which, being of a Superiour Na∣ture to that of Time, does comprehend and concentre in it self all the several Diffe∣rences of our Fleeting Time, and, after an Eminent Manner, includes, and is Equi∣valent to them all: Not by way of Com∣mensuration, (which can onely be found among Quantitative Things,) but by the Excellency it has above them. So that, as when an Angel operates upon any Body of a vast Extent, it is not Diffus'd, or Ex∣tended, according to the Extent of the Bo∣dy it works upon; but, by its own Indi∣visible Nature, produces that Divisible Ef∣fect: so neither are its Indivisible Opera∣tions,
tho' they be Equivalent to Innume∣rable ones, which are done Successively by us, perform'd by them Successively, or One after Another; but, according as the Nature of an Angel requires, Indivisibly, or Instantaneously: Yet, that Instant, be∣ing equivalent to all our Time here, con∣tains in it Thousands of Priorities of Na∣ture; nay, more, perhaps, than we can imagin; by which, one of them may be conceiv'd by our Reason to be Originiz'd from another. For Example; We can truly conceive them to be, or to have their Es∣sence and Existence; and, consequently, to be naturally Good, as they came from GOD's Immediate Hand, ere their own deprav'd Will made them Morally Bad; be∣cause, according to Priority of Nature or Reason, Being must antecede their Opera∣ting, or making a wrong Choice. Also, for the same Reason, we conceive them to know themselves, their own Dignity, and Man's Inferiority; That one of these Men was to be set above them, be their Head, and Ador'd by them; That they took thence, out of their Selfish Pride, an Ae∣version against GOD, as the Orderer of it; and Envy against Mankind, as their Compe∣petitor; and against our Blessed Saviour's Humanity, as an Usurper over them: That, hence, they inspir'd other Angels to rebel; That they contested with St. Michael, and
were foil'd by him, &c. as is explain'd more largely in my METHOD to SCI∣ENCE, p. 319, 320, 321, &c. where I conclude thus: [All these may be conceiv'd to have Certain Priorities of Nature, as those Causes have to their Effects, which are in the same Instant. So that this single Instant of theirs, is, tho' not Formally, yet Virtually, and, in order to the many Indivisible Effects producible in it, as good as a long Series of our Time; not by way of Quantitative Commen∣suration of one to the other, but by the Emi∣nency of the Angelical Duration, or their Ae∣viternity, which is of a Superiour Nature to Body, and, consequently, to Bodily Motion, or Time; and comprehends it all Indivisibly, or Instantaneously.] 22. They who dislike this Discourse of mine, ought, if they would confute me, to shew that I do not, in it, hold Firmly to the Nature of the Thing, or Subject, in Dis∣pute, and thence draw my Argument; but deviate from it: And, withall, they are to make it Evident to the Reader, that themselves do this, while they oppose me. But, I have the Misfortune to have to do with such Adversaries, who never in their Lives dreamt of any such Consideration; or so much as thought of any such Solid Ground: They never attend to the Na∣ture of the Subject we are discoursing of, nor heed the Force of my Arguments, or my
Premisses; but Manfully deny the Conclu∣sions; deform them all they can; and then, most learnedly oppose them with Jests, Jeers, and fulsome Railing. But to return to the Matter in hand: 23. Lest any should think it impossi∣ble, so many several Effects should be per∣form'd by an Angel in one Instant, and sus∣pect it is some Whimsie of my own head, I desire them to reflect on what St. Thomas of Aquin (Prima, Q. 62. a. 4.) positively asserts, or rather lays for a Ground, viz. That the Angels, by one Act, and in the first Instant, did merit. Perhaps, I might here alledge, That, if in the first Instant they could merit, or chuse GOD for their True Last End, they might also, in the same Instant, chuse a wrong Last End, or Deme∣rit, and so be damn'd. But I need not press it so far here: I only desire we may consider how many distinct Acts would pass in us, successively, ere we could be dispos'd for Heaven; which, in the Old Language of the Church, is call'd Merit∣ing. Several Objects are propos'd to us, to chuse out of: Then we consider, or compare them; then we yield that this is more A∣greeable to us, (thus affected, and circum∣stanc'd,) than the other; then we make choice of the one, and reject the other; then we resolve to pursue it; and, lastly, we set our selves to lay Means to compass it,
Now, all these are, according to this great Divine, perform'd by an Angel, in one Instant; tho' there be evidently Priority of Nature or Reason of the fore-going Acts; to the following ones: and, therefore, that the Angels must necessarily, in the same Instant, (it being suppos'd by us the First,) know their own Nature, their Existence, what is Agreeable to that Nature, and all the Train of Motives that conduce to the Determination of their Wills; without which, there can be no Merit. By which, Mr. Le Grand (who understands no more of those hard Points, than a Child does Algebra) may see they may have that which we call Deliberation and Determination in in the first Instant, without needing Suc∣cession of Time to it, as he seems to ima∣gine. Nay, the same Learned Doctor af∣firms, that Angels are happy by one only O∣peration; which includes, virtually, Mil∣lions, nay, Innumerable, of our Know∣ledges. These are strange Paradoxes to Mr. Le Grand's Merry man, and such Men of Fancy; yet, we see this Great and Profound Speculater asserts them for Truths. 24. I know the same Holy Man holds the contrary Opinion to that which, in this Point, I think most reasonable; nay, which, I see, follows out of the Grounds lately mention'd, which himself had laid.
For, if they may have so many Operations in the First Instant, (subsequent to one an∣other, in the Order of Nature,) why not more? What can stint them to such a pre∣cise Number? But, 'tis to be noted, First, That in the place cited, (Q. 63. Art. 5. corp.) he affirms, with St. Austin, that this Opinion I follow does not induce the Manichaean Heresie, because it makes them not Bad by their Nature, but by the Depravity of their own Free-Will: Which evinces, there is nothing against Faith in it; nor would he have pass'd it over so unconcernedly, had it been so. Next, speaking of the Opi∣nion I maintain, he says, Quidam posue∣runt, &c. Some Divines maintain'd, &c. Which shews, that there have been di∣vers Learned Men of that Opinion for∣merly. Thirdly, He confutes those who gave this for their Reason why it was im∣possible, because two Operations could not be terminated in the same Instant; and tells them, That this Reason holds on∣ly in those Agents which work by Local Motion; but, that it may well be thus in Operations which are Instantaneous; and, that in these, there may be, in one Instant, the Terminus of the First and Second Ope∣rations. Lastly, The Reason for which only that Great Man dissents from those who held our Opinion, is grounded on that Maxim of Aristotle, That the Gene∣rans,
or he that gives Being, gives also the First Operation; which, in the Devils be∣ing Sinful, cannot therefore be in the First Instant; lest it should make GOD the Author of Sin. Which Reason does not convince me, or seem to conclude. For, First, However this may hold in Natural Agents, for which only Aristotle did cer∣tainly intend it as a Maxim; yet, I see not how the Parity holds in those Agents which have Free-Will; for, the Opera∣tions of such Agents are not purely refun∣ded into GOD, but partly into themselves, who are the Producers of them; nay, whol∣ly, as far as they are Defective. Second∣ly, The First Natural Operation of an In∣tellectual Creature, is, to know her own Essence, at least (in Souls) their own Exi∣stence; and, by them, all other Things which may be known by it, according as its Nature and Circumstances require; and this is given her by the First Cause, who gave them their Natures. But, there are many other Operations, subsequent to one another in Posteriority of Nature, (as is explain'd above,) which may be all perform'd in the First Instant, as St. Tho∣mas himself, above-cited, has declar'd; and, among them, the Choice made by their Free-Will: Nor does any Reason ap∣pear, why all these thus subsequent Ope∣rations should be ingenerated in them, by
the Giver of their Being; much less, why those Defective Operations, which have a Natural Dependence on others, should be refunded into GOD. 25. Let us pass on now to Souls separa∣ted, which die with some Venial Impuri∣ty in them, or (as St. James calls it) with Sins not unto Death, and therefore need Purging; nor can be sav'd, but by Fire. Mr. Le Grand puts it upon me, that I hold them Immutable in their Intermediate State, as Angels are. I would ask him, how he knows I hold that Opinion, since I have never declar'd in my Writings that I hold it. Wherefore, the putting it upon me, who no where assert it, is Unfair, Uncivil, Captious, and Invidious. I have shewn, indeed, (Id. Cart. p. 58.) that his Argu∣ments against it, do not conclude. So did St. Thomas, in the place now cited, op∣pose the Inconclusiveness of the Reason brought against his own Opinion; and, yet, himself held that Opinion of his not∣withstanding. He will say, the same Ar∣gument concludes equally for Angels and Them: But he will be hard put to it, to prove it. The Soul had its Being, by rea∣son of the Dispositions in the Embryo, re∣quiring such a Form as Nature could not give. It is the Form of the Body, and na∣turally requires, to act with it. It had its Education (as we may say) in the Body;
for it receiv'd its Spiritual Growth in Know∣ledge, by means of Bodily Impressions on the Senses. It is Unactive when the Body is out of Order. It has naturally a dear Love for it; procures its Good, grieves when it is hurt, and has a kind of Hor∣rour to part with it. Nay, it retains a Hankering after it, after it has parted with it; insomuch, that even the Greatest Saints have not the perfect Consummation of their Bliss, till they get their Bodies again at the Resurrection; and, magis est Anima ubi amat quàm ubi animat. Lastly, Those Imperfect Souls carry some Bodily Affe∣ctions along with them. Hence, F. Sera∣phinus Caponi, in his Elucidationes Formales, Q 76. Art. 1. says, the Soul is always uni∣ted to the Body, vel actu, vel inclinatione na∣turali; either Actually, or by its Natural In∣clination: And he gives for his Reason, Aut ergo aptitudine saltem unitur tali mate∣riae, aut non est Anima; sed semper est Ani∣ma, ergo, &c. Either the Soul then is, by her Aptitude at least, united to the Body, or it is not a Soul: But it remains always a Soul, &c. The contrary to all which Particulars is found in an Angel. Now, what Con∣natural Dispositions to Mutability these Considerations may give to a Soul, rather than to an Angel, I have not speculated so deep upon that Point, as to determine; which made me pitch upon an Angel, ra∣ther
than a Soul, when I advanc'd that De∣monstration. And, had I spoke of a Soul expresly, own'd its Immutability as my Tenet, and gone about to defend it, I do not doubt but so to explain my Sentiment in that Point, as will give no Offence to any sober Man, nor any who is not resolv∣ed to remain unsatisfy'd. 26. The next pretended Bug-bear, is, the Impossibility of Annihilation; which I prove thus: 27. 1. Every Cause acts according as it is, or according to its Nature; at least, it cannot act contradictorily to its own Es∣sence. But Annihilation is the putting of Nothing, or Not-being; which is Diametri∣cally Opposite to GOD's Nature, which is Pure Existence: Therefore Annihilation cannot be caus'd by GOD. 28. 2. Every Active Power, (as Omni∣potence is,) even tho' Infinite, is for some Action: But Annihilation is no Action; therefore it cannot proceed from GOD's Omnipotence. That Annihilation is no Action, I prove thus: That which is no Species, or no Sort of Action, is no Action: But Annihilation is no Kind, or Sort, of Action; for, every Scholar knows that every Action is of such a determinate Kind, because its Terminus, or Effect, is such or such; whereas, Nothing is no Effect at all, much less a Determinate one; but, in eve∣ry
imaginable Respect, a Defect, and In∣determinate. Therefore, Annihilation is no Action; nor, consequently, can it be perform'd by an Active Power, as Omni∣potence is; and, therefore, it argues no Power at all; and, which follows, 'tis ra∣ther an Impotency, or Want of Active Pow∣er, than Omnipotence; because that Active Power which can have no such Action pro∣ceeding from it; or, (which is the same,) an Active Power which cannot VVork or Act, is so far Impotent; which cannot be said of GOD's Omnipotence. 29. 3. To be Creator of all Things, or Giver of Being, is (as our Creed teaches) one of GOD's Attributes: But it is un∣heard of, that to be Uncreator, or Destroy∣er, of Things, was ever attributed to GOD; or, that Contradictory Attributes could be peculiarly Appropriated to him; as my Adversaries hold there can, while they deny both Creating, and Uncreating, or Annihilating, to be Possible to any, but to GOD; that is, Peculiar to him. 30. It will be said, that Annihilation is perform'd by Suspension of GOD's Posi∣tive Action of Creating, or Giving Being. But this seems more Unconsonant than the former: For, 31. 4. Suspension (if it have any Sense) means, the Action of Suspending; espe∣cially, being put by them to be only per∣formable
by GOD's Omnipotence, which is an Active Power; and this Action must have its Effect upon that which is Suspend∣ed, making it, of Not-suspended, to become Suspended; that is, Chang'd. But, that which is here Suspended, is GOD's Pow∣er of giving Being. Wherefore, this Te∣net of Suspension puts a kind of Passive Power in GOD, receiving this Action, or Effect of Suspension; which makes Him, who is Essentially Immutable, to be Muta∣ble; Neither of which themselves will say. 32. 5. That Actuality is not Infinite, which is not actually Exercis'd, or produ∣ces not actually the Effect peculiar to it, when the Subject is Dispos'd to receive its Influence, and it self is intimately Apply'd to it. But the Ens, or Thing, suppos'd to be Annihilated, was equally Dispos'd, or Capable to be, in the Instant it is suppos'd to be Annihilated, as it was before; and the Cause, by GOD's Omnipresence, was intimately Apply'd, and yet the Effect, or Being, was not put; therefore the Cause it self was not Infinitely Actual, as it was before; which is impossible to be thought. Note, that to an Infinite Actuality, it is requisite, and necessary, that it be (all other Requisites being put) actually Ex∣ercis'd; For, Actual Exercise being the most Formal Notion of Pure Actuality, it
follows, that it is not Infinite if it be stint∣ed, or fails precisely on its Part, of being Exercis'd, when all other Requisites are put. 33. 6. The same may be deduc'd from GOD's. Infinite Goodness; which consists in his being (as far as is of it self) Com∣municative of Goodness and Being when the Subject is capable, and his Wisdom sees it best; by which only it is stinted. This is so certain a Truth, that, in such Cases, (as Divines shew,) even in Supernaturals, 'tis the Incapacity of Wicked Souls, put∣ting an Obstacle to the ever-ready Influ∣ence of Heavenly Grace, that suspends it from working in such Corrupt and Indis∣pos'd Hearts: Whence, as soon as, by their sincere Repentance, that Obstacle is taken off, they receive again the Superna∣tural Influence of the Holy Ghost, and the Gift of Divine Love. And this is so con∣stant a Doctrine of the Church, that ne∣ver did the most Sceptical Divine que∣stion or fancy that it could become GOD's Goodness to Suspend the Influence of Grace to such Penitents; but rather, they oft∣times receive it in a greater Measure, ac∣cording to that Saying of our Saviour, (Luke 7. 47.) Cui minus dimittitur, minùs diligit: He to whom less is forgiven, loves less. Whence also, upon their hearty Repen∣tance, (which includes a Will to do what
GOD and his Church enjoin,) the Offi∣cers of the Church are bound to Absolve them, or admit them to the Participation of the Sacrament of Love; by which they are spiritually restor'd to the Communion of Christ's true Members, Vertuous Souls. Hence I argue: The Creature suppos'd to be Annihilated, was equally capable to receive Being at the Instant in which 'tis suppos'd to be Annihilated, as before; and GOD's Exuberant and Infinite Goodness cannot but be Equally ready to communi∣cate Goodness, or Being, to his poor, In∣digent Creatures, as it was formerly; therefore, the same Effect, or Continua∣tion of Being, must follow; and, conse∣quently, there can be no Annihilation. 34. The same is deduc'd from that Su∣preamly wise Saying, grounded on GOD's Infinite Actuality, and Goodness, [Dona Dei sunt absque paenitentia: The Gifts of GOD are without Repentance.] Which signifies, that, Let not the Creature change, and GOD is still immutably the same; and so, the same Effect must still follow. Nay, the Diversity of the Divine Attri∣butes that respect us, is wholly grounded on the various Disposition of the Crea∣tures. So that the same Ill Accidents are Mercies to good Souls, and serve to try, purifie, and improve them in Vertue, and thence, increase their Reward in Heaven;
which, to obstinately Wicked Souls, who are not Dispos'd to make good Use of them, is truly call'd an Effect of his Ju∣stice; vexing them here by Comfortless Irresignation, and Sinful Repining at GOD's Chastisement; and, so, tending to increase their Torments in the next World. Wherefore, as was said, by Pa∣rity, the Disposition of the Creature being the same, and GOD being Unchange∣ably the same also, the same Effect will follow: Nor can it be, that any Creature should be Annihilated. 35. The same is evinc'd from GOD's Attribute of VVisdom, or Knowledge, by which he made the World. To under∣stand the following Discourse, we are to reflect upon that admirably profound Say∣ing of St. Austin, (Conf. cap. ult.) Nos ita∣que quae fecisti videmus, quia sunt; Tu au∣tem quia vides ea, sunt: VVe see (or know) Creatures, because they are; But thy Seeing (or Knowing) them, is the Cause, or Reason, that they are. Which amounts to this, That GOD gains not his Knowledge of Creatures from their Being so as he sees them to be, as we do; but his Seeing, or Knowing, them to be fit for the Best Order of the World, which his Infinite Wisdom had Determin'd, gives, or makes, them to be. By which Metaphysical, or rather Di∣vine Maxim of this Learned and Holy
Father, it follows, that GOD leaves off to know a Creature at the Instant it is An∣nihilated: And, consequently, since this Knowledge of his is not taken from the Existence of the Creature, (which is Ex∣trinsecal to him,) nor depends on it, but on himself; it should follow, that GOD, by Annihilating a Creature, becomes Intrin∣secally Chang'd; which is impossible. 36. The same is prov'd from GOD's Attribute of Justice. For, if any One Crea∣ture can be Annihilated, All of them may; since 'tis granted by both Parties, that they do, all of them, Entirely and Equal∣ly depend on the Divine Goodness, for their Existence. Let us put then two Souls to be Annihilated; the one of which, by loving GOD heartily, is, at the Hour of Death, perfectly Dispos'd for its Glorious Reward in Heaven: The other dies obsti∣nately, and Devilishly Wicked: It is ma∣nifest, that neither that Holy Soul will ever be Rewarded, nor the VVicked one Pu∣nish'd, in case they be Annihilated. But, this is against GOD's Justice; There∣fore it cannot be done. 37. In a Word; Let them explicate Suspension as they will, and assign it for the Cause of Annihilation, it makes GOD the Cause of no Effect; that is, to be no Cause, which destroys their own Position: Nay, it makes him the Cause of the worst
Defect imaginable; or rather, of Pure De∣fect; for, Nothing, or Not-being, is such; to put which upon GOD, who is Pure Actuality, and, therefore, a Cause (as far as concerns himself) ever Actually Work∣ing, is (to speak with the least) a strange Tenet. If they mean only to say, that Creatures depend every Moment on GOD, for their Being; or, that, if, per impossibile, he should suspend his Acting, they would no longer be, I do heartily agree with them; for this is Agreeable both to the Self-Existence of GOD, and the Nothingness of Creatures, of themselves: But, if they contend it is an Act of his Power, or Omni∣potence, (the Notion of which is manifest∣ly relative to its Effects, that is Active, or Effective of Something,) actually to execute this, or, that it consists with his Divine Attributes; they must bring very strong Arguments to prove it, ere I shall think fit to yield it; whereas, hitherto they have brought none at all, but Merry-man's silly Explication of a Glass falling down, and breaking, if he takes away his Hand; which the weak Fop thinks is a rare Ar∣gument: Whereas, it is demonstrable in Physicks, that the Glass would stand for Eternity where his Hand left it, if there were no Positive Action of a Cause impel∣ling it downwards, viz. (the Descent of the Atmosphere;) which kind of Positive A∣ction is here wanting.
38. They will object, that GOD is a Free Agent, and so may chuse whether he will sustain Creatures in Being, or no. But those weak Divines take the Notion of Freedom from the Folly of Creatures; which is this, that we can, out of Humour, do, and undo Things at our pleasure, whether it agrees with True Reason, which is our Nature, or no. Whereas, True Free∣dom does not consist in a foolish Humour∣someness, or in the doing and undoing Things, as the Toy takes us; but in this, that, Unforc'd, and Unconstrain'd, by any thing which is without us, we determin our selves according to the Inclination of our true Nature, Reason; and, when we do otherwise, we are less Free; or Slaves to some Passion which impels us, and makes us deviate from the Propensions we have by our True Nature, to do what is Ratio∣nal. Wherefore, GOD's Freedom con∣sists in this, that he is Essentially Self-de∣termin'd to act according to his own Nature, and to his own Attributes, which are Essen∣tial to his Nature. Since, then, it has been shewn, that to Give Being is Agree∣able to GOD's Essence, which is Self-Existence, and to his Attributes, he is more Free for his being thus Self determin'd to give Being to such Creatures as his Wis∣dom sees fittest for the best Order of his World; and, that, to do otherwise, or to
Annihilate, is to be less Free, because it is less according to his Essence, and Attri∣butes; which is, not to be every way Perfect, and Infinitely such. 39. I must confess, it seems very Inde∣cent, and Shocking, to Pious Ears, to say that GOD cannot do this, or cannot do the other: But the School-men, in their Dis∣putes, first brought that Expression into Custom; and, tho', following them, I have sometimes us'd it, yet I have endea∣vour'd to soften and explicate it so, as it may not breed any Offence. Hence, in my METHOD, pag. 363. I have these Words, [It is generally more Safe, more E∣difying, and more Proper, to say, in such Ca∣ses, [It cannot be that GOD should will such a thing.] than bluntly to say [GOD cannot do it:] For, This flatly limits Om∣nipotence; That only restrains its Acting hîc & nunc, because of some Attribute of the Di∣vine Nature, to which it is Disagreeable.] Hence, also, I affirm, (Id. Cartes. p. 61.) That it sounds the same among Philosophers, to say, [GOD cannot do it,] as to say, [The Thing is a Contradiction, or Im∣possible:] Possibility being the Object of all Power, even tho' Infinite.] And, to render it still the more Inoffensive, and to pre∣vent all Cavil against my Doctrine, I ad∣ded; [When Philosophers affirm any thing is Possible, or Impossible, they regard only the
present State of the World, and the Order of Second Causes.] So that this Phrase, ac∣cording to my Doctrine, amounts to no more but this; That it is beyond the Power of Second Causes, as carry'd on by GOD's Ordinary Providence, to effect it; as I have also explain'd my self, in my METHOD, long ago, in the place lately cited. Which Innocent and Common Do∣ctrine my Maligners do character to be, the Running down all Piety, Religion, and GOD himself: Which shews, their Dregs of Common Sense run very low, though their Malice flies the highest Pitch of Slander, and Calumny. To finish this Discourse, let them bring Solid Arguments to prove Annihilation Agreeable to GOD's Self-Existence, his Pure Actuality, and the rest of his Attributes; and they shall see how readily I will embrace their other∣wise-Groundless Opinion. But, alas poor Triflers! they never set themselves to bring any Demonstrative or Conclusive Argument, either pro, or con, in their Lives. They talk Big, and, perhaps, sprinkle their As∣sertion with some Slight, Insignificant Ex∣plication, or Untoward Parallels; and sup∣ply the Defect of Reasoning, with Jeering, and Railing against what either their Short Capacities do not reach to understand, or their Resolute Insincerity will not let them acknowledge, tho' they know it.
40. But, now comes an Objection of weight: Spondanus tells us, (he says,) that It was one of Wickleff's Errours, Condemn'd in the General Council of Constance, by a perpetual Decree, That GOD could not An∣nihilate. This looks Great, and Mighty. But, why does he not relate this Perpetual Decree of the Council, in its own Words, if there be any such? Is not the Council it self extant? Or, is Spondanus's Relating it more Authentick than the Words of the Council it self? Why does he not tell us then, out of the Acts of the Council, in what Sense, and under what Terms, Wickleff propos'd it: In what Words, and in what Sense, that Council condemn'd it? Or, whether it were more express than that of Joannes Thessalonicensis, in the Second Council of Nice, That 'tis the Sen∣timent of the Church, (that is, the General Opinion,) that Angels have thin Bodies of Air, or Fire? The contrary to which, for all that, the best Catholick Divines do now publickly teach. Lastly, If this be a Point of Faith, (as they would have it thought,) why is not this press'd home against me? This would knock me down at one Blow; and there would need no paltry Jeers, Flouts, or Falsifications, to do that Job, which is their only Aim. The Reader may be sure they are conscious there is some great Flaw in this Objection, that
they are so favourable to me, in thus bare∣ly and crudely Alledging it. But, what is all this to me? It is a common Doctrine, taught openly in the Schools, That this is not performable by GOD's Ordinary Power; and, I have already shewn, out of express Words, both in my METHOD; and in my later Books, that I speak of no other Power. So that, either I am no Wickleffist for maintaining it; or, I have enow of very honest Brother-Hereticks; who maintain publickly the same, and, yet, are not ill look'd upon for it by the Church: Which being manifestly so, it would be worth our Consideration to find the Reason, why our Libelling Merry-man, whose Ironies are Sarcasms; and, who pretends Mirth, to cloak his Uneasie Ma∣lice, does let all those Divines alone who hold the same that I do, and fall upon me only. But those Men had not challeng'd the Cartesians to produce Principles for their New-fangl'd Doctrine; in which consists my peculiar Heresie, which blows their Zeal for Faith into such a Flame. 41. I wish the Cartesians, who make the Soul and Body two Things, because they are two distinct Natures, could as well clear themselves of speaking inconse∣quently in Matters belonging to Faith, as I have done: For, by making them two Things, and, consequently, Individual
Things, each of those Things must have its peculiar Determinations, Modes, or Complexion of Accidents, constituting it an Individual Thing, which are sustain∣ed by those Things, as their Subject; which is the very Notion of a Suppositum. There are therefore, and must be, Two Supposi∣ta in Christ, as long as those two Natures remain in his Humanity; that is, for ever. To which, add the Divine Suppositum, it must follow, that there are Three Supposita in Christ; which shocks Christian Faith. To those, Mr. Le Grand has given no Sa∣tisfactory Answer; nor can, unless he di∣stinguishes the Nature from the Suppositum; which, if he does, then the Suppositum of every Man may have Two Natures in it; and so, the Soul and Body may compound One Ens, or One Thing: And, then, since 'tis impossible, and contradictory, they can be One and Two in the same Respect, or under the same Notion, it will follow, that Man need be no more than One Thing. They will, perhaps, say, they are One Compound Thing; but Two Simple Ones, or Two Parts of that Compound: But I have taken off, and shewn, the Weakness of that Distinction, Id. Cart. from p. 241. to p. 248. and shewn, that an Ens, or Thing, is, That which is capable of Existing: Wherefore, each of those we call Parts, if they be Things, are capable of Existing
alone, when separated; which cannot be be True of the Body, which is a Distinct Thing when Separated, (viz. a Dead Car∣cass,) and not the same Thing, with the same Nature, much less the same Existence it had: Nay, a Compleat Thing too; be∣cause, That is compleatly a Thing, which wants nothing to make it Capable of Exist∣ing; and, if it wants that, it is not a Thing at all. But, what enforces farther, this Objection is, That 'tis defin'd in the Coun∣cil of Vienna, under Pope Clement V. that the Rational or Intellectual Soul is the Form of the Body. The Words are these; [Do∣ctrinam omnem seu positionem, temerè asse∣rentem autvertentem in dubium quòd Substan∣tia Animae Rationalis seu Intellectualis verè ac perfectè Humani Corporis non sit Forma, velut Erroneam, ac veritati Christianae Fidei ini∣micam, hoc Sacro approbante Consilio, repro∣bamus. Definientes, ut cunctis not a sit since∣rae Fidei Veritas, quòd quisquam deinceps as∣serere, defendere aut tenere pertinaciter prae∣sumpserit, quòd Anima Rationalis seu Intelle∣ctiva non sit Forma Corporis Humani per se & essentialiter, tanquam Haeretious sit cen∣sendus. Here we see all those condemn'd for Hereticks, who say, or hold, that the Intellectual Soul is not the Form of the Bo∣dy; and, that the Opinion it self is stig∣matiz'd with the Brand of being an Ene∣my (that is, Destructive, or Pernicious) to
the Truth of Christian Faith. Now, if the Soul be the Form of the Body, then the Body is the Matter of that Form; And then, let all the Divines in GOD's Church judge, whether the Matter and Form can be Two Things, since they all hold, that the Matter and Form make up One Thing. Did ever any Solid Man hold, that the Matter or Form either, singly consider'd, are Things, or any thing else than Parts of a Thing? Or, can we think that those Definers meant by the Ward [Form.] the same that is meant by the Word [Thing?] Whenas, all the Learned World, before Cartesius's Time, held, that the Form was no more but that Actuating or Determining Part which, by informing the Matter, con∣stituted the Thing. The Cartesians will tell us, that it informs the Matter, according to the Notion of Action: But the Council has fore-stall'd that Evasion, as if it had fore-seen it, by the Word [Essentialiter;] by which signal and cautious Expression, it declares it to be Heresie, to say, it does not Essentially inform the Body, or accord∣ing to the Notion of Ens, or Thing, (and not Activè, or Co-activè, only;) that is, it makes the Matter become Huma∣num Corpus, and Homo to be One Ens, or Thing, (to use St. Athanasius's Words) Ex Animâ Rationali & Humanâ carne subsistens. I do not here accuse the Intention of the
Cartesians; but I see plainly, that their New Notions, or Ideas, will never agree with the Explications which former Divines make of Christian Faith; much less, help them with better; or, indeed, with any. But, to return to our Subject: 42. Let us sum up this Tenet of theirs, concerning Annihilation, and see what Work they have made of it, according to the Lights Nature and Art, working upon our Natural Notions, have given us. First, They make it belong to GOD's Omnipotency, for which Attribute alone they seem zealous; for, I do not see that, in discoursing this Point, they even think of, or regard, his Self-Existence, which is his Essence, or his Goodness, his Justice, or any other Attribute of his; or pretend, in the least, it is Agreeable to them. Now, Om∣nipotency is a Power of doing all things; and they would make it a Power of Not∣doing, or of doing Nothing, as to the Things Annihilated, to which only it relates. 2. Omnipotency is an Infinite Power, and withall, an Active Power, (for, I do not think they will put a Passive Power in GOD:) And, every Active Power is es∣sentially such, because it can have such an Action. Yet, Mr. Le Grand, in his Pre∣face, p. 36. seems to grant, that Annihila∣tion is not the Action of any Power; nor, indeed, such a Power; they being, as I al∣ledg'd,
specify'd by their Objects: To which he answers, Rectissimè! So that here we have an Active Power working, with∣out an Action answering to it; or an Omni∣potent Power, (to which they ascribe that Effect,) which may be Deny'd to be such a Power; or, (which is the same,) he makes that a Power, which is no Power. 3. They say, 'tis done by Suspension: Well then; this belonging, as they say, to GOD's Om∣nipotency, which is an Active Power, this Suspension must, for the Reason given, be an Action. No, say they; 'tis no Action, but a Cessation from Action. Now, that not Acting should belong to Omnipoten∣cy; or, that the Action of Suspending his Power, should be an Action of that Power, gives us a Second Bull of the largest Size. 4. Suspension must either have some Effect, or no Effect: If none, 'tis to no purpose; If any, it must be in GOD; for, 'tis his Power that Acted before, and is now Sus∣pended: But, this puts a Passive Power in GOD; which is a higher Strain of Non∣sense, than either of the former. No, say they; the Effect is upon the Creature An∣nihilated; But this is as nonsensical as the former; for, Common Sense tells us, that Suspension has its proper Effect upon that which is Suspended, which is GOD's Con∣servative Action: Nor is the Existence of the Creature, in good Sense, Suspen∣ded;
for, that which is only Suspended, remains still, tho' in Suspense; whereas, the Creature remains not at all, being An∣nihilated. Yet, grant the Existence of the Creature could be said to be Suspended; still, GOD's Conservative Action, which made it be, must, in Priority of Nature, be suspended it self, ere its Existence could be suspended, or it self cease to be. But, waving this, let us see where this Effect is, which terminates this Action of Suspension. In the Creature, say they: And, what can we conceive to be in the Creature when it is Annihilated, which is the Effect of this Action, and terminates it? Why, to be∣come Nothing. Now, Nothing, or Not-be∣ing, is a pure Defect; nay, infinitely, or in every imaginable Regard, Defective; and so can be no Effect, for this has some∣thing Positive in its Notion. The last thing, therefore, they can possibly alledge, is, That Suspension is no Action. For An∣swer to which, we must turn them over to School Boys, who can tell them, that Suspendo is a Verb Active, has a Transitive Signification, and must have an Accusa∣tive Case after it. The Question, then, is, What is this Accusative Case? Or (which is the same,) What is this Thing which is Suspended? Which we have already shewn, can with no Sense either be GOD, or the Creature; that is, Nothing is sus∣pended;
and, therefore, this Suspension is no Suspension. So that, which way so∣ever they turn and wind themselves, their own Contradictions still meet them in the Face, and confound them. And so much of this Point, which is only therefore scan∣dalous, because 'tis unsutable to Fancy; that Faculty, which, if solely attended to, leads all its Followers into Folly and Non∣sense. 43. Another Impiety of mine against GOD, is, That I will not allow that The∣sis of Cartesius, (for, we are to suppose, that all his Conceits, tho' never so Ground∣less, are Gospel with these Men,) that GOD is the Immediate Cause of Motion; the Denial of which does ravel the Scheme of that Hypothesis. Hence Mr. Le Grand infers, that I deny GOD to be the First Mover: Whereas, (so short is his Reason∣ing Faculty,) the direct contrary follows: For, he who only denies that GOD is the Immediate Cause of Motion, does, even by doing this, imply that he is the Me∣diate, Remote and Principal Cause of it; as giving Angels, his Ministring Spirits, both the Power to move Matter; and, withal, moving them to move it, by Spiri∣tual Motives, or Manifestations, of the Wise Decrees of his Divine Providence, how he would have it done. Thus, all Instrumental Causes are the Immediate Cau∣ses
of every Effect in Nature. Will he say, that this is Impiety against GOD; or, that it debars Him from being the Principal Cause! Does not Fire immediately burn us? Water wet us? Or, Will any but a Mad-man say, that GOD is the Imme∣diate Cause of that Burning, or Wetting? Or, that this hinders Him from being the Principal Cause of all the Effects in Na∣ture, who gives them Power to produce those Effects, and Premoves or Applies them to produce them? Does not the Denial of this make all Second Causes Useless? How shallow, then, is this ridiculous Objection! Wherefore, let them either shew that An∣gels, which are of a Superiour Nature to Matter, and are Pure Acts, have not Power to act upon it, or move it; or, that it be∣comes the Sublimeness of the Divine Ma∣jesty, to put his Immediate Hand to such mean and low Effects that his Servants have a Power to produce them; or, that this Power was given them by Him, to remain Useless, and Unemploy'd about its Proper Objects: or, let them grant that Angels, or (which is the same) GOD, by his An∣gels, gives Motion to Matter. Again, to omit many other Arguments; That which GOD does Immediately by Second Cau∣ses, is according to Nature; but, what he does immediately by Himself, is Miraculous, and Instantaneous, as coming from an Acti∣vity,
whose Infinite Power no Indisposition on the Creature's side can check, and re∣tard. Did GOD move Matter, when (as they hold) he divided it into greater Lumps at first, Instantaneously; whenas, it is not Motion, unless it have part after part; or, unless it be Successive? Would these Men but please to leave guiding their Thoughts by the hasty Sallies of their Fan∣cy, and regard deliberately the Natures of the Things we are discoursing of, that is, the Nature of GOD, who is Pure Self-Existence; the Nature of an Angel, and the Nature of Matter, and build their Discourses from those Grounds, we might hope, in time, for some Sense from them: But that is too Solid for them; it will not give their Fancy Leave to range, and take Vagaries in the Air, but holds them in too strictly; and, therefore, 'tis not their way. Yet, something must be said; and, there∣fore, Ill Language must supply the place of Sense and Solidity. 44. But, Gentlemen, to what end were all these Objections huddl'd together, in their Preface, and Dialogue? These Theses are (except this last) altogether Foreign to what I oppos'd, and prov'd against Carte∣sius and Mr. Le Grand. What is Annihi∣lation to Cartesius's Method to find out First Principles, by denying the Certainty of all his Senses? Or, What is the Immuta∣bility
of a Pure Spirit, to the Unaccount∣able Constitution of Cartesius's First Mat∣ter, which grounds all his Physicks; which they put neither to be Dense, nor Rare; Hard, nor Soft; Rough, nor Smooth; So∣lid, nor Fluid; Moist, nor Dry? &c. A∣gain; If they would needs be meddling with Impertinent Questions, why were the Reasons for them Suppress'd, the Conclusions themselves most Learnedly Deny'd; and, this done, a Black Mark set upon them, at the pleasure of the Painter? Who sees not that this odd Prevarication, and un∣toward Management of it, does evidently bewray a Distrust of their Cause, and a perfect Despair of maintaining it? Who sees not, that, by their flinching thus from the Question, and haling in impertinent Points, which were odd to Vulgar Fan∣cies, and were deny'd by other Divines, they hop'd (to save their own Bacon) to get those Men on their side, to make use of their Arguments, and of their (mis∣called) Authority, to decry me, because they wanted Arguments of their own, to uphold the Cartesian Doctrine? Lastly, What is their Scurrilous Dialogue, to their producing, or so much as Naming, any one Principle of theirs; to do which, I had challeng'd them? Or, Why should this exasperate them to a Raving Extasie of Railing? Let them take their own New
Method, unheard of amongst Learned Men, hitherto: Who can hinder them? But, if their Passion have but left them one single Grain of Prudence, they can∣not but see that all Civil Men will hate their Abusiveness; all Good Men, their Ma∣lice; and all Learned Men, their Folly and Ignorance. 45. But, to take off the Edge, and blunt the Teeth of all their reproachful Calum∣nies, I have shewn, above §. 39. that what they object to me, if they will but truly represent my Doctrine, can dissatis∣fie no sober Man, even of their own Par∣ty; since, in the three first Points, which their Confus'd and Undistinguishing An∣ger strives to render so Invidious, I speak of GOD's Ordinary Power, or, of the Course of Causes, and the Nature of Things, as they come to our Knowledge by Natural Means, and are carry'd on by GOD's Ordinary Providence. What Philo∣sopher, but a Mad-man, will say, he can fathom and comprehend all the Supernatu∣ral Methods and Ways which GOD's Infinite Wisdom can contrive, or his Al∣mighty Power execute, when he shall please to work miraculously? He who is the Original Cause of those Natures, can∣not he order them as he pleases, when His Wisdom, for Reasons inscrutable to the Greatest of his Creatures, sees it fit, to
bring about those Hidden Ends design'd by his Divine Decrees? Who can say, that, tho' Angels have no Means to acquire New Knowledges, and so ought, by their Na∣ture, to have all the Knowledge they are capable of, infus'd into them at first; yet, that GOD, acting miraculously, cannot de∣tain some Light from an Angel, and com∣municate it to him (as we conceive) af∣terwards? Who can say that GOD, if he pleases to alter the Course and Nature of Things, or to order the Circumstances of the next World, by Ways unknowable by us, cannot, by his Miraculous Power, ef∣fect, that Imperfect Souls may be releas'd from the Chains of their Captive State, and be reciev'd into Heaven before the Last Day? Or, Who dares contend, that his Divine Goodness, that oft-times does Stupendious Miracles for the Prayers of one single Saint on Earth, will not do Mi∣racles, and this frequently, for the Prayers of his Spouse, the Church! Once more I do earnestly beg of Mr. Le Grand, it may be consider'd, that all our Science is built on the Nature of Things, as they are in themselves, and govern'd by GOD's Or∣dinary Power: 'Tis beyond the Skill and Sphere of Philosophy, even to guess at how many Miracles may be wrought upon the very least Thing in Nature: Nor did any Man, I know of, ever pretend to deter∣mine
any such Point; and I cannot but think it some kind of Neglect in them, not to declare as much. Miracle is beyond all Humane Science; Ecce, DEVS vincens Sci∣entiam nostram! (Job, ch. 36. 28.) Which being my present Sentiment, and having ever been so; and, that Philosophers have nothing at all to do with the Subjects they treat of, as standing under GOD's Power working Supernaturally, and Miraculously; 'tis manifest, that all the Expressions I have any where, do still relate to his Ordina∣ry Power only; nor can they be meant, or wrested by Malice it self, to be meant, of any other: And, tho' I may seem, in some extravagant Case, to doubt, because a Power that never Acted, seem'd Useless, and, so, was not an Attribute befitting GOD; yet, I no where assert that An∣nihilation is Impossible to GOD's Mi∣raculous Power. Indeed, in case it be real∣ly against GOD's Attributes, I should not stick at all to say, it is beyond Mira∣cle; yet, I no where maintain, that In∣finite Wisdom may not miraculously con∣trive it so, if it sees it fitting to be done, that it may not be against his Attributes; tho' Things being left in their Natural Condition, it may truly be concluded to be opposite to GOD's Attributes admi∣nistring the World after the Ordinary Me∣thods of Providence: Which being so;
and, that I, as a Philosopher, speak of GOD's Ordinary Power only; what is become of all their Calumnies, of which they are so lavish? Why is my Foot Cloven? Why did none but his Devil set me on writing? Why do I run down all Piety, Religion, and GOD himself; as Merry-Andrew, their Buf∣foon, in his Hurry of Calumny, would as∣sure his Reader, if any regarded him? 46. Convicted thus of rallying me so severely, and without the least Occasion, or Ground, since I say no more than o∣ther Divines in the Schools do, without any Control, maintain publickly; per∣haps they may, for their Excuse, pretend very charitably, that they are heartily glad they have prevail'd with me, at length, to be a good Christian; and ex∣ult, (as their Fellow-Libeller, Lominus, did,) that they have brought me, with much ado, to retract my Unwarrantable Opinions. But, I am their humble Ser∣vant, and beg their Pardon; I have not seen one Argument of theirs, as yet, that could bring a Man, endow'd with Com∣mon Reason, to retract; no, nor hold any thing; but to be a Sceptick, and appre∣hend there is no Certainty in the World, seeing Men, who, as appears by their Car∣riage, are mighty Ambitious to be held Men of Knowledge, produce neither Prin∣ciples to ground their Discourse, nor Con∣nexion,
to make the Parts of it hang toge∣ther. What my Sentiment was former∣ly, as to this Point, I have told them often, ere this, (in my 1d. Cartes. p. 61.) where I say, First, Idem sonat apud Philo∣sophos, &c. It signifies the same among Phi∣losophers, (especially Scholasticks,) to say, [GOD cannot do such a thing;] as to say, [It is impossible to be done.] Next, That, when Philosophers pronounce any thing to be Possible, or Impossible, they have respect only to the present State of the World, and the Or∣der of Second Causes. Thirdly, That, there∣fore, a Thing may be Contradictory, and Im∣possible, according to the Ordinary Course of the World, or to the Natures of Things, by which GOD, according to his Ordinary Pro∣vidence, governs the World; which, yet, ac∣cording to his Supernatural and Miraculous Power, by which he subdues all things to him∣self, are Possible. Of which, I there brought divers Instances. 47. Perhaps too, they will say, that, by this Doctrine I abandon and give up all my Demonstrations; and leave them to shift for themselves, or confess them to be False. I answer; Not one jot: For, all Science regards its Objects only as they stand in Nature, and not under GOD's Miraculous Power, which orders or alters the Natures of Things as he sees fit. Thus, One perfectly Skilful in the Sci∣ence
of Physicks, might demonstrate, that it was impossible a Virgin should Con∣ceive; or, that Clay, temper'd with Spit∣tle, should cure Blindness; yet, by GOD's Miraculous Power, both were done: Thus, a Speculative and Learned Metaphysi∣cian, before the Incarnation was Reveal'd to the World, might have brought most clear Demonstrations from his Altissimae Causae, and the Nature of GOD, that it was Impossible GOD should be Chang'd, Suffer, or Die; (which, amongst other things, made the Greeks esteem Christia∣nity Foolishness;) yet, GOD's Infinite and Miraculous Wisdom and Goodness could contrive a Way, how all those Pro∣positions might be Verify'd. Which will make it less wonderful to us, that he can, if he sees fit, find Ways enow, which sur∣mount our Guess, or Imagination, how a Pure Spirit may Change; Souls in the Inter∣mediate State be deliver'd, or a Creature Annihilated, if his Incomprehensible Wis∣dom sees it fit. Whoever reflects serious∣ly on those Powerful and Emphatical Words, [Ecce, Nova facio omnia, Apoc. 21. 5.] spoken by the Great Restorer of the World, and Promoter of all Creatures, and, amongst the rest, Glorify'd Bodies, to their Utmost Perfection, in their Fu∣ture and Eternal State, will find in them Matter enough of Contemplation; and
easily apprehend that their Condition will be so alter'd for the Best, that, to our Low Conceits and Notions we have of them now, it would seem impossible for them to be such as we shall find them then. In∣deed, I have not expresly put this Distin∣ction formerly, because it was not neces∣sary, nothing of that kind being then ob∣jected to me; yet, I had done this Equi∣valently, and in other Terms, by telling Mr. Le Grand, (Id. Cartes. p. 61.) that, When Philosophers affirm any thing to be Pos∣sible, or Impossible, they regard the present State of the World, and the Order of Second Causes. And, he is aware of it; for, in his Censure, p. 63. he would wave that Di∣stinction, and seems willing to deny it; yet, is forc'd to admit it, by his Recurring to Potentia Obedientialis in Creatures; which is the same I express'd by Quâ naturas Rerum sibi subdit. But, to fix his Cavil up∣on me, he tells us, that the Question is not, Quid Philosophi pronuntiant; sed, Quid ille statuit: And, I do statuere, it cannot be done by GOD's Ordinary Power; and, that all the Notions we have of GOD, and his Attributes, by Natural Means, and Acquir'd Learning, (or Philosophy,) seem Op∣posit to it: But, I hold, notwithstanding, that, if GOD's Wisdom sees fit it should be done, the same Wisdom can contrive Ways how it may be done Unknowable, nay, not
possible to be gues'd at, by our Uneleva∣ted, and Infinitely Short Natural Reason inform'd by the Lights we have of him from Creatures; and that, what his Infinite VVisdom sees fit, and his VVill ordains, his Power can execute. Which is what (ap∣plying my Words to this Particular) I call Potentia Miraculosa, or Extraordinaria. Nor do I any where say, that GOD's Wisdom, if he sees it Fit, cannot bring it about that it may be done, and yet, not be Prejudicial, or Contrary to any of those Attributes, from which, as far as known to us by Ordinary Means, I, as a Philoso∣pher, ought to argue. And, it would be a Madness in either of us, to maintain, that GOD's Power is not beyond our foolish Philosophy, or the Reach of Knowledge, which Ordinary Means can afford us. 48. I do not doubt, but it will be de∣ny'd by my Adversaries, that they have been so wanting to their Cause, as to main∣tain it only by Bantering, and Railing: They will say, (for, what will they not say, if Saying would do their Business?) that they have produc'd Arguments to prove their Doctrine, and have invalida∣ted all mine. But, I deny that Mr. Le Grand has, in his Censura, even so much as given an Answer to any one of my De∣monstrations; unlese he thinks it is An∣swer sufficient to call them (as he does in
his Epistle to the Reader) Cavils; and to tell him, according tò his Way of saying any thing, that he has, satis abundè, reply'd to them. I must, I say, absolutely contest against him, that he has not produc'd any one Conclusive Proof for any one Tenet of his own, nor given any one Solution to any one Argument of mine, where I pretend to Demonstrate, as I do frequently. I know he mentions some Words pick'd out of them, and reflects on them with Jeers, or Jests; but, when he should come se∣riously to a Close Discourse with them, and either admit or confute the Connexion in which the Force of them consists, he is in a Hurry, and Hast, to be gone to another Business; (for, his whole Method here, is a VVild and Distracted Leaping from one thing to another;) and so, he fairly takes a short Leave of them, and away he is va∣nish'd. So that the Frame of his Dis∣course seems to be made up of little else but Transitions. And, as for his Proofs, he thinks it is enough to say a thing; and, 'tis a Favòur to the Reader, now, if he be∣stows so much as a slight Explication of any Point; of which, formerly, he was more free. He sometimes cites my Words at large, even a whole Page together; so that one would verily think he meant ful∣ly to confute me; but the Reader may ea∣sily see, it was only to make a Shew, and
swell his small Performances to the just Size of a Treatise: For, if we set aside the Sar∣casms, Ironies, sought Phrases, quaint Ex∣pressions, pretty Curiosities and Observa∣tions, (to shew how profound a Man he is at Note-Book-Learning;) if we set aside these, with his Angry Words, and what he transcribes out of me, and others; and his Medly of little indifferent Nothings, which do not signifie any thing, either pro, or con; and, look for what only should be expected from a Philosopher. viz. Connected Sense, grounded on Princi∣ples; and then go about to cast up the Ac∣count of them, the Total Summ would amount to nothing but a long Row of Ci∣phers. Mediums fit for Demonstration, or any thing that, even, savours of true Lo∣gick, are such Strangers to his Loose Talk, that the Solid Sense in it might be com∣priz'd in a Nut-shell; as will more amply appear hereafter. 49. To give farther Satisfaction, and, perhaps, some Benefit to the Reader, I will instance in one Demonstration of mine; and shew how empty Mr. Le Grand's Pretence is, that he has (as he phrases it,) abundè satis, answer'd my Ar∣guments; and, how frivolous it would be in me, to lay open his Incredible Weak∣ness in the rest of his Imaginary Solutions of my other Demonstrations: For, since I chal∣leng'd
him, and the Cartesians, to give an Answer to this Argument, we may be sure he will exert his utmost to perform it pun∣ctually, and satisfactorily. Whence we may conclude, that if he most miserably falls flat in doing Right to himself, and his Cause, in this; it cannot be expected, but he will much more fail in all the rest; which is the only Reason why I pitch'd upon this in particular, as a Decisive In∣dex of all his Atchievments of this kind. 'Tis mention'd above, §. 20. and I will re∣peat it in distinct Propositions; fetching it (perhaps, something needlesly) from Remotest Grounds; and, then, reducing each piece of it to Self-Evidence, both that the Force of it may the better appear to be Irresistible; as also, that Mr. Le Grand may consider which of the Identical Pro∣positions he will, in his great Learning, think fit to deny. But, first; to avoid the Old Cavil, let it be remember'd, that we speak here, as Philosophers ought always to do, of the Nature of an Angel, as in it self, and not as it may be wrought upon by GOD's Miraculous Power, by which he disposes of all his Creatures, as he sees to be Wisest and Best for Supernatural Rea∣sons; which, as they are beyond the Sci∣ence of Philosophers to Know, or even to Guess at; so, 'tis evidently beyond their Province to meddle with them.
THESIS: An Angel, or Pure Spirit, is natu∣rally Immutable. Prop. 1. BOdy and Spirit, which are sup∣pos'd, by the Question, to be the Species, or Kinds, of Ens or Thing, do agree, (or do not differ,) precisely, in the Common Notion of Thing. This is as self-evident, as that [Every Thing is a Thing.] Which is an Identical. Prop. 2. Therefore, they only Disagree, or Differ, by those Notions, call'd, their Differences: For, since, to have a Difference in it from another, is the Formal Reason, why one is Different, or Differs, from an∣other; as, Whiteness in a Thing, is the Formal Reason which makes a Thing be white; it follows, that [to have Differences in them, is, to Differ,] is as Self-evident, as 'tis, that [to Differ, is, to Differ.] Which is an Identical. Prop. 3. Therefore, those Things which have Greater (or more Opposite) Differences in them, do more differ; and those which have the Greatest (or most Opposite) Diffe∣rences in them, do most differ: For, since, to have a Difference from another, is the same as to Differ from it, by Prop. 2. this Proposition is as Evident, as it is, that
[These which do more Differ, do more Dif∣fer;] or, [Those which do most Differ, do most Differ.] Which are Identicals. Prop. 4. Divisible and Indivisible do Ad∣equately Divide the Common Notion of Thing, as its Differences. For, since [Di∣visible] means [Not-Divisible,] which is Contradictory, that is, most Opposite to, or most Different from the other; and, be∣tween Contradictories, (or, is, or is not,) there can be no Third, or Middle Notion; this Proposition is as Self-evident, (by Prop. 3.) as 'tis, that (Those which do most Dif∣fer, do most Differ.] Which is an Identical. Prop. 5. Therefore, Body being evident∣ly Divisible; Spirit, which differs from it, must be necessarily Indivisible: For, since Body and Spirit Differ; and they are for∣mally made to differ by their Differences, by Prop. 2. and those Differences are most Opposite, or do most differ, by Prop. 4. and every thing is what it is Constituted, or made to be; this Proposition is as Self-evi∣dent, as, that [A Thing is what it is;] or, that [What is Divisible, is Divisible; and, What is Indivisible, is Indivisible.] Which are, all of them, Identicals. Prop. 6. Therefore, whatever is Affirm'd of Body, except the Generical, or Common Notion of Thing, must be Deny'd of Spirit: For, since all Predicates (except that of the Common Notion) must be taken from
the Difference; and the Difference is that which makes one of the Species different, or distinct, from all others; that is, consti∣tutes, or makes it to be no other; and, con∣sequently, (since it must be something,) makes it to be it self only; it follows, that Body and Spirit are so, or, in such a man∣ner, Distinct, as those Differences make them, by Prop. 3. that is, are most Diffe∣rent, or most Oppos'd; that is, Contradicto∣rily Distinct; or, are of Contradictory. Natures to one another, by Prop. 4. & 5. Wherefore, that whatever (besides the Common Notion of Thing) is Affirm'd of the One, must be Deny'd of the Other, is as Self-evident, as, that [Contradiction (or, saying contradictorily, by is, and is not,) is Contradiction.] Which is Identical. Prop. 7. Wherefore, since we do truly and properly Affirm of BODY, that it is Successive, or Part after Part, in its Opera∣tions; the Contradictory, viz. that 'tis Un∣successive, Simultaneous, or Instantaneous, in its Operations, must, by Prop. 6. be Af∣firm'd of SPIRIT. Therefore, this Pro∣position is as Self-evident, as it is, that [What is not part after part, is not part af∣ter part; but all at once.] Which is evi∣dently Identical. Prop. 8. Whatever is Mutable, is other∣wise afterwards, than it was before; and, consequently, 'tis Successive: For, if it has
all it had before, (neither more, nor less,) 'tis manifestly the Same, or Unchang'd; and, where there is no Successiveness, there can be no possible Ground for Before, or After: Wherefore, this is as Self-evident, as it is, that [VVhat must remain the same, or can receive no Change, is Unchangeable.] Which is Identical. Prop. 9. Wherefore, an Angel (being, by Prop. 6. & 7. Unsuccessive) is natural∣ly Unchangeable. 50. Ere I come to examine Mr. Le Grand's Solution of this Demonstration, I desire all Ingenuous Readers to reflect what Advantage it would bring to True Know∣ledge, or SCIENCE, were this Con∣nected Way of Discoursing from Clear Grounds brought into Fashion, and can∣didly pursu'd. It would quickly make Truth appear; and discover, what Pro∣ductions are the Genuine Effects of Right Reason, and what is only Loose Talk. It would put an End to all Controversies, and avoid all Occasions of Men's Catching at, and availing themselves, by those insig∣nificant Methods of Wrangling, Ill Lan∣guage, and Prevarication; to which Ob∣stinate Opposers of Truth are forc'd to have recourse. Whence, I must sincerely declare that (as far as I am conscious to my self of my own Intentions) it was not
any Arrogancy, or Vanity of preferring my Labours, and Thoughtful Productions, before those of some Writers, who took not this Way of Connexion but seem'd wholly to dis regard it; but, that which caus'd me to take that Way of expressing my self with that Assuredness, was, an Ear∣nest Desire to invite, and (as far as I could possibly) incite others, and breed an Emu∣lation in them to follow such a Method, as might set Truth in a Clear Light, ad∣vance Science, and difcountenance and beat down Scepticism, and all its Incon∣clusive Ways of Talking; which, in Phi∣losophy, where Solid and VVell-grounded Truth is aim'd at, (let it be never so Pret∣ty, and Witty,) amounts to no more, nor deserves any better Name, but that of Idle Tittle-Tattle. Nay, I express'd my self, in my Preface to Solid Philosophy Asserted, that I was aware this would be objected to me; and, therefore, I did there (from §. 8. to §. 14.) alledge many Reasons, to shew that this Carriage was necessary for a Writer who resolv'd, without Fear or Favour of any, to pursue those Good Ends; and to put it to the Test, what Doctrine, or Method, was True; what Sophisticate, and False. Which Reasons, till they an∣swer, themselves must confess, that their Objecting Arrogancy can only be built on their seeing my Heart, and penetrating
my Inward and Invisible Intentions. The plain Truth is, Mr. Le Grand would have had me speak well of his Books, (and o∣ther Writers of the same Strain and Pitch;) for which Reason he complains of me sad∣ly, in his Preface to his former Treatise, that I had not so much as read his Books, sive Latinè, sive Gallicè scriptos; (there is a Quod not a benè for you, now!) My Rea∣sons why I neglected that Expected Duty were these: First, Because (except his Volume which is a Collection out of Des∣cartes his Placita) they were so very Fa∣mous, and universally taken notice of, that I never so much as heard of them. Next, I did not apprehend I had any such great Obligation to read them. Thirdly, I read as much of them as I had occasion to speak to; which did not so hugely please me, as to think it worth my while to look af∣ter any more of them. Lastly, Those I had read were like Whipp'd Cream; be∣ing so empty of Solid Sense and Frothy, so void of Principles or Connexion, that is, without either Head or Tail, that I was weary of them. And, as for his last Books, he has so doubly disfigur'd them with Ill Language, that the Ground-work of them is Insipid and Unconnected Talk; and the Embroidery of them is Raillery: Which are no such great Philters, to make me in love with their Brethren; nor could
any Flattery be so fulsom from me, as to deck them with Encomiums. But, Words from an Adversary are of no VVeight; Let us, then, come to examine how pertinent∣ly and punctually he has Answer'd this De∣monstration, which was so highly incum∣bent upon him. I earnestly beg of the Reader, to take the pains to go along with me for this once, so that we may get a full View of the Solution of it; which, if he does, I am confident he will confess, that never did a weaker Writer appear in Print; and, that he will both grant that my farther Confuting him is Needless; and, withall, will admire I have had the Pa∣tience to lose my Time so long upon such an Insignificant Trifler. 51. He recites my Demonstration in his Censura, p. 44. and sets himself to answer it, p. 45. First, He says, This Demonstra∣tion is none of those he brought formerly; but, that this is the first time he has produc'd it. What is this to purpose? Let it be where it will, whose it will, or whensoever first produc'd, here it is; and I have challeng'd him, and his Cartesians, to Answer it; and therefore, we are to expect their Perfor∣mance. Yet, he is much out, even when he talks frivolously; for, I produc'd it for∣merly, at large, (tho' not in the self-same manner,) in my Method to Science, p. 316. as any one that can read, may see. Next,
He says, I durst not repeat here my former Argument, drawn from the Immutability of GOD. He says very right; for, I dare not commit such a Folly, as to repeat an Argument which was brought to evince Another Point, to prove This Thesis, which is so widely Different from it. The Im∣mutability of GOD was my Medium, to prove, that GOD could not be the Imme∣diate Cause of that which is Essentially Mu∣table, as Motion is; his Nature being Con∣tradictory to it. Why must this Argument be repeated here, where we are speaking of the Manner of Operating peculiar to Angels? Tho' this be nothing to purpose, and sillily Ridiculous; yet, the Words, [He durst not bring it here,] look Great; and would persuade his Readers, if they were Fools, that he has frighted me from my Argument; which, tho' he sets a good Face on it, and looks and talks Big, I dare say, poor Man! himself is far from ho∣ping. Thirdly, He talks Ironically of its Formidable and Invincible Strength. Whe∣ther it be Invincible, will be best seen by his Answer to it: But, it seems, 'tis For∣midable to him; for he is loath to come up to it, but makes his Approaches very backwardly', and cautiously. Fourthly, He calls it Garrulity, and (afterwards) Verbo∣sity. What Reader will not smile at his Humour of saying any thing, tho' never so
manifestly False? Whoever reviews my Argument, put down by himself, in the fore going Page, and in my very Words, will see there is not one superfluous Word in it, but barely as many as suffic'd to shew the Connexion of my Discourse: And, of all the things in the World, Verbosity and Garrulity in a Demonstration is the on∣ly way to blunt and spoil the Force of the Argument; since this Loosness of much Talk, bIinds the Considerer from seeing the Close Coherence of its Terms. But this acquaints us perfectly with his Genius: The very Grain of his Thoughts is laid so cross to all kind of Connexion, that he thinks all Connected Discourse is nothing: but Idle Babbling; and, that only Loose and Rambling Talk is True Demonstration. 52. But, these Avant-Guards of his, are only VVhifflers before the Show, to make way: Now comes the Answer it self. First, He excepts against the Common Notion of Ens, or Thing; which I had said, consisted in this, that It had a Power to be, or could be. Upon which, he thus descants; Quasi verò Essentia omnis Entis. Finiti, tam Creati quàm Creandi, non sit quid Positivum, sed nihil aliud quàm Poten∣tia Essendi, seu id quod Quo possit Esse. More Folly, and Shifting Tricks, could not have been well crouded into five Lines! Where did I speak in the Abstract of Es∣sentia,
Potentia essendi, or Quo potest esse? Does not he see, in my Words, put down lately by himself, that I speak of Ens, or the Concrete; and, that, in my Id. Cartes. p. 244. where I demonstrate to him, what the Notion of Ens Creatum must be, (of which he takes no notice here, but only talks against, that is, denies, my Conclu∣sion,) I express'd what was meant by such an Ens, p. 245. l. 2, 3, viz. Illud quod po∣test existere; and, all along, I name Ens, Corpus, Spiritus, which are all Concretes. And, surely, he will not say that the Essence of Created Things includes Actual Existence; for, if he does, he makes them so many GODS; for, 'tis the Preroga∣tive of the Deity only, Essentially to Exist. Let him take any Individual, Created Things, (those being most properly Things;) For Example; Michael, Peter, a Horse, a Stone, &c. and then examine his Thoughts, whether he finds either Actual Being, or Not-being, in their No∣tions; and, if he cannot, but finds (as he must) they Abstract from both, that all that can be said of Ens, as to what it has of it self, or its own Nature and Essence, in order to Being, is, that it can be, or can receive Existence, if the First Cause pleases to give it. This being so, let us abstract the Notion of Ens from all Individuals; and we shall see that the Notion of Ens, or Thing, in
Common, is That which is Capable of Be∣ing, and can be no other. 33. Having thus chang'd my Words, let us see what Advantage he makes of this slippery Dealing. He objects, that this would make the Notion of Ens not to be Positive. What means he? Does he think that the Notion of Quo est Res, or the Form, or quo potest esse Res, (suppose I had said so,) is not Positive; whereas, 'tis Impos∣sible a Negative Nature can exist, or ren∣der a Thing Capable of Existing? Indeed, Aristotle's First Matter is defin'd Negative∣ly, as having no kind of Form at all in its Notion, neither Substantial, nor Acciden∣tal; but, that the Form which is part of the Essence, and constitutes the Thing, should be Negative too, would make the whole Thing to be made up of Negatives; which is such a strange Blunder in Philo∣sophy, as admits no Parallel. The Form determines the Potentiality, or Indifferen∣cy of the Matter, and makes it become This, or an Individual Thing, and so fits it for Existence; because a Thing in Com∣mon, or that which is Indeterminats, is not Capable of Existing. Now, that the Es∣sence that makes an Individual Thing, which is the most Positive Notion we have, (or rather, no Notion is perfectly Positive, but it,) should not be Positive it self, or be less Positive, because it makes the Matter
capable of a farther, and best Perfection, to wit, the last Actuality of Existence, is a Paradox unheard of in Metaphysicks. So that Mr. Le Grand has alter'd my Words, and yet gets no Advantage by it, but blunders himself, while he went to blun∣der the Demonstration. For, What is all this to the Argument? If he do but grant that Body and Spirit are Species of Thing in Common, or (which is the same) that they are both of them Things, (which 'tis a Madness to deny,) the Demonstration, which consists in the Connexion or Agree∣ment of the Notions, will go on, and pro∣ceed, whether he will or no. And, this he fore-sees very well; and therefore, by throwing these Flim-flams, as Rubs in the way, he endeavours to keep it off, and hin∣der it from going on. 54. Next, He tells us, that De Corpore & Spiritu, rebus finitis actu existentibus, nunc sermo instituitur: This Discourse treats of Body and Spirit, actually existent. I be∣seech him, who stated the Question on this fashion, or pretended we spoke of This Body, or This Spirit, which only do a∣ctually exist? He knows, that, when he put my Demonstration, I acknowledg'd, that I spoke of Body and Spirit, which were the Species of Ens, in Common; and therefore, are themselves the most common Notions next to it; and, not Particulars,
which only do exist actually. Yet, he tells us, Nunc Sermo instituitur: The Speech now, is, of Things actually existing. I beseech him, VVhose Speech? His, or Mine? Not Mine, as is now shewn: It must mean, then, that 'tis His Speech. And, by what Rule must I needs speak as he would have me? Cer∣tainly, I have Right to put my own De∣monstration as I please my self. It lies be∣fore him; and, he is to answer it as it lies. What wriggling is here to pervert the Sense of it, instead of representing it in my own VVords, and Solving it! Again, this is a Sign he knows little what belongs to Sci∣ence; for this treats of the Abstracted No∣tions and Natures of the Subjects we han∣dle; which, as distinctly such, exist in our Understanding, and no where else; for, there they are concise, and exact, even to an In∣divisible; whereas, if we treat of them as they actually exist in Matter, or in re, they are jumbl'd confusedly with innumerable other Modes; so that there cannot possibly be any Science, nor Demonstration of them at all. I wish him to reflect upon all the particular Sciences in the Mathematicks, whether they are of Circles, Quadrates, Triangles, &c. and he will see they do all of them treat of those Formal Notions, or Natures, abstractedly, from their Actual Existence in re; where, perhaps, no Fi∣gures Mathematically so exact as our
Mind frames of them, are to be found. The same is to be said, when we treat of the Common Notions of Ens, Corpus, Spiri∣tus, &c. which can no where exist, but in the Understanding: Nay, 'tis evident, I speak of Ens Formally, as its Notion is taken Generically, or of Ens in Common; and, sure, he will not say, the Thing for∣mally, as in Common, can any where actu∣ally exist, but in our Mind. 56. He proceeds after his old rate, and tells his Reader, that all my Verbosity, hoc solum vult, means only this, that Body has Parts, and Spirit has none; and, that there∣fore, Body is Successive, and thence Mutable; and Spirit Immutable. He puts my Rea∣son, after a fashion, indeed; yet, only slightly, and slubberingly: He would have more oblig'd me to have us'd my own VVords, which were more Ample, and Full, viz. That the Differences which constitute them being Contradictory, it follows, that whatever we say of the One, (except what belongs to the Common Notion of Thing,) the Contradictory to it must be said of the Other; and, therefore, if Body have Suc∣cession in its Operations, Spirit must have none, but must have all its Operations in an Instant; and, consequently, be Immu∣table. However, I thank him he has put the Substance of my Demonstration on any fashion, tho' not forcibly, but rawly. Here
'tis the Argument presses; now let us ex∣pect his Solution. First, He says the An∣swer is Easie; and, 'tis true; for, in his Way one may easily, without any Trou∣ble, Answer all Euclid: 'tis but altering his Words, and saying something, or rais∣ing some extravagant Scruple against his Conclusions, and the Deed is done. Next, He grants they may know some Things at one View, but not all. This is said; but, still the Question is, Why not All at once, if Some? His Reason? Does the Know∣ledge of those Some burthen or fill the An∣gel's Intellect, so, that it can hold no more? No, surely; for, we experience, even in our Souls here, that are very much Infe∣riour to the Intelligences, which are Pure Acts, that the having some Knowledge, increases our Capacity to take in more; whence 'tis demonstrable, that nothing can fill or satisfie them, but the Sight of an Infinite Truth, or the Beatifical Vision of GOD. Do Angels require some Time to have more Knowledge, because slowly-mo∣ving Corporeal Phantasms, must bring things leisurely into their Understanding; or, Impressions on their Nerves occasion the producing Ideas? Neither of these can be said. What hinders, then, their having at once all they naturally can have? Are not all Truths, the Objects of these Knowledges, Connected; but some of them
stand at variance with one another? This would disgrace GOD's Workmanship, the Product of his Wisdom, if we make Truths Incoherent, Contradictory and Chimo∣rical. None of these Rubs, then, being possible, which only could hinder or retard an Angel from having all his Intellectual O∣perations in an Instant, it had been but a piece of Civility in Mr. Le Grand to have bestow'd upon us some Reason for his dis∣senting from us in this Point; and, not to have popt us off with a bare voluntary De∣nial of the Conclusion, which is the only thing in question. 57. For, we have much more Right to expect his Reason, because (as was now said) this Denial of his, instead of An∣swering the Argument, is a plain Denying the Immediate Conclusion which follow'd from that Demonstration. Yet, I must say, that (however those foolish Fellows, the Logicians, would laugh at him, for such an Unpardonable Errour in Disputa∣tion, yet) he behaves himself here like a Civil Gentleman; for, he compounds with us, and grants very kindly, that they do at once know some Things, but denies they have all the Operations belonging to them at once, or know all they ought to know in an Instant. Now, this being evidently the Conclusion of my Argument, (as far as I there press'd it,) 'tis a double Injury;
first, only to hint the Argument, and then slide away from speaking to it, and deny our Conclusion; and, yet, give us no kind of Reason why. Yet, he pretends to give us something that he would have thought a Reason, tho' 'tis so slight, that he is shy to call it so: Which we will hearken to; only, let it be first remember'd, that he is Arguing against the Conclusion, which he had most learnedly Deny'd; and, not An∣swering my Argument, or shewing that the Terms of it do not cohere; or, that the Conclusion does not follow out of my Pre∣misses. His Reason (if it be one) is grounded on an Explication of his own Doctrine, that GOD moves Matter Im∣mediately; which, unless he first establish∣es, (as he never did, nor can,) his Foun∣dation shakes. However, that fuppos'd, he demonstrates it after his usual sort, by bringing a Parallel. His Discourse runs thus: Bodies are Stupid Things; nor could they stir at all, if GOD did not give and conserve their Motion, and all the Modes of it: And, in like manner, GOD gives and conserves Cogitation, and the Modes of Cogitation, to Angels. Where∣fore, as a Body does not therefore lose its Essence by Moving more or less, so an Angel does not lose his Essence by Thinking more or less. Where are we now? I am sure we are rambl'd quite out of the Purlue of
our Question. My Conclusion only says, and my Argument only aims to prove, that if the Ordinary Laws of an Angel's Ope∣rating be observ'd, it would know all it is naturally to know at once, and not succes∣sively; but, that it would, otherwise, lose its Essence, I never said, nor thought; nor that GOD, acting Supernaturally, can∣not devest them of some Property they have, tho' naturally ally'd to its Essence. So that, he first Denies my Conclusion, instead of Answering my Argument: Next, brings a Parallel for an Argument; and when he has brought it, he shoots it at Rovers, and levels it at a wrong Mark: So far he is from knowing what belongs to any one Rule belonging to Disputation. Add that his pretended Parallel is the most Unparal∣lel of any he could have invented; Divi∣sible and Indivisible are the Essential, or In∣trinsecal Differences of Ens nor can there be any Ens, but it must be either the One, or the Other of them. Are Moving more, or Moving less, Essential Differences of Bo∣dy? Or, cannot Body be, without being either of them? Could not GOD's Om∣nipotence have kept their First Matter from Moving, when he had first Created it? Or, are [Moving more, and Moving less,] Contradictories; as are the Differen∣ces I put, and argue from them? Or, could an Angel, which is a Pure Act, have
been Created without Knowing at all, as a Body could without Moving at all? What a Lame Similitude then, or Parallel, is this, which has never a Leg to run on! And, yet, he will needs make it run on a Sleev∣less Errand, and applies it to a Point which is Foreign to our Question. Add, far∣ther, that our Question is not here of an Angel's Simultaneous Knowledge omnium rerum, of all things, as he puts it: 'Tis not the Quantity or Extension of the Angelical Knowledges, which I do here strive to e∣vince; but the Unsuccessiveness of them; or, that it has them all at once, (whether they are many or fewer, large or narrow;) from whence is deduc'd immediately, that 'tis naturally Immutable. 58. Yet, of this Aukward Answer he is so fond, that he Crows over my Demon∣stration most Triumphantly, in these Words, p. 45. [Quâ simplice solutione, &c. By which Simple Solution, all the Herculean Strength of his Demonstration, as Sampson's did of old, by meerly cutting off his Hairs, falls to the Ground, to his great Disgrace.] And, I must confess, 'tis (as he says) a Simple So∣lution indeed. Were he but half as Power∣ful in his Arguments and Solutions, as he is in his Confident Braggadochio Talk, he would be Invincible. Poor Man! He thinks the Tinkling a few fine Latin Phrases is far beyond all the strongest Reasons in the
World: And, can any Man think I have nothing else to do, but to stand laying open the Nonsense of such a perpetual Tri∣fler? 59. This may serve for a Sample of his Solutions of my Arguments, by which (since this concerns him more than all the others) we may judge of all the rest: For, I am forc'd to take the Method of pro∣ceeding by Instances, in regard it would require a Volume to lay open all his Fol∣lies of each kind. In the next place, I will produce an Instance or two, of his Great Talent of Aggravating and Pervert∣ing my Words to a Sinister and Invidious. Sense; which is an Essential Part of this New Cartesian Method, and takes up near a quarter of his Book; and, withall, gives it a Thousand times à greater Shew of be∣ing Victorious, than all his Arguments. An Honourable and Worthy Gentleman hapt to say, that the Parts of the Cartesian Do∣ctrine did cum quodam lepôre sibi consenti∣re, agree to one another with a certain Grace, or Prettiness; than which, I know no Ex∣pression more proper. I reply'd to Mr. Le Grand, who seem'd fond of this Commen∣dation, in my Id. Cart. p. 10. and grant∣ed, it was not only Lepida, Graceful, or Pretty; but also, Witty. Which says the same that Noble Person said; and I added a farther Commendation to it. Upon this,
Mr. Le Grand tells his Reader, that, No∣bilissimum illum Virum spiculis suis venenatis petit; that I assault, or set upon that Noble Person with my Poyson'd Darts. His Fancy is, certainly, very fearfuly Hypochondriack: Every thing is a Spiculum, or Dart, that he dis-likes. Thus a silly Asterisk *, ca∣sually left in the Context, in my ME∣THOD, was interpreted as a Design, trans∣figere ipsum quinque radiis tanquam tot Spicu∣lis; to strike him thorow with those Five Points, as with so many Darts. Nay, he tells me, moreover, in that Preface, §. 31. that I have petulans ingenium ac Judicium pravum, for attempting to do him that Mischief with those five Darts of that A∣sterisk; and is so afraid of being transfix'd, or run thorow by them, that he complains of it sadly to the Reader (it being, as we are to conceive, a Matter of much Weight) a second time there, in §. 44. Of which, see Id. Cartes. p. 30. & 72. Another In∣stance of his Ranting, and shameful Ex∣aggeration, shall be this: He had quoted Bellarmin, to say, that a piece of Wood was turn'd into Stone. I reply'd, That it did not appear, but Stony Particles might be interwoven with the Wooden ones, Id. Car∣tes. p. 45. for which I gave my Reason. What Harm, what Incivility is in this Reply? None. Yet, let Mr. Le Grand come to represent it, (who, as Icterical
Men see all things Yellow, dyes every Word, tho' never so Innocent, into the Colour of his own furious Choler, and ren∣ders it Hideous,) it amounts to this, in his Language, (Cens. pag. 112.) Bellarmine Rationis expers es, mentiris: Bellarmin, thou hast no Sense (or Reason) in thee; Thou Lyest. Hundreds of such Ingenuous Re∣presentations of my Words garnish his Censure; to which, what Credit is to be given, these few Instances may inform us: And the Reader may observe, that when∣ever he is most Transported and Furious in Amplifying, he may be sure there is always the least Reason. And, so much for this Exaggerating Method, so Useful and Pro∣per to our New Cartesians. 60. Another Method of theirs, is, to impose upon me False Tenets, to make me look like a Monster of Folly and Impiety. These are great Sticklers in his, and his Friend Merry-man's Pamphlets; and give the briskest Vigour to their Invectives. For example; He tells the Reader, (p. 42.) that I say, It is infinitely more Impossible that GOD should change an Angel, (if it were Changeable at all,) after the First Instant, than that it self, or another Angel, should do it. Now, What Man, reading these Words, thus industriousty singl'd out, would not verily think I made GOD in∣finitely less Powerful than an Angel, or any
other Creature; and admire at my Folly, and Impiety, both? But, read the whole Discourse there, and it is evidently quite contrary; nor could any Man more high∣ly magnifie GOD's Attributes, than I do in that very place. My Discourse is this: An Indivisible Effect must be put in an Instant; therefore, it will be put in the first Instant, if all that is requisite to pro∣duce that Effect be put: Those Requisites are, Power in the Cause, and Disposition to exercise that Power, and Application of the Agent to the Patient; and, that, in case the Agent be not yet Dispos'd to act, it must be Chang'd, so to be made Dispos'd. Wherefore, since 'tis Infinitely more Im∣possible GOD should not have Power to do it in the First Instant, being All-power∣ful, than that another Spirit should not have such a Power; or, not be Dispos'd of himself to act, he being Pure and Infinite Actuality; or, that he can be Chang'd, thus to be made Dispos'd, he being Unchange∣able; or, not be Apply'd, he being Omni∣present; than it is, that an Angel should not have Power to do this Effect; or, be chang'd, so to be fitted to act: Or, not be Apply'd most intimately to the Patient; therefore, 'tis infinitely more Impossible GOD should not do it in the First In∣stant, (that is, not after the First Instant,) if the Effest were feisible, than that an
Angel, which falls infinitely short in every regard, should not do it in the First In∣stant; or, (which is the same,) should do it after the First Instant. See my Demon∣stration, in my METHOD; from p. 307. to p. 314. particularly, p. 313. Now, 'tis evident, that, in this Discourse, I bear up to GOD's Attributes, there mention∣ed; and maintain them to be infinitely a∣bove those of the best Created Beings in e∣very regard. What do these Men? They pick out a few Words, and purposely con∣ceal the whole Tenour of my Discourse; and, by this False Dealing, endeavour to impose upon me so Wicked an Impiety, as neither any Christian, nor any Heathen, who holds a First Being, did ever assert. How he deforms this Argument, by sing∣ling out a few other Words, may be seen in his Censure, p. 49. Judge then, Read∣er, whether those poor spiteful Men have not renounc'd all Shame and Conscience, who dare thus wilfully defame their Neighbour, and fraudulently abuse their Reader. Would not a Lawyer that us'd such a Dishonest Trick, in Altering the Words which concern'd the Title of an Estate, be turn'd over the Bar, and hated by all Honest Men? Something worse than this as containing the same Malice, and in far worse Circumstances, is this Other Instance. He had, in the Preface of his
former Book, §. 40. made me to say, it was Vile opus & Laboriosum, for GOD to be the Immediate Cause of Motion. He put it directly upon me, as my very Words; by introducing it with Pergit, statimque ad∣dit; and, by printing the Word [Labo∣riosum] in Italick Letter, and the same with the other Words, which were truly mine. This makes me Impious against GOD, with a Witness; for, it represents my Opinion to be, That GOD makes use of the Ministery of Angels, to ease himself (forsooth!) of the Fatigue and Weariness, which, otherwise, he would have felt, had he mov'd the First Matter Himself. Hereupon, I challeng'd him to have flatly falsify'd my Words, and, to have added [Laboriosum,] to put upon me such an absurd Doctrine, as never came into the Head of any Man acquainted with Christianity, or Common Sense. I had happ'd to express it to be a Drudgery mis-becoming GOD's Essence, who is Un∣changeable, to be the Immediate Cause of Mo∣tion, or Change. Where, 'tis manifest, I put it upon the Mis-becomingness, or Un∣sutableness to GOD's Nature, which is Pure Actuality of Existence, to cause Change immediately; because, Being only was the Proper Effect of Him, whose Nature was Self-Existence. Yet, in despite of all the Concomitant Words, and the whole Te∣nour
of the Discourse, instead of Retract∣ing, or Excusing his Fault, he stands to it stoutly, p. 44. And, why? Because Drudges do use to toyl and moyl, and sweat and la∣bour, and lead (as we say) a weary Life: As if there were not Meanness in Drudge∣ry, and Indignity for the Master of the Fa∣mily to perform, it being below his Fun∣ction; and, as if the Concomitant Word, [Mis-becoming,] and [Vile.] join'd with it, did not restrain it manifestly to this Sense, that it was Indignum DEO; and, not such a Toilsom Business to move Matter, which every Angel can do. Could it be possibly thought by any Man in his Wits, that he who holds that GOD Created Heaven and Earth, of Nothing, in an Instant, should think he had not Power to give Motion to Bodies, without over-straining himself? Who, but a Mad man, could hold two such Inconsistent Tenets? Or, What Man, well in his Wits, could hope to obtain Belief that I held such a piece of Extravagant Nonsense? But, what can∣not Impotent Passion feign, and pretend, when Reason is Nonpluss'd? Something was to be said when he was at a Plunge; and any thing is taken up, in that Exigence, to serve a turn; and, the more Extrava∣gant it is, the better it pleases his Humour; which never lets him consider whether it be Credible, or no: It serves to bespatter,
and vent his Uneasie Anger, which is still boiling in his Breast; and, that is enough for his purpose. 61. Another piece of this New Cartesian Method, is, To cry aloud against me, and call me Proud, Self-conceited, and Arrogant, if I will not allow such Writers as himself to be most Excellent Philosophers: Or, if I hap to dissent from other Learned Men, in some Opinions, (as, Who does not?) then, presently, he complains pathetical∣ly, that I damn, contemn, and trample upon those Authors: Or, if I do but say, I De∣monstrate such a Point; or, that others do not demonstrate; then, presently, I am as Proud as Lucifer; and, the Lord knows what. How sincere he is in alledging this, will appear by the examining three most signal Places he makes Choice of; where he objects it, (§. 40.) In which he makes me say, [Providentiam Divi∣nam, ex Aliis omnibus, me, ad Rationem Do∣minio suo restituendam selegisse:] that Di∣vine Providence had chosen out Me, from All Others, to restore Reason to her Dominion, or Soveraignty, over Fancy. This, certainly, thus worded, sounds proudly. But, may we not fear, after so many Trials, that Mr. Le Grand has falsify'd my Words, tho' he puts them all for mine: and, that too, in a Distinct Character? To say, I would attempt or endeavour this, is but to ex∣press,
that my Zeal for Truth had put me upon such a bold Undertaking, and, with∣all, to give an Encouragement to the Reader to weigh my Argument: Or, to say, that I apprehended GOD's Provi∣dence had enabi'd me to perform this, was no more than to say, I had writ a Method to Science, which the Title-Page had pro∣fess'd openly; for which too, I gave GOD the Glory. But, to say GOD had chosen me, out of All others, can become no body but a Proud and Imprudent Boaster. How proves he this? that is, How shews he these Words, thus put together, in my Books? Why, he cites the very places; which, if True, must shame me; if False, must disgrace him, as a Falsifyer. The First of the Places he cites, is found in the Pre∣face to my METHOD, p. 27. where I find, in the Beginning of that §, these Words; I have not enumerated these Parti∣culars, to boast my Performances; but, to be-speak my Reader's Pardon, if, travelling in an Unbeaten Road, I happen now and then to stumble. Which have not the least Shew of Arrogancy, but the quite Contrary. In∣deed, I say, p. 27. that It is Impossible for any Wit of Man to invent any other VVay than what I have propos'd; that is, Solid and Evident: Which, I say there, is, to build on the Nature of the Thing, and frame my Discourses by Connexion of Terms. But, do
I pretend, that what I propos'd was my own Invention, or that I am the Author of it; as the Wondrously Modest Cartesius did; who oppos'd all the present and past World, to set up his New-fangl'd Doctrine? Do not all Aristotelians pretend to it, as well as I? And, Did not all the Learned World fol∣low it, till Cartesius's Time? With what Ingenuity, then, does he tell his Reader, in the Margin, that this is Arrogantia J. S. non aliàs audita; the Unheard of Arrogance of J. S. to propose in his Books, (in Op∣position to the Ideists,) what Ten Thou∣sand had propos'd before him? The Second Place he cites, is, from the Epistle Dedi∣catory to Solid Philosophy Asserted, §. 8. where I have these Words, [I must own, I have a high Opinion of my Principles, and of my Method, which Nature, and GOD's Good Providence, have laid, and establish'd.] Is it Arrogance to have a high Opinion of what GOD, and Nature (the Work of his Di∣vine Wisdom) have done? For, it is plain, that I do not pretend I have any hand in establishing either of them. My Non Ultra has told them why I have a high Opinion of my Principles, because they are built on the Metaphysical Verity of Things, establish'd by the Ideas in the Di∣vine Understanding: And of my Method, or Way of Discourse; because Nature, or (which is the same) GOD, as Author of
Nature, has made our Soul such an Infe∣riour sort of Spirit, that it works by Ab∣stract or Inadequate Notions, which we compound or connect into Propositions, (in which all Truth formally consists;) and then connect those Propositions into Co∣herent Discourses. These, then, being by me ascrib'd to GOD and Nature, I assume nothing to my self, but my Conclusions; and, of these I deliver'd my self thus, in the Words immediately following: [But, as for my Conclusions, and my Deductions, as I will not justifie them with the same Firmness as I did the others, so I should not think I ought to propose them to Learned Men, unless I judg'd them Demonstrative.] And, now, where is all this Unheard of Arrogancy? Where is my Bragging that GOD had Selected me so particularly, from All Others, which he most expresly puts upon me; and pre∣tends to shew them, [tribus ex locis,] from three Places; of which, these are Two, where not a Word is found savouring of Arrogancy, or any thing like it; but, ra∣ther, the direct Contrary? Would it be Un∣civil, on this Occasion, to ask of Mr. Le Grand, whether he has not forsworn all Sin∣cerity, and Common Honesty? To stander is too great a Crime for a good Christian to be Guilty of; but, to falsisie his Adversa∣ry's Words, and Slander him too; or ra∣ther, to pretend falsly he says thus, or thus,
in such Determinate Places, (which Par∣ticularizing makes it look Credible,) on purpose that he may slander him, is so vo∣luntary and wilful a Complicated Crime, that the Tenderest, and most Indulgent Charity is at a loss to invent an Excuse for it. 62. The Third Place to which he re∣fers his Reader, is taken out of the Dedi∣catory to Solid Philosophy Asserted; where there are, indeed, some of those Words, but not one of those haughty ones he here expresly and distinctly fixes upon me. My Discourse in the two fore-going Pa∣ges, was, concerning the Way of Ideas made use of by Cartesius, and others; which, I made account, did delude their good Reason; and, by making them dis∣regard the Nature of the Thing, led them into Fancies, and Imaginary Conceits: I gave there for the Reason why I writ Philoso∣phy, That I apprehended GOD's Provi∣dence had fitted and enabl'd me to redress such great Mischiefs, (viz. that Fancies should beat down Reason and Truth;) and there∣fore, I thought it became me to Re-instate Reason in her Sovereignty over Fancy; and, to assert to her the Rightful Dominion Nature had given her, over all our Judgments.] Which amounts to this, That I thought my self able to confute his Way of Ideas, and to shew it to be Opposite to True Reason.
Is it such a piece of Arrogancy to pretend to be able to confute a piece of Novelry, so Opposite to the Way of all the former World, (especially, ascribing, as I did, that Ability to GOD?) Or rather, (if there be any Arrogancy at all on either side,) Is it not more like Arrogancy in them, to blame the Methods of so many Thousands of Learned Men, who writ be∣fore them; and, by introducing New Ways of Philosophizing, to accuse, by Conse∣quence, all the former VVorld of Ignorance? Is it not rather Arrogance in him, to be so haughtily and rudely Stiff in maintaining Ideas (as he says) Elicited, or produc'd by Himself, without even attempting to bring any one Demonstration, or Conclusive Proof for them? Can there be any Self-Conceit more Enormous, than to be thus Ravingly Earnest to maintain that he has this Invisible Gift of Producing Ideas out of his own Head, or ex se, (as he expresses it;) which he holds to be the only Ground of all True Knowledge, without bringing any one Argument that is able to evince it; and, then, because we will not believe him without Proof, to foam thus at the Mouth with the foulest Language the most Transported Rage could dictate? See his Words at the End of this §. [Quis a Luci∣feri lapsu, superbiùs unquam de Seipso sense∣rit! VVhat Man, since the Fall of Lucifer,
had ever such a Proud Conceit of himself!] Then follows my never-heard-of Arrogance, my Intolerable Arrogance, my Nequissima, most VVicked Arrogance. Poor Impotent Railer! Whose Passion will neither let him reflect how he dishonours his Place, disgraces his Friends, scandalizes Good Christians, or wrongs his own Conscience. But, in the Name of Wonder! How comes it that no body but himself ever thought me thus damnably Arrogant! I do confess, I write briskly, and smartly, when I think it Evi∣dent I write for Truth. It is my Duty: And, I have given my Reasons for it in my Preface to Solid Philosophy; which he, instead of Answering, tells us here only, he cannot read them without Horrour: No, nor my Arguments neither; for, he an∣swers them both just alike. In what, then, consists this Arrogancy of mine? The plain Truth is this; and, his Carriage confesses it: I had challeng'd him to bring one Prin∣ciple, or one Conclusive Proof, for his New VVay of Philosophy: He has none; and, therefore, I must be Intolerably Arrogant, because he is Obstinate in his Errours, and pitifully Ignorant; as also, because I follow the Way, which builds Truth on the Nature of Things, and on the Connexion of Terms; which all the Learned Men in the VVorld had so long embrac'd, and Unperverted Na∣ture teaches every Man.
63. But, we have lost our Third Cita∣tion. I beseech my Reader to re-view it, and then to consider whether there be one Word there, that GOD had Selected me from All Others; which he here, §. 40. puts upon me, as my Express Words; and prints in a distinct Character, as mine. That I have truly represented the Three Places he relates to, will appear by the Preface to his former Book, §. 26. where he puts them down at large. This, then, being evident to Eye-sight, I charge him with Three Wilful Falsifications here, in citing Three Places in my Books for these haughty Words; viz. that I said, I was se∣lected from All Others, &c. whereas, I on∣ly said, that I apprehended my self Able to confute his Ideas. I demand of him, ei∣ther to shew me the Words in my Books, or, to acknowledge his Errour. But, I do not expect from him the Candour to retract any of his Slanders, whatsoever he professes here, pag. 2. For, this would ob∣lige him to make Satisfaction; against which, as I have sufficiently experienc'd, he is (I know not by what Case of Con∣science) Church-Canon-Proof. This, then, is Another Branch of the New Cartesian Method of Arguing, and Answering; viz. to falsifie, and impose on his Adversary, what∣ever VVords he pleases: And, he is very Constant, and Diligent, in pursuing that Useful Method.
64. Another Branch of this New Me∣thod, is, Without so much as one VVord to abet his Saying; nay, in despite of many VVords, and, even, Avow'd Demonstrations to the contrary; to impose upon me False, Invidious, Incredible, and Unchristian Tenets. Thus, p. 78, 79. he makes me deny that the Soul exists when it is separated from the Body: Nay, he is afraid I deny it is Created, but is ex Traduce; and, that it is Extinguish'd with the Body, and Rais'd a∣gain at the Last Day. Nor is this all; but, (that we may see how his Suspicions con∣tradict one another,) he calls into Doubt, p. 78. whether I acknowledge a Resurrection. I see, it is a great Favour he will let me hold some few of the Articles of my Creed; for, he has debarr'd me from holding most of them. His Reasons, (such as they are,) as well as I can collect them, or make them look like Aiming at any Sense, are these. First, I made her incapable of Pre∣existing before the Body, of which she is the Form; (of which Opinion he seems here an Earnest Asserter:) Whence he concludes, I deny she can exist when Se∣parate from the Body afterwards: And, yet, p. 78. l. 4. himself uses my Words; which affirm, that, after she is separated, ex se existere apta est, she is able to exist of her self. Next; What says he to my Dis∣course: Ens is only that which is capable of
Existing: But, as the Council of Vienna has told him, the Soul is Forma hominis; and, therefore, she cannot, of her self, exist here; but the Totum only, of which, she is a Part. Again, I argue thus; That which is Indeterminate in any kind, can∣not exist; but the Soul, before she had Knowledge in the Body, was a meer Po∣tentia Cognoscendi, or (as some express it) Rasa Tabula: Therefore, she could not exist before the Body. The Major is Evi∣dent. The Minor must be granted by Mr. Le Grand himself; for, the Soul can have no Actual Knowledge, without I∣deas; and, he denies she has any Innate Ideas, but only an Innate Power of produ∣cing them; that is, she has, according to him, none at all before she had elicited them out of her self: Therefore, she was, according to some Priority, before she did elicit them, or, before she had any Know∣ledge; and, consequently, she was, of her self, only a Power to have them; or, a meer Power to have Knowledge; which is, to be utterly Indeterminate, in Ratione Cognoscitivi: But, what is Indeterminate in any kind, is neither This, nor That; nor, consequently, can exist: Therefore, there can be no Pre-Existence of Souls. What answers he to these Arguments? We must excuse him; 'Tis not his Custom to do such trifling Work, as to answer any Ar∣gument
at all: 'Tis enough for him to stand stiff to his Cartesian Tenet, that the Soul and Body are Two Things; I, that they are, let Arguments say what they will. However, he will do better than Answer∣ing Arguments: And, How is that? Why, he'll make them all Bad Christians, and Hereticks, that speak against Cartesius; which no sooner said, but, in his wise O∣pinion, down they go to the Pit of Hell, like so many Imps of Lucifer, as they are: They deny the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection; and there is an end of them. And, Is not this Confutation enough in all Conscience! 65. His Follies here were tedious to Enumerate. He yields, with much ado, what the Council of Vienna told him 'twas Heresie to deny; but he yields it very faint∣ly, in these Words; Anima (says he) Ho∣minis Forma aliquando dici potest: The Soul may sometimes be call'd a Form of Man. The Council is much bound to him for his Ci∣vil Complement; and Cartesius is their most humble Servant, but not so Obedient to its Decrees of Faith as he ought. But, What kind of Form is the Soul then? The Council said, it was such, verè & essentiali∣ter; and, if it were Truly such, why may not a Truth, that belongs to Faith, be spoke at all times? Why, only, [dici po∣test, It may be said;] as if it were some
Improper and Unusual Phrase, and not Pro∣per Language, in which Declarations of Faith use to be worded? Why aliquando only? May not Truth be spoke Always, as oft as there is Occasion? Well, but, all this while, what kind of Form is it? He tells us here, p. 78. l. 18, 19, 20. Is it neither an Assistant, or Extrinsecal Form; nor an Informing, or Intrinsecal one? Now, Intrinsecal means Not-Extrinsecal: We should be glad, then, to see this Mon∣ster of a Form, that is neither Extrinsecal, nor Not-Extrinsecal. What is this Mid∣ling Form then? He gives us no Account of it, but that 'tis alterius Generis, Of an∣other Kind; quo fit, ut Hominis Formam Hu∣manitatem esse strictiùs asseramus; By which it comes to pass, that we more strictly call the Form of Man Humanity. What Gibberish is this? Is the Soul a Form at all, or no? If not, then he must say the Council errs: If it be, what is the Matter to this Form? Or, Is it neither Intrinsecal, nor Not-In∣trinsecal to it? A Form that is not Intrinse∣cal to the Matter, or Informs it, is a strange kind of Form. Again; What Sense is it, that Humanity is, by the Soul, more strictly made the Form of. Man! One would think, that this being the Abstract Notion of Man, its Concrete, and that which ex∣presses his Total Essence, should be so more strictly ally'd to it, by the very No∣tion
of it, (as Whiteness is to that which is White,) that nothing could make a Man more strictly call'd a Man, than Manhood, or Humanity, can do of it self. So that, Insignificant Words and Contradictions are obtruded upon us, instead of Solid Rea∣sons; and we must be content with them, when no better can be had. 66. As for his pretending I hold, the Soul is ex traduce, and not Created, he goes against the Light of his own Con∣science: For, whoever reads my Fourth Preliminary to Solid Philosophy, § §. 8, 9. (as 'tis evident he has, since he cavils at that Book,) will see, I make the Soul come immediately from GOD, and Crea∣ted; tho, indeed, the whole Man not be∣ing properly Created, but, in part (viz. according to its Body) Generated, the In∣fusion of the Soul is call'd by the Schools, not simply Creation, but Concreation; meaning, that the Soul is then Created, when, by Generation, the Bodily Part is brought to that Perfection, as to be fit, in some degree, to work with it. This, then, is another piece of their New Cartesian Me∣thod; and would serve for Arguing and An∣swering both, and do mighty Execution in Running down their Adversary, if they hap∣pen to meet with Ignorant and Credulous Readers, who are so weak, as not to con∣sider that Imputations of the Largest Size
may as well proceed from Confident Calum∣ny, as from Honest Ingenuity. 67. Another New Method of my Car∣tesian Adversary, is, to cite Scripture, then interpret it by his own Fancy, without giving us any Rule of interpret∣ing it; or, of distinguishing Metaphorical Speeches, from Literal ones; but, taking every Word that serves his purpose, or seems to chime to the Cartesian Novelty, in a Dogmatical Rigour; (which Method, follow'd home, would make mad Work with Philosophy, and Divinity too;) and then, if we will not allow his Private and Untoward Interpretations, presently to ex∣claim aloud, and tell the Reader very sadly, that I oppose not only Cartesius, but Moses, St. John, and St. Paul; nay, GOD himself, and (which is a worse Fault, it seems, than to oppose GOD) the Holy Ghost too; and, p. 47. St. Jude al∣so. Certainly, this Self conceited Man makes account his Private Interpretation of Scripture is the Infallible Rule of all our Faith; and, therefore, all Mankind must be Bad Christians, and Hereticks, that con∣tradict such a Supernaturally-Gifted In∣terpreter. What a clutter does he keep with the Word [stetisse?] And, that 'tis against all Arts and Sciences, and Com∣mon Sense too, to say a Thing did not stand before it fell; as we both hold of the
Angels, That there was some Terminus à quo, or some kind of State, whence they fell, is certain, and undeniable. The Question is, VVhat this State was? I took him to mean it was to see God; (and so did the Learned Merry-man too;) for, to say they were in Heaven, is the same, in Christian Language, as to say they en∣joy'd the Beatifical Vision. Nor do I think any Man living will deny, but that our Saviour's Words, In the House of my Father are many Mansions, (one of which Man∣sions he assign here, p. 47. l. 25. as a Ce∣lestial Habitation to the Devils, before their Fall,) was meant of the Stations, or De∣grees, of Essential Happiness, in the Sight of GOD; for, no Man will deny, but that 'tis there he told his Disciples, he went to prepare a Place for them. Now, since Mr. Le Grand calls the House which our Saviour calls here his Father's, [Heavenly,] what I want to know, is, what he means by this House, if it be not the Heaven of the Blessed Saints, who enjoy GOD. He makes it another thing; and says, that they are thence promoted, and admitted more fully to the Beatifical Vision. What means [promoted, and admitted more fully to see GOD,] but, that they saw him be∣fore, tho' not so fully? If so, and, that this was really his Tenet formerly, as I suspected, then my Argument proceeds
against it thus: If they saw GOD, they were Happy; If Happy, they had all they could wish; If they had all they could wish, they could wish no more, nor love any Created Good inordinately; nor, conse∣quently, Sin, nor be Damn'd: Therefore, they did not absolutely stare; that is, they were not absolutely in Termino, or in Hea∣ven. I am half afraid, that, from the Words Mansion, Domicilium, and such like, which they left, he conceits there are certain kinds of Upper-Rooms, and Low∣er-Rooms, in Heaven; and, that Lucifer, and his Adherents, dwelt in some of the Lowest; and were there besieg'd, and driven thence by St. Michael and his Angels. Some may think this is too much strain'd, and looks as if I spoke in Jest: But I am very Serious; and, can see no Reason in the World that is Solid, or taken out of the Nature of our Subject, Angels; why he, who assigns to them, [Before and After,] which are the Proper Differences of Time, should not assign to them Local Habita∣tions, and Places too: And, I should be much oblig'd to that Man, who would shew me, out of the Nature of the Thing, why Angels, which are Pure Acts, should not have the One, as well as the Other; or, why they should not be Contain'd in, or Commensurate to Place, which is Perma∣nent Quantity; as well as their Operations,
by being one after another, should be Com∣mensurate to Time, which is Successive Quantity; both of them being equally Op∣posite, nay, Contradictory to the Nature of Indivisible Beings. 68. To clear this Point, which is much blunder'd by Metaphorical Words, which are Equivocal; First, It is Certain there was some Condition, State, or Terminus à quo, from which they fell. Secondly, That Words which signifie Place, when apply'd to Spirits, are, and can only be meant, of States, or Conditions; that is, of Exalted Knowledge; Ignorance of what they long∣ingly wish to know; of Extreamly Torment∣ing Griefs, Blissful Joys, or Suspended Hope, which is also very Penal. Thirdly, That Aquinas (Pr. Q. 62. a. 1.) maintains, that Angels were Created by GOD Happy, Beatitudine naturali; or, in that Happiness which they could have by the Force of their Nature, (which is, in some sort, call'd Hap∣piness, or Felicity;) in which Sense, Aristo∣tle said, that the Utmost Happiness of Man was, to contemplate the Optimum Intelligi∣bile, GOD. This Beatitude (says he) Angels have by their Creation, because they cannot acquire it by Discourse, but 'tis given them for the Dignity of their Nature. But there is an∣other Beatitude plac'd in the seeing GOD's Essence, which is not within the Limits of Na∣ture, but is the End of Nature; which, there∣fore,
they had not by their Creation.. Be∣sides, 'tis probable they had some Grace, and some Gratuitous Knowledge, beyond what their meer Nature gave them; which Grace they resisted. These Gifts made them Candidates for Heaven; in which, the First Act of their Will would have invested them. This was their State, or Condition, from which they fell: This Hope and fair Possibility, and (as it were) Title to Heaven, they lost by their First wicked Choice: And, This, according to this Learned Saint, is all that is meant by the Domicilium, (which so much puz∣zles Mr. Le Grand,) which they forfeited by their Deprav'd VVill, and Unhappy Wilfulness. 69. But, does Mr. Le Grand imagine there goes no more to the Interpretation of Scripture, than a hasty Fancy of our own? I know he is resolv'd to like no∣thing that comes from me: However, I will acquaint the Readers with my Thoughts, hoping it make some of them more Cha∣ritable, than to Censure highly, and Con∣demn one another, because they interpret Scripture otherwise than themselves do. I conceive then, that in Passages belong∣ing to Faith, Scripture is to be interpret∣ed, as Mr. Thorndike (Just VVeights and Measures, p. 37.) also holds, by what the Church, from the Beginning, has receiv'd by
their (the Pastors) Hands. In Matters that belong to Natural Subjects, True Sci∣ence is the best Means to interpret it; be∣cause, VVords (in a Book intended on∣ly for Faith and Good Works, and not for Natural Speculation) may be Ambi∣guous; but a Demonstration, if truly such, cannot deceive us. Thus, when 'tis said, that GOD made Two Great Lights, the Words would make us think that the Moon is the Greatest, next to the Sun, in the Fir∣mament; but the Science of Astronomy corrects that Thought, and assures us, it is the Least within our Ken. Particular∣ly, True Science of the Natures of Things enlightens us to know when Words that relate to them are to be taken in a Literal, when in a Metaphorical Sense; but, most especially, when the Speech is of Spiritual Natures; which, if we should understand Literally, it would make us entertain a thousand Frantick Conceits, unworthy GOD Almighty, or Angels either; as every one knows. This determin'd, and that 'tis once known the Words are meant Literally, then Criticism, which acquaints us in what Sense they us'd to be under∣stood by those who liv'd about the same Time and Place, will give us great Light. If Metaphorically, then Logick will assist us to know in what Regard, and for what Reason, the Word is transferr'd from one
thing to another; and, to gather by the Te∣nour or Consequence of the Discourse, the Sense of the whole Passage. Nor is Gram∣mar useless in what concerns the Congruity of the Words which compound the Sen∣tence and Context. This, and such other Considerations, if Mr. Le Grand would please to lay to heart, he would not im∣mediately pronounce, and conclude, that every Interpretation that sutes not with his Fancy, or with the Ideas of Cartesius, (the Agreeableness or Disagreeableness to which seem to be his Rule of Interpreting Scripture,) to be such heinous Sins (as he does, p. 15.) against Moses, St. John, St. Paul, St. Jude, nay, against GOD himself, and (which is an odd Addition) against the Holy Ghost too. (Had I said so, he would have objected, that 'tis a Clear Case I do not hold the Holy Ghost to be GOD.) By which Method, he assumes to himself a Prerogative to make more Decrees of Eaith in a Moment, than all the General Councils, since the Christian Church stood, have made in Sixteen Hundred Years, with all their Disquisitio Magna. But, I doubt, he will find few that will subscribe to his New Symbolum Fidei, or his New Articles of Faith, no better grounded; nor believe (however their Science, according to Malbranche, comes by Divine Revelation) that their New Faith hath such a Supernatural and Sacred Original.
70. I had forgotten a very smart Con∣futation of his, put down largely, p. 125. which is the more Victorious, because my own Words are brought to tell me to my Face, that I eat them. The Point was this: A Syllogism being the most Ex∣act of Discourses, out of which some De∣terminate Conclusion follows, from the placing of the Terms; hence, in my ME∣THOD, B. 3. L. 1. where I treated of the Figure of a Syllogism, which consists in the Placing the Two Extremes with the Mid∣dle, so that some Determinate Conclusion might ensue thence, I advanc'd this Pro∣position, that therefore the two last Fi∣gures were Unnatural, and Illogical. My Reason given there, § §. 10, 11, 12. was, because the Place of the Predicate being that which belongs to Superiour Notions, and the Place of the Subject (as the Word imports) being that which sutes best with Inferiour ones; and, it being Natural, that that which conjoins Two, should be placed in the Middle, between them; it was most Unnatural, that the Middle-Term should be plac'd so as to be Predicated, or Above them both, as 'tis in the Second Figure, where 'tis twice Predicated; or Below them both, as in the Third, where 'tis twice the Sub∣ject: whence, the Middle-Term is, in neither of those Figures, in the Middle. Hence, in my §. 15. I advance this far∣ther
Consequence; [Hence, no Determi∣nate Conclusion can follow in either of the last Figures, from the Disposal of the Parts in the Syllogism:] Which I repeat again, and farther explicate, in the next Page; concluding thus, (The Indeterminate Con∣clusion follows not from the Artificial Form of the Syllogism, but meerly from the Material Identity of all the Terms; or from this, that their Notions were found in the same Ens.] And, in Conformity to this Do∣ctrine, I put Two Propositions only in each of those Figures, (which I did no where else when I came to make Syllogisms,) be∣cause no Determinate Conclusion follows thence; as I declare my self, expresly, in the last Line of that Page. By which, any Man of Common Sense may see clear∣ly, that the State of the Question is this, Whether any Determinate Conclusion fol∣lows in the two last Figures; and this, from the Disposal of the Parts in the Syllo∣gism. Whence, (Id. Cart. p. 27.) I chal∣leng'd him, and all his Cartesians, (as I do now again,) Ut ostendant, &c. That they would shew, out of the Nature of the Sub∣ject we are treating of, (as they ought;) that is, out os the Artificial Frame of a Syllo∣gism; which would not be such as it ought to be, (that is, Artificial,) unless all the three Terms had a Determinate Place in it; but, chiefly, out of the Placing of the Middle-Term,
and the Laws of Predicating; why One of the Extremes ought, in the Conclu∣sion, to be Subject or Predicate, rather than the Other: Or, (which is the same,) why a∣ny Determinate Conclusion follows from such a Placing of the Terms. This is the Point truly stated from my Words, over and over repeated: This, then, he is to answer to, and to shew, that out of such a Placing of, the Middle-Term, any Determinate Con∣clusion, that is, One of them rather than the Other, does follow. Now, let us see his Answer, and reflect upon his Method. 71. 'Tis found in his Censura, p. 125, 126. Where we may observe, First, That there is not one VVord of either a Determi∣nate Conclusion following thence, nor of following out of the Placing the Extremes with the Middle-Term in the Premisses; concerning which only the whole Que∣stion proceeds, as I over and over repeat∣ed. Whence follows that he has not spoke one VVord to the purpose, in his whole An∣swer. 2. He says, Turpiter lapsus est, He has fallen into a filthy Errour. That is to be try'd, and determin'd, by the Solidity of his Answer. In the mean time, if my Position was an Errour, he has never so much as touch'd it, much less confuted it; since, 'tis evident, he has prevaricated from the whole Question. 3. He says, I do calcare Aristotelem, trample upon Aristotle.
Poor spiteful Trifler! Cannot I dissent from Aristotle, or any other Author, in a∣ny one thing, but I must presently calcare, spernere contemnere, damnare those very Au∣thors themselves? Did Cartesius calcare, damnare, spernere, &c. all the former World, when he introduc'd this New Do∣ctrine of his, so Different, and, in most things, so Opposite to them all? 4. He says, I do calcare Porphyrium, trample upon Porphyrius; he means, in putting a Sixth Predicable, or Manner of Predicating: And, in case we allow Identical Propositions, without doing which, we must (as Non Ultra has demonstrated) renounce First Principles, it is Evident, that the Predica∣ting the VVhole, formally and expresly, of the VVhole, is another Sort or Manner of Predicating, from his Five. Let him know then, once for all, that I am so far from standing Corrected, as to my Luciferian Pride and Arrogancy, notwithstanding his Casvigations, (as he calls them,) that I va∣lue not a Pin what either Aristotle, Porphy∣rius, or any other Philosopher says, when I see an Evident Reason to the contrary; Since, 'tis only the Goodness of their Rea∣sons that gave them all their Credit and Authority. 5. I had alledg'd I had produ∣ced no Syllogisms there at all; since a Syllo∣gism consists of Three Propositions, where∣as, I had manifestly put but Two; because
no Determinate Conclusion follow'd; and, I challeng'd him that himself had added a Third. What says he to this? Does not Eye-sight, and my express Words in that place, put this out of all Doubt, or Ca∣vil? He reflects on it thus, Quae haec homi∣nis Impudentis Confidentia, &c. VVhat a strange Confidence is this of this Impudent Man, whose Mouth can by no other means be stopp'd, but by citing his own VVords in Eng∣lish! And, immediately he puts down my very Words, in which are only Two Pro∣positions, and not Three; without which last, there can be no Syllogism. His Rail∣ing I pass over, and only desire the Read∣er to find a Word (if he can) to express fully the Humour of this Mad-man, who strives thus to cut-face Men's Eyes; and puts down my very Words here, which evidently confute himself. 6. He cites my Words in his Censure, p. 126. that the Conclusion may either be This, or the O∣ther; and, as far as I can guess, (for I am loath to fix upon him absolutely such a prodigious piece of Nonsense) he thinks that, by these Words, I signifie, some De∣terminate Conclusion follows. Can any Man be so weak, as not to know that [Ei∣ther the One, or the Other,] means, [Nei∣ther the One, nor the other, Determinatery?] I see a thing a far off, and I say, 'Tis either a Man, or a Horse: Do I, in saying so, sig∣nifie
that it is determinately a Man, or de∣terminately a Horse; when as my Words expresly speak Indifferency, or Indetermi∣nation, to either? Every Conclusion that is deduc'd, is some One; and, what is One, is Determinate; and, if it be not Determi∣nate, or One, 'tis None; for, None signifies No One: Whence, I told him, (Id. Cart. p. 26.) [Consultò abstinui ab ullâ Conclu∣sione inferendâ, eò quòd nullam Determina∣tam (seu quod tantundem est Nullam) inde deduci aut sequi tum ostendi, tum disertè pro∣fessus sum.] What replies he to this, in which the Force of my Answer consists? Not one VVord, nor so much as mentions it; but rambles on, after his own fashion; that is, Concealing all that is to purpose, or else Perverting it; and, then, making a wide Mouth over it, and Railing against it. Lastly, He will needs do Feats, and put the Syllogisms, [clariùs & distinctiùs,] more clearly and distinctly than I did: Which is Ridiculous Bragging, and Nonsense to boot; for, (as Eye sight attests,) I put no no Syllogisms at all; neither Clearly, nor Obscurely; neither Distinctly, nor Confusedly. I know he will still be doing twenty things he should not do, to avoid the doing what he should do. If he will be doing. let him shew that any One or Determinate Conclu∣sion follows out of Terms no better pla∣ced in the Premisses; and this, from the
Disposal of the Parts of the Syllogism; which are my very Words, §. 15. But this he has not done, nor Attempted to do, nor so much as mention'd, or taken Notice of it, tho' it be the only Point; and, therefore, he has done nothing at all but prevaricate, fool and rail, and given no kind of An∣swer. To make this clearer; Let the three Terms be A B and C; of which, A is the Majus Extremum; B, the Middle Term; and C, the Minus Extremum. If A be predicated of B, that is, be Above it; and B be predicated of, or Above C; then it follows, à fortieri, out of the very Placing the Terms, that A, being the Supreme Notion, must be above C, or the Predicate in the Conclusion; and, so, a Determinate Conclusion follows, out of the Situation of the Terms: But, if A and C stand on the same Level, and be both of them ei∣ther Above B, or both of them Below it; neither has any Title, by virtue of their Place, to be above, or below; that is, to be Predicate, or Subject, in the Conclusion; and, therefore, the Conclusion remains In∣determinate, or No One; that is, None. The rest is Empty Vapouring, [turpissimè lapsus est,] and such like stuff; his con∣stant Assistant, when he is at a Nonplus. If any one have a Mind to have a List of his Swaggering and Ranting Vapour up∣on this Occasion, he may read them in
my Ideae Cartesiauae, p. 27, 28. in these mo∣dest Terms, deliver'd in his own Words; [Attend, you University men; for, he would be your Master too—This Inventor of this New Logick, or Method to Science—See here his Syllogism— (whereas, Eye-sight tells every Man, I put no Syllogism at all:) —He makes himself Ridiculous—He errs against the most known Rules of Syllogisms—His Judgment, or Opinion, is Foolish—He contemns every Man; nay, he blots out of the Catalogue of Philosophers, and makes a Mocke∣ry of the most Noble Sir Kenelm Digby, and Albius: (Which is most openly and ridi∣culously False, and Groundless; since the Former never writ any Logick, and the Later maintain'd the same Doctrine in this Particular.) —His Syllogisms (he means, his own; for, I brought none at all) are Er∣roneous in more Respects than one—These Rules, not only Sophisters, but almost Fresh-men are well acquainted with—He errs filthi∣ly—He is a Cobler, beyond his Slipper—He is an Ass, playing upon a Harp—He be∣wrays his own Ignorance—He is, in Logick, more blind than a Mole—He deserves to be hiss'd at—He will be Eternally famous for a Trifler.] Now, would any Man imagin, that this Vapourer is, all this while, so utterly out, that (as has been now shewn) he has not so much as spoke one Syllable to the true Question; which is, Whether
a Determinate Conclusion follows in the Second and Third Figures, out of the Placing of the Middle Terms with the Ex∣tremes. By the way, observe, Gentlemen, with what meek and humble Spirits these Men are endow'd: They think, there is not the least Shew of Immodesty, or Inci∣vility, in their Words; not, tho' they call me Impudent here, for saying what the ve∣ry Words they cite shew to the Eye of every Reader. This Errour (forsooth!) was shewn me long ago, by his Friend, and Tutor, Mr. Bisset, after my Book was printed; who, out of his own won∣drous Kindness to me, told me, he was sorry I had so strangely mistaken; and, as I am inform'd, he has objected it since, to some of my Friends; as a great Lapse: To rectifie whom, I have been something larger, in case he be not past Rectifying. But, of him, and all that has pass'd be∣tween us, more hereafter, as Occasion presents. 72. I cannot omit another Method of Solving my Demonstrations, 'tis so very pleasant. I had demonstrated in my ME∣THOD, that all Intrinsecal Differences were nothing but more or less of the Gene∣rical Notion; for, if they be Intrinsecal, or keep within the Precincts of that Com∣mon Notion; that is, if they be not fetch'd from another Head, (which is, to be Ex∣trinsecal,)
then, in case they did equally partake the Genus, the One of the Species (they being, both of them, constituted by their Differences) would have in it no∣thing particular to it self; or, have nothing in it, but just the same the Other had; and, so, they could not differ Intrinsecally from one another: Whence follows, that the Intrinsecal Differences, by which they formally differ, can be no other but an Un∣equal Participation of the Common No∣tion; that is, more and less of it. What says he to this Clear Demonstration? Not a Word. 'Tis his Prerogative, never to regard the Argument. He denies my Con∣clusion, as he does almost always, quite thorow his whole Answer; and, he never fails of having something or other to say against That: And, to let the Reader see here it cannot stand, he brings no less Ar∣tillery than Omnipotence against it: VVhat! (says he,) Is it Impossible, then, for GOD, whose Power he is not VVilling to Obey, (that Unchristian Slander must come in of Course,) to make two Species, or Indivi∣duums, that Equally participate their Supe∣riour Notion? Is it Impossible for GOD to cause two Things, or Modes, or two Eggs, not to be Essentially unequal, since they all depend on GOD. Now, there is not one Word in my Argument, that relates, in the least, to GOD's Omnipotence, more than there is
in any of Euclid's Demonstrations, or any other Argument whatsoever, brought by any other Philosopher: So that, this An∣swer is equally applicable to them, as to this of mine. And, is not this a most Formida∣ble Method, and, withall, very Expedite, to Answer all the Arguments in the World! viz. If they who alledge them, offer to say they conclude, he tells them, in short, that they deny GOD's Omnipotence, that they are not willing to obey his Power— on which all things depend; and, therefore, are Impious against GOD, if they will not grant, their Argument may, possibly, not Con∣clude, or be Good for Nothing! What Man living dares deal with such an Ad∣versary, who has Omnipotence, in all Exi∣gencies, still at hand, to befriend him? This is their constant Topick; and, tho' he uses it never so oft, it will never be worn thread-bare. Certainly, that Sacred Attribute was never so Prophan'd, as by these Men, who make it perpetually an Excuse for their Ignorance, and a Cloak for their Malice. Cartesius could dare Omni∣potence to do his worst, to deceive him, Med. 2. Nunquam (says he) efficiet Deceptor ille summè Potens ut nihil sim, quamdiù me aliquid esse cogitabo; and, yet, is Applaud∣ed for it: But others cannot bring a Plain Demonstration, but we are presently bob∣bed in the Mouth with denying Omnipotence.
But, the Question is not, whether Omnipo∣tence can solve it; but, whether Mr. Le Grand can. In the mean time, What An∣swer does he himself give to my Argument, which, in short, is this, If the Species do not partake the Generical Notion Unequal∣ly, One has nothing in it under that Genus, but what the Other has: If it has nothing in it, as under that Genus, but what the Other has, it does not differ from it, as un∣der that Genus: If it do not differ from it under that Genus, then 'tis One and the same with it under that Consideration, and not Two; v. g. Two Yards being Equal under the Notion of Quantity, they do not Dif∣fer, that is, they are the Self-same under the Notion of Quantity, precisely: Which is as certain as this Identical, into which it is refunded, viz. A Yard is a Yard. Now, would I give something to be present when Mr. Le Grand puts on his Considering. Cap, and bethinks him what to say to this De∣monstration: I expect he will laugh at it, as meer Gibberish; (that we may be sure of,) for, he has a perfect Antipathy against all Connected Discourse; and, if the Con∣nexion be Close, he falls into a Paroxysm of Railing; but, if the Evidence of it be dri∣ven to Identical Propositions, then his Rea∣son falls into a Swoon, and is perfectly En∣tranc'd; nor can any thing cure him, or furnish him with any kind of Answer, but
to have recourse to the Divine Omnipotence, for Relief; and then he is Enchanted, and Proof against all the Demonstrations in the World; and, will either pretend an Iden∣tical Proposition may be False; or tell his Adversary, that GOD's Omnipotence can make his Argument not conclude; and, that he is Unwilling to acknowledge and obey GOD's Power, if he will needs stand to his Argument, Was ever Man so Nonpluss'd, and Baffl'd. 73. Another most remarkable Instance of his Exactness in Solving my Demon∣strations, (and 'tis a very Compendious and Admirable one,) shall be, his Skipping over Multitudes of them, very Nimbly, at one Leap. In my Appendix, which confuted his false Pretence of holding Formal Muta∣tion, (without which, all Physicks and Metaphysicks are meer Nonsense,) I had shewn how he spoke Contradictions in eve∣ry Step he took; v. g. How he made [In∣trinsecal] to be [Extrinsecal;] [Substan∣tial,] or [Esseutial,] to be the same as [Accidental;] The Producing a new Sub∣stance, or Ens, call'd [Generation,] to be meerly [Location,] or [Situation] of ma∣ny things orderly together, which belong to another Head, or Predicament; and, consequently, is no Generation. How he makes [Unum, or One,] to be [Non-U∣num, or Multa;] that is, Not-One, but
Many; and Ens, or Thing, to be Entia, or Things. How he so abus'd the Notions of [Simplex] and [Compositum,] that he made them to be the Same, under the same Notion. How he made Completum, and Incompletum, to be the self-fame. How he confounds the Commonest Notions of A∣ctus and Potentia, and destroys both their Natures; which contradicts all Learned, and, even, all Common Discourse. How he makes what is] Divisible,] to be no way Divisible, or, [not-Divisible.] How he puts that to be Physical, (which belongs to a Distinct Science from the Mathema∣ticks,) to be Mathematical; that is, Not-Physical. How he makes [meer Matter,] which, as such, is contradistinguish'd to Form, (as the Principle of Potentiality and Indetermination is to that Principle which is Actuating, or Determinative,) to be [In∣form'd;] and that too Essentially. How he makes [Suppositions] (on which Carte∣sius proceeds) to be [Principles,] and re∣lies on them as such; which are not only No Principles, but Contradictorily Opposite to the whole Nature and Essence of Princi∣ples. All which, and much more, I ob∣jected, and prov'd, against him, (at least, all but this last) by Mediums, fetch'd from Metaphysicks, which are next to Self-evident, and border upon the very First Principles of all; or, on Identical Propositions, to which
also I did, by the way, reduce some of them. What Answers he to this large Discourse, consisting of thirty five Pages, which demonstrates how he had stumbl'd into Flat Nonsense, every Step he took? Read, Gentlemen; and admire the pro∣found Learning of my Adversary, and his Dexterity in Solving my Arguments. He answers all those Demonstrations (O won∣derful!) in less than a Page and a half. But, How? Does he shew they proceed upon Unevident Principles, or False and Unprov'd Suppositions; or, that the Terms I use in my Discourse, are Unconnected? No, no; all these are meer Fooleries with him: This is none of his Methods. How, then, does he Answer them? Why, First, (Censura, p. 128.) he prefaces confidently, (which is no small Part of his Method of Answering,) and says, Expectandum erat, ut Vires suas omnes in eâ (he means his Ap∣pendix) confutanda eliceret: It was to be ex∣pected he would have exerted his whole Force, in Answering my Appendix. Well! But, does he reply to my Answer, tho' never so negligently and carelesly written? that is to be yet examin'd. Secondly. He proceeds, At proh hominis Ignavi Imperitium! hic, cer∣tè, si usquam, nugatur egregiè: Oh, the Un∣skilfulness of this Slothful Man! Here, if e∣ever, he trifles egregiously. These are, hi∣therto, but Bold Sayings. What is his An∣swer?
Why, he says, that I bring a Physi∣cal Discourse to the Ten Predicaments; to Ge∣nus and Species; to Ens and Unum, Abstra∣ctions, and Logical Trifles. Indeed, in one Page, (235.) where I am stating the Que∣stion, I make a small Logical Discourse, to shew under what a precise Considera∣tion we speak of our Subject; thus to be∣get a Clear and Distinct Conception, what Forms or Modes are Intrinsecal, what Ex∣trinsecal: But, my Reader will see, that all my Mediums are either taken from Phy∣sicks, or from Metaphysicks. And, 'tis to these Mediums, we would have an An∣swer. Does he shew that I deviate from the Nature of the Thing in hand? Do I not hold to the Notions of Ens, Unum, Matter, Form? &c. Alas! he never minds such frivolous Considerations. Thirdly, He says, I tell my Reader, my Peripateti∣cal Assertions are not suppos'd gratis, but De∣monstrated. Does he go about to prove the Contrary? He not so much as attempts it. To what end, then, does he bring such Stuff? Oh! 'tis a necessary Ingre∣dient of his Method, to tell us at large what I say; for, that makes a Shew, as if he were about to confute me; and, when he has done, he lets it all alone, and slides away to another thing; which is his Ge∣neral Trick, all over. He is true to one part of his Title, which is, Censura; for,
he Censures very Notably: But, he never promis'd he would give a Reason, Why; and, he will not go beyond his Promise, or his Bargain. Fourthly, He says, I would have the Readers believe that the Words [Divisibility, Physical, Matter, &c.] are Abus'd by him. He mistakes; I would not have any Readers of mine believe any Tittle, upon my Word; but, see with the Eye of their own Reason, that my Argu∣ments prove what I pretend, to be True. But, were it so; Does he even attempt to shew that my Arguments do not conclude; and, by doing so, to preserve my Readers from the Mischief of Assenting to my Im∣pious Doctrine? Methinks, his Charity to his Neighbour should oblige him to En∣deavour this, at least: But, he begs their Excuse; he must not run to New and Trou∣blesome Methods, and leave his own, which never yet fail'd him, and is, withall, so Easie. By which, every one will see, that his Policy is much greater than his Charity. After this, he surceases his Impugnation of my Arguments; and ends with calling them Cavils, which, he says, he has satis∣fy'd formerly; but he neither tells his Read∣er, nor can tell him, Time, nor Place, when or where, he thus satisfy'd the Debt he ow'd him; and, therefore, the Obligation remains yet in Force. Then he says, I neglect his Observations, (the worthy Tran∣scriptions
of his profound Note-Book-Learn∣ing,) which may sometimes (if they be Pertinent, and Authentick) be brought a∣gainst a Conclusion; but can, with no Sense, be pretended fit to solve Arguments, or shew the Terms Unconnected. Besides, I have laid open, how Insignificant the Way of Observations or Experiments are, (when we are laying Grounds of Philosophy,) at the End of my Preface to my METHOD. He brings up all, with sounding his No∣ble Triumph over my Demonstrations, and then concludes it with a little Pedan∣tick Foolery, which are great Embelish∣ments through his whole Books; and, tells his Reader, like a right Solid Phi∣losopher, as he is, that the Mountains Brought forth, and were Deliver'd of a Ri∣diculus Mus. Yet, tho' he has, with a won∣derful Agility, skipp'd over all those De∣monstrations against his Appendix, at once, without either touching or mentioning any one of them; yet, he tells us, for all that, (p. 20.) very briskly, and confidently, Ap∣pendicem meam, ab omnibus ejus ictibus sar∣tam tectam, tuebor: I will defend my Appen∣dix, safe and sound, against all his Assaults. And, in one Sense, he says very true; for, certainly, never did Man, in the World, make such a Defence against so many De∣monstrations: One would think that, to avoid them all, and run away from them all,
is a strange Way of Defending them all. But, these Cartesian Methods of theirs can do more than Miracle. This Prevarica∣tion of his from performing one jot of what he had so largely promis'd, would be enough to make any Writer, but himself, lose his Credit utterly; and so it would his too, but that he is Proof against it, having none to lose: For, he has us'd us to it so often, that none now expects it. By the same Nim∣ble Method, he leaps over my whole 4th Indication, without replying one Word to those most Important Objections: See his Censura, p. 36. where he gives them their Quick Dispatch, in Ten Lines, by virtue of the same Method; which deserves to be call'd, The New Cartesian Method of EX∣PEDITION. 74. In the self-same Method he answers my Demonstration, (Id. Cart. p. 127, &c.) which prov'd, the Cartesians had no Prin∣ciples of Knowing; my Five Demonstra∣tions, which shew'd their First Principle of Knowing (consisting in this, That the Soul had a Power to Elicit Ideas out of her self) was Contradictory to the First Princi∣ples of our Understanding; and Three more against the Insignificancy of the Occasional Impression upon the Nerve, whence, as they say, those Ideas come to be Elicited; and yet Three more, against the Pretence of Annexing such and such Ideas to such
Motions made upon the Nerve, by GOD's meer Will, as they pretended, but never yet prov'd. Now, this Expedite Way of An∣swering serves them as well for These, as it did for the Former; and is equally fit to solve all the Demonstrations in the whole World: 'Tis but calling them Trifles, Ca∣vils, and Ridiculous Mice; and, immediate∣ly, all the Connexion of Terms in them, and all the Consequences deduc'd from them, tho' never so Strict, and Close, will fly quite asunder, and they are all shatter'd into Loose, Incoherent Talk, by the Mira∣culous Virtue of this All-answering, All-confuting Method. Yet, he tells his Rea∣der, in his Ad Lectorem, that Omnibus Ad∣versarii Objectionibus satis abundè factum inveniet; that he will find all the Objections of his Adversary sufficiently and abundantly Answer'd. Whereas, whoever reads my Ideae Cartesianae, will discern, that he has not so much as mention'd the Tenth part of what he ought to have Reply'd to, and Con∣futed. He tells him also, that Nihil inta∣ctum reliquit, which was not Futile ac Ri∣diculum nimis; He has left nothing Untouch∣ed, but that which is very Babbling, and Ri∣diculous. And, this is another Answer to all my Demonstrations; for, these are the Things he has most carefully, and most exactly left Untouch'd, (tho' he handles Wrangling Trifles very largely:) Or, if,
by Accident, he happ'd to Touch them, he first defiles and perverts them, as he thinks fit; and then he musters, and brings up his little Army of his New Methods, to At∣tack them. 75. But, What is become of these Ca∣tegorical Propositions, all this while, into which I had reduc'd his Loose Ramble, as into the Principles which, I saw, lay at the bottom of his Respective Discourses, and grounded the several parts of them. I had collected them with much Exactness, and referr'd to the Places where it would appear, that they were the Foundations on which he built all his Incoherent and In∣artificial Superstructures. I did this, to oblige him to aim his Random-Talk at some Certain and Determinate Mark; and, that, by seeing what he was to prove, he might, at length, be forc'd to bring some Deter∣minate Arguments, to make them good. I was so far from Imposing them, that (Id. Cartes. pag. 111, 112.) I left it at his Choice, either to Grant or Deny them: If he Granted them, then he was to main∣tain them; If he Deny'd them to be his Sense, then I undertook to shew that he would, by doing so, overthrow all his own Doctrine which was Grounded on them: But, he will not so much as take Notice of any one of them; only, he tells his Read∣er, they are Theses Fictitiae, and Fidelitate
nullâ collectae: Fictitious Positions, and Un∣faithfully Collected. If so, I had given him the greatest Advantage against me, he could ever hope to gain. However, if none of his, and, that therefore he could not Grant them, he might have Deny'd them: But he fore-saw the Consequence, and, that I could easily fix them upon him; and, that those Positions he had made use of for his Principles, were such Shameful Nonsense, that nothing could be more Opprobrious to him, than to be Convicted to have built all his Doctrine upon such Chimerical Grounds. He fore-saw too, that these scurvy Categorical Pro∣positions use to have some kind of Coherence in them, and so might hap to bring our Dispute into that abominable Way of Con∣nexion; and, thence, might oblige him to bring Arguments to prove them; which would require much more Trouble, and Pains, than meer Saying would do; and, withall, would put him quite out of all his Friendly Methods, which had supported him hitherto, and were still his only Re∣fuge: And, therefore, he very fairly and and prudently let them all alone; only, he tells us they are Fictitious, and Unfaith∣fully Collected; and there's an end of them. For, he thinks, Good Man! that what∣ever he Says, is Prov'd, as if he though he could Create and Uncreate Arguments,
(and Answers too,) with only saying they were Naught. And, 'tis Unconscionable to expect more from a Man, who has no more to give us. 76. In the next Rank of his New Me∣thods, march his Follies; and, first, for Dignity sake, come forward his Learned Ones, as those that should aim at having some Speculative Truth in them; viz. Pag. 74. he puts upon me to hold, that Creation is Essential to God; a Tenet I ever abhorr'd, and have laid Grounds to confute such a Senseless Opinion in my METHOD, B. 1. L. 7. §. 12. And, for what Reason does he impose it upon me, to hold such an Impious Tenet? Because I say there are no Different Points in Eterni∣ty, or before the World was made; by the Distances from which, we may frame to our selves any Notion of Sooner, or Later; alledging, that these were Differences of Time, which could not be, till Time it self was; nor could Time be, till the World was. Which Thesis has no more Connexion with Creation's being Essential to GOD, than the Tenet of the Extension of Body is to the First Chapter in Genesis; or, that of the Four Elements is to Algebra. Whence, all his Discourse, pag. 77. by which he would seem to oppose me, is wrong level∣led. Again; Since all Common Notions have their Original from our observing
many Individuals agreeing in the same Nature; which, when All agree in it, we call it a Summum Genus; if very many only, then a Species; and so we descend to Infe∣riour Kinds, or Species; which Species are Intrinsecally Constituted by partaking Un∣equally the Superiour, or Common No∣tion; as I have Demonstrated, and shewn by Instances, in my METHOD, B. 1. L. 3. to §. 11. Again; Since it is not e∣very Indeterminate, or very small Degree of magis and minus, or of Unequal Partici∣pation of the Genus, which constitutes or makes divers sorts of Mankind, or de∣nominates it to be another Kind; but, the Distance between them must be Conspi∣cuous, and very Notorious; and, under the Species of Man, there are found great Multitudes that do partake the Notion of Rational, (which is Essential to Man,) both in their Intellectuals, and Morals, and this from their Natural Constitution, or Ge∣nius, above others; so that they seem, in a manner, Angelical, in respect of them; and the other, Comparatively, in a man∣ner, Brutal. Hence, I advanc'd this Para∣dox, That there may be such Degrees of more and less Rational found in Mankind, so that some of them may seem to be another Spe∣cies, Sort, or Kind of Men (for those three Words are Equivalent) from the other: Nay, the Nature-taught Vulgar, follow∣ing
their Genuin Thoughts, use to call them so too: As, when they say, [He is another Kind of Man than you imagine;] meaning thereby, more Rational, or (which is the same) a Man of better Judgment, or more Vertuous. What does Mr. Le Grand? Instead of Confuting my Princi∣ple, or Examining my Reason, he falls to to talk of Lunar-men, or Men in the Moon, and the other Stars; and tells me, lest (as he says) I should be ignorant of it, (How infinitely am I bound to him for Enlight∣ning me!) what Authors have thought there were Men there. Then he talks al∣so of Planetary-men, and tells us fine things of them too. Which done, he says, If I am too dull to understand these Astronomical Observations, (that is, which he had not made himself, but pick'd them out of Books, which he thinks to be a Work of Great Learning,) he desires I would shew my self a Divine, and answer to his Question, Whether I hold that there are any Pre-Ada∣mites, or no? Why, this is pure Bedlam! What have I to do with the Men in the Moon, the Planetary Gentlemen, or the Pre-Adamites? Not a Word to this pur∣pose is found in any of my Books. I spoke only of our honest Neighbours here, in our Earth; where there are many, ex ip∣sâ naturâ, as Dull as Beetles; and, natural∣ly, as Immoral as Brutes: Others, vel ex
ipsa Origine, (that is, Essentially,) of a high pitch of Knowledge, and inclin'd to Vertue; and both naturally dispos'd to see Truth clearly, and to pursue it in their Practice sincerely: Whereas, Others can scarce see s far as their Nose; and have such weak Eyes, that they are blear'd, and be dark∣en'd, if any Evident or Connected Truth is propos'd to them; which is the great∣est Depravation of Rational Nature, (as far as 'tis Intellectual,) that can be ima∣gin'd, in regard all Truth consists in Con∣nexion of our Notions: Which Men do therefore seem to be another Species, or (as we say) another Kind of Men, as to their Rationality, than Others are. You will say, These are only divers Qualities in those Men, which do not infer divers Spe∣cies. I reply, That, if they do concern their very Power of Reasoning, or their Rationality, which is their Essence; and, that they have this from their Primordial Constitution, in the very Instant they are made Individually such; (which is always Essential, because it distinguishes them from other Individuals.) Also, if Nobilitas Ani∣marum sequitur ex Nobilitate Corporum; The Nobility (or Excellency) of Souls follows out of the Nobility (or Excellency) of the Body, (as St. Thomas of Aquin says, Prim. Q. 83. q. 7.) then this Difference between such two Men is not only a Diversity in some
Quality, but Essential; and, therefore, in case there be many of each Sort, and so vi∣sibly Different, that we can abstract a Notion from those of each Sort, which is Common to all those under it, 'twill be a Sub-Species, or an Inferiour Kind of Man. But, could he have more discover'd his own Igno∣rance, than to call the Knowledge of Men in the Moon, and Planetary-Men, Astrono∣mical Observations? What Astronomy treats of, is, the Motion of Celestial Bodies, their Bigness, Distance, the Times of their Appearances, their Influences, and the Respects they have to one another: But, that any Astronomer did ever observe, (as he says,) Men in the Moon, or in the other Planets, I confess my self too Dull to con∣ceive, or to apprehend; nor, how any Man, not better-half Craz'd, could ima∣gine they should. 77. Well, But the Question is, Whe∣ther there can be abstracted a Common Notion of a very notable Rationality from some Sort, or Kind of Men, which agrees to all them, and does not to another Sort, which are not, by their very Intrinsecal or Essential Constitution, near so Rational! If so, is not this all that is requisite to make a Sub-species? This being so, What says Mr. Le Grand to the Reason of it? Not a Word. Yet, he is never out, in his Way: For, as in the Preface to his former Book,
he did, upon this Occasion, instead of re∣plying to the Argument, give us a most Learned Discourse of all sorts of Dogs; of Generous Dogs, Clownish Dogs, Degenerate Dogs, Hunting Dogs, Hawking Dogs; which he says, (contrary to the Notion of all Mankind,) that they differ only in some Qualities, and not in Kind; So, he tells us here, of Lunar Men, Planetary Men, and Men before Adam. For which he had two Reasons; One is, to talk something, lest Men should think he is Nonplus'd, tho' it be not one tittle to the purpose, or, in the least concerns my Argument. The other is, Because he had laid up in Laven∣der those Pretty Collections in his Note-Book; and it was a thousand pities the World should die in Ignorance of them, or himself lose the Credit due to the great Sweat of his Brain, and most profound Learning, in Reading and Transcribing them. 78. But, this premis'd, Who can do less than admire at Mr. Le Grand's Assertion, p. 130? Three Propositions were exibit∣ed to two Sorbon Doctors; and so pervert∣ed, and untowardly propos'd, that they seem'd plainly to say, that we must see the Connexion of Terms in those Propositions which express'd the Articles of Christian Faith; that is, that we must see the very Mysteries themselves Demonstrated, ere
we ought to believe them; and, in this Sense they condemn'd them, as they clear∣ly signify'd in their Censure. Now comes Mr. Le Grand, and tells us, p. 130. Error ab Authore isto dicitur quicquid non exhibuit damnata illa olim Parisiis Terminorum Con∣nexio: J. S. calls every thing an Errour, what∣ever that Connexion of Terms condemn'd for∣merly at Paris, does not exhibit. Is not this Pleasant? They condemn'd not the Con∣nexion of Terms, even in the Mysteries; for, then they must condemn the Truth of all the Mysteries of Christian Faith: What they condemn'd, was, most expresly, the Necessity of our seeing this Connexion of the Terms in the Mysteries themselves, ere we ought to believe them; for, this ex∣cludes, or evacuates, the Divine Authority, in which only, and by relying on which, we see such Propositions to be True, or, their Terms to be Connected. Again; Does he think there is no Connexion of Terms in other things, but only in these? Does not all the Truth in all the Sciences in the World; nay, all the Truth, even, in all our Discourses, consist in this, that the Terms of the Propositions do cohere in Sense, or are Connected? Does he think that I account all these to be Er∣rours? Which if I do, I must deny all my own Arguments, and all my Thoughts, which are True. No, no; that's not the
Business. This would be a most prodigious piece of Ignorance. But, his cruel Feud against All Connexion, and, particularly, that in my Demonstrations, is so Deadly, and Implacable, that he would persuade the Reader that those Sorbon Doctors did con∣demn All Connexion of Terms whatsoever; nay, the very Way of Discoursing Connect∣edly; that is, all the Deduced Truths, writ by all Scientifical Men in the whole World. This, I must confess, would be (tho' Shameful to them, yet) of vast Ad∣vantage to himself; for, then he need not stand Solving my Demonstrations, for, in that Case, they would be solv'd to his hand; or rather, they were never Ty'd, Knit, or Connected. And, it would be a Second Advantage to him, that, in that happy Case, his Fancy might ramble at random, without any Control, or without being fet∣ter'd and shackl'd by this cruel Tyrant Con∣nexion, and by the severe Laws of Logick; which improve, and, by virtue of First Principles, shew this Connexion to be real∣ly such, and reducible to Self-Evidence. By which we see the Reason why his Friend Merry-man and himself are so uneasie, and Piqu't at my METHOD to Science, which advances and builds all along upon this Enemy to all these Cartesian Methods, this most abominable Proud and Arrogant U∣surper over his Ideas, CONNEXION.
79. It were endless to reckon up all his Loarned Follies of this kind. My Notes, which gather all his Performances into se∣veral Heads, reckon them to be about two and forty: All which spring from his Ab∣horrence of Connexion; which neithe permits him (or rather, render it Impos∣sible for him) to bring any Arguments of his own, or to Answer mine. Whereas, I am so Arrogant, and Proud, that I am o heartily contented, unless I see Self-evidens Connexion of the Terms in my Principles, and the Terms of my Conclusion to be Connected, because the Two Extremes are clearly Connected with the Middle Term, or Medium, in the Premisses. And, now we see too what is the Reason why he does still slide over the Premisses, and ne∣ver looks my Argument in the Face, but comes cowardly behind it; and first denies, and then (after his fashion, or by some of his aukward Methods) sets upon their Rear, my Conclusions. 80. After his Learned Follies, march, in a long Row, his Plain Fooleries: Tho' Those may not seem worthy to be rank'd among his New Methods, yet we are mis∣taken; for, they serve to set off the others, and to stop Gaps when his Reason is at a Loss: And, first, come his Profound Cri∣ticisms. For example, p. 68. he takes much pains to tell us what , or Im∣possible,
means; and spends above a whole Page in declaring at large no less than Four several Senses, in which Lawyers take that Word. As if Philosophers could not understand the Meaning of the Words themselves Use, without having recourse to Lawyers. However, this helps to shew he is an Universal Scholar, and informs the Reader, he has peep'd into Law-Books too; at least, into their Indexes; and, that he has glean'd thence some few Notes, to enrich his Common-place-book; to do which, he thinks a high Point of Know∣ledge. Which puts me in mind of the Saying of a certain Poet, concerning such Collectors: —Lord! how they'd look, Should they but chance to lose their Table-book! 81. The next shall be that of sentire; and of Hearing also, both in primo gradu, and secundo gradu: The Summ of which is, that the Word is Equivocal; which is no wonder, most Words being such: By which Method, he might make Refle∣xions on ten Parts of twelve of the whole Dictionary. Now, in our Way of Do∣ctrine, how easily are all these Speeches reconcil'd? For, Man being One Thing, all his Operations are Corporeo-Spiritual;
whence, our Direct Knowledge of Things coming in by our Senses, it is natural to say when we hear, that we know; since both are done at the same time, and by the same Compound Operation. Thus, when we see a thing, we say, we know it; all Mankind, till Cartesius's Time, holding firmly, that we ought to trust our Eye-sight, and the other Senses, when the Power is not disabl'd from perceiving, and the Ob∣ject and the Medium are well propos'd, convenient, and well circumstanc'd. He has a worse Criticism upon the Word [Conceptus,] Conception; and this, for two Reasons; One, because we rather Appre∣hend, than Comprehend; as if we did not hold our Conceptions to be Inadequate; and, by doing so, declare, that we do ne∣ver, by any one Conception, comprehend the whole Thing. The other Reason is, be∣cause a Conception in the Womb is, Touch'd and Comprehended by it: Whence, he says, Visio sutes better with our Knowing a Thing, than Conceptio. I wish he would reflect on that Known Maxim, that the Common Use of Words gives them their Signification, whatever their Radix, or Derivation, Grammatically imports; and, that to be Conceiv'd by our Understanding, is the same as to be seen by it: So that Vi∣sio and Conceptio fall into the self-same Notion. What a Coil does he keep with
his Incoherent Criticism upon Lepidus and Lepor. Now, it signifies, Elegancy of Speech; then, Liberal Arts; then, Tri∣fling and Ridiculous Sports; then, Scur∣rility. Then he wonders I do not take it for Lepus, a Hare, and make the second Syllable short. And, why so? That he might bring in his Jest of corripuit Fluvium, objected to an old Poet, when he us'd the Word Euphrates so. Certainly, this be∣wrays such an Emptiness of Sense, and such a Nitty Pedantick Levity, that it is below Ridiculousness. But, what is all this to me? What is all this to Philosophy? Lastly, What is all this to the Duty in∣cumbent on him, and owing to his Read∣ers, who desire to see Truth? Does he think it becomes him to trifle away his Time, in running thus a Wooll-gathering after petty School-Boy Criticisms, and hunting after Butter-flies; and let so ma∣ny Demonstrations, which, if not solv'd, overthrow all Cartesianism from the very Foundation, lie Unanswer'd, and Untouch'd? 82. The last Criticism of which (omit∣ting others) I shall take notice, is found in his Censura, p. 130. which is such a fa∣mous one, that it deserves to be a Pattern to all future Generations, and to entitle him King of Criticks. I had us'd the Word [Directus,] as a Particle of the Verb [Di∣rigo,] in the plain obvious Sense for [Di∣rected;]
as we use it, when we say, We direct our Prayers to GOD, or a Letter to a Friend: But, Mr. Le Grand, who is so little acquainted with any kind of Prin∣ciples, that he reflects not that the First Principle, that governs the Sense and Mean∣ing of all Words, is the Common and Obvious Use of them, which stamps the Significa∣tion of them, and makes it Current and Proper, finds strange Mysteries in this or∣dinary Word; and, as he formerly fear'd a silly Asterisk, or Star, left casually in the Context, was a Plot of mine, to run him thorow with those five Darts; so, now he ap∣prehends I have some Stratagem upon him, for taking [Directus] in that plain Sense: Whereupon, he tells the Reader here, that I am Vir subdolus, a Crafty, or Subtile Man; and have some pernicious Meaning; but, let him alone, he will, in the end, turn it upon my self. Now comes his most No∣ble Criticism: First, he brings in the Phrase of Plautus, the Comedian; Abi di∣recte; Go your Ways, straight. Thence, he carries it on still farther, I know not how, to [Dierectè;] which Adverb comes not from Dirigo, but from an odd Obsolete Word, [Dierectus,] which his Brother-Criticks will tell him, comes from sub Dio erectus; that is, set up in the open Air, or Gib∣beted. Where are we now? for, we are quite got out of the Signification of the Word
[Directus,] which signifies [Directed.] But our Critick is not got half way to his Journey's end: For, from [Dierectus,] he carries it on to the Adverb [Dierectà;] which signifies, in English, [With a Mis∣chief:] And, [Ito dierectà,] is an old Ex∣pression for [Go, and be hang'd.] Having brought it to Dierectus, the next thing he does, is, to bring Dierectus, by the Altera∣tion of a Letter, and putting in Another, to [Diarrectus:] whereas, no such Word is to be heard of in our Common Dictio∣naries, nor in the Lexicon Latino-Barba∣rum: Yet, he had a Learned End in it, we may be sure; and 'tis this; He remem∣ber'd there was a Greek Word [,] which signifies [Disruptus;] that is, Burst, or Broken asunder; and, this bringing it to [Diarrectus,] gives him Oc∣casion to take a Leap from Italy, into Greece, that he might make the Word [Di∣rected,] signifie [Broken in pieces,] as  does. Yet, this comes not fully home to his purpose; and, therefore, he makes [Directus,] I know not how, to signifie, amongst Criticks, (he means himself,) [Disrumpi dignus, Worthy to be broken in pie∣ces.] And, now the whole Plot is come to Light: For, when once he had, by of∣ten scruing the Word, and shifting the Sig∣nification of it, from one Country, to an∣other, got the plain Word, [Directus,]
whither he would have it; that is, to signi∣fie, [Worthy to be broken in pieces; [imme∣diately he applies his Formidable Engine he had been preparing, and down goes my Preface, and my Epilogue, Directed to such and such; they, all of them, deserve to be broken, or torn in pieces. Then he brings [Broken in pieces,] to Perishing; and, then, my poor self (he says) perishes with them too; and, lastly, by virtue of a Greek Poet's saying, [If I do perish, let the Earth and Fire be mingl'd;] Let (says he) [U∣niversus Terrarum Orbis,] the whole World perish too. Who could have imagin'd that such a Dite and Universal Catastrophe should befall the Whole World, from my using the Word Directus, when I expres∣sed my self to design, send, intend or dedi∣cate my Books, or any piece of them, to such and such Persons. Gentlemen; What can any sober Men think of such a kind of Writer? This is neither Levity, Folly, or Childishness; but, plain Downright. Madness: This is something beyond Prince Butler himself. If any one can think this Censure too harsh, let him but parallel such a Distracted Way of Writing in any other Author extant, who is well in his Wits and, I promise him, I will re-call my Censure. For my part, I can liken such a Rambling Career of Criticism, to nothing but that of a merry Sophister in Cambridge-Schools,
who, Jokingly (as the Fashion was then, at some certain times,) would needs prove his Adversary, whose Name was Cooper, to have been Lineally Descended from King Pepin, by the like Gradation of Criti∣cisms; alledging, that he was call'd [Coo∣per, quasi Hooper; Hooper, quasi Haper; Haper, quasi Naper; Naper, quasi Diaper; Diaper, quasi Napkin; Napkin, quasi Pip∣kin; Pipkin, quasi King Pepin. This, I say, is its only Parallel; only, this Youth did not ramble from one Language to another; nor did this, but only when Mirth and Wit were expected: But, that a Grave Man (as he would be thought) should, in a Treatise where Philosophy and Solidity were expected, let so many pretended De∣monstrations lie at his Door, demanding, and calling-out to him for an Answer; and spend a considerable part of his Reply so unseasonably, in such Fooleries; and, which is worse, (as appears by his Carriage,) think himself very Learned in Criticism all the while, (which shews he does it se∣riously,) makes him not reachable by that Sophister, or by any; but, to be a Phoe∣nix, and only Self parallell'd. By this wor∣thy Criticism, the Reader will easily see what a rare Interpreter of Scripture this Man would make, with his Acute Art of Criticizing, which can wire-draw quidli∣bet è quodlibet.
83. So far concerning his Criticisms: His other Fooleries, which, I believe, take up the fourth part of his Book, are Innume∣rable: The best of them are so ridiculous, that it is a kind of Foolery in me to take notice of them. However, since I am to lay open all the New Cartesian Methods, I am oblig'd to give my Reader some few Instances of them, by which he may guess at the rest. A Friend of his told him, a Terrible Answer was coming out against him: This slight Occasion serves him for an Ironical Expression all over his Book; and, Terribilis Author, Terribile Responsum, Terribiles Falsificationes, Terribile Argumen∣tum, comes over and over, I believe, at least, a hundred times, in his Censura: Which I can liken to nothing so well as to some little, apish, wanton School-boy, blowing a Feather up and down in the Air, to make himself Sport. Yet, this does him more Service than all his An∣swers. But, give me leave to tell him, that the Way of shewing it not Terrible, is, boldly to come close up to my Demon∣strations, and solve them: But, he is so far from shewing any such honest Courage, that whoever reflects how he avoids them all, or over-leaps them, will see, that, tho' my Ideae Cartesianae was not so terrible as to fright him quite out of his Wits, yet, it has put him quite beside them; and, has made
him skip aside into twenty Bogs and Quag∣mires, and Hiding-holes, to escape meeting with them. Should a Gentleman, Chal∣leng'd to the Field, instead of Meeting and Grappling with his Adversary, run about, into all Companies, flouting at him for a Terrible Fighter, a Terrible Hector, a Terrible Swash-buckler; I fear, every Man would conclude, he was really, and indeed, Ter∣rible to him, however he call'd him so in Mockery; and, that this Flouting him, with∣out giving him the Satisfaction due, and expected, would scarce serve his Honour, or save him from the Imputation of a Coward. Then, every Errour in the Printing is charg'd upon me, as if I knew not how to write true Latin. Upon which, I am told, I break Priscian's Head, am an Ignoramus, and many such Civil Comple∣ments. Did I think such Toys worth no∣ting, I could requite him with enow of such Observations, in his late Scabrous, and (in some places) Unintelligible Piece. Then comes in Horace, to prove all my Wri∣tings are but Ridiculous Mice. Then, Arto∣trogus, an Idle Fellow in Plautus, the Mer∣ry Comedian, is cited, to prove me Per∣jur'd; [Perjuriorem hoc homine, &c. If ever any one saw a more perjur'd Man than this, or more full of Vanity, let him take me to him, and I will be his Bond slave if ever I eat a Sal∣lad with him, tho' I were like to starve.]
And, to clinch this Undeniable Testimo∣ny that I am perjur'd; and, lest the Reader should not believe it was Artotrogus, who thus testity'd this Unchristian Immorality of mine, he assures him of it, by telling him, [Sunt IPSISSIMA Artotrogi verba apud Plautum:] They are the VERY and EX∣PRESS VVords of Artotrogus, in Plautus. What an Emphatical Word is that same [IPSISSIMA;] and, how Necessary to be particularly remark'd! Then comes in Canis Aesopicus, the Dog in Aesop, and ad∣monishes him, by his Example, not to follow my Shadow: And, he is so heartily ready to follow the Example Aesop's Dog had set him, that he not only not catches at my Shadow, but he lets pass what is most Substantial too, by not replying to any of my Demonstrations. Then, he talks of a Cos Gyratilis, a VVhirling VVhet-stone, to put to my Nose: Which is a Mystical Jeer, taken from some of his Pedantick Observations. Then comes in Miles Gloriosus, and his Machaera quoe gestit fartum facere ex hosti∣bus; his Sword that longs to make a Pudding of his Enemy: I beseech the Reader to view the 2d and 3d Pages, and then tell me, if ever he read a Man more vainly proud of big VVords, than this Empty Man is. After that, he brings in his Friend's Pyrgopolyni∣ces in campis Gurgustidoniis is ubi Bombomachi∣des Cluninstaridysarchides erat Imperator sum∣mus,
Nptuni filius. What Stuff is this? Can this Man do himself a greater Dispa∣ragement, than to tell his Reader how fond he is of such Trash? Yet, to talk idly when he has nothing else to do, is more excusable for an Aery, Light-headed Man; but, to talk at this rate, when he has such serious Business lies upon his Hands, as Vindicating his Cartesian Doctrine from so many Arguments; and, then, instead of Answering any one of them, to stand Cut∣ting Capers in the Air, and Vapouring with such High-sounding Bombast, tells every Man he is at a scurvy Loss; and, too plainly detects, how Insignificant he is in any thing belonging to Sense and So∣lidity. 84. Yet, upon Second Thoughts, how∣ever Mr. Le Grand makes me a Lyar, and Perjur'd; yet, I will be so civil to him, as to declare he has not, for any thing I can say, told one single Lye in any of his Books; perhaps, never since he follow'd Cartesius's Doctrine; no, nor Falsify'd neither. To understand which thorowly, and, that the Reader may see I neither flatter him, nor injure my self, upon whom he has laid so many false Aspersions; I am to give him Information of one main Point of Carte∣sius's Doctrine; which is, That (no Cre∣dit being to be given to our Senses, but only to the Ideas which the Soul frames in
her self) our Judgment is not therefore True, because 'tis conformable to the Things without us; but, the Things are then to be judg'd True, or to be really thus or thus, when they are conformable to our Ideas: Whereas, the Aristotelians say, That we then judge True, when the Things are such as we judge them to be; and, that our Sen∣ses, except in some odd Circumstances, do not deceive us. Wherefore, since to Lye, is not barely to say a Falshood; for, a Man may do so very innocently, and yet, since he spoke to the best of his Judgment, be an Innocent and Good Man: but, to Lye, is to go against his own Thoughts, or Judgment: This being so, hence Mr. Le Grand may think, and say, (as he does in his Preface to his Reader,) that I spoke false when I objected that he had said I was in DEUM impius, Impious against GOD; for, his Ideas might inform him so: Whereas, I, neglecting his Way of I∣deas, and relying on this Fallacious Sense of mine, Eye-sight, seem'd to read those Words very plain in his former Preface, p. 38. l. 4. Thus he might read in my Books, by the Light of his Ideas, that I deny'd GOD was Primaria Causa, or the First Cause of Motion; whereas, I believing these false Senses of mine do find that I only deny'd he is the Immediate Cause of it; and, that he must therefore be the Pri∣mary
Cause, because he moves Matter by Second Causes, the Angels. Thus my Ears in∣forming my Common Reason, of the Lan∣guage amongst Charitable and Good Peo∣ple, told me, that to call one Asinus ad Lyram, Talpa Caecior, Blasphemus, delirus, facie non satis honesta; and, that I spit at Heaven, and twenty such like Contume∣lies, were Virulent Expressions; notwith∣standing which, his Ideas might, for all that, tell him that they were (as he calls them here) Modest. So, my Eyes inform me, that I only put two Propositions in that place lately cited, and said expresly, No Determinate Conclusion could follow, out of them, from the Disposal of the Terms in a Syl∣logism: But, his Ideas might tell him, I put three Propositions in both places, and, that there are no such Words as those now mention'd, which directly told him the true State of the Question; and, that therefore he had no reason to take notice of them. Lastly, By the same means it may come about, that his Ideas might tell him that I had said those very Words, [Providentia Divina me, ex Aliis omnibus, selegit.] And, the like may be said of all the other Falsifications I had Charg'd on him, and Multitudes of others, which (proceeding only by Instances) I had omit∣ted; whereas, these False and Fallacious Eyes of mine told me, there were no such
Words in the places he cited for them, but quite contrary. So that, he and I might both of us mean to speak Truth; but, ei∣ther my Senses, or his Ideas, might delude, and deceive us: Which we ought to believe, is left to the Reader's Judgment to de∣termin. Besides, perhaps, he might think, as is Malbranche's Method, (whom he so zealously defends,) that he saw all these things I object, in the Ideas which he sees in GOD, or fancies that he has a Divine Revelation of it; and therefore, it had been Impious against GOD, not to believe, and do, as he did. Whence results this Co∣rollary, That 'tis hard to fix any Ill In∣tention upon any High-flown, Seraphick Cartesian, lest we judge rashly of what he thinks he is assur'd of by Divine Inspira∣tion. 85. But, leaving him to make out the Certainty of his Ideas, and passing over his most Useful New Method of Saying any thing, tho' never so Extravagant, and Incre∣dible, provided it but tends to Disgrace or Jeer his Adversary; now comes their Last Method of Arguing and Answering, which flies a higher pitch, and aims at Blemish∣ing all my Endeavours, by an Objection, which, tho' it be an Extrinsecal one, and taken from the Authority of Learned Men, of great Repute, (as the Sorbonists are;) yet, he is well aware it will do greater
Execution, than any Intrinsecal Arguments they can hope to bring against me. Their Design (as their Managery of this Con∣test shews) is not to instruct the Reader, or Confute me; but, meerly to Despite, and Disgrace me: And, a Censure of my Doctrine by the Sorbon-Doctors, especial∣ly, back'd with Authority of the Chief Ec∣clesiastical Governors in that place, will, (as they hope) lay such a Load upon a Single Man's Credit, that it must necessa∣rily sink under it. And, tho' the pretend∣ed Censure were in a Matter quite different from that of Cartesianism, (which was at first, and still ought to have been, the on∣ly Question,) and therefore, is nothing at all to the Right purpose; it is, for all that, very much to their purpose; which is, to defame me; which blessed Project at∣chiev'd, they hope, by this Means, to raise such a Hubbub, and Noise, that the Quiet Force of my Intrinsecal Arguments will never be heard, or regarded; but, put to Silence, and Shame, by their Clamorous Out-cry. Besides; They judg'd, nothing could make their Calumny more Authen∣tick, than to relate it confidently, as Plain Matter of Fact; and, to represent it as such a Matter of Fact, as already transiit in rem judicatam: Nor are they much concern'd whether it be True, or False; that is Indif∣ferent to such Resolute Men; so long as it
serves a turn to beat down my Credit, all is as well as may be. He tells the Read∣er then, pag. 7. that I did audacter asserere tam Fidem quàm Scientiam non nisi per hoc Principium, (viz. Terminorum Connexio∣nem,) acquiri posse. Also, (ibid.) Autho∣ritate publicâ duas Propositiones, (which he names there,) anathematizare adactus est, neanon subscribere Censurae diconti; Illas in sensu Catholico non posse explicari; that is, that I boldly affirm'd, that neither Faith nor Science could be attain'd, but by this Princi∣ple, viz. Seeing the Connexion of the Terms, or seeing Faith, or, at least, the Way to it, Demonstrated: The First of which ex∣cludes All; the Later, Almost all the Chri∣stians in the World, from the Means to Salvation. Also, That I was fore'd, by Pub∣lick Authority, to Anathematize two Proposi∣tions of mine; and also, to subscribe to the Censure, That they could not be explicated in a Catholick Sense. The Sum of which is, that the Sorbon-Doctors Censur'd some Do∣ctrines of mine; and Publick Authority for∣ced me to retract, or (as his hot Phrase runs) to Anathematize them, and subscribe to the Censure that said, they could not be ex∣plicated in a Catholick Sense. And, pag. 8. he adds farther, That it is Printed, or Re∣corded, for Eternity, by an Egregious Author, in a Verissima Historia; (meaning Lominus his Libel:) And, Lastly, That this puts
me into a Panick Fear of the Roman Inqui∣sition. And, hence, he tells his Reader, p. 11. that I am abundè satis notus; he means, abominably well known, both in France, Germany, Italy, nay, to the Pope himself; which, if not True, is a Lye at large as all England, Scotland, France and Ireland. What will become of poor me! Or, where shall I hide my Head! I am, it seems, like Old Cain, Vagus & Profugus in ter∣râ: Mr. Le Grand has, for my Sins against Cartesius, Excommunicated me, and all-to-be Heretick'd me, here in England: And, his Lashing Friend (according to his Obliging Temper) says, my Book against the Cartesians deserves to be burnt by the Hand of the Hang-man. So that here is no staying for me here, after such a Disgrace: And, it will be hard to find any other Country, where I can hope for Shelter; or, where my Crying Sins will not pursue, and proclaim me. And, which is worse, should I be put to death, or burnt, as such a complicated Lump of all Here∣sies deserves, I must never hope for the Honour of a Christian Burial: And, what a lamentable Case am 1 in then? 86. But, to be serious: If what Mr. Le Grand says, in this Long-winded Calum∣ny, be True, I am Eternally Disgrac'd: But, if I manifest, by Undeniable Testi∣mony, that all this Rabble of Matters of
Fact he charges upon me be an Arrant Fals∣hood, and Calumny; and, that I make it appear, that not one tittle of my Doctrine was ever Condemn'd by any Sorbon Do∣ctor; and, that I never retracted one tittle of it, nor was forc'd by Publick Authority to do so, much less to Anathematize it. Also, if I prove here, that I never held, nor said, (what he here, in express Terms, imposes upon me, viz. [Tam Fidem quàm Scientiam non nisi per Terminorum Connexio∣nem acquiri posse;] but ever held the con∣trary Doctrine, both as to that Proposi∣tion, as also to the Ill Sense put by Tricks upon some Words taken out of my Books, which Ill and Falsly-impos'd Sense was the only Sense that was Condemn'd; then Mr. Le Grand must consult with his own Conscience, whether he has not incurr'd the Penalty of Excommunication, for Pub∣lishing in Print such notoriously False Slan∣ders against his Fellow-Christian; or, by what Case he will excuse, or how he will acquit himself, when it comes to be prov'd upon him, that by his thus Ca∣lumniating his Neighbour so grievously, falsly and openly, he has render'd himself thus Criminal, and Obnoxious: Especial∣ly, when the Circumstances that highly ag∣gravate this Crime of his, shall come to be charg'd upon him.
87. To understand more fully how this Business pass'd, we are to premise, that nothing is easier than to extract Words out of any Book, writ by a Christian; and then disguizing them, (by concealing the Scope and Tendency of the whole Book, the State of the Question, and the Immediate Antecedents and Consequents in those very places,) to make those Words, thus Extract∣ed, and Exhibited, to speak perfect Here∣sie, or worse. Take an Example: If, out of that Verse in the Psalmist, [The Fool hath said in his Heart, There is no GOD,] any one should extract those Words, [There is no GOD,] and propose them in a Paper, thus singl'd out, to any Learned Man, for his Judgment, not telling him they were found in a Book, where the Con∣comitant Words, or the Circumstances, might, perhaps, give them quite another Sense; but, that it was in Theses, where every single Proposition stands alone, un∣assisted by its Fellows, as to the declaring its Sense: Would any Christian, thus sur∣priz'd, stick to declare, that such a Pro∣position was flat Atheism, and could not be explicated in a Christian Sense? This was my very Case. A certain Great Ecclesia∣stick, who was of good Parts, but (as we are not all of us of the same Temper) of a High Spirit, Turbulent, (for which Reason, 'tis thought, he had been dismiss'd
out of his Order,) and, withall, a Great Pretender to Policy, hapt to be at Paris, when I was also there. He pretended great Friendship to me, and extoll'd my Books highly; (as another Gentleman, now my greatest Adversary, has also done formerly,) and this in Print. But, it un∣fortunately happen'd, that a certain Great Person, on whose Esteem he had set a high Value, did, very imprudently, to his Face, prefer my Writings before his; with some Undeserv'd Aggravations of the One, and Reflexions on the Other. This, tho' with∣out my being Accessary, in the least, to that Affront, quite Alienated his Friend∣ship from me; and, he would needs make all those Books of mine, tho' of late so highly prais'd by himself, to be Heretical. At which time, some certain Gentlemen, who love to fish in Troubl'd Waters, and were not over-friendly to me, (one of whom, as I am told, had a Hand in Pen∣ning Merry-man's Libel,) struck in with him; knowing, that a more fitting In∣strument to make Bustles could hardly be found. To carry on this Project then, Three Propositions were pick'd out of my Books; and so politickly contriv'd, that, partly by stifling the Knowledge that they were in any Book at all, partly by Adding to, and Altering, my Words, they plainly signify'd, that None was to believe,
unless they saw the Connexion of Terms, or (which is the same) had a Demonstra∣tion, or Science, of the Mysteries of Faith themselves: And, in this Sense, two Sor∣bon Doctors, thus cheated, condemn'd them; as my self, had I been thus over-reach'd, should have done; that Sense being both manifestly Heretical, and point-blank con∣trary to my constantly avow'd Doctrine; as I shew'd manifestly, out of many signal and most express places, cited in my Vin∣diciae. This Censure being, by Stratagem, obtain'd, he flew about the Town, shew∣ing the Censure, and amplifying mightily upon my Imaginary Heresies: But, no Sollicitation could obtain of him a Copy of the Censure it self; lest it might come to my hands, and so enable me to defend my self, and detect the Falsity; so, being incapacitated to say any thing in my own Vindication, I never troubl'd my self at that which I could not help. About ten Days after, during which time his Envy took its full Swing, the two very Reve∣rend Persons, Dr. Godden, and Mr. Bark∣lay, Principal, or President, of the Scotch College, came to my Chamber, and thus, with some Resentment, accosted me: Sir, What do you mean? Are you stupid, that you sit studying here, Unconcern'd, when you are proclaim'd a Heretick all over the Town? I re∣ply'd, When I can get the Censure, and know
what is Objected, I am sure I can defend my self: In the mean time, 'tis Defence enough to let People know I cannot obtain the Equity of him to know my Fault. They reply'd, Tho' you dis-regard your Credit, we, that are known to be your Friends, resolve to be more careful of ours. So Mr. Barklay, taking Monsieur St. Amour, a Sorbon Doctor, with him, to make his Quality known, went to the Chamber of Monsieur de S. Beuve, the Chief of the Censurers, and thus ac∣costed him; Sir, you have condemn'd Three Propositions in the Books of Mr. S. which may make as great Stirs in England, as the Five Propositions have done in France. He, all amaz'd, reply'd, That he had Censur'd no Proposition in any Book, nor could in Pru∣dence, or Honesty, unless he had perus'd the Book it self; to be satisfy'd, by comparing it with the Scope of the Discourse, and the ad∣joining VVords, what Sense it must clearly and necessarily have. In the Nick comes in my Adversary, with the Censure in his Poc∣ket: VVell met, Mr. Barklay, says he; now your great Friend, Mr. S. is condemn'd of He∣resie, by this Learned Man. My Lord, re∣plies Mr. de St. Beuve, I neither Censur'd his Person, nor any Proposition of his, unless he maintain'd those Propositions thus singl'd out, and exhibited, as you propos'd them in your Paper. Then Mr. Barklay begg'd he might have a Sight of the Censure; which was
something unwillingly granted; yet, it could not be deny'd in such a Presence. Having perus'd it; Now, my Lord, says Mr. Barclay, to let you see, I am neither a Heretick, nor a Favourer of them, I will sub∣scribe this Censure: More than that, I dare swear, Mr. S. will, at first sight, subscribe it too: For, the Sense here condemn'd, is quite Different from the whole Scope of his Books; which treat only of Demonstrating Praevia ad Fidem, and not at all of Demonstrating the Mysteries, or Points of Faith; nay, 'tis di∣rectly Opposite to his Doctrine, to say, they can be Demonstrated. At these Words, Monsieur de St. Beuve grew warmer with him; telling him roundly, Domine, calli∣dè & artifieiosè mecum egisti, adeò ut suspicer um hoc ex ivore profectum: You have dealt craftily with me, and with Artifiee; so that I suspect that all this Business springs from Pique. Mr. Barclay astipulated, and told him, Domine, rem acu tetigisti: Sir, you are in the very right on't. Whereupon, my Adversary rising up in a great Heat, with a Face engrain'd in Anger, thunder'd out; Mentiris, Barclaie; mentiris impudentissime. Ego novi quis sis; nempe, Haereticus ipse, & Fautor Haereticorum: Ego tibi has vices re∣pendam. You lye, Barclay; you lye most im∣pudently. I know what you are; that is, a Heretick, and a Favourer of Hereticks: But, I shall be even with you. The grave Sorbon
Doctors were astonish'd at this furious Transport; but, Mr. Barclay being a Man of great Prudence, and never in Passion, Nay, my Lord, says he, I do not love to hear my self abus'd. So he takes a short Leave, and brings away the Original of the Cen∣sure with him; while the other, being in a high Passion, had forgot to re-demand it: Yet, he lingerd, unseen, not far off, till he saw my Adversary gone by; and return'd to the Doctor. and told him, he had got the Original of the Censure; desi∣ring him to go to the Archbishop of  from me, and request of him, that I might keep the Censure, and write my . He was heartily glad it was got from him, promising to go thither immediately, and to do me all the Right I could desire; and, affiaring him, the Censure should never come into his hands again. So my Re∣quest was granted, and I set to write my Vindiciae. In the mean time, we sent di∣vers to my Adversary; desiring to see the Censure; telling him, they would not be∣lieve such a sinister Report concerning me, unless they saw it with their own Eyes. Which put him (loath to say, his Passion had made him lose it) to a great Nonplus how to answer, and gave us much Divertisement. He apply'd to the Archbishop, and complain'd to him, that Mr. Barklay had stole the Censure from him.
But his Answer was, That he had order'd I should have it, to make my Defence. Which mortify'd him exceedingly. 88. My Vindiciae, which were now fi∣nish'd, being in Latin, and my Books in English, eight Divines of the greatest Qua∣lity and Worth, (who understood En∣glish,) were deputed to examine the Sin∣cerity of my Vindiciae; and all of them, except one, admitted by my Adversary himself; viz. Mr. Thomas Godden, Doctor of Divinity, Ex-President of Lisbo-College, Preacher to Her Majesty, and Treasurer of her Chapel: Mr. Francis Gage, Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, afterwards President of the College of Doway: Mr. Robert Barclay, Principal, or President, of the Scotch Col∣lege at Paris: Mr. John Betham, and Mr. Bonaventure Gifford, then Batchelors of Divinity in the Sorbon; afterwards, Pa∣risian Doctors; and the latter of them now. Bishop of Madaura: Mr. Edward Cary, and Mr. George Kempe, Canons: And Mr. Ed∣ward Lutton, Confessor to the English Re∣ligious: Who did, first, each of them a∣part; afterwards, met in a Body, or Con∣ference, give their Unanimous Attesta∣tion, subscrib'd by their Names, in these Words, viz. First, That All the places, out of my Books, alledg'd by me, were faithful∣ly turn'd into Latin. Secondly, That From the whole Context and Scope of the Author,
in those placos brought by him, to prove that he does not maintain the Sense condemn'd, it is manifest, that he does not require Know∣ledge of the Mysteries, in themselves, by Evi∣dent Reason; but, professedly maintains, that they are Incomprehensible, and above the reach of Humane Reason. Thirdly, That the Sense assign'd by him, to the three abovesaid Propo∣sitions, is Conformable to the Scope and Te∣nour of his Discourse in those very places whence they are extracted; and therefore, we judge this to be his True and Genuine Sense. Also, we cannot but confess, that those Omis∣sions, and Additions, which were the Reasons why the Propositions seem'd to bear another Sense, were justly charg'd by him.] After this, my Adversary would needs give them some Objections, (which, we may be sure, were the best he could make,) by way of Instruction to their Second Thoughts, how they might make a right Judgment of my Doctrine. They met all again, con∣sider'd them maturely, and made a Se∣cond Subscription, That they found no∣thing in them, which could, in the least, make them judge otherwise than they did witness formerly. This done, the Archbishop of Pa∣ris told me, that if I would subscribe to the Censure, he would order the Censurers to make me Satisfaction under their Hands, by declaring, no part of my Doctrine was Censur'd; alledging, that, as they were
ready to clear my Credit, so it was but fit∣ting I should clear them; and acknow∣ledge, those Propositions, as they were exhibited to them, were justly Condemna∣ble; as may be seen in my Clypeus Septem∣plex, pag. 96. I, at first, begg'd his Par∣don; alledging, that my Adversary was of that Humour, that he would thence take Occasion to Vapour, he had made me Retract. Subscribe then, says he, in what Form you will. Hereupon, I gave in my Subscription, in these very Words; Non Doctrinam meam Retractans; sed in ea∣dem, utpōtè â Censurâ immuni, atque ab Il∣lustrissimo Olivero Plunketto totius Hiber∣niae Primate, atque à Superioribus meis ap∣probatâ, Persistens, contrariumque ubicunque repertum fuerit condemnans. This done, the Censurers were commanded to make me Satisfaction under their Hands; which they did, in a Formal Instrument, decla∣ring, That they did not, vel minimam no∣tam inurere, blemish with the least Note, or Censure, either me, or my Books: Adding, That If any should pretend it, they did, from their Hearts, profess, that they made a sini∣nister Interpretation of their Censure. And, there was an End of that Politick Jigg; the Issue of which was very Honourable to me, and most Shameful to my Ene∣mies.
89. By this Relation, every Tittle of which I can justifie by sufficient Testimo∣ny, and Authentick Records, which I have now in my hands; as also, by my Vindiciae, and Clypeus Septemplex, publish'd immediately after the Contest, where all these Particulars, (and many others,) to my farther Clearing, are printed; which I durst not have publish'd, unless they had been True to a tittle, before the Face of all those Honourable and Learned Persons yet alive, who would have hated me for printing Falshoods of them; and my Chief Adversary himself, and his Com∣plices, yet living, who would have desir'd no more, but to have found me tripping in the least part of my Narrative. These Things, I say, being so, Judge, I beseech you, Gentlemen, what a prodigious Fol∣ly, as well as Malice, it is in Mr. Le Grand, and his Libeller, to pretend that any one tittle of my Doctrine was Condemn'd by Sorbon Doctors; that I was cited before any Tribunal; that I was forc'd to Ana∣thematize any part of my Doctrine, and subscribe to the Censure of it, &c. Where∣as, it is manifestly attested, I only sub∣scrib'd to my own ever-avow'd Doctrine. Nor was I forc'd: No Tribunal meddl'd with me, or concern'd themselves about me; and, if I would have wav'd my own Satisfaction from the Censurers, none ob∣lig'd
me to subscribe at all. Lastly, How Base and False a Calumny is it, to say, that by Subscribing, I Retracted; when I ex∣presly subscrib'd, as Not-retracting my Do∣ctrine; or, that I was forc'd to Anathe∣matize it, whenas I subscrib'd it as Persist∣ing in it! Nor are any of those Proposi∣tions, thus exhibited, and extracted, in reality, mine, (Nam malè dum recitat, in∣cipit esse sua,) any more than [Non est Deus,] thus singl'd out, is the Scriptures: I have no Propositions, but in Books; where many Circumstances are found, de∣termining the Sense: And, he that pre∣tends this, may, by the same Reason, ac∣cuse the Scripture of Atheism. How rash a Slander, then, is it in Mr. Le Grand, to lay these things to my Charge! And, how lying a Fellow is his Libelling Assistant, whose Calumnies are so notorious, and some of them so Criminal, that, were he known, he would be liable to lose his Ears. 90. The next Stratagem of our Politi∣cians, (for, we expected new ones every Day,) was, to pick out of my Books no less than 37 Propositions, (with the same Honesty, we may be sure, as they did the former,) which they carry'd to the then. Nuncio at Paris, now Cardinal Spada; pretending the same Zeal for Faith, as Mr. Le Grand does; and, as those two Idle
Knaves did, who are said to have laid their Heads together, to pen this Libel: And therefore, pressing to have them sent to the highest Tribunal, to be Condemn'd with all speed, because my Heresie (for∣sooth!) spread far and near in England, and infected the whole Country. The Nuncio took them; but, being a Man of Wisdom, apply'd to my Lord Abbot Montague the next Morning, to know what strange Heresie this was, which, like a Cancer, spread so fast in England. Who, smiling, acquainted him at large with the Undeserved Feud of my Adver∣sary, and my Innocency. The Nuncio sends for me the next Day, receiv'd me very kindly; told me, he understood how I was persecuted by some Adversaries of mine, and deliver'd me their Objections; desiring me to write an Answer, and he would do m the Equity to send up both together. Both which are printed in the Second Part of my Vindiciae. So this Se∣cond Plot was defeated; and my Malig∣ners came off as shamefully as they did in the former: For, they could never gain the least Advantage upon me, if they did not surprize Great Men with False Preten∣ces, and prevent my Answering for my self. 91. But, Envy is a Restless Vice. Their Third Main Plot, (omitting many petty ones,) was, to print a Libel against me,
under the Name of Lominus, (which, some say, N. N. and T. W. have Copy'd, and imitated, exactly;) making me guil∣ty of near forty Herefies. But, this Book having neither Author, Printer, nor Ap∣provet's Name put to it, (which made it highly punishable by the Laws of the Kingdom, if any did spread it,) it was glad to sneak in hugger-mugger: Which concurring Blemishes so disgrac'd it, that none regarded it; For, What Man of Common Sense will believe, that a Wri∣ter for Faith, against such a manifold He∣retick, should be afraid to own his Name, if his Accusations were not Calumnies? Besides, the Writer of it had counterfeited the Subscriptions against me of two Pari∣sian Doctors, by name, of Mr. Peter Nu∣gent, and Mr. Thaddaeus ô Brien; who, in their Letters to the Cardinal of Norfolk, (Authentick Copies of which I have in my hands,) complain'd of such Impostures, and requested they might not pass Unpunish∣ed. So that, from many Heads, it was con∣victed, and held to be a plain Libet. Lastly, I complain'd of it to the Sacra Con∣gregatie; laid it open, and confuted it, in my Querimonia to Superiour Powers, and my Antidoti; as it is to be seen in my Cly∣peus Septemplex, and the large Preface to my Vindiciae. And, so, the Third Plot of my Adversary, and of the Gentlemen be∣hind
the Curtain, his Assistants, went out in a Snuff, and lest an ill Scent behind it. And, so much for Mr. Le Grand's Egregius Author, and Verissima Historia, which does Aeternitati pingere (as he says) my Errours. Which none regarded, but those who help'd to pen it; with one of whom Mr. Le Grand and his Friend (as I am inform∣ed) have struck a Holy League, to carry on their Sensless and already Baffl'd Slanders and Calumnies against me. 92. But, the Fourth Plot was so finely laid, they hop'd it would be prosperous, and make amends for all; and, that, be∣ing so well levell'd, it could not but hit the Mark. They sent up all my Books to Car∣dinal Barberin; and, with them, one of my Lord Chancellor Hyde's, writ against Mr. Cressy, (the Title of which they had torn out;) pretending to him, they were all writ by one and the same Author, my self. Their Friends there press'd the Con∣demnation of them with such a hurry, as if the whole Church had totter'd if it were not done quickly. To expedite the Bu∣siness, they earnestly sollicited him, that only that one Book (viz. Chancellor Hyde's) should be read; and then, to de∣termin whether all the Books writ by such a pernicious Author, ought not to be con∣demn'd. The Cardinal, without naming me, delivers them to a worthy Divine,
who understood English; bidding him Keep the rest, till call'd for, and read only this one; (pointing to that of the Chancellors, which they had signally particulariz'd to him,) and give him an Account of it as speedily as was possible; for, by that one, they could judge of the rest. What Reme∣dy now? Would not any Man swear now that all was Cock-sure? But, there is no Policy against God's Providence; which directed thither an English Divine, who had lately come out of England, and at∣tended the now Earl of Derwent-water, and his Brother, in their Travels. He being of Acquaintance with this Divine, came to visit him in the very nick of Op∣portunity, and finding him very busie in reading that Decretory-Book, went to his Table, and took up some Books that he saw lie there together: Finding, to his Astonishment, they were mine, he ask'd him how they came by all Mr. S's Books? The other told him, he was much mis∣taken; and said, they could not be mine; telling him, they had a far other Chara∣cter of me; whereas, the Book he was reading, which was (said he) writ by the same Author; could not possibly be writ by a Man of Mr. S's Principles. Mr. Mid∣ford (for, that was my Friend's Name) knew the Book, and avow'd it was writ by another Author, whom he nam'd to
him. At which, the Roman Divine held held up his Hands with Admiration, at such a Knavish Contrivance. So, they agreed that Mr. Midford should go with him the next Morning, to Cardinal Bar∣berin, to inform him what a Cheat was put upon him, to hasten him to judge of all my Books, by the Book of another, who was of another Judgment, and went upon different Principles. This was so Shameful, and Horrid, that, after this, not an Enemy of mine durst appear. Besides my Clypeus Septemplex, and Vindiciae, I had sent divers Apologeticks thither, explaining my Doctrine; which the Roman Divines examining, desir'd Mr. Midford to know of me, if my Occasions would let me come thither, to teach the same Doctrine there, I had printed in England. If I would, they would petition for a good Pension to maintain me. But, I was a greater Lover of my Studies in my Priva∣cy, than I was of Courts. However, Mr. Le Grand, and my then Opposers, may see by this, how I am Notus in Gallia, and in Ita∣lia. The Malice of my Enemies (as GOD had order'd it) having done me more Kindness, and gain'd me more Honour, than all my Friends could ever have done. All this was writ by Mr. Midford, to my Friends, and my self, then at Paris; di∣vers of whom are yet alive, to witness it.
63. I am heartily sorry to lay open such Fraudulent and Unconscionable Carriages in any Christians much more in those of my own Persuasion it being so perfectly con∣trary to Common Honesty, than a Turk would blush at it, and a good Moral Heathen de∣test it. But, when my Christian Credit is thus assaulted, I am oblig'd in Conscience to vindicate my self: Nor, can any Man blame me, for doing that Just and Neces∣sary Duty to my own Reputation. Per∣haps, to revive this Quarrel, which the Chief Church Governors have Exami∣ned, Determin'd, and Compos'd, Mr. . Grand exerts himself in this Consure of his, to gratifie the Contrivers of it then, hoping it would oblige them to put them in a Capacity to play a Book-Game. And, for the same Reason, he goes about to gratifie some Protestants too, by ha∣zarding his Credit, to do them a Kindness. But, as I believe, the former are too pru∣dent to begin Squabbles with one, who meddles not with them; so, I am very confident, the Later have too much Ho∣nour and Candour in them, to be offended at a Man who writes for his Conscience; and in such a Cause, as is the Settling Christian Faith upon such Grounds as are Absolutely Certain; which is the Interest of all Christians: And, that they will never be favourable to a Writer, that wrongs
the Common Cause, and, consequently, his own Conscience, to please his Passion; much less, to such a Man, who, in his Cen∣sura, as appears by the Words, [ut sint,] calls the Protestants In England, INFI∣DELS. 94. That the World may know of how different a Temper I was, from that of Mr. Le Grand, (whether Natural to him, or Inspir'd by another, I wave at present,) after his Censura Injustissima came out, not∣withstanding his Unoccasion'd Provoca∣tions at first, which was the Origin of all his Warmth of Opposition, so little Edi∣fying to Sober Christians, or Beneficial to Learned Readers; tho' I saw also, there was a Pound of Gall in that Book, for a Grain of Reason; yet, I did charitably resolve to try if I could calm his Passion, and sweeten his Bitter Humour. To compass this, I put my self upon some great Disadvantages; and blam'd my self as much as I could with any Degree of Truth; that so I might in∣vite him, by my Example, to some Civil Acknowledgment of his Peevish Errours, I had resolv'd to pass over all his Unsavou∣ly Taunts, his Railing, Falsifications, and Un∣true Imputations, under the Name of Mis∣takes; nor to take notice of his manifold O∣missions; but, to put down barely, and clear∣ly, my yet Unanswer'd Arguments; tho' it was tedious to me, without any Occasion,
to repeat them. Nay, I fully purpos'd to give his Pretended Answers a fairer Chara∣cter than they could deserve; and, while I rectify'd his Errours, to excuse, as well as I could, what was Amiss, or Defective. I had fram'd my Thoughts to pen my Book in a Gay, Familiar Style, to put him in a good Humour. And, in a Word, I was resolv'd to omit nothing that could become a Kind Friend, and a Charitable Christian. Whence, I had begun my Reply on this manner; by which, the Reader may make an Estimate, how Condescending and Obli∣ging the Whole had been, had they let it go forward. VERITAS & PAX. REsponsio mollis frangit Iram, Ser∣mo Durus suscitat Furorem, in∣quit Sapiens, (Prov. 15. v. 1.) Hor∣tatur etiam Propheta, Dei nomine lo∣quens, (Zach. 8. v. 9.) ut, Veritatem ac Pacem diligamus. Utrumque hoc di∣ctum, Vir Eximie, nobismetipsis appli∣care debemus; saltem, Ego utrumque mihimet applico. Quare iterum ad Te redeo, iterum te adorior: Non animo infenso, sed verè Amico: non, prae Fa∣mae meae tuendae studio, forsan ultra mo∣dum effervescens; sed, ad Amicitiam Charitatémque (heu nimis laesas!) re∣dintegrandas
paratissimus. Perculit me, fateor, (idque non immeritó,) quòd nun∣quam à me laesus, sed uti existimabam, mihi Amicus, Cartesianae tamen Doctri∣nae, quam impugnabam, Zelantior, &, forsan, suasionibus Aliorum eodem ze∣lo nimis flagrantium, obsequentior, in Contumelias contra Personam ac Fa∣mam meam, effusiùs quam par erat, Scri∣pto Publico, proruperis. Venit mihi in mentem Davidicum illud (Ps. 55. 13, 14, 15.) Si Inimicus meus maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique—Tu verò homo unanimus & notus meus—in domo Dei am∣bulavimus eum consensu, &c. Hinc, com∣motior factus, ad Defensionem me ac∣cinxi. Atque utinam intra justae De∣fensionis fines me continuissem. Perdif∣ficile siquidem est, ut quisquam, acerbè, idque (quantum sibi conscius erat) sine causâ tractatus, modum ubique servet. Reposuisti tu, & altioribus adhuc Con∣vitiis fraena laxâsti. Quid hîc facien∣dum? Num in Jurgiis ac Rixis, sine fi∣ne reciprocatis, ac nemini profuturis, prodigendum Tempus, conspurcanda Charta? Ridiculum! Tandem, sapia∣mus, & redeamus ad cor. Scilicet Ho∣mines uterque sumus, originali labe in∣fecti, indéque lapsu faciles; at supernâ (uti spero) praemuniti gratiâ, quò minùs malevolentiae venenum in Animae visce∣ra
se effundat. Nec rideant nos Lecto∣res nostri. Eâdem pice inquinati sunt & ipfi, eâdémque farinâ subacti. Et, forsan, pauci sunt, qui hoc idem non factitâssent, si in iisdem circumstantiis fuissent constituti, atque easdem cogita∣tiones eosdémque affectus habuissent. Solus, idque meritò, ridebit nos Huma∣ni Generis Hostis (& quos habet sequa∣ces;) qui Homines invicem committe∣re, rixas serere, ac seminatas usque fo∣vere gestit. Quin rideamus & nos, vi∣ce nostrà, Incendiarium illum; & delu∣sum se sentiat qui foveam aliis struxit. Quicquid crepat Metaphysica de Primù suis Principiis atque Altissimis Causis, cer∣tè Nos à Certioribus longè Principiis & Causis Altioribus, Divina Lege sancitis ac commendatis, edocti sumus Chari∣tatem Fraternam Dissertationibus Phi∣losophicis, & Magistri (quisquis ille fue∣rit) Placitis longè anteferendam. Ho∣mines, inquam, sumus; indéque nonni∣hil Humani passi; At videant omnes, nos tales nihilominus esse Homines, qui nô∣runt corrigere in sese quodcunque de∣num illud fuerit, quò minùs Homines, seu minùs Rationis compotes sumus. Vides, mi Amice multùm colende, quòd etiam dum de Pace loquor, Impug∣nationem aggrediar ac Contentionem te∣cum denuò instaurem? Quare, cave s
tibi; nam Novum Bellum Tibi indîco, Provocationem Novam ad Te mitto. Spiculis non umbratilibus, sed verè Ig∣neis (Clritatis scilicet) te adoriri decre∣tum mihi est; in quo profectò praelian∣di genere usque ad mortem terum decer∣tabo. Quicquid nonnulli ex Amicis tuis de East meo existiment, audacter ja∣ct quòd Priores mihi partes, Tibi Posteriores in hâc Lite Christianâ cessurae sint. Quod amplius est, palam pro∣nuntio me Lauream in isthoc certamine reportaturum; imò aliqualiter (quantum mihi liquet) jam reportâsse. Praeripui si∣quidem Tibi Honoris (non Aeri, sed Solidi) Florem, dum Prior ad Concor∣diam gradum promoveo. Nisi forsan & Tue hoc idem fecisses, nisi quòd exi∣stimâris me, (obsirmato utique, ut opi∣natus es, ad bellum animo,) Pacem de∣rectaturum, Id si prositearis, tunc enim∣verò fatendum est quod inter otramque partem —dubiis volitet Victoria pennis. Aliter, totum atque integrum Trium∣plum jure optimo mihi vendicabo. Si rationem exposeas, habeto Notissimum atque Sapientissimum Estatum illud, —Fortior est qui se, qum qui fortissima vincit Mni— In quo quidem sensu, vel à Te, vel à quovisalio, Pgopolyni∣ces vocari non recusbo, im Honori mihi ducam.] &c.
TRUTH and PEACE. A soft Answer breaks Anger; Harsh Speech stirs up Fury, says the Wise-Man. The Prophet also, speak∣ing in GOD's Name, exhorts us to love TRUTH and PEACE. Both these Sayings, Honoured Sir, we ought to apply to our selves; at least, I account it my Duty to do so. Again, then, I return to you; again, I set upon you; not with a Mind full of Resentments, but, of real Friendship: Not out of an earnest Desire, and, perhaps, too sensi∣ble a Concern, to defend my own Fame; but, most ready to renew and repair Charity and Friendship a-fresh, already (alas!) too much violated. I must con∣fess, it struck me, and shock'd me exceed∣ingly, (and, no wonder,) that you should, without the least Offence done to your Person, who (as I thought) was still my Friend; but, out of a too fervent Zeal for the Cartesian Doctrine, which I impugn'd, and, perhaps, too easily per∣suaded by others transported with the same Zeal, break out, in Print, into Contumelious Words, more than was Decent, against my Person, and my Christian Reputation. That Saying of King David, (Psal. 55.) came into my
Mind; [If my Enemy had revil'd me, I could have born it—But, thou, my Friend and Acquaintance—who didst walk with me unanimously, in the House of GOD.] Thus, causlesly provok'd, I set to write my Defence: And, I wish I had con∣tain'd my self within the Bounds of a meer Defence, or Vindication: For, 'tis very hard for any Man who is roughly handl'd, and (as far as he was conscious to himself) without Cause, to keep him∣self within an Exact Mean. You re∣ply'd; and, in your CENSURA, out∣did your former Self, in Affrontive Language. What is now to be done? Must we still throw away our precious Time, and blur Paper with Angry Re∣partees, reciprocated endlesly? 'Twere most Ridiculous! At length, then, let us grow wiser, and return to our Right Temper. We are, both of us, Men; that is, Frail, and tainted with Original Sin; but, yet, (as I hope,) so pre-esta∣blish'd by Christian Principles that the Poyson will be thrown out before it in∣fects the Vitals of our Soul. Nor, let our Readers laugh at us; Themselves too have some of the same Pitch sticking to them, and are made up of the same Mass of Corruption. And, perhaps, there are Few, who had not done the same we did, had they been in the same
Circumstances, and had had the same Thoughts and Affections. None but the Enemy of Mankind (and his Imps) can have just Occasion to laugh at us; who hates Peace, and delights to sow and foment Dissension. Let us, in our turn, laugh too at that Wicked Incen∣diary; that he who digg'd a Pit for for others, may fall into it himself. Whatever Metaphysicians talk of their First Principles, and Highest Causes or Reasons, I am sure we are taught by far more Certain Principles, and Higher Rea∣sons, establish'd, and commended to us by the Divine Law, that Brotherly Cha∣rity is infinitely to be preferr'd before Philosophical Contests, or the Tenets of any Master, let him be who he will. We are Men, I say; and, thence, have suffer'd some Humane Imperfection: But we will let the World see, that we are such Men, as can correct in themselves whatever makes them less Men, or less Governable by Reason. You see then, my much-Honoured Friend, that even while I speak of Peace, I impugn you a-fresh, and renew my Con∣test with you. Wherefore, look to your self; for, I denounce a New War to you, and send you a New Challenge; in which I will never yield the Victory. I am fully resolv'd to Attack you, not with
Imaginary Darts, but with Fiery ones; to wit, with those of Charity; with which I will maintain the Combat, to my last Breath: Whatever your Friends talk of my Pride and Arrogancy, I bold∣ly proclaim, and boast, that I will have the Advantage in this Christian Conten∣tion. Nay, I do openly brag, that (as far as yet appears to me) I have already won the Victory; by getting the Start of you in this War, (the Guerdon of which is a Crown, not of Aiery, but of Solid Honour,) by making thus the first Step to a Reconciliation: Unless, per∣haps, your self also had intended the same, had you not thought me to be Re∣fractory. If you profess you had the same Thoughts, then I must, indeed, confess, the Victory hovers doubtfully between us: But, if not, the Whole and Entire Triumph will be justly due to me. If you ask me the Reason of this forward Condescension; take for An∣swer, that most Famous, and most Wise Saying, ['Tis a greater Victory to conquer one's self, than to subdue the strongest Forts.] In which Sense, I shall not be asham'd; but, shall think it a High Ho∣nour to be call'd by your self, or any other, a Pyrgopolynices.]
95. I do not believe there is any Man in the World, who reads this Charitable Overture of mine, and considers all the Circumstances, but will both commend, and admire at, such an Unexpected, and Extravagant Condescension, and Modera∣tion, on my part. Mr. Le Grand had been the Unprovok'd Aggressor; for, I had not gi∣ven him one Unhandsome Word, but only oppos'd some Cartesian Tenets, by way of Argument; when he, in requital of my Civility, fell upon me with the the most Virulent Language that ever was heard gi∣ven by (I will not say any Christian, but) even by any one Heathen, to another Tho' my Defence was Smart, yet I confin'd my Resentments, to oppose him only as an In∣jurious and Weak Writer; without imita∣ting him, by blackening him as Impious against God, or Unsound in Faith; but still excus'd him in such Occasions. He had printed Infamous Slanders against my Books, writ for the Absolute Certainty of Faith; making my Doctrine in them Con∣demn'd by Scrbonists, Retracted and Anathe∣matiz'd by my self; and, what not? He abetted a Known Libel, as a most True Hi∣story; which makes me guilty of Twenty Heresies at least. Lastly, He had given me more Advantages against him, as a Scholar, in his Censura, than even my self could have wish'd. Yet, I was willing to pass by
all these Highest Provocations, and lose all these Advantages, and (Unconstrain'd) to make the First Charitable Step to a Friend∣ly Accommodation; Requiring only, that he would make some Publick Satisfaction, not for any Reviling Words, or Slanders, against my Particular Person, (all which I was ready to pardon;) but, to wipe off the False Aspersions he had laid upon my Books writ for Faith, which reflected upon the Common Cause of Religion; to do which is the precise Duty of every Good Man: To promise which, notwithstanding, (by the way,) I could never learn he was Willing, or Inclin'd; Nor could I ever get any certain Light what he would do, or how far he would comply on his part. I had now finish'd about a Third Part of this Healing Reply, and had communica∣ted this Exordium of it to some Friends of his; who, I dare say, had acquainted him with my Peaceful and Friendly Intentions; when, as if done on purpose to prevent it, out comes Merry-man's LIBEL, contriv'd and fram'd by some Achitophel, (I leave it to the Reader to guess whom,) to render all Reconciliation Impossible; and, Tim'd so, as to be Publish'd just in the Nick, when I was expecting that Half-Sheet, which (as I had requested in my Non UL∣TRA) was to decide the whole Controver∣sie, by way of PRINCIPLES. This made
me see, that my Charity was requited with such a Rude Affront, that all the Malice in the World, put together, could scarce have invented any thing more Rancorous; and, that I was to content my self with my own good Intentions, and prepare for a Vigorous Defence. Which, also, was the reason why (putting a Stop to my Latin Treatise) I became oblig'd to reply in Eng∣lish, into which their Slanders were now brought; that so my Answer might be as Universally Read, and Understood, as Order had been taken their Calumnies should be: And, indeed, both Mr. Le Grand, and the Libeller, very Brotherly conspire to slan∣der my Doctrine, as Condemn'd; or, which is the Word they do both of them affect, [Damn'd;] Whence, I saw plainly, that this Writing in English was Absolute∣ly Necessary, and most proper to spread my Vindication, and make it more taken notice of. 96. I am to expect, that Mr. Le Grand, and his Inspirer, will stoutly deny that they are Accessary to this Libel, or knew of it: 'Tis their Interest, as well as their Credit, to do so. That they did not pen it, I am apt to believe: Nor, is it Pru∣dence to charge them positively with their Knowing it, Liking it, or (in their Way) Abetting it; unless I had Positive Testimo∣ny for it. But, yet, I must beg the Fa∣vour
of them, to leave Thought Free: 'Tis best, in such Cases, to give my Reasons, and remit the Decision to the Judgment of Prudent Readers: For, First, I could ne∣ver learn, that any one Man in England spoke the least Word against those two Books of mine, till Mr. Le Grand and his Governor did so; and, this Libel visibly abets them, and carries on the same Cause, viz. the Defaming of me: And, 'tis very hard to conceive, that one who assists an∣other, should not let him know what Kind∣ness he is doing him; or, that the Assisted Person should not contribute to his Power, and help those who were so kindly helping him; or, that a Journey-man should go to work without the Knowledge of his Prin∣cipal; especially, when he uses his Tools all the while, as Merry-man does Mr. Le Grand's Censura; out of which, the whole Libel is Extracted. Secondly, I was in∣form'd, ere the Libel came out, by a wor∣thy Gentleman (Mr. F. H.) that Mr. Le Grand had struck in with a certain Eccle∣siastick, who would joyn with him, in op∣posing me; which, all things consider'd, especially, their sympathizing in their be∣ing, both of them, of a Light, Inconside∣rate Genius, and, in their Aversion against me; makes it very Wonderful, and Un∣heard of, that Confederates should not com∣municate their Designs, or confer their
Notes, how to carry on their Common Cause. Thirdly, That Ecclesiastick spoke of, as siding with Mr. Le Grand, is the ve∣ry Person who is universally said to be, at least, the Parcel-Author (if not the only one) of that Libel. Now, that a Con∣currence in Affections (that is, in Disaffe∣ction to the same Person) should not pro∣duce a Concurrence in Action, when that Person is upon the Anvil, when they are both striking at him, and when the Resolu∣tion to run him down is already evident∣ly, Taken by both; let any Man believe that can. Fourthly, 'Tis evident, that they do Mutuas operas tradere, or friendly assist one another. Mr. Le Grand (I fear, in this, made Foot-of-Whelp) hazards his Credit, in defaming my Books, as Con∣demn'd; and crying up Lominus's Libel; so, to retrieve the Credit which was lost by a former Defeat: And, the Libeller, by ta∣king his Matter out of his Censura, and ec∣choing aloud all those Slanders in English, manifestly abets him, and requites his Kindness; and yet, we must believe (to the Forfeiture of Common Sense) that all this lights by Chance, and not by Design, or Agreement. Sure, they think all Men are Fools, but themselves; or else, they Child∣ishly imagin, that while they hood-wink themselves, none can see them. Fifthly, The Opposing Cartesius would not bear
the weight of an Accusation in the High Court; whereas, the Magnifying Albius, who had given Disgust to them above, would easily, as they hop'd, if well im∣prov'd, and manag'd, be made Criminal, if they could but catch me in that Snare: But, it light unluckily to their Project, that (resolving to live quietly with my Neighbours, if I could; and, to carry on Truth, without giving Offence to any) I had not, so much as once, nam'd Mr. White in either of those two Books the Libeller is is so angry at; nor have I any Position there, peculiar to him alone; as I can easi∣ly shew, when put to it. Wherefore, it was plotted to bring me, by Stratagem, to name Mr. White, with some handsome Character. To this End, Mr. Le-Grand, in his Railing Preface, p. 39. (by which we may see 'tis an Old Project,) challeng'd me, that I did [eradere Albium-ex albo Phi∣losophorum, & in ludibria vertere;] that is, that I did blot Mr. White out of the Roll of Philosophers, and make a Mockery of him: And, I was blam'd by them, as proudly dis-regarding all others, and assuming all to my self. I might have smelt a Design in it, it being such Nonsense, that I should make a Mockery of a Man I had not so much as spoke of: But, I was too Candid, to give easie way to Suspicions. Upon which, hating to be held Guilty of such
an Ungentileness, I made mention of him in my following Books, tho' under no other Character, but only that of a Great Philo∣sopher, which his worst Enemies cannot refuse him. No sooner had I done so, and that he had drawn me into the Noose, but the Cloak was immediately pull'd off; and, the same Man who had lately seem'd so zealous for the Honour of Albius, presently profess'd himself his greatest Enemy: He sets up, and abets Lominu's Libel, which makes him Guilty of half the Heresies that have pester'd the World, from the Be∣ginning of the Church; and, a Mark is set on every Man who has any Esteem for him, as a Scholar: And, I was told by a Right Reverend Bishop, that I had done my self a greater Injury, by speaking well of Albius, than I could imagin; as fore-seeing the Malicious Use they intended to make of this Fraudulent Trappan. All which, laid together, shews the Intimate Corre∣spondence between Mr. Le Grand, and the Libeller; and, to think that his Old Friend, who began all this Stir, would not joyn with him in this, and gather a few Twigs to help to lash me, were, to break the Sacred Bond of Friendship between them, and disoblige them both. Add, that Mr. Le Grand, according to his small Politicks, to gratifie his New Friend, picks Quarrels with me, in his behalf, by
making me say of Bellarmin, (an Author he much esteems,) Bellarmine, Rationis ex∣peris, mentiris. Which, and divers such Passages, are too plain Evidences of their strict Confederacy; and, consequently, that he could not be ignorant of this Prop of his Cause, this Libel. His Hopes were, that the Libeller would bring in divers. Friends of his, to increase the Cry, and assist him with their Interest: But, I will not think them to have so little Charity, or so little Regard to Religion; or, to be so Imprudent, as to oppose a Veteran Wri∣ter for Faith, who meddles not with them; against whom they have nothing to say, Justly; and, who has already given good Proof, that, in case he be attack'd Unjust∣ly, he is able to defend himself; nay, who is before-hand with them too, should they attempt it. 97. Against all these strong Proofs of their being Conscious of, and (in what they could) Abetting to this Libel, what can they bring for themselves? Oh! they De∣ny it: As if, either Affirming, or Denying, were such most Valid Arguments for Per∣sons speaking in their own Cause! Or, as if I (who was the Person concern'd) ought, in Prudence, to give any Credit to to the Words of those Men; one of which smil'd in my Face, and pretended great Friendship, when he was doing me all the
Mischief he could: The Other so falsifies my Words, and publishes such False and and Scandalous Slanders against my Do∣ctrine. Whence, that Objection is Ground∣less, which (for want of something else to say) is lately given about, that Things were about Composing, and I, upon Occa∣sion unjustly taken at this Libel, flew off; and, so continu'd the Difference, when it might have been heal'd. These Gentle∣men are either Ill-inform'd, or very Partial; For, 1. He never offer'd Peace at all: 2. I offer'd it (as a Judicious Friend, meet∣ing with my Thoughts, had advis'd me) on these Terms; viz. Heartily to pardon and pass over all his Causless Revilings a∣gainst my Particular; only desiring, that the Injury done to the Common Cause should be Repair'd; to which I could ne∣ver hear he would yield. Some cry [Pax, Pax; ubi non est Pax.] I had never ob∣serv'd the least Ingenuity on their side; and, I had been false to my self, to print my Condescending Treatise, and be laugh∣ed at for my Foolish Charity; and, Advan∣tages be made of it, against my self. Nay, I ever reply'd, to those Good Men who de∣sir'd it of me, that I would do any thing that could be thought reasonable; but, that I much fear'd, all our Charity would be lost, thro' Mr. Le Grand's being ty'd up by this New Engagement, and govern'd
by a Man who was an Enemy to all Mo∣deration. 98. I expect, Gentlemen, you will complain you have lost your Time in Reading this Treatise; and ask, What Benefit accrues to the Reader, by seeing the Faults of others laid open? But, I must beg your Pardon; and maintain, that this Procedure, tho' most Unpleasant to me, is, notwithstanding, most Benefi∣cial to the World. [Virtus est Vitium fu∣gare, & Sapientia Prima Stultitià caruisse—] And, these Idle Methods of Railing, Flout∣ing, Prevaricating, Bantering, Fooling, Slan∣dering, Falsifying and Libelling, (to which Nonplus'd Writers are forc'd to have re∣course,) being thus Expos'd; and, by your declaring against them, Disgrac'd; they must either be driven to take the Way of Discoursing Connectedly, or leave of Wri∣ting at all. To return then to my Adver∣saries: I Request, or (it being my Right) De∣mand of them, that they would make choice of some one Principle for the Cartesian Do∣ctrine, which they will maintain to be such; or, some one Argument of theirs, which they will undertake to be Demon∣strative; or, pitch upon some one Solution of theirs, to any one Argument of mine, where I pretend to Demonstrate; and, that Principle shall be Examin'd, by looking into the Self-Conexion of its Terms, or
the Reducibleness of them to Self-Connexion, or Self-Evidence; that Argument shall be try'd by the Necessary Connexion of its Terms, with the Medium; and, lastly, that Solution shall be judg'd of, by putting my Argument home, shewing on what the Connexion of the Two Terms with a Third, was built; and, then, considering upon what Grounds it it is pretended they are Unconnected, the Consequence of it Slack, and the Reason of it Solv'd. And, let him who uses the least Disrespectful Word to his Adversary, be held Nonplus'd, and to deserve no Answer. By this means, in a Reply or two, Truth will be made appear, much precious Time sav'd, all Wrangling avoided, the Rules of Decen∣cy and Civility preserv'd Inviolate, and the Controversie decided. 99. Only, this Condition I would re∣quest, That if any Principle, Axiom, Po∣stulatum, or Argument, be produc'd, which has been solidly Refuted already; that, then, to save Unnecessary Labour, it may be sufficient to relate to it, unless it has been Reply'd to formerly: Which I de∣sire, because I have very lately seen and perus'd a Book, written by a Professor of Philosophy in Paris, and Dedicated to the Dean and Faculty of Sorbon; in which, many of the Principal Positions of the Cartesians are solidly Confuted. It bears
for Title, [De Existentiâ Dei, & Humanae Mentis Immortalitate, secundum Cartesii & A∣ristotelis Doctrinam, Disputatio.] This A∣cute and Learned Author is thorowly ver∣sed in Cartesius; and has so perfectly di∣gested Aristotle; that he seems to have tur∣ned him in Succum & Sanguinem. He tells us, Cartesius attempted to Demonstrate these two Points, because he was (I believe, Unjustly) suspected to hold neither of them. He refutes his Definitions of [Cogitatio, Idea, Sustantia, & Mens:] As also, his Notion of [Corpus, Materia, Extensio, Phy∣sica, &c.] He shews his Definition of GOD, to be Faulty; and, his Notion of Real Di∣stinction, to be Groundless. He sifts all his Seven Postulatums, his Ten Axioms, and all his pretended Demonstrations of those Two most Important Theses; and, shews them to be Shallow, and Spurious. Lastly, In his Second Part, he Domonstrates those main Points, by the Principles of Aristotle. Tho' a School-man, (indeed, the Best of our Modern ones, I have seen,) and, for being such, ought to have some Grains of Allowance granted him; yet, he avoids School-Terms as much as is possible. His Style is Concise, and yet Clear. His Oppositions and Solutions (generally) Forcible, and Full. He lights, frequently, into the same Arguments I do; and, very often falls into my Abominable
Sin, (which so mads my two Cartesians,) of telling his Reader, and shewing, that the Cartesian Doctrine is strangely FA∣NATICAL. I thought fit to acquaint our Country-men with the Just Character of that Learned Book; than which, I know none more Proper for those of our Universities, after they have pass'd their First Studies; as well for the Excellency of the two Noble Truths it demonstrates, as for giving them great Light to look in∣to the Nature of True Demonstration, and and into the Right Understanding of Ari∣stotle's Genuin Doctrine; so much mista∣ken by most of our Unskilful Modern Commentators. 100. I hear, my Adversaries contend, that (Id. Cart. p. 64.) I deny Annihila∣tion to be Possible, even to GOD's Ex∣traordinary or Miraculous Power. I an∣swer, 1. That I speak there, (§. 43.) not of Annihilation it self, but of a parti∣cular Way I was inventing, how it might be done; which Way, whether it holds, or no, I neither know, nor care. 2. I did not seem to deny even This, but upon Supposition that it would put an Attri∣bute in GOD, which was unworthy of Him. 3. That, in my whole Discourse there, 'tis most Evident that I only spoke tentativè, not assertivè. I will not re∣count how many Authors have held the
same, as to this Point, which my self (if truly represented) have done: One will suffice, ad hominem, against my Cartesian Adversaries; viz. Du Hamel; the Best Philosopher of the Cartesian School, tho' he be none of the Fierce, or Furious ones; who, in Tom 5. p. 8. says, Substantiae An∣nibilatio aliquid Inconstantiae in ipso rei Con∣ditore testari videtur: The Annibilation of a Substance (or Thing) seems to testifie some Inconstancy in the Maker of the Thing, Himself: Which, certainly, is a Dishonour, and Im∣perfection; and, cannot be attributed to GOD. The Sense of that Position, as far as concerns the Generality of Christians, who are no Speculators, is, that Crea∣tures should not be held, to subsist of themselves; but, to depend entirely, eve∣ry Moment, on GOD, for their Being. Now, let us consider how I had exceed∣ed all other Writers, in Asserting that Substantial Truth. Others use to say, that the Nature of Creatures is Indifferont to Being, and Not-Being: Whereas, (Me∣thod to Science, p. 304.) I maintain, that, [Were there any Inclination in Creatures, rather to One, than the Other, it seems to be, rather to Not-Being, than to Being;] And, that [the Nothingness of Creatures is so radicated in their Natures, and sticks to them, that it inclines them to Not-Being,
even while they are.]. Whether this Do∣ctrine of mine be more for the Honour of our Great Creator, and for our Con∣tinual Dependence on Him; or Mr. Le Grand's, in his Censura, p. 71. who de∣nies that Creatures would, out of their own Defectiveness, or Indigent Condition, fall to Nothing, or be Annihilated; and says, that every thing, as far as is of it self, would remain in the same State; let In∣different Divines judge. Nay, he says this, in Opposition to me, when I affirm, that all Creatures depend on GOD, for their Continuance in Being. Certain∣ly, there needs many Grains of Salt, to make such Doctrine as this sound well to a Christian's Ear: For, this destroys the Doctrine of Suspension's being the Cause of Annihilation; in regard he makes the Creature still, of its own Nature, able to Exist alone, after it is once put to be; which, I am sure, takes away its Conti∣nual Dependence on GOD, for its Being; which is both against the Language and Sense of Christianity. Yet, I doubt not, but his Intention is very Orthodox, what∣ever his Ideas are. By this time, Gentlemen, I fear I have over-weary'd you; I am sure I have my
self, with Replying, by Snatches, to Un∣connected Talk. I hope, my next Present will be more worthy of your Perusal. In the mean time, I am, with all Re∣spect, Your most Humble Servant, J. S. FINIS.
