S3355 12032317 52770
A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Reverend RICHARD MEGGOT D. D. AND LATE Dean of WINCHESTER, Decemb. 10th. 1692. AT TWICKENHAM. By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Pauls, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesties. IMPRIMATUR, Geo. Royse R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. à Sacris Domest. Decemb. 18. 1692. London: Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetsteet. 1693.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Dr. Meggot, Decemb. 10. 1692.
I PHIL. 23, 24. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far bet∣ter. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. ST. Paul wrote this Epistle to Philippi from Rome, where he was in Bonds for the Gospel; but though his Body was confined to a Prison, his Soul, his great Divine Soul was at Liberty to visit the Churches he had planted, to advise and counsel and comfort them, to en∣crease their Knowledge, and to confirm their Faith, to inflame their Zeal, and to spur them forward to more perfect Attain∣ments in all Piety and Vertue.
The Philippians seem greatly concern∣ed least the Progress of the Gospel should be hindred by St. Paul's Imprisonment, and least they and the whole Church should be deprived of the Labours and Ministry of so great an Apostle, should this Persecution extend to Life, as they had reason to fear it would. As for the first, St. Paul assures them, That his Bonds were for the furtherance of the Gospel; for his Imprisonment was taken notice of both in the Court and City, which made Men curious to know, what that Doctrine was, which he preached, and for which he suffered Bonds, and this published the Gospel more effectually than his Preaching could have done, v. 12, 13, &c. As for the second, he tells them, He was no farther concerned either about Life or Death, but that Christ might be magnified in his Body. If he lived, his Life was wholly devoted to the Service of
Christ, and of his Church; if he died, it would be for his own great Advantage. To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain; vers. 20, 21. and this made it a hard choice to him, whether he should desire to live or die: whether he should get rid of his Bonds, and make his Escape out of a troublesom World into the Re∣gions of Ease and Rest, to reap the Fruit of his Labours here in the eternal Enjoy∣ment of his Lord, whom he had so faithfully served; or whether he should live to Encounter with a thousand Dif∣ficulties and Deaths in the Service of Christ, and of the Souls of Men. What I should chose I wot not: for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to de∣part and to be with Christ, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you. Was there ever such a Dispute as this before, That a Man, who was as cer∣tain to go to Heaven, as he was to die; who had himself been snatch'd up into the
third Heavens, and had his Mind possest with strong and vigorous and lively Idea's of the Glories of that place, who had seen and heard such things as could not be ex∣pressed; who saw a Crown, a glorious immarcessible Crown prepared for him; I say, that such a Man should make any question what he should chose, whether immediately to take possession of this Crown and Kingdom, or to live longer in this World to suffer Bonds and Im∣prisonments, Hunger, and Cold, and Stripes, and all the ill usage, which he had so often met with, for no other reason but still to preach the Gospel, and to en∣large the Borders of Christ's Church. What a Contempt is this, not only of the little Pleasures and Satisfactions, but even of all the Miseries of Life! what a Triumph is this over the World, o∣ver all the Frowns and Terrours of it! what a Triumph is this over Self! such a degree of Self-denial as the Gospel it self does not command, which is in some sence to deny Heaven, to deny all the
Joys of Christ's Presence for the sake of doing good! for it is to delay, to put off Heaven, to adjourn his own Happi∣ness, that he may live the longer to serve his great Master, though with great Dif∣ficulties and Labours. What Love was this to his Lord! what Love was this to the Souls of Men! it is certainly the most perfect imitation of the Love of Christ, that is possible to Man; Christ so loved us as to come down from Heaven to live a laborious Life, and to die an accursed Death for us; this great Apo∣stle so loved his Lord, and so loved the Souls of Men, that he made it his choice to stay some time out of Heaven, and to encounter all the Miseries and Ter∣rours of this Life, to serve Christ and his Church. Where is this Divine Spi∣rit now to be found! Let us, my be∣loved Brethren, who are entrusted also with the Care of Souls by the great Shep∣herd and Bishop of our Souls, blush to think how far short we fall of this Ex∣ample: let this inspire us with a flaming
Love and Zeal for the Souls of Men, for whom Christ died, and make us at least contented to deny our selves some of the Ease and Security and Pleasures of Life, to serve the Church of Christ, which he hath purchased with his own blood. But to keep my self within some Bounds, I shall briefly Discourse on these two Heads, which are very proper for this Occasion, and very proper to my Text. First, The great Rewards of faithful Pastors and Ministers of Christ, and how much it is for their advantage to be removed out of this World. St. Paul was very sensible of this, which made him desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Secondly, How ne∣cessary the Lives of such Men are to the Church, and what a great loss it is, when God removes them out of it. Neverthe∣less to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.
1. Let us then consider in the first place the great Rewards of the faithful Ministers of Christ, and how much it is for their advantage to depart, and to be with Christ. Now I do not here intend a comparison between Heaven and Earth: Good God! what different things are these? and what Christian doubts, whe∣ther Heaven be a happier Place than this World? Heaven! whither no Troubles or Sorrows can follow us; no persecuting Sword, no persecuting Tongue: where we shall be delivered from all the Wants, Necessities, and Infirmities of the Body, from Hunger and Cold and Nakedness, from wracking Pains and languishing Sick∣nesses; where there is eternal Ease and Rest and Joy, without labour, without discontents, without quarrels; where our Souls shall be perfected in knowledge and in love; where we shall dwell in the Presence of God, see him as he is, and know him even as we are known; where we shall dwell with Christ, adore his Love, behold his Glory, and be trans∣formed
our selves into the likeness and image of his Glory. We have but ob∣scure imperfect Conceptions of these things now; Heaven will out-do our highest Expectations, as much as the most perfect state of Happiness in this World, always falls short of what we expected; and this is the case of all good Men, it is a mighty happy Change they make, when they remove from Earth to Heaven. But there are different Degrees of Glo∣ry in the next World, proportioned not only to our different attainments in Ver∣tue, but to those different Trusts and Services which we have been employed in, and have faithfully discharged here. We read of the Reward of a Prophet, that he who gives a Cup of cold Water to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets Reward, which must sig∣nifie some peculiar Reward that shall be bestowed on Prophets: We know so little of the other World, that we can∣not conceive, what these different Re∣wards
shall be: The Prophet Daniel repre∣sents it by an external Glory, 12 Dan. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the bright∣ness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. But our Saviour represents this by a different degree of Rule and Empire, 12 Luke 42. 43, 44. And the Lord said, who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over his houshold, to give them their meat in due season: This is the honourable Character of Gospel Mini∣sters in this World, that they are Rulers in God's houshold, to instruct and feed them with the Word of Life; and their Reward is proportioned to their Work; Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he com∣eth shall find so doing. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler o∣ver all that he hath. What this Rule signifies in the other World is a Mystery to us, e∣specially since we have fancied the other World to be only a State of Contemplati∣on, not of Action, where we shall have nothing to do but to see God, and to love
and to praise him, but no service to do for him; but we know there are different or∣ders of Angels, who are imployed in great Trusts and Offices, Arch-Angels, Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers, which are names of Rule and Government, though we know not what their Power and Authority is nor how they Govern; in like manner our Saviour pro∣mises his Apostles, verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regenerati∣on, when the son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, 19 Matth. 28. The like we may see in the Parable of the Pounds and Ta∣lents; He who had gained ten Pounds had Rule over ten Cities; and he who gained five Pounds had Rule over five Cities: for these Servants to whom the Lord gave these Pounds and Talents to improve, plainly signifie his Stewards, and the Ministers of his spiritual Kingdom: for no other Persons have in so peculiar a manner, this honourable Character of the Servants of Christ throughout the Gos∣pel.
And if there be Order and Govern∣ment among the Angels themselves, Why should we think that there is nothing like this among glorified Saints? if Angels are the Ministers of God, there is no reason to think that Heaven is a State of meer Rest and Contemplation, especially when Happiness consists in Action. And if Christ have any Ministers of his spiritual King∣dom in the next World, it is most reason∣able to think, that those shall have the greatest Authority, and be employed in the noblest Services, who have been his faith∣ful Stewards and Ministers in this World. For the Church on Earth and in Heaven is the same Church, though their State be ve∣ry different; and therefore they do not lose their relation to Christ, nor their sta∣tion in his Church by removing to Heaven. It is a sacerdotal Kingdom, our High Priest is King, and therefore a Priest of Jesus, how mean soever this be thought now, will be one of the highest Characters in Heaven. What the Happiness of this is we cannot tell; but we know that there are no emp∣ty
Titles in Heaven, but every degree of Dignity there signifies a peculiar degree of Happiness, and what an advantageous ex∣change then is it for a faithful Minister of Jesus to be removed from Earth to Hea∣ven. For let us consider what the State of Christ's Ministers is in this World; what it was in St. Paul's days he tells us, 2 Cor. 6. 4—10. In all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in Stripes, in imprison∣ments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fasting; by pureness, by knowledge, by long suffering, by kind∣nesses, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the Armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left; by honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report, as deceiv∣ers and yet true; as unknown and yet well known; as dying and behold we
live, as chastened and not killed; as sor∣rowful, yet always rejoycing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Which describes a most laborious Life, a Scene of Wants, of Difficulties, of Sufferings; a perpetu∣al exercise of passive Vertues, to recon∣cile the most appearing Contradictions, to live and struggle and contend in this World, and to fetch their Comforts and Supports from Heaven. This indeed is not always the State of the Christian Church, nor of the Ministers of it; but yet in the great∣est external Prosperity of the Church, the Ministers of Religion, who discharg∣ed their Trust with Diligence and Faith∣fulness, find many difficulties to encoun∣ter. The care of Mens Souls is itself a migh∣ty Trust, and Who is sufficient for these things? consider but the Charge St. Paul gives to Timothy 1 Epist. 4. 11, &c.
Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity; give attendance to read∣ing, to exhortation, to doctrine, neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophesie, by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all; take heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine; continue in them, for in doing this thou shalt both save thy self, and then that hear thee. Here is work enough to employ the whole Man, and our utmost care and diligence and prudence; work for the Study, for the Closet, for the Pulpit, as the same A∣postle exhorts and charges Timothy, to preach the word, to be instant in season, out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffer∣ing and Doctrine, 2 Tim 4. 2. But yet though there be labour and diligence in this, it would be a delightful work, were our Labours always blessed with success; could we rescue the Souls of Men
from the Dominion of their Lusts, and from the Power of the Devil, could we turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, but we must often expect to labour all might and catch nothing, we must contend with the Lusts and Vices of Men, must bear their Folly, their Fro∣wardness, their Reproaches, and Cen∣sures, and injuries, be thought Trouble∣some, Pragmatical, and Busie-bodies, for our charitable Exhortations and Reproofs, and watchfulness over their Souls. And when the Church is at ease and rest from without, how often is it rent and torn in Pieces with Schisms and Heresies? as St. Paul fore-warned Timothy, the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables, 3, 4. ver. and what infinite Labours and Difficulties does this create to the Ministers of the
Gospel, to heal the Breaches of the Church, to confute Heresies, Atheism, Infideli∣ty, and to be scorned and persecuted for it with a bitter Rage and Zeal. That St. Paul might well add, But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry, 5 verse. We ought not indeed to be discouraged by such difficul∣ties as these, because our Reward will be great in Heaven, but it will be a happy Day, when Our warfare shall be accomplished, when we shall cease from our labours, and our works shall follow us: when we can say with St. Paul, I have fought a good fight, I finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteous∣ness. 2. Thus to die is their gain, Never∣theless, it is more needful for the Church, that they should abide in the flesh: And a great loss it is to the Church, when they die. I need not use many words about
this, for the case is plain. The Death of every good Man who is very useful to the World, in what way soever he be useful, is a very great loss; for Death puts an end to his doing any more good in this World: but as to take care of the Souls of Men, is to do the greatest good to Mankind, be∣cause the Happiness of our Souls is of the greatest concernment to us, so to lose a faithful and a prudent Guide must be the greatest loss. We indeed of this Church, have great reason to bless God, that he has sent forth so many able and painful Labou∣rers into his Harvest, that it is not the loss of every good Man that can much affect us at ordinary times: For there are great numbers of wise and good Men to perpetuate a Succession of able and faithful Guides: but a St. Paul is at any time, and in any Age of the Church a great loss: Nay, Men who are much Inferiour to St. Paul, but yet fitted with
peculiar Abilities to serve the Church at some certain Seasons, and in some difficult Circumstances, are a very sensible loss at such a time, when their service is most needful. A Man of Council and Conduct, who is fit to sit at the Helm, and knows how to steer in a Storm, is a great loss, in times of Difficulty and Trouble, when the Church is assaulted on all hands, and it is hard to avoid one Mischief or Inconvenience without running into ano∣ther. A Man of Goodness and Temper, who knows how to govern his own Passions, and how to soften and manage the Passions of other Men, is a very sensible loss, when the Passions of Men are broke loose, and disturb the Peace of the Church, and even threaten the ru∣ine of it.
A Man of Learning and sound Judg∣ment, who can distinguish between Truth and Errour in all its most artificial and flattering Disguises, is a great loss, when old Errours are revived, and new ones broached; when we must dispute over again the very Being of a God, the truth of the Scriptures, and Articles of the Chri∣stian Faith. A Man of great Diligence and Indu∣stry, Courage and Resolution, to defend the Truth, to oppose Heresies and Schisms, to preserve the Unity of the Church, and the Integrity of the Christian Faith, is a very great loss, when the Church is en∣compassed and assaulted with busie and rest∣less Enemies. A Man of an exemplary Life, and un∣tainted Vertue, who shines like a Light in the midst of a crooked and perverse Ge∣neration, who maintains the declining Ho∣nour and Repuration of Religion and
true Vertue, is a mighty loss in a profli∣gate Age, when men are grown such Stran∣gers to the sincere Practice of Vertue and Religion, that they begin to think there is no such thing. But I can go on no farther, the very men∣tioning of these things brings the fresh Idea of our deceased Brother to mind, and the afflicting Sense of that great loss, which we suffer by his Death. It becomes us to Reverence and Adore the Wisdom of the divine Providence, even when we can∣not understand the Reasons of it. We are certain God is never wanting in his Care of his Church, and yet had we been made Judges of this Case, we should have thought it a very ill time to have spared him. He was abundantly furnished with all good Learning, both for Use and Orna∣ment; he was an accomplished Scholar, and a well studied Divine; he knew Books and read them, and judged of them:
He was a Scribe instructed unto the King∣dom of Heaven, who like a Housholder could bring forth out of his treasure things New and Old, 13 Matth. 52. He had carefully perus'd the ancient Philosophers, Orators and Poets, to discover what Nature taught, which gave him a truer Knowledge and greater Value for the Excellency and Perfection of the Gospel-Revelation. He had true and clear Notions of Reli∣gion, and he was Master of them; he knew why he believed any thing, and was neither prejudiced nor imposed on by po∣pular Opinions; he was a hearty and zea∣lously Assertor of the Doctrine, Worship, Government and Discipline of the Church of England; he saw nothing material, which could be changed for the better, which made him jealous of Innovations, as not knowing where they would end. He was a Friend to all sincere Christians, pit∣tied their Mistakes, and bore with their Frowardness, but did not think that Chri∣stian Charity required him to sacrifice
Truth, or good Order and Government to the pretences of Peace and Unity. He was for several Years a very diligent and constant Preacher to a numerous Au∣ditory, till his own Diocesan who knew his Worth, and the weakness of his Con∣stitution, and was desirous to preserve him for the Service of the Church, provided this place where we now are, for his Ease and Health, and Retirement; where he lived many Years a constant Preacher, though his Labours were then divided be∣tween his two Cures, which did not lessen his Preaching, but made the Benefit of it the more diffusive. For indeed he was an admirable Preacher, not for Noise and Lungs, but for well digested useful pious Discourses, delivered with all that becom∣ing Gravity, Seriousness, and a command∣ing Elocution, as made them sink deep in∣to the Minds of his Hearers, and made them hear. This I speak with Assurance and Confidence in this place, which was so long blessed with his Labours, with
what fineness of Thought, perspicuity and easiness of Expression instructing and en∣tertaining Images of Things, he expound∣ed the Doctrines, and inculcated the Laws of our Saviour; how plainly he Taught, with what Vehemence and Passion he Ex∣horted, with what tender Sharpness he Re∣proved: remember how he used both to Please and Instruct, to Chide and Shame you without making you angry, how he has warmed and chaffed your Minds into the most pious and serious Resolutions, and sent you home from this place wiser and better then you came; and if you grew cold, and suffered your good Resolutions to die again, consider I beseech you, what Account you have to give. As he grew in Years, it was necessary by degrees to ease his Labours, he could not Preach so often, but yet continued to Preach. And yet had he not Preached at all, or much less then he did, he had not ceased to be a very useful Pastor to the Church; for he was a Man of great Expe∣rience,
and great Prudence and Fore-sight; fit for Government and Counsel; who knew Men and Things; was dexterous in his Applications, zealous without Passion or Peevishness, steady and resolved with∣out violent Oppositions, and needless Pro∣vocations; who served the Church and the Truth with little Noise, and with∣out making many Enemies: And I am sure at such a time as this, there is more need of such Men, and a much grea∣ter scarcity of them, than of good Preach∣ers But he was not only a good Preacher and a prudent Guide, but a very good Man: he Preached continually by his Life and Example: his Conversation was Inno∣cent, Entertaining, and Useful; he was a true sincere Friend, very Courteous, Af∣fable, Civil to all Men, but never pre∣tend Friendship where he had none: he was ready to do all good Offices, was Li∣beral, Generous, and Charitable; a Man of a true publick Spirit, who scorned to
serve himself to the Injury of others, who hated little Arts and Tricks, mean and servile Compliances: he was an open and generous Enemy, if we may ever call him an Enemy, who never wished, never in∣tended any hurt to any Man; but my meaning is, that when any Dispute and Quarrel happened, as such things will sometimes happen, he was open and undisguised, any Man might know what he disliked, and had no reason to fear any thing worse from him, than what he would tell them. In a Word, he was a very good Christian, and that made him good in all Relations, and that Crowned all his other Labours; he took care as St. Paul did, Lest while he preached to others, he himself should become a cast-away. And now he is gone to rest, and we must all shortly follow him; God grant that we may all so run our Race, and finish our Course, that when we depart this Life we may rest in Him, as our hope
in this our Brother doth, and may re∣ceive that Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge, will at that Day bestow on all his faithful Servants, and on all those who love his Appear∣ing. FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sher∣lock, Dean of St. Pauls, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesties. AN Answer to a Discourse, entituled, Papists protesting against Protestant Popery. Second Edition, 4to. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Dif∣ferences between the Representer and Answerer. 4to. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend B. Calamy, D. D. 4to. A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion from the Charge of A∣greement with the Church of Rome. 4to. A Preservative against Popery; being some plain Dire∣ctions to unlearned Protestants how to dispute with Romish Priests. In Two Parts with the Vindication, in Answer to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Com∣munion of the Catholick Church. First Part. 4to. A Sermon Preach'd before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the City of London, on Sun∣day Nov. 4th. 1688. 4to. A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, &c. The Second Edition. 4to. The Case of the Allegiance due to Soveraign Powers sta∣ted and resolved according to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England. Sixth Edition. 4to.
A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sove∣raign Powers, &c. 4to. A Sermon Preach'd at White-Hall before the Queen, on the 17th of June, 1691. being the Fast-Day. 4to. A Practical Discourse concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. 8vo. A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. Third Edition. 8vo. A Sermon Preached before the Honourable House of Commons at St. Margarets Westminster, January 30th. 1691/92 4to. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall, Febr. 12th. 1691/92. 4to. The Charity of Lending without Usury, and the true Notion of Usury stated, in a Sermon Preach'd before the Right Hounourable the Lord Mayor at St. Bridget's Church, on Tuesday in Easter-week, 1692. 4to. A Sermon Preach'd at the Temple-Church, May 29. 1692. and Printed at the Desire of the Bench-Table of the Ho∣nourable Society of the Inner Temple. 4to. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White-Hall, June 26th. 1692. 4to. Printed for W. Rogers.
