S3462 R219624 99831080 35542
THE Constant Maid: OR, Love will finde out the Way. A COMEDY. By J. Shirley As it is now Acted at the new Play∣house called The Nursery, in HATTON-GARDEN. LONDON: Printed by Ja: Cotterel, for Samuel Speed, at the signe of the Rainbow between the two Temple-gates. 1667.
ACTORS Names. HArtwel, a decayed Gentleman, lover of Mrs Frances. Playfayre, Hartwel's kinsman and friend, lover of Hornet's neece. Lambert, another of Hartwel's friends, counter∣feit King. Three or four counterfeit Lords of Poland. Poldavis, Master of the Horse. Hornet, a great Ʋsurer, suitor to Mrs Belamie. Doctor of Physick to Hornets Neece. Startup, a Clownish Gentleman, Hartwel's rival to Mrs Frances. Another Country-Gentleman, his neighbour. Close, an old trusty servant to Hartwel. Three more servants cashier'd. Justice of Peace. Pursuivant. Officers. Constable and Watch. WOMEN. Mrs Belamie, a rich Widow. Mrs Frances, her daughter, Hartwel's Mistress. Hornet's Neece, Playfayres Mistress. Nurse.
LOVE will finde out the Way. Actus Primus. Enter Hartwel and Servants. Hart. NAy let's not part so heavilie. Close. For my own part, it does not trouble me so much, That you have broke up house. 1 Ser. And yet that sticks in my stomack: For hospitality went out of fashion, with crop-doublets and cod∣pieces. Close. But I have worne out so many liveries, under your wor∣shpful father. Hart. My father had an office which brought in A fair Revenew; I inherit but His little land, whose annual profits will not Encourage me to live at the same hight: You may meet better fortunes; there's enough Preferment in the world: my love and best Assistance promise to your selves. Close. I do not stand upon wages, sir, I wont leave you. Hart. Not leave me? how wilt thou live? Close. Live? as other mortals do: yet I wont play th thief, that's a course may be taken, by which a man may ascend the ladder of preferment; but I never lov'd to climb trees: I must confess I cannot cheat; I have heard there's a devilish deal of knowledge in the dice, and if men wont lend mony, they'll fetch it out o'th' bones: but it's best casting in a Tavern, when the reckoning and the wine come up together. Some men have
a trick to spin out a living by't: there be many secret ways for Servingmen to live: alas 'tis not wages that does maintain all our tribe; especially those that have Mistresses. Hart. But I am a batchelour. Close. I pray let me be one of your buttons still then; I am not half worne out; ye know what mould I am made of: I e∣ver did you honest service: and though the rest of my fellow∣vermine can leave your falling house, I do not fear the rafters: By this hand I will wait upon you, though as some grat mens servants, I live upon nothing but the air of commendation Hart. Well, since y'are so resolute, still attend me; the rest I here discharge: there's somewhat more, not worth the Name of bounty; I will all A happier entertainment. 2 Ser. Heaven bless you, sir, and there be no remedy. 1 Ser. Farewell Close. Close. Pray give me leave to wet my lips with my old fellows; sorrow makes a dry proverb; I must to a Tavern, and condole a quart with 'em. Hart. Meet me at Mistress Bellamy's.— Exit Hart. Close. I shall, sir. Enter Playfaire. Play. How now, my Masters? Close. You do not speak to me, sir? I am a servant still: in∣deed, the case is alter'd with them; they are Masters for want of a service. 1 Ser. Oh Master Playfaire! 2 Ser. It is not now as when Andrea liv'd. 3 Ser. This place was made for pleasure, not for dearth. 1 Ser. There was a time, when Mortals whetted knives. Play. What's the matter? 2 Ser. In time of yore, when men kill'd brutish beasts. 3 Ser. Oh cruel butcher, whosoere thou wert! Close. Do you not know what all this signifies? Play Not I. Close, My Master has given over house-keeping. 2 Ser. Burglary, sir, burglary; our young Master has broke up the Celler, and thrown the Kitchen out of the Hall-window. Close. Nay, he has thrown the house out at window; it has a superscription already; and is directed to his next loving friend, that will pay the rent. You'll hardly know me, I have no fellow.
Play. Y'are very merry. Close. He has casheer'd a company. 3 Ser. And taken our good names from us. Play. I know his nature is more noble; thou wort his groom. 3 Ser. Right, and now I am turn'd off, that good name is taken away; nay I am not company for his horse. Close. Grass and Hay, we are all mortal. 2 Ser. VVe may see what it is to be prick'd with provender; now we must bite o'th' bridle for't; all discharg'd. Play. Certain? Close. Yes, certain of us are; for my Master only belongs to me: if you would speak with him, you may overtake him, he's gone to Mistress Bllamies: in the mean time I give you to understand, that I Close do still follow my Master; have great hope to continue eating, though the rest of my fellows here be blanks, and want filling. Play. My Masters, I have known you long; and though you be at loss, in the confidence of your future honesties, I will employ yo in a device, which if it prove happy, mayreward you hand∣somly. Close. And me too? Play. No, sir, you are another mans servant; follow you your Master: if there be occasion, I'll enquire for you: will you be faithful to a project of mine? Omnes. Doubt it not, sweet Master Playfair, any thing. Play. Follow me for your instructions: Farewel Close, com∣mend me to your Master. 2 Ser. 'Buy Close, honest Close, we are blanks.— Ex. Playfaire and Servant. Close. Roul your selves up, and be drawn at the next lotterie: I wont leave my certainty, for all your projects, take my word for't; if your project fail, I shall find some of you in Pauls, watching behind a pillar, with a prayer that some gentleman will read the bedrol, and take pitty of a very serviceable fellow, to wait on him; but wants a cloak, Much good do ye with your Project.— Exit. Enter Hornet and Mistress Bellamy. Hor. Come widow, be rul'd by me; I know the world, And I have studied it these fifty years: There's no man to be trusted. Bel. Without good
Security, you mean. Hor. No young man, widow, That talks and says he loves you, writes you verses, And swears he shall go hang himself unless You pitty him: take me an old man. Bel. Take you an old man: so. Hor. Season'd with care and thrift, not led away By vitious conversations, nor corrupted With pride and surfeit: one that knows the use Of money? d'ye mark? the use. Bel. Yes, sir; use upon use, you mean. Hor. And dares not spend it prodigally; knowing The principal end it was ordain'd to was, To relieve necessity, and lay up VVhat is above. Bel. To help the poor. Hor. You may, If you be so dispos'd; but 'tis as commendable To give it in our will, to build an hospital, And so our charity comes all together. Besides, who knows what tempests while we live May rise? 'tis wisdom not to be without A sun-shine in our bags to quiet all: I know you want no suitors in the City, There be courtiers, great ones, with large titles, Cold in their own estates, would warm themselves At your rich City-bonefire: there's no Alderman Or wealthy Merchant, leaves his widow wealthy, But streight some noble blood, or lustie kindred, Claps in with his guilt coach and Flandrian Trotters, And hurres her away to the next Countess: No matter for corruption of their blood; Some undone courtier made her husband rich, And this new Lord receives it back again. I would not have your state thus eaten up By caterpillers, but preserv'd and made Greater by marrying a discreet old man. Bel. And such a one you shew your self. Hor. You happily interpret me. Bel. I will not tell you till we meet again, What operation your good counsel has upon me. Hor. She inclines; 'tis your good nature. I'm plain Hornet, and have no tricks; I'll tell you all My fault, I'm given much to gather wealth; No kindred, only a neece, left to my trust With a great portion; one that is never like to marry.
Bel. Why? Hor. She never thriv'd since she came to me. Bel. I easily believe it. Hor. Melancholy VVill kill her, and yet I pursue all ways That promise her delight; I spare no cost Of physick; what her Doctor says, is done. Enter Hartwel and Frances. Bel. 'Tis lovingly perform'd. Hor. VVhat's he? Bel. A Gentleman that bears my daughter much affection. Hor. Sure I have seen him. Bel. Master Hartwel. Hor. Oh he's a begger, or must be very shortly. Bel. Have you his lands in morgage? Hor. Not yet, not yet, but he'll want money too: His kinsman Playfair keeps him company; Take heed on him. Bel. He has good breeding. Hor. Hang breeding, 'tis unluckie: They never keep their state that have too much on't: Counsel your daughter, Mistress Bellamy, To throw him off. Bel. You direct well. Hor. VVhen we are married, I'll provide a match For her. Bel. You have care on us. Hor. It will become me. Hart. Is a suiter to thy mother. Fran. He would be such a thing, were I not happy In such a jolly father in law. Hart. A looks like some cast money-bag, that had given up The stuffing, and for want of use grown mouldy: He dares not keep a fire in's Kitchen, lest VVarming his hands, which rather look like gloves so tan'd, And thin, he lets 'em scorch, and gather into a heap. I do not think he ever put off his clothes: He would run mad at sight of's own anatomie. That such a wretch should have so vast a wealth! Fran. I'll not be his Neece, For all his fortune. Hart. I presume Your mother is more noble, then to encourage Him in his courtship: her estate would mix
Not well with his ill-gotten wealth, extorted From widows and from orphans: not will all His plenty keep his soul one day from famine: 'Tis time ill spent, to mention him; let's talk Of something else. Fran. Of what? Hart. Of love again, Whose flames we equally divide. Hor. Your table Is a devourer, and they shut up doors First, that keep open house and entertainments: This Lord is feasted, and that young Ladies sweet tooth Must have a banquet: t'other old Madam with ne'er a tooth, must have some marchpane Coral to rub her gums withal: these are Vain and ridiculous expences. Bel. 'Tis not too late to thrive. Hor. This room has too rich furniture, and worse Hangings would serve the turn; if I may be Worthy to counsel, pictures are too Superfluous, of this and t'other masters Doing: hang Michael Angelo and his oyls; If they be given, y'are the more excus'd To let 'em hang; but have a care you let not Appear either in Arras or in Picture, The storie of the prodigal, 'twill fright Young gentlemen from spending of their portions That come to visit you; whose unbounden Riots May enrich you, with their forfeited estates: I have a thousand precepts more. Bel. But d'ye not Think all this while of Heaven? Hor. 'Tis in my wealth. Bel. Or hell? Hor. A fable to fright fools and children; but I cannot stay, my Scrivener does expect me; I'll visit you another time, sweet widow, And give you more instructions. Bel. Spare your labour, I sha'not practice these in haste, and must Declare, these precepts make not for your welcome. My patience was no vertue all this while. If you but think you have a soul, repent: Your rules I am not covetuous to follow; I dare not love 'em. Hor. Live, and be undone then;
You'll tell me another tale hereafter, widow.— Exeunt Hornet. Enter Nurse and Close. Nurse. If it please you, here's a letter from Master Startup The Country-Gentleman. Hart. What's he? Fran. A fresh suitor of my Nurses commendations. Close. Heaven deliver me! What have I seen? sure this Thing was once at Bartholomew-Fire, or such another Furr'd Baboon for all the world: do'st know him? And yet why do I ask? the devil would hardly Take acquaintance with him. Nurse. 'Tis master Hornet the great Usurer. Nurse. Hornet? Nay then my wonder's over; and the devil himself Be such another, they may be sworn brothers, and divide Hell betwixt 'em. Hart. Who's that you talk on, sirrah? Close. Of the disease that heaven be thank'd has left you, Hornet. But sir, I have news for you. Bel. Franck? Hart. I'll hear it in the Garden.— Exit Hartwel and Close. Bel. Do you love this Gentleman? Fran. I hope you move not this as if you doubted; I took him first upon your character, Into my good opinion. Bel. But things alter; What then I thought him, I delivered you, Nor since hath he deserv'd a less esteem In his own person: but the circumstance Is not the same; his fortune I have examined, Which rises not to such a value I Did apprehend it; it becomes my care, Being at one gift to depart with thee And my estate, to look for one whose purse May carry a proportion. Fran. Make me not Imagine you would wed me to a heap Of shining dust, a golden bondage. Bel. Nor to penury: His birth and education are not unworthy, he's hansome too: But be not govern'd by your eye too much; Children and age pursue us, and some storms Hover about our frail conditions:
All these must be provided for: they are not Kisses will make our winters warm; and therefore Confident of your obedience, I propound Another to your best thoughts. Fran. Oh my unhappyness! Bel. A Country gentleman of spreading fortunes, Young too, and not uncomely; for his breeding, It was not spun the finest: but his riches Able to guild deformity, and make Even want of wit a vertue, when your life Renders it self more sweet by your command: His name is Master Startup, expected Our guest to morrow; that's his letter, read it. This may seem strange, while it is coming toward you: But when discretion comes to examine what A fruitful consequence attends it, you Will thank me for't. Fran. But with your pardon, mother: Although I could dispence with my own thoughts, And frame them to obedience, will this change Be for your honour, or mine own? when such, When such a noble gentleman shall boast he had With your consent my liking? or admit That which we gain by riches of the second, Seem to authorize, and may justifie The act with some: How can it cure the wound, Which the poor heart that loves shall find too soon, When 'tis neglected, and so cruelly, Where it hopes for cherishing? Oh think How you did love my father, first; and be Now gentle to your daughter: your estate Is above needy providence, or grafting Into a new stock; it does grow already Fair from his own root, and does want no piecing; Nor are the means of Hartwel so contemptible. Bel. No more: when y'ave consider'd well, you'll shape Another answer; i'th' mean time dispose Your countenance to entertain this new And able lover: leave the satisfaction Of Hartwel to my care; he's here, to your chamber.— Exit Francis. Enter Hartwel and Close. Close. I know not what's the trick on't, nor themselves yet, But he has a project to employ 'em in. Hart. I wisH it well—But do you work your self
Into the opinion of the Nurse, she is The Major Domo, and has all the intelligence. Close. Let me alone, I'll work her, sir, like wax, To print what form you please upon her; 'tis A loving croan to me already: I'll speak her fair, and in my drink may marry her. Bel. Master Hartwel? Hart. About your business. Bel. There is a business, sir, which I must open, And you perhaps will wonder at. Hart. You prepare my attention. Bel. You do love my daughter, At least I think so. Hart. If you knew my heart, You might be confident; in her I sum All my desires on earth. Bel. Be not so fixt. Hart. How, Lady? Bel. When you have heard me out, perhaps you'll find Your consent easie to call back a promise Made to your disadvantage. Hart. I acknowledge This makes me wonder; pray interpret Lady, And speak a language I may understand; I love your daughter. Bel. But must never glory In the reward which you expect should be Her marriage. Hart. In the number of my actions There is not one that's guilty of so much Offence to you, that I should be so soon Lost to your favour. Bel. Have no thought so poor, You can deserve less; my opinion Is icher laden with your merit then before. Hart. Now I fear again, this violent turn of praise, Makes me suspect my state: if I be fallen, Teach me to know my trespass. Bel. I ne'er look'd With so cleer eyes into your worth; and 'twere A sin to general goodness to delay The free resign of that, your truth may challenge. Hart. If this be meant, pray pardon my mistake Of something went before: love made me fear You said I never should enjoy your daughter
In marriage, which your self so late incline to. Bel. And must again repeat, you sha' not call Her bride. Hart. Can you forbid this happiness, and love me? Bel. Yes, so dearly, Hartwel, I present My self to thy affections. Hart. You amaze me, and fright my understanding. Bel. Does the name Of widow sound displeasing? I have learn'd Already to obey; my years are not So many with a thought to freeze your blood; I wear no print of time, deep on my brow, Nor have my hairs the innocence of age: Gentlemen active, and of noble birth, Think no dishonour to beseech my love, And if they flatter not, commend my person: Adde unto this my wealth, no narrow fortune, And without competition, my daughter Depending on my love, whose portion must Flow from my bounty, or be nothing: make A sober apprehension of this Tender, And think I was not able to suppress These flames of love increase still by your vertues: This minute quit all hopes of Frances, Whose mother will admit no Rival; 'tis Within your own election to be happy: My love accepted comes with fair attendance; Deny'd, you hasten your own exile; think on't, To morrow sometime, I'll expect your answer.— Exit. Hart. What have I heard? Was it her Mother spake thus? As Pilgrimes by mistake of some small path, Having told many weary steps, at night When their hopes flatters 'em they are not far From some kind entertainment, finde themselves Lost in a wilderness; so am I miserable: Thus Love delights to wound and see us bleed, He were a gentle god to kill indeed.— Exit. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus. Enter Nurse and Close. Close. WO'd thou wo'dst speak a good word for me: I am Weary of my indentures: I like a fool was in good hope He should have married Mistress Frances. Nurse. He's a begger; she his wife? no, Master Startup Is the man, the man of lands and mony. Close. Into whose service if I could wriggle my self, a Word of thy mouth does it. Nurse. I must tell you by the way, he is little better then a fool. Close. The fitter for her husband, and my master. Nurse. Y'are i'th' right, he's innocent to your hands, and You may soon come to nonage his estate Close. VVhich if I do, thou sha't want no petticoats, All's thine own. Nurse. VVhat? Close. VVhy all that I can beg, borrow or steal from him: VVhat should he do with so much riches? I'd perswade my young Mistress, after the first year, to put him to his pension: he should pay for's diet; and after a month or two, for every time he comes aloft. Hang him, Cuckow-pintle. Nurs. Nay, let her begin betimes, if she mean to rule the roast: I'll give her Documents; and be you sure you stick close to your Mistriss; there's something to be got that way. Enter Hartwel and Playfair. Close. Excellent Verges! How I do love thy documents! I but he's here, I'll not be seen with thee; farewell: At night we'll talk the rest over a sack-posset.— Exit Close. Nurse. I will use this advantage to over-hear a little. Play. You tell me strange things; is it possible The widow her self loves you? Hart. VVould I had reason but to suspect.
Play. Turn Colt again; this love will kill's all: And can she make no choice, but where her daughter Has the same longing? not her dancing days done yet? VVhy there's no remedy, you must love her. Hart. How? and violate my faith to Frances? Play. Thou wilt not be so much an infidel, To think I mean thou shouldst forsake the wench. Tell me the mother a fine tale of love, Print kisses on her paper-lip, and hug Her reverend body; any thing but lie with her: VVrite sonnets on the ivorie tooth afore; Swear she does cough distinctly; get a rime To bless her when she sneezes, and cry up The method of her nose, which sweats and falls So perpendicular; admire the motion Of her blew eyes that look three ways at once: Praise her above thy reason, or her daughter, And then she will believe, thou maist be mad for her. Hart. Is this the way to do me good? she comes Too fast upon me already. Play. Let her flie to thee, Thou maist clip her wings the sooner, this secures thee: Should you hold off, and play the modest creature, Nay but deny as maids do, when they love it, And bending of your hams cry, No forsooth, Profess your self, with coxcomb like civility, You are not worthy of her carnal favours, She may believe it; and in very spight Marry her daughter to a Citizen; Or should you be so mad to think to win her To your first choice, withholding your passions For Mistress Frances, complaining how Don Cupid Hath sacrific'd your heart; you may go hang your self: Go to the Barbers, let him firk your hair up, And spend his powder; wash your sullen face, And starch your infant, upper-lip to look Like one that would run desprate on a widow. Nurse. Here's pretious conspiracie! Play. This is the way: At leasure, you may tell your natural Mistress, Like Jove you have but put another shape on To cheat the Beldame Juno. Nurse. Foul-mouth rascal, I'm glad I know your plot. Hart. I apprehend, th'ast given me good counsel: I'll watch the first occasion to assure, I have prefer'd her in my heart already.
Nurse. I'll conjure up a cross plot, and that quickly, Shall mar your mirth, and pay your fine dissembling; Are you so cunning, my love gamester?— Exit Nurse. Play. So I'll take my leave then, y'ave no other service To use my stay: I have a project, Hartwel, That must not be neglected. Hart. May not communicate? Play. Thou art ingag'd to wait Upon thine own affair, or I should trouble thee To be an actor in't; thou know'st Hornet. Hart. He is a sutor to the widow, and After the rate we cast the plot, my rival. Play. I'll rival him; he smothers a poor gentlewoman At home with Sea-coal, and allowes her no More light then serves to read in painted cloth, The exposition of the harlots storie. Hartwel, I love her; and before her Father Dyed, we exchang'd our honest hearts; 'tis here To free her from that slavery she lives in Under the iron-hearted Jaylor, else I shall repent my aim; he broods upon Her portion, but I have a trick may spoil His hatching of young bags; thou shalt know all Hereafter; to the widow, Hartwol: I am For state-affairs; be faithful, and pray for me. We must be bold: farewell, if something hit, We'll laugh in spight of Dives and the Devil.— Exit. Enter Belamy, Frances, Close, Startup. Close. This is the thing, sir, that must carry away The garland; they have given him a cup or two Of sack, and he has the prettiest humour, He does so whistle out his complement: He wears his feather like the captain of A country team, and would become a horse-coller Rarely; I do not think, but were he put to't With little switching, he would draw the Cart well. Star. Sweet Lady, I am your humble servant; 'tis well known what I am, where I live; my father dyed since I was of age, and left me a younger brothers portion. Bel. A younger brother? Star. Sweet Lady, I know what you would say, my father had no more children; but I speak modestly of my estate; I have land enough for two or three wives; I have a horse in Town; your daughter shall ride behind me: Sweet Lady, did you ever see the country?
Fran. What country, sir? Star. VVhy, any country living: sweet Lady, I am your humble servant; if you love hawking, hunting, or drinking, there be good fellows will bear you company. Is there any good Tobacco in London? Nurse. Virginia. Tobacco grows here. Star. Sweet sir, I am your humble servant, you seem to be a gentleman will fetch me a pipe: there's half a piece, if I be not troublesome: perhaps, sweet Lady, you do not love it: if it offend you, let it alone. Close. A very pretious widgen. Star. La, la, la, lere. Sings and Dances. Fran. You dance well, sir. Nurse. He has a strong back, I warrant him. Star. Sweet Lady, is this your daughter? Close. Ask that question now? Bel. I was her mother, sir. Star. That may be too; what gentleman is that? sweet sir, I am your humble servant likewise. Hart. You are too humble, sir, to stoop so low; It would become my duty. Star. Sweet sir, 'tis all one; a leg or an arm is not cast away among friends: I am a Country-Gentleman, all the world knows; sweet sir, I have no business in Town. Bel. I thought you came to see my daughter. Star. That may be too; sweet Lady, pray excuse me, I ho∣nour your fair daughter; for I know as well as another, what belongs to a gentlewoman: she's not the first sweet Lady I have lov'd i'th' way of Matrimony. Hart. Were you ever married? Star. Sweet sir, no; all men are not alike. Hart. For some are fools. Star. Sweet sir, I do confess it; But wit is never good till it be bought, They say; there are very good wits in Town, I have brought money a purpose with me to buy; If any will sell me a good pennyworth, I'll give him a hundred pieces, because I would carry a little down into the Country. Hart. Is there a dearth in your Country? Play. Sweet sir, there's plenty. Close. Of wild-ots; I heard you had much to sow still. Star. My Tenants have, sweet sir, but 'tis all one; This Lady shall be Lord o'the Soil: I wo'nt Give any man six pence for a bushel of mony. Close. Oh brave sack!
Star. I am a gentleman, my Father was a Yeoman; But that's all one, sweet Lady: howsoever I am yours, And every limb is at your service; My hands shall walk, my feet shall run. Fran. Away, away. Star. By this bright gold they shall. Close. He keeps his oath.— Star. Not run? My Grand-father was a Noblemans Footman, and Indeed he run his Country; my Father did Outrun the Constable. Close. And he, sweet Lady, Being his fathers issue, must run naturally. Star. If I live.— Close. He'll run himself out of all. Star. Not run, Sweet Lady? if you have occasion to use me, I wo'nt stand upon my feet. Fran. No, sir? Star. Nay I'll stand upon my head, sweet Lady, To do you courtesie. Close. Then his heels were upwards. Bel. Please you, a sorry dinner stays for you. Star. Sweet Lady, I am your servant; will this Gentleman dine with us? Bel. I'll prevail with Master Hartwel. Close. D'ye know what you have done? he's rival Mistress; why, d'ye mean to invite him? Star. Sweet sir, I invite nobody; if you love Any body here.— Hart. What then? Star. Sweet sir, I sha'not take it kindly, I do not use To quarrel. Close. When y'are beaten, sir, he sha'not wrong you: Then lay lay him o'er the face. Star. Sweet sir, 'Tis dinner-time, fair Lady. Bel. Mastert Hartwel?— Exeunt. Close. I had a great mind to have him beaten; But he's not valiant at meals: would I Were hired to beat him hansomly after dinner, And make him thank me for't; I'll have some plot Upon your pretious body, my sweet sir.— Exit.
Enter Hornet and Doctor, Playfaire's Brother. Hor. You ll me wonders, Doctor. Doct. I have cur'd Her melancholy; but she's o't' other side Now extream merry, dance and sing, all air. Hor. 'Tis strange methinks, nothing, but extremities: Good Master Doctor, could you not have par'd Her t'other leaden humour? Doct. Sir, I could not Kill the malignity of her melancholy Another way: extreamities must be cur'd With extreme applications: my next work Shall be to abate this levity of her brain, To qualifie her spleen, sir, by degrees; So state her body in that modest temper She was possest of. Hor. I complain'd before Of quietness; now she's all noise and madness, By your description. Doct. You must have patience A month or so, she is not mad but merry; Some stange figaries: you must understand, I have open'd, sir, her fancie, wherein lay All her imaginations confus'd, And of a heap, smother'd for want of vent; And now the spirits that were imprison'd Rush out, which causeth all her faculties Before opprest, to exercise themselves So unexpectedly, as the agitation of her tongue Soon will manifest: she's here. Enter Neece. Neece. Unkle, how does your body? you appear As lean as Lent: I've a great mind to dance About a Maypole; shall we? Hor. She is mad. Neece. This Doctor has so tickled me, I cannot chuse but laugh; ha, ha, ha: Unkle, if you'll procure a dispensarion To marry me your self, deduct the charges Out of my portion: I'll have no other Husband; I could affect an old man now With all my heart.
An old man with a bed full of bones, Turn to me hony and give me a kiss, &c. Unkle, when did you put on a clean shirt? Not since your wife dyed; that was a pretty shift. Indeed I dream'd o'th' devil the last night; They say 'tis good luck: d'ye not know him, Unkle? Hor. I know the devil! Neece. He's a fine old gentleman, And something like you; no such bugbear as The world imagines; you and he'll keep house Together one day: but you'll burn sea-coal too, To save charges, and stink the poor souls so. Shall we go hunt to day? I long to strike A Deer; pray lend me a Cross-Bow, will you, sir? I'll pay you use for't. And still she cry'd, Shepherd shoot home. Unkle, you are not merry, I pray laugh A little; imagine y'ad undone a widow, Or turn'd an orphan begging now: ha, ha! How many Churches, 'faith, will you build when You dye? I'll have six Bells in every Steeple, And they shall go to th'tune of Turn again Whittington, who let out his land For nine lives, cause it came in by a Cat. Die Unkle, die, at all adventures. Hor. Why does she talk of dying? she's stark mad; Could you not put into the next receipt, Something to make her sleep well Doct. Opium. Hor. In a good quantity. Doct. I could so proportion it, She should not wake at all to trouble you: I did it for a Merchants wife last week, Which lov'd a Knight. A great man not long since, Was weary of his Countess; and I cur'd him So artificially of the disease.— Hor. She hears. Doct. But collects nothing, yet her sences Are scattered. Neece. You shall give towards the building Of Pauls—Nothing: see the mony first Laid out that's given already; it were much
Sin to bely the dead; but 'tis no matter, You may be as famous, sir, for pulling down The Parish; for the Church will fall of't self, With a ding dong Bell. Why did they put the poor fellow in prison? Hor. Whom? what fellow? Neece. Why the Corn-cutter, Poor gentleman he meant the City No harm; his feet were weary, and that made him In every street cry out, Have ye any Cons I'your head or toes? Enter Pursivant. Pur. Which is Master Hornt? Hor. Ha! with me? Pur. A word, sir. Neece. Prethee what's he? he comes to borrow money On his wives wedding-ring, or his childs whistle now: You may see by his nose, he has no land, he looks As hungry as a Hawk: what do you dream on? Or what Ladies tympany is your next cure? Or whose state body must be rectified With your quaint glister? Pur. There is no disputing, I must attend you. Hor. I am sent for by a Pursivant: the King? Alas, I am undone, I never saw him; How should he know me? a poor wretch. Doct. Is't not Some complaint? think. Hor. That's my fear, there be Too many Knaves i'th' world; and a man cannot Grow rich, but one state-surgeon or other Must practice on his purse: before this Lord One veyn is opened, in t'other Court So many ounces he must bleed again. Let me see: all the treason I committed, Is, that I shifted houses; for I took Delight to cozen him of his subsidies. I live obscurely, to avoid Taxations: I never paid the Church Her superstitious tythes, nor come to trouble Sermons, for fear of homilies before, That beg for burning. Neece. Why how now, Uncle? Is your Scrivener broke, You talk such lamentation?
Hor. I am sent for To the King, Neece, and shall be made a beggar, As I was born: I see my Chattels seiz'd; This Chest is ransack'd, and that bag deflour'd; My dore seal'd up; and with this hungry messenger I am already marching to the Fleet Neece. Nay, and you be at that ward, I leave you. Masty, farewel: pray do not bite my Uncle Too hard; and so I leave you all to th' mercy Of the Bear-Garden. Hor. Best make fast her chamber. Neece. I, I, cursed Dog: and Set a thousand guards about her, Love will find out a way. Exit. Doct. Wo'nt some money qualifie your haste, And give him time to appear? Pur. Good Mr. Doctor, Teach your Apothecary: Galen nor Hippocrates can perswade me from my duty. Will you go, sir? or shall I certifie? Hor. Go! I must go. Doct. Have comfort, sir: this cloud May soon blow over. Hor. Yes, when I'm blown up: I read imprisonment in his very looks, And all my gold confiscate. Exeunt. Enter Nurse and Startup. Nurse. I heard her say, she would walk up to her chamber: The trick was but to teach him whither he Should follow, who as nimbly apprehended, To acquaint her with his new affections. I did this for your good, that Mrs. Francis, Whom I'll send presently to you, may be Convinc'd in Hartwel's falshood, and transplant Her love on you. Star. This will be excellent! So shall we strangle him in his own noose, And he ne'er know who hurt him. Nurse. I'll loose no time, you know my instructions. Star. I almost had forgot; there is a cast Of angels more. Nurse. They are not cast away. Star. If thou dost fear they'll drown, Nurse, I can give Thee lighter, I have some want weight.
Nurse. If you have an evil angel about you, your business will thrive the better, when 'tis departed. Star. There, Mother of the Maids. Nurse. Now all the good ones wait upon your worship. Star. These things that go to and again, must have Their fees, they'll never speak in our cause else. Enter Frances. Aha, sweet sir! we'll be too cunning for you. She's come already: sweet Lady, how do ye do? Y'are melancholy, you shall have some cause If I can help you to't; if you be sad Because I love you as I do, be merry Again: there's no man cares a button for you Besides my self. Fran. I am very ill befriended. Star. You are deceiv'd in some body, and me too; I love you I confess, but how? not for Want of a Mistress; I came not a woing For such necessity, although you have So little wit, to believe something that I know concerning t'other party. Fran. How's this? Star. Tell me, have you opinion, sweet Lady, That any man besides my self does love This face of yours? but understand, I'll mak't Appear, and presently. Fran. VVhy I dare shew my face: My glass cannot so much deceive me, sir: I shou'd be asham'd it should appear. Star. Nay I am For that, a your side; d'ye conceive me right? A worse face will become the Country, and Shew well enough at the mustering; but that You should be such an ass. Fran. This is plain Courtship. Start. Be sure you understand me, and you do not Repent it, I dare give one of these ears. Fran. You do not threaten me? Star. Understand me right, But if I do, and will threaten you agen, Because you shall live long to see your folly, And what a Coxcomb you have made your self, To love a man that is a suitor to Your mother: ha, ha!
Fran. VVhom do you mean? Star. E'en Mr. Hartwel: Are you such a buzzard You cannot see't? then you shall hear it: step Behind these hangings, and he'll justifie it. Enter Hartwel and Mrs. Bellamy. Hart. I have consider'd perfectly; and if You will vouchsafe me hearing, dare pour forth My heart, which full of love tenders it self To your acceptance: I acknowledge, Lady, My passions are but young, for could I hope You should with so much favour look upon me? Bel. But may I credit this? Hart. But to suspect, Were an injustice to my faith, which looks Upon your vertue with as much religion As love is able to receive: your age Hath struck a reverence into my eye; And what you want of youth and spring upon you, Your wisdom richly satisfies. Those characters Which time hath written on your careful forehead, Are but his envie, and your ornament, VVhen it shall come to pass by your example, That youth shall be esteem'd an infancy, And women never ripe for love or marriage VVithout your age upon them; 'tis a fault That men not guided by the tract of reason, But heat and wantonness of blood, run giddy To seal such weighty covenants; better 'twere The world should end in our Virginitie, Then spin it self more length, by inconsiderate And hasty marriages. Bel. Have you already Retriv'd the affection which pursu'd my daughter? Shall I believe no seeds of love remain, VVhich may grow up and ripen with repentance? For this exchange I do allow you, sir, The consideration of my fortune, which Might in it self incline you to accept me. Hart. That is but an attendant, as you use it, I must confess a welcome one, although The mind is the first beauty which true love Aspires to, when 'tis waited on with person
And an estate; it comes with greater priviledge To win upon's: I do not wish you, Lady, Rashly believe what I profess, but measure My service by the tryal; I'll expect, And write your smiles a competent reward, Till time and your demand demonstrate me, Although not equal to your full deservings, Yet one that has ambition to be thought Not too unworthy. Bel. And I guess ere long, Such an occasion will present it self. Hart. Till then have Hartwel in your loving memory, Who wishes no more happyness of life Then to be call'd yours.— Exeunt. Fran. VVhat have I understood? Star. Will you believe me another time, sweet Lady? Fran. It is not he, some devil does but cozen us, And mock our sence, with these phantastick bodies. Hartwel! Star. Nay 'tis the man, I hope you'll be converted, And think a Country-Gentleman worth favour That brought you to this knowledge; I deserve.— Fran. My curses for this black discovery: VVhereas before 'twas not impossible In time I might be brought to pitty thee; Henceforth I'll look upon thee as my sins, And beg as much forgiveness, that I knew thee. Star. Nay, but d'ye hear? Fran. Die quickly, and be forgotten. Star. This is very fine, sweet Lady! Fran. My mother! Oh my fate! see me no more, And I'll forgive thee.— Exit. Star. Is't come to this? I see I am a fool, and there's no remedy— Exit. Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertius. Enter Startup and Nurse. Nurse. Fie, fie, I am asham'd on you, a Gentleman Of your high promising, and be put off So slightly? Star. VVhy Nurse? what would you have me do? Nurse. Do? I would have you do—something; a man of your ability, and cannot turn and wind a woman? Star. You would not have wished me To have put her to't behind the hangings? Nurse. You should have been round with her. Star. I was round With her; I call'd her ass, I think, and coxcomb: Unless I should have given her the lye, And call'd her whore, I could not be more round with her. Nurse. I do not mean that way. Star. And she call'd me, I think, her— Nurse. VVhat? Star. Why no worse then all her sins; heaven forgive her, She has the more to answer; nay she did Not stick to bid me dye too, in that desperate Estate. Nurse. Come, you shall take another course. Enter Close. Close. What ailes my Masters sweet-heart? is she frighted? I met and ask'd her for my Master, and She turn'd tail like a hound had lost the sent: There's something in the wind: my three pil'd worshipful, Are you there, with my Lady o'the larder? Now in that posture, do not they two look like
A fine Brick-House and a Thatch'd-Barn i'th' Country, Laying their heads together? without doubt Some pretious consultation: what poesie Will fit his joynt ring, or how many yards Of Holland without seaming-lace will make His Mistress smock: they have spied me. Nurse. Close, Come hither; nay he's faithful, and one that Has a desire to serve you: you may trust him. Close. Your worship may trust me abed w'ye; Have had an itch this great while, sir, a kinde Of longing, to be one of your appurtenances; I have some faults, and I'll confess 'em: I have A humour now and then when I am asked A question, to tell truth, though I be chid for't; And I do not love blows: you may sooner beat My brains out, then a word of flattery: I cannot batten upon commendation, Without my wages, nor be valiant Upon small beer; I am not overmuch Given to be drunk, but I've a trick o'th' Dutchman, To do your business as well drunk as sober: I have not impudence enough to pimp For you; but I have a gift, I can say nothing As well as your chaplain; I suck'd secresie From mine own mother, once a baudy Mid-wife: I was born upon Shrove-Tuesday, and shall be Now and then given to rebellion: My flesh will once a year rise at a chambermaid, If none such take me down; I shall in malice And deep revenge, fling out upon May-Day Among the Apprentices without fear or wit: If you chance to be arrested, I dare kill Any thing, but a Sergeant; he's lapt In law, a wearing stronger far then buff: If any gentleman ne'er so much provok'd, Prick him between the seams, or knock his brains out, Which is the surer way (for most a these Vermine, would fain be kill'd) he is sure to take His leave at the Towns end; his breakfast is Tyed up, and stays for him, neer my Lord Mayors Banquetting house, made for the City-progress. Star. I like his humour. Nurse. Nay he has a sconce, And shall be of our counsel; afterward,
Your worship may entertain him: Look you Close, There is a plot to help this Gentleman At night, when they are abed: and if you went To bed betimes, to avoid suspition, 'Twere never the worse; I'll say you are not well: D'ye mark? this honest Gentleman shall be Let into Mrs. Frances bedchamber. Close. Without her knowledge? Nurse. You shall only attend To give him notice from me when to come, And watch about the house, he may get off Without discovery; this is all. Close. So, so, I sha' not keep the door. Nurse. I can do that. Close. Let me alone to give you notice who Stirs about house. Enter Hartwel. Nurse. Away, 'tis Master Hartwel, We'll not be seen together, Go your ways.— Exit Nurse and Startup. Close. A foolish knave and baud, that do want nothing But carting; I would sooner see that Tryumph Then all the Pageants a day after Simon And Jude, when the fine City goes a feasting. Oh sir, I have news; yes, they are gone, brave news, Your gentlewoman can hold out no longer: This night there will be a stratagem; the governess Old madam Humpeapampe, the Nurse, has promis'd To admit the Country Gentleman, when all Are abed, into her chamber; yes, your Mistrisses: I'm o'the plot to lie perdue, and give The word if any fire-lock approach; The rest imagine: if he have not art to Perswade her to the feat with him, yet there Be tricks, and he may be surpriz'd i'th' chamber, And she may be compell'd to marry him, in Her own defence: there have been such devices. Hart. Does she consent? Close. She is betray'd to't, Sir. Hart. Thou wo't not be so base. Close. And I had meant it, I ne'er had told you this: can you make use
Of this intelligence? Hart. Th'art my honest servant. Close. I promis'd to be his. Hart. I have it, canst By any means procure me but his cloathes? Close. With ease: he'll go to bed betimes, to void Suspition, that's a part of our designe. Hart. I could not wish a happier opportunity, To try how she affects this gaudy fool, And cleer my faith to her; which her mothers watch Will not permit: she has I fear observ'd My new familiarity with the mother, Which I'm compell'd to, and must cure this way: Fail me not, Close, and propound thy own Reward. Close. Tell me your purpose, and let my wit Dispose of him. Hart. Prosper me Love in this. Close. And you fall to your prayers With good Love look about us, I shall suspect You will not thrive: you should go to a wench As gentlemen fall to Oysters, without ceremony, Or saying grace; devotion will spoil all.— Exeunt. Enter Playfaire and Doctor his brother. Doct'. Right as an arrow. Play. Witty engineer: But was she taken with the plot? Doct. I was Compell'd to frame an outside of a reason, Lest her own mirth should play the traytor with us, Her spleen was so dilated; he believes She's mad: which change makes for us. Play. Excellent. Doct. And he that you employ'd, the Pursivant, Shew'd such a surly rascal, the poor Usurer Trembled as Bauds beneath the lash. Play. He comes then. Doct. With as much joy, as to receive a hanging. Play. He would be whipt, and say his prayers at Pauls in a white sheet. Doct. That were penance to him: Nay he would pay as much as he should fine
For Alderman, though half his soul went with it, For his Quietus; he does apprehend Nothing but earthquakes. Enter three Lords. Play. How I am rampant With the imagination? bid the musick Be ready, they know all their flourishes: But shift you quickly—My honourable Lords.— Exit Doctor. How they do look like States-men! where's your tooth-pick? Excellent! bear your staff hansomly; contract Your brow, and look more superciliously. 1 Lord. I warrant you for my part. 2 Lord. We came now from practice. Play. Can ye do't with confidence? 2 Lord. These very cloathes have made me proud already: It was some Lords cast sute, I'll lay my life. 3 Lord. And mine; it smells of honour. Enter one with perfume. Play. More perfume, so, so; how now man? 2 Lord. He looks pale; my Lord, how d'ye? 3 Lord. Well, well, I hope 'tis but conceipt. Play. Of what? 3 Lord. Will the pox lie in cloathes? I cannot tell, I finde some alteration in my body Since I shifted. Play. 'Tis a meer conceipt; They were an honest mans, upon my knowledge, A Captain of the Train'd-Band in the Country: They were bought against the general muster last; He wore 'em that day, and most carefully sent 'em up To tast our London lavender. 3 Lord. Sir, you have Satisfied me. Play. Be sprighful: where's this Prince, Whose nod must make us double before age? I long to kiss his hand. 2 Lord. He's here. Flourish.
Enter Lambert, Playfaire's brother, for the fourth Lord, Sir Poldavis and attendants. Play. Now by that sprig, a pretty lump of Majesty, No actor could become it half so royally: But wilt thou not be out of thy Kings part, And when wine is wanting at the banquet, Call upon drawers, quarrel with your Nobles? Or when we shall present our man of morgages, Take him aside, and borrow half a crown To give your whore benevolence, which trusted For you last tilting; or be drunk too soon, And leave our project in the durt? Lam. My Lords, This fellow's insolence must be corrected: Dispose him in what prison you think fit. 4 Lord. He's mad, I think. Lam. To Bedlam with him then: Is this a place for fools and madmen? who Admitted him? take him away; see you He be well whipt, and let him thank our mercy, Bandog. Play. I quake already; excellent Lambert! Cool, cool thy lungs, and whisper with some Lord, Thou wo't be a key too high else: good sir Poldavis, Master of the house, at whose cost we are Entertained! Pol. My part is rotten In my head, doubt not. Enter Pursivant. Play. Is he come? Pur. He waits at the first chamber. Play. Then let the Lutes Begin, and then admit him. Lutes. Enter Hornet. Hor. Here's revelling, my purse must be squeez'd for't: That's the King, the rest are bare; how supple they are
I'th' hams? that Courtier has oyled his joynts: He looks this way, they point at me; a rot O'that knaves finger. 2 Lord. What fellow's this? who waits? Pur. It was his Graces pleasure he was sent for. 2 Lord. My good Lord. 4 Lord. My Lord of Noland, as you were saying. Lam. Is this the man whom you so much commended for his abilities? Hor. I smell no good from that word ability. Lam. Discreet, and read i'th' Common-wealth, a man Fit for employment in some Embassie? Pol. The very same. Lam. His countenance is promising. Pol. If the King Of Spain had but his head, that politick head, I know who might go fish for the Low-Countries. Lam. His garments are but course. Pol. His mind is rich. Hor. They praise me: I am a thousand pounds the worse. Lam. Kneel down, thy name? Hor. Gyles Hornet, your poor creature. Lam. We'll knight him. Hor. I do beseech you, sir, to spare this honour, I am not able to maintain my self; There be more Knights then can live well already. Pol. Neglect his favour? Lam. Be it your care To give his body more becoming ornaments, He shall be like himself then; we will confer More honours on him. 4 Lord Do you make haste, his Grace Will have you new thatch'd; you must have rich cloaths Fitting your state and honourable title. Hor. These will be good enough for me, 'las I am not able. 4 Lord. Nay you must have them from his Wardrobe, sir, They'll cost you nothing; you'll not look in these Like a poor Knight of Windsore. Lam. Where be the Ladies, and the Bride? Pol. She's your Graces handmaid; they Are dancing, sir, within. Lam. Direct us to 'em prethee; VVhen he is ready give us knowledge— Flourish. Exeunt. 4 Lord. Yes, sir. Hor. VVhat will become of me?
4 Lord. You were best prepare, Your cloaths will be here presently; the King VVill send to you before y'are ready; cast Your old skin off: do you not to save sheets And trouble, wrap your selfanights i'th' blankets? Or are they asham'd to shew the linings? Hor. Hum; if this be but a preparative for a whipping, VVhat case am I in? Enter Servant with cloaths. 4 Lord. VVell said, now they are come, Be nimble now, and help to strip him. Hor. 'Las, must I wear this doublet? it would yeild Heaven knows how much to burn. 4 Lord. You may be desperate VVhen 'tis on, and burn your body with it, sir. Hor. I sha'not know my self. Ser. Fit as 'twere made, sir. Enter Playfaire. Play. Which is sir Gyles? Hor. I am not Knighted yet. Play. You have your grace, and may be call'd so. Hor. Have I the grace to be a Knight? I am the man you please to call sir Gyles. Play. Then I congratulate your happy fortune; Y'are like to be exalted; his Grace talks Much on you; I'll be proud to be your servant: Sir Robert, a word. Hor. VVhat gentleman is this? Ser. The Bridegroom, sir; in great favour I can tell you, And new created by his Highness, Baron Of Landskip; his living is far off. Hor. My very good Lord, my breeches are almost on. Ser. Here be your keys. Hor. His Majesty has pleas'd to shine upon A piece of barren earth. Play. You are too modest: The King hath been informed, sir Gyles, you are One of the ablest men in his Dominions: Should vertue still be cloath'd in rags? advance it
To honour and regard: you waste your brain At home in cheap and low engagements, sweat Your soul out, for a poor and paltry living: Old houses, let 'em fall to the dull Lord O'th' Manner; switch me up a town together, Or meddle not; this and that strading Acre Not worth your care: study some Monopoly, May sweep the Kingdom at a stroak: despise A project will not bring in half the City: Find out a way to forfeit all the Charters: Have an exchequer of your own, and keep The Princes round about in pension: These are becoming businesses, and speak a States-man. Hor. You do talk strange things, my Lord: So, now my keys, good gentlemen, my keys. 4 Lord. You have 'em, sir. Hor. Cry mercy. Play. They are things Material to our business. 4 Lord. And we'll have 'em again: Let me alone, the Barbour has not done yet; When he's i'th' suds, we may be more familiar With's worships pocket, and return 'em quaintly. Play. I will account it one of my felicities To be a witness of your honour, sir. Hor. Oh my good Lord of Landskip.— Ser. How shall we dispose of these? 4 Lord. The Hangman will not have 'em; and I fear They will corrupt the well; faith give 'em stable-room, The are dung already.— Enter 1 Lord. 1 Lord. My Lord, the King asks for you; good sir Gyles, 'tis so decreed; write me i'th' number of your faithful friends. Play. We must attend. 4 Lord. Do not yet say he's ready, The Barber has a duty to dispatch, He will be an hour a rubbing, washing, powdering: Then I'll attend him to his presence. Play. We shall excuse him so long, still your servant— Exit Playfaire and 1 Lord. 4 Lord. The Barber, sir, attends in the next room. Hor. I wo'not shave. 4 Lord. He fears his throat.
Hor. I never Give above three pence. 4 Lord. Talk not you of charge, You have but yet your welcome; do not you Think, good sir Gyles, but we can shave you too.— Exeunt. Enter Close and Startup. Star. Where is he, Close? Close. I told him, sir, You lay in a chamber o'the t'other side The house, whither he's gone with his sword drawn, And curses of themselves able to kill you; You did affront him once, and now his Mistress Has quite neglected him, for your love, he thinks; He'll make you an example to all rivals; I'll bring your cloaths t'ye after: yet your fear And running, sir, will keep you warm enough. Star. Honest Close, thou hast sav'd my life. Close. Death, is he not behind you? this way, good sir.— Exeunt. Enter Nurse and Mistress Frances. Nurse. Have you not made a fine choice? I did ever Think he was false; your mother did but counterfeit The love-sick widow, all this while, to try him. Fran. To try him, Nurse? Nurse. She told me so her self, Assuring him the state was hers, and you At her devotion: put him to his choice To take her with the wealth, or you with nothing; What followed you have heard: come, be wise yet, And love the Country-Gentleman, that dotes on you; He's rich and half a fool: I'll fetch him to you.— Exit Nurse. Fran. My mother counterfeit? why may not Hartwel Pretend as well as she, fearing her anger And policy, if he refus'd her love? I have observ'd some sorrow in his gesture, As he were willing to deliver something, If opportunity would give him leave: He cannot be so false; now I suspect He does obey some dire necessity; Twould puzzle a wise lover to be so
Severely put to't. Enter Nurse and Hartwel disguis'd. Nurse. On like a bold Captain, Give her a broad side, she's within your shot; I'll leave you.— Exit. Fran. 'Tis the fool; why Nurse? Hart. Nay, flee not, Before you hear. Fran. 'Tis Hartwel. Hart. If my voice Betray me not. Fran. Why in this shape? some trick in't, He hides his face; I'll put him to't however, Although the hour be unseasonable; any time We may express our joy: my Nurse once told me You were not well, and gone to bed: your health Is welcome as mine own; I dare not, sir, In modesty presume to bid you stay, And to requite your pains, kind Master Startup. Hart. She knows me not. Fran. Forgive me if I blush: I have no other way, but to declare My eyes that late frown'd on your love, shall smile. Hart. On me? Fran. On none but you: I have been too Unkindly dealt withal by Hartwel, whom How dearly I affected, good heavens knows: But I have read discretion to my fancie, And were he here, he should be witness of My vows to you, if you accept my heart, And can with equal truth embrace it: I Will chuse my husband here; you, only you: This Faith is registred in heaven, shall challenge From me a wives obedience. Enter Nurse, Hartwel Planet-struck. Nurse. Away, her mother's up; I would not for A thousand pound she finde you in this chamber.— Exit Frances. Hart. I have undone my self. Nurse. Sweet Master Startup To your own lodging, take this close lanthorn with ye.
Passion of me, what makes her rise? Hart. I will discover yet. Nurse. Discover what? How! Master Hartwel! Hart. You have midnight-plots. Nurse. Oh we are wretched miserable! what have I done?— Exit. Hart. Oh who shall lead me to a world where are No women! farewell all: I'll be above Your charms, and finde out death a cure for love.— Exit. Finis Actus Tertius. Actus Quartus. Enter Startup and Close. Star. WHere are we now? 'tis very cold, why dost not Lead to some house? Close. What at this time of night? All people are abed; the very Owls Are in their dead sleep: or if we could Be admitted, would you venture a this fashion, And publish your disgrace? proclaim your self Coward, and lay some imputation Upon the place you came from, where your hopes May yet be fair for marriage? this brunt over, To meet a drunkard now were comfortable, Whose eyes inflam'd would serve instead of torches, Or he might spit Flap-Dragons from his fire Of Sack, and light us; but no sober man Considering what case you are in, sir, By my consent should see us.— Star. Ha, what's that? Close. Where? where? a fire-Drake? Star. Now 'tis gone, 'tis bright
Again, is't not a spirit? Oh deliver me! Close. I have heard some such things use to walk the Fields. Star. What shall I do? Close. Pray, pray, with as much strength As if you had no land, or were confin'd To my Annuity; now I hear no spirits, This riches makes us cowards: hide your self, I will go nearer.— Exit Close. Star. Dost know the devil if thou seest him, Close? A pox a love, if this be the reward on't; Some call it fire, but I find no such matter; I am frozen to the blanket, and my teeth Strike one another, and keep time like hammers; I do believe if they were beaten out, They would make false Dice, there's Quick-silver in 'em Already by their dancing. Enter Close. Close. Sir, where are you? Star. Here I am, here still. Close. Y'are a dead man. Star. More terrour? what's the matter? Close. 'Tis my Master With a dark lanthorn, and pursues us, by This darkness; 'tis his voice, wrap your self up, And roul into some ditch; flight will betray us. Star. I were as good be kil'd, and yet I'll venter.— Exit. Close. 'Tis he indeed, and more then I expected: The matters do not fadge well with his Mistress. Enter Hartwel with a dark lanthorn. Hart. What a sweet thing is night! how calm and harmless! No whispering but of leaves, on which the breath Of heaven plays musick, to the birds that slumber: Here are no objects to betray our sence To a repentance; nor can women thus Advantag'd by the tapers of the night, Spread their temptations to undo poor man: What a fine book is heaven! which we may read Best now when every star is a fair letter: How much they wrong thee, night, that call thee guilty Of rapes and murders? 'tis the day that like A glorious whore ingageth men to act 'em;
And taking then the darkness to obscure 'em, We unjustly lay the shame upon thy brows That art so innocent, thou never sawst 'em: Befriended with the silence I begin To wander; there's no wilderness abroad To him, that's lost at home. Close. Sir. Hart. Who's that? Close. One that has ta'en some pains for you to night: I am Close. Hart. VVhat mak'st thou here? Close. I wait upon my charge, I lead your Rival a procession In's shirt, perswading him you had resolv'd To cut his throat else: he's hard by at's prayers, And thinks you have pursu'd him. Hart. Ha! I'll do't: Shew me the fool, by all my hopes I'll kill him, And send his base heart, as a present to her: Fate has presented me with this revenge, And I will not delay his death a minute. Close. Indeed, indeed you sha'not. Hart. How? Close. You dare not. Hart. My drudge offront me? are you grown his champion? Close. Not I, sir, but you dare not do an act So much against the honour of a gentleman; You wo'not kill him basely. Hart. No. Close. VVhy then There is no fear, but he'll live long enough: I'll undertake, he ne'er shall grow provided To fight with ye; and other satisfaction, Name it and take it; so I'll fetch him to you. Hart. Stay, I have been too passionate, let him live To be her punishment; that's revenge enough While I pursue my own ways. Close. VVhither now? Hart. VVhither you must not follow, by thy honesty: I charge thee come not after me. Close. That binds my attendance, sir. Hart. But not when I command the contrary: If thou dost move this way, thou draw'st mine anger: Mind the preservation of the same thing you Undertook: farewel; if thou dost love me,
Follow, not, nor question; 'tis in my power To loose thee or my self.— Exit. Close. I cannot see i'th' dark with spectacles, And mine eyes have lost him o'the sudden; VVell, I must hope the best: what shall I do VVith my hen-hearted lover, who would give Half his estate, this cold fit were well over? I shall make work for the Physitians: Caudles and Cullices will not restore him; If he but scape with life, I am not sorry: He may be a souldier, and endure the trenches; I put him first to the becoming sufferance. But what are these? an army of horns and halberts? Upon my conscience the VVatch: I thought The Fields had not been haunced with these goblins: I cannot run; if I should squat, and they Find me, there were no mercy but Bridewel, Or some such lousie place: I am resolv'd To cast away a few good words upon 'em; A leg, and worshipping the Constable That leads the rusty regiment, will quit me; I pass the gates with't often, and so may The devil, if he pay the Porter. Bless ye My Masters, what a clock is't? Enter Constable and Watch. 1 Watch. VVho goes there? Const. I charge you stand. Close. Your worship may do much. Const. VVhere have you been? Close. At Islington, an't please you, about business. 2 Watch. Some thief I warrant him, no honest man, I know by his basket-hilt; some rogue that watches: The Fields are pester'd with such sturdy robbets. Close. He is a rogue that watches, for my part. Const. He calls my VVatch-men rogues, perfidious traytor. 1 Watch. How! Master Constable, You are one your self Const. Sitrah I will teach you to commit felony. Close. How, sir? will you teach me to commit felony? take heed what you say, if I commit fellony by your authority. Const. My tority shall stretch for't: away with him; if you be not whipt for these intergatories, his Majesty shall keep his own peace himself; is this a time anight to call honest men rogues? away with him.
Close. Good sir. 2 Watch. We will provide you lodging. Close. Where? 2 Watch. New prison. Close. But are you in earnest, gentlemen? for what? 1 Watch. For answering the Constable. Close. Cry him mercy, I shew'd him too much manners, if there be No remedy. 2 Watch. We'll humble you. Close. I have a Companion hereabouts: where are you, sir? Within. Star. Here in a ditch. 1 Watch. They seldom go alone, We'll find him out. Ha sirrah? Close. Do you hear, You watch about these places for no good, It seems. Const. We watch indeed for knaves. Close. You dare not Speak to their faces: some of you I am sure Do watch for your good Masters o'th' Parish. Enter Startup. Star. I thank you honest men; where art thou, Close? Close. Here: these good men will help us to a lodging. Star. Blessing a'their heart; I am almost starv'd. Const. Yes, yes, we'll d'ye that favour: come away, sir. Star. Where shall we go now? 1 Watch. To prison. Star. How, Close? Const. You shall be close enough. Close. I follow, sir, I cannot leave you in adversity: All this is for your health: clean straw is warm, sir. You have the benefit of being naked; I shall have work to morrow in my woollen. Const. Away, away, bring 'em away.— Exeunt. Enter Mistress Bellamy and Nurse. Bel. I heard some noise, look, call up the servants, See if the gentlemen be abed; I'm troubled Exit Nurse. I have not dealt so nobly as became me
With Hartwel; and that love which I pretended, If I have drawn his fancy to affect me, Must make him satisfaction; his language And soft demeanor, when he gave me up His resolution, made me quite forget My purpose to have chid him for his levity, So soon to leave my daughter, who I know Hath plac'd him neer her heart; and I have done Her injurie, by this tryal of her truth. Enter Nurse. Nurse. Oh Mistress! Bel. What's the matter? Nurse. Master Startup Is not abed, nor Master Hartwel. Bel. This is very strange. Nurse. I dare not tell her of his shift, they're gone, The doors I found left open, and no signe Which way they are bestowed. Bel. This puzzles me: Pray heaven there be no mischief in this absence: Is Franck abed? Nurse. Yes. Bel. What should Move 'em to leave my house so late? and Master Hartwel Without his cloaths? some knock; they're there; go see.— Knock. Exit Nurse. Beshrow me but I trembled. Enter Nurse. Nurse. 'Tis a stranger, And says he would speak with you. Bel. At this late hour? What accidents are these? from whence? Nurse. I know not. Bel. Has he no name? what should this mean? Nurse. He says, He is a Country-man of Master Startups. Bel. Admit him, he perhaps may bring some newes. Enter Country-Gentleman. Coun. By your leave Mistress, pardon my importunity
At so unfit an hour. Bel. Y'are welcome, sir. Coun. I met with fortunate directions, Though I came lte: I understand you have A guest, one Startup, of Northamptonshire, That comes a woing to your daughter. Bel. Such A one there was that supt with us, and went To bed; but since, as I have faith, I know not Which way he has convey'd himself: another Gentleman too is missing, and his rival. Coun. Pray do not mock me, Lady; I have rid A great way, and the business much concerns him. Bel. You may believe me: he is no such treasure, I should conceal him. Enter Frances. Coun. Then I see you dally; Know, Mistress, you may slack your preparations, Your daughter must look out another husband; He is contracted. Fran. How! Coun. And something more, Gotten with childe one that without blushing I cannot call my daughter; he shall make Her credit streight again: although my fortunes Have no equality with his, I shall Finde law to force him. Fran. You prefer'd this sutor: This news returns my blood. Bel. Sir, you shall finde All truth I have delivered; I am not sorry To hear this news; this is no time to seek him: Please you accept the lodging that was his: My servant shall attend you in the morning, To help you search. Coun. You seem a noble gentlewoman, I take your courtesie. Bel. Nurse, a light: pray walk, sir.— Exit Coun. and Nurse. Fran. I was unkind to Hartwel, he not wise: But love still apprehends too much or nothing. Bel. Frances, a word: do you not know what is Become o'these Gentlemen? Fran. Not I, their absence is strange to me.
Bel. Oh Franck, I am undone. Fran. Good heaven forbid. Bel. This Gentleman, Master Hartwel, Whom we shall never see again, I fear. Fran. How, mother! are you acquainted with any cause to fear thus? Bel. 'Tis in vain to tell thee how I lov'd him. Fran. Bless my sences! you love him? Bel. 'Bove all the world, affectionately plac'd him Too neer my heart. Fran. I heard you made pretence Of love, to try him for my sake; and pardone me If yet I dare not believe more. Bel. Oh Franck! Fran. My heart doth tremble, I feel coldness run Through all my veins. Bel. I had no other thought At first, but wisely to distinguish whether His heart was fixt on thee, or my estate; With resolution, if I found him more A courtier of thy fortune, then thy person, To punish him with loss of both: but love Hath chang'd the scoene and title of our Comedy; And what I meant should slip—All his hopes, Hath ruin'd us: his modest and calm answer, To accept my tender, with such force and reason Directed to my fancie, turn'd my purpose, And made me his indeed, his perfect lover: But now we have both lost him. Fran. All the piety That ever taught children to love their mother, Will but suffice to keep my heart obedient: Was ever maid so miserable? was there No other in my fate to be my rival? I live too long: Oh break, my poor heart, break; Then she that gave me life, hath took it from me. Bel. Why do you weep? Fran. I do not weep; or if I do, I know not why. Bel. Now I perceive, Thy duty was but counterfeit; you love him, Upon my life you love him still: have my Commands no more respect? my care and love So ill rewarded? that I desiring One comfort in the world, and shall my childe
Rise up to take that from me? Fran. Alas, I knew not You lov'd him too; indeed I had rather die Then you should call me rebel: parents often Affect not where their children love; but you With too much loving what my thoughts delight in, Have quite undone your daughter. Bel. Now I see The cause of his departure in this fashion: Pray heaven he have not made away himself: Did ever childe deceive a mother so? I have a sad presage: you may to bed, And rise again without my blessing; yet You may stay—Wherefore should I despair Of his return? you say you could not tell That I affected him. Fran. Indeed not I, And do believe it now against my will; But I am your daughter. Bel. Shewing it in conforming Your self to my desires, and what is past I can forgive you: if he come again, Will you be rul'd, and shew no favour to him? For 'tis in you I see to make me happy: I will not tye you to affect th'other: Chuse any for your husband, but this man, My love and prayers shall go along with you. Answer. Fran. Indeed I dare not, yet could I Put off the knowledge that you are my mother. Bel. What then? Fran. Though my imagination allow'd you The greatest Empress in the world, whose frown Could kill, and eyes at pleasure make alive Again, thus I could answer. Bel. pray let's hear? Fran. You do not well to heap oppression: Authority was given to preserve, Not kill the poor beneath you: I durst tell you In confidence of my cause, that you betray Two innocents to sorrow; and though heaven Look on, and seem to smile upon your cruelty, Yet there is thunder, for divorcing those, Whose hearts That hath conjoyn'd: I durst say more, Though all your terrors were prepar'd to punish My bold defence, and call you tyrant.
Bel. How? Fran. A most unjust, a sacrilegious tyrant. Bel. You would not be so violent. Fran. That do Not onely ruine and deface the altar, But steal away the very sacrifice: And I durst adde, and smile upon your anger, Though as you frown'd, death lurk'd in every wrinkle, My soul's above your tyranny; and would From torturing flames receive new fire of love, And make your eye faint to behold the brightness Of my poor bodies Martyrdome; and if ever Love shew'd a miracle, my heart should bear The characters of him you have torn from it, With beams about it like a Saint that suffer'd. But as you are my mother, thus I kneel, And beg a pardon for my innocence; If that offend you, live you happy still, And be the Mistress of your vows: live to Enjoy whom you affect; may every hour Return new blessings on you both; renew Your spring, and let him think you young again; And let me beg but this for all my duty, Against the day you marry him, to provide My cosfin; for I fear, I sha'not have Breath many minutes after, to pray for you: The herbs that shall adorn your bridal chamber, Will serve my funeral, and deck my hearse: Beneath which you shall say, There lies your daughter That dy'd to shew obedience. Bel. Why shouldst thou Continue thus to him? Fran. I know he loves me Still, though hereafter your affections May meet. Bel. And they shall meet, But never to procure thee one bad thought: Now I have tryed you both, assure my child I lov'd him but for thee; dispose thy self To be his bride; this news at his return VVill make all well:—To rest. Fran. Can this be true? Bel. 'Twere sin to mock thee any more—To bed. Fran. No, I'll spend all this night in prayers for you, My dearest mother: Oh my Hartwel!— Exeunt.
Enter Playfaire, and the Doctor his Brother. Doct. How like you her now? Play. The morning never bloom'd So fresh, nor Venus with more charms upon her: Adon would melt before her eye, and woo Her kisses at the expence of her last breath: Cupid himself, could he but see, would fall In love with her, and throwing away his shafts, Offer the empty quiver to her eyes, Ambitious to fill it with her beams, The least of which would wound more hearts, then all His stock of golden arrows. Doct. No more raptures. Play. Didst thou not know before, that love is able VVithout the help of sack to make a poet? My nimble Mercury; Joves Herald in Reversion. Doct. I confess, I had a trick of Mercury, when I pick'd His pocket for the keys. Play. He never mist 'em. Doct. His eyes were drench'd in suds, and we return'd 'em Ere they recover'd light. Play. 'Twas excellent, He was in darkness still. Doct. D'ye think he'll know her? Play. His cloaths already have. Made him forget himself; or if he have But the remembrance of such a woman, The more he sees her now, the more he'll think The change impossible. Doct. VVhere have you left him? Play. I'th' Gallery, where with much patience, He does expect his Highness will send for him. Doct. Then all runs smooth, his wonder does continue. Play. I fed that humour artificially, He is half perswaded all is but a dream yet: To which imagination, his cloaths Are a great help, because he paid not for 'em: Sometimes he is very merry, then again He struts about with such a scurvie pride, As some new crept into nobility, VVhen some of their first livery come to see 'em.
His honour has so chang'd him, that he now Knows not of what religion he is; Or if by chance he thinks of his first faith, He spits o'th' hangings, and excuses with I do not like the story, 'tis apocryphal: Sometimes he'll offer at a jest, Frown upon any man that will presume To have more knowledge in worse cloaths: I told him It was his Graces pleasure he should be Controuler at the Mask, and he did sweat As he were studying for some mighty oaths To clear the presence.—He is here, away— Exit Doctor and Playfaire. Enter Hornet and Poldavis. Hor. Are you the Master of the house, sir Poldavis? I heard you call'd. Pol. It is my name, Sir Gyles, unworthy of this Grace his Highness Is daign'd to shew in honouring of my daughter. Hor. And was she married this morning, say you? Pol. This morn she lost her Virgin-Name. Hor. I have Not seen her yot, nor any of the Ladies; You have but little noise methinks i'th' house. Pol. It would offend his Grace. Hor. VVho as you say Came hither privately, with a small train Of Lords: would I might see his face again: I am not sent for yet; I have been ready, Sir Pol—these three hours; and I do wonder His Grace so much forgets himself. Flourish. Pol. That musick Speaks him on entrance. Enter Lambert, Playfaire and attendance. Lam. I, this garb becomes him; How was his person lost within that shape He was first presented to me! Hor. Indeed the case Is something altered, by your Highness bounty, To your poor servant Hornet. Play. How he looks
As he did scorn the Quorum, and were hungry To eat a States-man! 'las an office in The houshold is too little for a breakfast, A Baron but a mornings draught, he'll gulp it Like a round egge in Muscadine; methinks At every wiping of his mouth, should drop A golden saying of Pythagoras: A piece of Matchiavel I see already Hang on his beard, which wants but stroking out; The statutes and the Magna Charta have Taken a Lease at his tongues end. Lam. We'll think on't; he shall be—But To the banquet: Then let the Mask be ready, There we shall employ your worthy diligence.— Flourish. Exit Lambert and attendance. Hor. Heaven bless your mighty Grace. Play. You'll follow.— Exit Playfaire. Hor. I attend you presently: I know not what to think of these things yet; 'Tis very strange I should be thus exalted, Without desert, best known unto my self: Princes I see are mortal, and may be Deceived in placing of their honours: I Am little better then a favorite, If these be true, if these be true; 'tis a question, Let me consider wisely; it may be I am not I, not Hornet, no, I'm a Knight: Are these my cloaths? I do not use to wear such: A pocket in my sleeve, and velvet hose, Six times translated since they were a Midwifes Forepart, were things I wore on holydays: The price of these would break a Camels back; And yet some men walk under them like Elephants, And have variety as the devil were Their Taylour; who best knows where all their land lies: Then why this cost on me?—'Tis a dream; I am now confirm'd, a very idle dream, And I am very glad on't: 'tis impossible It should be true, it does not hang together: I will have paience, till I wake again, And care not what becomes on't. Enter Playfaires brother for the 4 Lord. 4 Lord. 'Tis his highness pleasure,
Now the banquet's done.— Hor. How, the banquet done! I was coming to't' You could hardly say grace by this time. 4 Lord. That's a ceremony Grown out of use; it was a running banquet. Hor. A running! so it seems, it was a galloping banquet, For you made haste: I do dream certainly, There's no sence nor reason in any thing they do. 4 Lord. You know your place, The Mask will streight begin; and his Grace will not Have any one admitted: he resolves, If the conceipt affects him, it shall be Perform'd at Court hereafter: i'th' mean time He does command all privacie; they are Some set to guard the door, but your care must Provide his Highness be not interrupted: Hark, they are rude already— Exit. Hor. Let me alone: What turbulent knave is that? Within. I am a Country-Gentleman, sir Gyles; And if I may presume upon good cloaths, You may before his Grace call me your Cozen, And not be asham'd: here is a Lady too. Hor. A Lady too? is she with child? what makes she Here, and she be with child already? I Tell thee, none such shall be admitted while I am in place—More rapping?—Keep the doors, If I do fall a swearing once, look to't. Within. I beseech you for my wives sake. Hor. Thy wives? What's he that pleads in forma pauperis? Within. A Citizen, and like me. Hor. Like me? thou liest, I am more like a Lord, Thou sha't fare ne'er the better for that word: Knock down the women, if there be a hundred, And make their husbands drunk, the guard are lazie: These womens insolence will force a statute: I will petition to the Prince my self, They may have liberty but once a year To see the galliefoyst, then be consin'd To their chamber and one 'Prentise—Yet again? Within. Sir Gyles, sir Gyles, you know me well enough. Hor. But while I am in office, I know no body. Within. I am your Scrivener. Hor. Draw the purse wherein
Thou keptst thy ears, and leave 'em at the door, The guard trusts none without a pawn; they'll serve If they be ne'er redeem'd, to seeth in milk For a sore throat. Within. Sir Gyles, here is your Neece. Hor. My Neece! the devil she is. Neece. VVithin. Pray Unckle let me in. Enter Servant. Hor. Her very voice—Ha, open the doors there: Where is she? Ser. Whom? Hor. My Neece that call'd me? Ser. None call'd, nor was there any women here. Hor. No, nor my Scrivener, hawling out sir Gyles? Ser. Not any nam'd your worship. Hor. Then I dream, And I am a fool to make a question on't.— Exit Servant. VVithin. Ha, ha, ha. Hor. The Knaves laugh at me too; but let 'em: I Shall be as merry with this tale to morrow. Flourish. What fancies men have in their sleep sometimes! His Highness! where be the Ladies? Enter Lambert, Poldavis and atttendants. Pol. They are all i'th' Mask. Hor. Nay, no matter where; why do I ask the question? Pol. You'll see them, sir, anon. Poldavis gives papers to Lambert and sir Gyles. Wilt please your Grace, And you, sir Gyles, the subject of the Mask? Hor. What's here? The three Goddesses Contention for the Gol∣den Ball. Dance. Enter Playfaire in his own apparel: He dances with a golden Ball in his hand. Hor. This is Paris, ha! I have seen that fae before now. Enter Juno, Pallas and Venus. Hor. These are the three Goddesses. Lam. Juno, Pallas and Venus.
The Goddesses dance, and court Paris for his Ball: To Juno enters one like a King; She takes off his Crown, and offereth it to Paris: he aceepts not. Hor. Juno doth woo him with her State and Kingdom. Lam. But he refuses. To Pallas enters one like a Souldier, plum'd and rich: She presents him to Paris, with a book; he refuses. Lam. He is not for her service, though she offer To make him Scholar and a Souldier, A compleat man. Hor. That Fairy wins the Ball. To Venus comes Cupid, leading in Hornets Neece, richly drest. Hor. Ha! that is my Neece. Pol. Which, sir Gyles? Hor. That Lady whom Dame Venus and her brat are busie withal. Pol. Contain your self, sir Gyles, that is the Bride. Hor. The Bride quotha! Pol. Married this morning. Paris gives Venus the Ball: Juno, Pallas, King and Souldier.—Exeunt Maskquers. Hor. These are my keys; she's safe enough at home, And has but half her wits, as I remember: The devil cannot juggle her from my custody: Ha, ha, I do dream still. Lam. 'Tis time to break off sports: how like you this, Sir Gyles? Hor. A very pretty dream. Lam. I see you wo'd be abed, you are not us'd to such late hours. Pol. Lights for his Highness. Hor. I humbly beg your licence, I may return to my old lodging.
Lam. Well sir, 'tis easily granted.— Flourish. Exit Lambert and attendants. Pol. Lights for sir Gyles, one shall attend you home. Hor. Ha, ha, ha. Pol. Why do you laugh? Hor. At a conceipt, at a conceipt: What did I eat last night, to make me dream thus?— Exeunt. Finis Actus Quartus. Actus Quintus. Enter Hartwel, Country-Gentleman, Servant and Officers. Hart. YOu have done well. Coun. VVwould you had done no worse: These are his cloaths, and you must give account How you came by 'em, and produce him safe, Ere you acquit your self: we may suspect You have kill'd him. Hart. Then I obey my destiny: Justice will still pursue the guilty person; Dispose me where you please. Ser. He does confess. Hart. What ere you , you can but have my life For his, all your revenge can reach no higher, And to the law I yeild my self. Coun. My hopes are Cold as his blood whom thou hast slain: thou hast Been cruel in this act, to me and mine, VVhose fames in him are miserably wounded; But look for the reward. Hart. I must expect it: In the mean time, I wo'not beg your mercy; Life is a burden I would fain be rid of,
Does weary me to carry it. Ser. I'll acquaint My Mistress. Coun. Do so: to the next justice with him, Come away.— Exit. Enter Hornet. Hor. She's gone; she's gone, I shall run mad: my Neece, Rob'd of three thousand pounds in her escape, And yet the doors were safe: some witch has taught her, Or some French boy, to clime a chimney; else I cannot think which way she is convey'd: I find too late, I am awake and gul'd, Nor know I whom to accuse for my tormentors, Devils or men; but sure they were not men, But very fiends I revell'd with last night: Though mortals want no malice, they have not art To undo me of this fashion: Oh that I Knew where to meet the prince of devils knighted me; The Poets call him Pluto, god of riches; I and my learned counsel would undo him In law, in very law, which he should find Hotter ere I had done, then hell it self, And call his place of torments in three terms, But a refreshing to't: yet let me see, I have her portion still, though she be vanisht; That's better then my Neece; but if she marry, I loose it all; there, there is the vexation. Enter Lambert. Lam. Save Master Hornet. Hor. 'Tis too late, away, I do not love unnecessary complement. Lam. This he? Hor. Yes I am he, am I not very fine? What do you think this trim will cost me? ha! Three thousand pound, no more. Lam. The broker wo'not Lend half the mony. Hor. Will you, sir, be gone? I have no money to lend now; it is not You know in fashion, with rich cloaths. Lam. I am
For other purpose, and with news perhaps You would be willing to receive; you have A Neece.— Hor, No, such a creature was in my possession: Do you know where she is? Lam. I imagine. Hor. Ha! good Master Lambert, on, pray forward; You shall have mony upon good security. Lam. I think you sir, for nothing; I owe you Too much already, on these terms. Hor. My Neece, As you were saying. Lam. Were you knighted lately? Hor. Ha! is that talk abroad? Lam. No general rumour; by a chance I came Where such a thing was whisper'd, only whisper'd, Just as he was describ'd: in my opinion Y'are very hansome, and do look as like.— Hor. An ass. Lam. VVhy you shall have it, sir. Hor. But touching My Neece, good sir, that most ungratious giglot, That's run or stolen away, juggled last night Out of my doors. Lam. Did she not leap the Casement? Hor. Do not encrease my agonie, you came.— Lam. With civil meaning to discover how You may be abus'd. Hor. VVhat mony do you want, sir? Your own bond shall suffice. Lam. I have forsworn Writing my name, or mark; but I can tell you.— Hor. Where I may finde this Girl? Lam. More I can do, If need require; 'tis in my power to give Her back to your possession, and I am willing. Hor. An honest man. Lam. On reasonable conditions, And such as shall not trench on borrowing mony. Hor. Honester yet. Lam. For you shall give it freely, and get by it: Sir, you must understand, if I do this, I shall betray a friend of mine, that has Put me in trust; one that intends to marry her, D'ye mark? and get three thousand pound upon her;
One that has lent me sums too, without parchment, Or foolish circumstance to be return'd; VVhich you were never yet so much a Christian, As to be guilty of, in your Usurers Gallon Of Conscience-melting Sack: this deserves something, 'Tis part of my revenew: younger brothers Are glad of pension; it helps to tooke At Ordinaries, and pay trifling reckonings, that Arise to a bill or tedious circumstance Of cleer Orphographie, for Cock and Mallard, VVhich puts the Bar-boy to Arithmetick, Because some expedition is required; You have a bond of mine. Hor. For fifty pounds. Lam. I had but forty, and the Scrivener paid; VVith whom your worship too perhaps divided: If you remember, there were pretious dinners, Ere I could count the chickens all together; Which was your thrift and my expence: you shall First cancel that bond; nay this wo'not do't, And give, d'ye mark? give me a hundred pieces, Perhaps I'll drink your health; this shall betray Your Neece again, give her into your hands, Though for my treachery I be sung in ballads, And have the Town-curse, if I ever marry, To shew my wife can graft well. Hor. 'Tis too much, For no more labour, sir. Lam. If you consider, Two hundred will not bring me to't again: Thus fair I'll deal with ye, I'll not have a cross Till I have don't, but then I will be sure on't: Fetch, fetch the business. Hor. The bond is ready. Lam. I will have ready mony too, you have Bags of all sizes, and denominations; Those things do promise well, Now I attend you. Hor. Do this feat for me, and 'tis all thine own.— Exeunt. Enter Justice, Playfaire, his Brother, Neece. Just. Now we may wish you joy, the Priest hath tyed That knot, no subtlety nor malice can Dissolve; and I repent not I have been
An actor in your Comedy; though I should not Be temped easily to such another Engagement: for your sake, I have dispenc'd with My person and my place Play You were always My loving Unkle. Neece. Sir, you have in this Deserv'd our lives and fortunes. Bro. I have plaid My part too. Play. Thou hast shewed thy self a Doctor, VVhich shall be a happy Omen to thy studies. Bro. I have shew'd my self a Brother, sir. Neece. That name I must know often too. Bro. Most happy in A vertuous Sister, I congratulate Again your wish'd enlargement, and the meeting Of both your loving hearts. Play. It was good mirth, To hear him confident all our device VVas but a dream. Just. He is awake by this time, Should Lambert fail, we'll have another way To invite him; and if honestie prevail not, Force shame, till he consent. Enter Servant. Ser. Some offenders, sir, Are brought to be examined. Just. Nephew, withdraw, with your fair Bride; these troubles Are incident to my place, I'll soon dispatch 'em.— Exit Playfaire, Brother, Neece and Servant. Enter Hartwel, Country-Gentleman and Officers. Just. How now, my Masters; Master Hartwel? ha! Har. Look on me, sir, as a delinquent: these Are able to accuse me. Just. VVhat's his offence? Coun. Nothing but killing of a man. Just. VVhat proof? Coun. He has confest it, sir.
Enter Mistress Bellamy and Frances. Just. Mistress Bellamy, Y'are come in a sad time; here's Master Hartwel Accus'd for killing.— Bel. 'Tis not possible: Good sir, believe it not. Just. He does confess. Hart. I am not worth your pity, gentle Lady: In vain I should extenuate my fact, To save the trouble of examinations; Here I confess again my hand is guilty Of killing him, whose feeble arm durst not Lift up a weapon to defend himself. Just. That was not manly. Hart. I but slew a coward so, Startup; and could I call his life again, I should as soon destroy it; you perhaps Know not my provocations; he was My Rival, sir: pardon me, Mistress Bellamy, To whom I only seem'd a proselyte In love: I had no heart to give from her; And in my study to decline your anger, I fell upon her scorn; which in a few minutes Engag'd me to this fate: nor am I troubled, That I must die; when she upon whose faith I durst have laid the hopes of my eternity, Hath violated all the trust of woman. Coun. Will't please you, sir? Just. Forbear a little. Hart. Tell me, thou most unkind, if thou didst love At all; how couldst thou think I could be such A desperate Atheist, that thou so soon, With so strange Apostacie, should'st revenge it? These swelling drops, which in thy innocence Might have prevail'd to have restor'd the dead, Heaven now doth look on, and despise; and though Thou shed moist tribute on this tomb,'t shall slide Neglected on the marble, and be lost; As if the stone had sence, to punish thy Disdain of me; I can behold thee weeping, And not be mov'd to wish I were not guilty Of killing him, whose love had been thy tryumph; And I dare boldly still stand in the contempt
Of what I am to suffer, and the justice Of my own truth; challenge thy soul to answer, In what I was beneath that gaudy fool, Excepting that he had more earth then I To help his scale, which yet he may be in debt for To his fathers sins; alive he could not merit One cold disdain from thee; and dead, how comes it He should be worth thy tears? but let thy eyes Chide this unruly sorrow: dress thy cheeks With thy fresh blood again, and let thy face Open a book of smiles, in the assurance I have not long to live: when I have numbred A few sad minutes, thou sha't be reveng'd, And I shall never trouble thee; if this Be not enough, extend thy malice further, And if thou find'st one man that lov'd me living. Will honour this cold body with a grave, Be cruel, and corrupt his charity: So fare you well. Fran. Yet you must stay and hear me. Bel. He sha'not suffer, if my friends or state Can purchase him a pardon: where's the body Of him that's slain? Coun. We know not, here is all The free confession of the fact. Bel. This may Proceed from discontents: life to some men Is but their torment, in whose pain they will As on the rack, often confess what never VVas in their thought. Hart. Speak it again, and I Dare promise thee to live. Fran. My heart was ever Constant, my mothers love was but thy tryal, As mine, a seeming change in thy disguise, Applied by thy too tender apprehension; The words were, I would chuse my husband here: But what will this avail us? Hart. Master Justice, I here discharge you. Just. How! Hart. My joy obeys No limits, I accus'd my self unjustly: Startup's alive. Just. Where? Hart. Nay I know not that:
My servant's with him; but if he have plaid The hangman, stay'd or smother'd him in a ditch, I have made fair work. Bel. This wore a welcome truth. Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, the Constable. Just. I had rather it had been Lambert and the Usurer. But wait, and give me knowledge when they come.— Exit Servant. Enter Constable, Close, Startup, Officers. Const. Where's Master Justice? Hart. Ha! 'tis he and Close, Then I am secure, your pardon and thy love. Bel. You have it freely, and a mothers prayers For both your happiness. Const. Please your worship, I have brought before you two vagrants that we took last night i'th' field, between one and two a clock in the morning; very suspicious vagrants; and by my own authority, I condemn'd 'em because it was late. Star. Shall we be hang'd, Close? we are condemn'd already. Const. Coming this morning to the prison, I found them drinking away sorrow in double juggs, to the very staggering of my authority: I beseech your worship to draw a pair of Mit∣tens for 'em both; for they deserve to be made samplers, and whipt for the edification of the Common-wealth. Hart. This is the Gentleman was kill'd, sir. Star. No, sir, Not kill'd outright, but I was almost starv'd With cold; these Gentlewomen know me, And I should know that hose and doublet; Those garments that you wear, I oft have seen. Hart. Well said Jeronymo. Star. I was fain to borrow These of a prisoner, that lies in upon A diamond. Just. Officers you are discharg'd— Exit Officers. Star. And we too? Just. Yes, and joy in every bosom. Hart. Close, you must know this Mistress. Star. How! Hart. My wife, sir.
Close. It is enough for you to know her, sir, And me to acknowledge. Coun. D'ye know me, sir? Star. Yes, and your daughter too: Who brought you to town? Coun. And you shall right her. Star. Is she grown crooked? pox on her, I know too well: Peace, not a word more, I know your meaning, Do not discredit me, and we'll steal down And marry her, ere any be aware on't: I wo'not stay to shift me, take no leave: The jest will be, when I am in the Country, How like an Ass he'll look on my apparel.— Exit Startup and Coun. Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, Master Lambert, and if I be not Mistaken, the Usurer Hornet very gallant. Just. I must entreat your patience a while; You'll meet with friends i'the next room.— Exeunt: manet Justice. Enter Lambert and Hornet. Lam. Excuse Our boldness, sir, this gentleman. Just. I should know him: Master Hornet, you are very welcome. Hor. Good sir, No ceremony, we are come to you 'Bout business: I have lost my Neece, and would Know where she is. Just. D'ye take me for a Wizzard? Lam. With your favour, our desires are that you would Be witness to a bargain, and receive Some trifles, sir, in trust to be delivered To me, if I restore his kinswoman. Hor. Not else, on that condition I deposite These hundred pieces and a bond; if he Deliver me my Neece, they are his fraught; If not, they call me owner. Lam. Pardon, sir, That I presume to bring this trouble to ye. Just. 'Tis none at all.
Lam. You sha'not expect long; So rest you merry.— Exit Lambert. Just. How fare you, sir? Hor. As you see, faln away an inch since morning; But this will physick me: if I possess This harlotry again, I'll make her sure: Trust not a woman, they have found the herb To open locks, not brasen towers can hold 'em: Or if they get not loose, they have the vertue Of Load-stones shut up in a box; they'll draw Customers to 'em; nay being dead and buryed, There is suspition they will break the grave; Which puts so many husbands to the charge Of heavie stones, to keep their bad wives under. Just. You are mov'd. Hor. Oh Master Justice, you are honest: I have been abus'd, so miserable cheated, I am asham'd to think on't: stay, what Musick?— Musick. Ha! 'tis my Neece; the very, very same. Enter Lambert and Neece. Lam. There, sir, you have her, and the rest is mine. Hor. Take it—And you shall go along with me. Neece. How, Unkle! A reveller? you'll lead me a Coranto. Hor. You shall dance homewards. Enter Playfair and his Brother. Play. What make you so familiar with my wife? Hor. Ha! wife! is she married? Bro. 'Tis upon record, I'll bring a Parson that shall take his oath on't. Hor. Give me my bond and mony, Master Justice: Where? where? Lam. Here, but they are not to be recover'd By law: I have a judgement, sir, against you. Hor. You have conspir'd, to rob, cheat and undo me: You shall be all Star-Chamber'd. Neece. Sir, be calm, and hear us. Hor. I'll hear nothing. Play. Yes, you shall, It will be necessary: I am bold, Persuming on her favour to demand
A parcel of three thousand pound; the sum Belongs to me by vertue of a marriage, And I must have it. Hor. Vertue of a marriage? Just. I saw the Priest conjoyn their hands; he will Deserve your love. Lam. Perhaps you may continue A thousand, or two thousand on security. Hor. What persecution this? Bro. Faith sir consider, 'Tis more safe to see her thus bestowed, Then trust a Jury; if the Doctor had Given her too much Opium, or purg'd Her soul away, things might go worse: but I'll Keep counsel. Hor. So, so, have ye mortified me yet? Lam. For your own sake, and as you are a true knight, I'll tell no tales. Enter Mistress Bellamy, Frances, Hartwel and Close. Hor. Now have ye done?—The widow, Not a word more: take her, I'll pay you, sir, Three thousand pound to morrow: Noble widow, You were in the first list to be invited; My Neece I told you of, is married to This worthy Gentleman. Bel. You look like a bridegroom. Hor. 'Tis in your power to make it good, what say you? Shall we joyn issue? Bel. I will never matry. Hor. You are resolv'd, why so? come hither Nephew, Sha't be my heir, I love thee for thy wit; But charm thy friends, they do not laugh at me: I'll be a knight too, if I live, and build An Hospital for twenty more o'th' Order; Which I'll reduce my self, out of the Suburbs, In women's petticoats, and turn Squires again To Whores, or Parasites to Noblemen, For want of fit provision. Play An excellent Foundation: but where's Startup? Lam. Sunk, I think. Hart. Ne'er conjure for him: we are ingrateful to Our bliss, for wasting of these pretious minutes,
Which are so many ages, till the Church Hath made us perfect. Hor. Is there any more work For the Priest? then give you joy beforehand, And let us celebrate the day together. Close. I am glad of your conversion, y'are the first Jew, that in my remembrance has turn'd Christian. Play. Walk on to joyes; Twixt Love and Fortune, now th' accompts are even. Hart. A chain of Hearts, and the first linck in Heaven. Exeunt omnes EPILOGUE. THrough many hazards, Love hath found a way For Friends to meet: good Omen to our Play. If love hath brought you hither, Gentlemen, Love will find out the way to come agen. And we dare promise, if you rellish these, Our Loves shall find out other ways to please. T. B. FINIS. There is lately Printed two excellent Comedies, en∣tituled, The Old Couple: By Thomas May Esquire. The City-Night-Cap, or Crede quod habes & habes. By Robert Davenport. Both these, with variety of other Playes, are to be sold by Samuel Speed, at the Printing Press in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1661.
