S3881 R25762 9109451 42460
Sir John Berkenhead REVIV'D, OR A SATYR Against the late REBELLION. LONDON, Printed for W. Benbridge, 1681.
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH REBELLION. WHen as we liv'd in peace (GOD wot) A King would not content us; But we, forsooth, must hire the Scot, To all-be-Parliament us. Then down went King and Bishops too; On goes the holy Wirk, Betwixt them and the Brethren blew, T' advance the Crown and Kirk. But when that these had reign'd a time, Robb'd Kirk, and sold the Crown; A more religious sort up climbe, And crush the Jockies down. But now we must have Peace again, Let none with fear be vext: For, if without the King these raign, Then heigh down they go next
A Peace, a Peace, the Country cries, Or else we shall be undone: For this brave War we thank the wise Confiding Men of LONDON. Sure now they may, as well as we, Know how to value Quiet, When th' Army comes their Guests to be, For a Twelvemonths Cash and Diet. Free Quarter is a tedious thing, And so is the Excise. None can deliver us but the King, From this damn'd Dutch Device. The Parliament hath serv'd seven years; True vengeance then we see Upon feign'd Jealousies and Fears; For yet they are not free. Long Peace a Plenty did beget, And Plenty brought forth Pride; Through Pride to Faction Men were set In Parties to divide. The new-form'd Priests first led the way, And said it was no sin By force to drive the King away, And draw the CITY in. The Lords and Commons they consent To what each Rabbi saith; And so the Catholick down went, T' advance the public Faith.
This brought a War and Taxes on, T' inslave a free-born People: And now the Work is thus far gone, Next have at Crown and Steeple. Our wise Reformers, brave and gay, Have ta'ne a goodly course, To fight, to feast, to fast and pray, And milk each honest Purse. The Crown's Revenue goes to wrack, While they sing Hymns and Psalms; And rather than themselves will lack, The King must live on Alms. We are, the learned Synod says, The Church of England's Nurse, Who make them bless the Sabbath-days, And all the week to curse. The Plough stands still, and Trade is small; For Goods, Lands, Towns, and Cities, Nay, I dare say, the Devil and all, Pays Tribute to Committees. A Scot and Jesuit joyn'd in hand, First taught the World to say, That Subjects ought to have command, And Princes to obey. These both agreed to have no King; The Scotchman he cries further, No Bishop: 'tis a godly thing States to reform by Murther.
Then th' Independent meek and sly, Most lowly lies at lurch, And so to put poor Jocky by, Resolves to have no Church. The King dethron'd! the Subjects bleed! The Church hath no abode; Let us conclude they 're all agreed, That sure there is no GOD. Our States-men (though no Lunaticks, No Wizards, nor Buffons) Have shewn a hundred Changeling-Tricks, In less than three New Moons. The Devils foot is cleft (men speak) And so (GOD knows) are they: The Factions rule by fits, then take Their turnes, and run away. They vote, vnvote, and vote with noise What they cry'd down before, As ready as if LONDON-Boys Were knocking at the dore. To day an Independ out-side; And then a Scotch to morrow: Thus shuffle and cut, they do divide Our Wealth, whilst we know sorrow. O happy▪ Treason! See how Wealth Is made their Heaven! They swell With Pride! and live by Blood and Stealth, As if there were no Hell!
No Saduces but must confess, Those Monsters which are told In Story, are risen now no less Prodigious then of old. Both Cain and Judas back are come, In Vizards most divine: GOD bless us from a Pulpit▪ Drum, And a Preaching Catiline. They feed upon a Kingdoms Curse, And prey upon a King! The Dev'l provide a second Course, And then a Voyder bring. Now CHARLES, thy Conquest is compleat, And all the World shall see, That GOD which guides the Royal Scot, Will thy Avenger be. O House of Commons, House of Lords, Amend before September: For 'tis decreed, your Souldiers Swords Shall then you All-dismember. But like fair Chapmen, 'twas well done, To give you time and day To cast accompts; for one by one They will you soundly pay. The Kingdom all in pieces torn! Your time is fairly spent; To make your selves a very scorn, Your King but Jack-a-Lent.
Now, now we see 'twas for the Crown The Houses both did fight: For since the Cavaliers are down, They put the King to flight. The Adjutators stern and proud, Said, He should have no Quarter, Because he is a King; and vow'd To make the Saint a Martyr. Their Officers cry'd, Hail, O King; The rest made mocks and scorns; The Houses Vinegar did bring, And all did plat the Thorns. Thus crucifi'd, Great CHARLES did live As dead, is gone away: For Resurrection, GOD will give A new Cor'nation day. Rouze up! King Charles hath mist the snare Laid for his Royal Feet: Let th' Adjutators now take care Each for his Winding-sheet. The Army rendezvouzed are, And do they know not what; The Scots and they are like to jar: Let us thank GOD for that. The Houses know not what to think; The Citt's horn-madded be: They must be whipt until they stink: A joyful sight to see!
Thus Cavaliers cast up your Caps, And tell the Rebels plain, That Charles in spight of all their traps, Shall shortly rule again. For Liberty, and Privilege, Religion and the King, We fought; But O! the Golden Wedge! That is the only Thing. There lies the Cream of all the Cause; Religion is but Whig; Pure Privilege eats up the Laws, And cries, For Kings a Fig. The Houses may a Christmas keep, The Countrymen a Lent, The Citizens (like silly sheep) Must fast, and be content. Then where is Liberty, (I pray) With Justice, Truth and Right? Sure they and Conscience fled away With Charles, to th' Isle of Wight. Gape, gape for Peace, poor Countrymen; The Members mean to treat: And we shall see fair play agen, When they no more can cheat. The King shall come to Westminster, It may be to his Grave, Or of a glorious Prince must there Be made a Royal-Slave.
But 'twere more wise to let him reign Out of his Peoples sight, For fear he should bring Peace again, And put them in a fright. Sure Martin lay in of a Clap, And Say himself did dote; The Devil too, wore a fick Cap, When th' Houses past this Vote, Come let us live, and laugh away The follies of this Age; Treason breeds care; we'll sing and play Like birds within a cage. Fetters are th' only favors now The Houses give (we see:) And since the King them wears, I vow, 'Twere baseness to be free. Then let us all our sorrows drown In Sack and merry Glee: Ye Citizens of London▪ Town, What jolly Slaves are we! For Common-prayer, ye have Excise, Free-quarter too is comming To pay you for your Mutinies, Feasts, Covenants, and Drumming. No Puritan, no Popish Priest, Nor Prot'stant now shall be; Nor Law, but to live as we list, 'Tis Heaven thus to be free.
Could Babylons great King now sit In Counsel with our Nation, He were the only Man to fit Us with a Reformation. The glorious Golden-Idol then Might shine in each Dominion; Both Factions and their Brethren Would soon be one opinion. Away, thou Pagan-Cavalier, This God must not be thine; But for the Saints at Westminster, Whose souls are more divine. Live, drink, and laugh, our Worthies may, And kindly take their fills; The Subjects must their reckonings pay, The King must pass their Bills. No Princes now, but they; the Crown Is vanisht with our Quiet; Nor will they let us use our own Devotions and Diet. All Plums the Prophets Sons defie, And Spice-broths are too hot; Treason's in a December-Pye, And Death within the Pot. Christmas, farewel; thy day (I fear) And merry-days are done: So they may keep Feasts all the year, Our Saviour shall have none.
O happy Nation heretofore, When Seas our Walls have been; Unhappy now we see no shore, But are all Sea within. Factions, like Billows, rage and toss, And Death mounts ev'ry Wave; Yet in this Storm we are so cross, We will no Pilot have. Just such a Tempest seiz'd upon Blest Paul, the Scripture says, When he had seen no Sun nor Moon, Nor Stars for many days. Our Sun and Moon no beams create, Our Stars disperst we see: Such as was his, will be our Fate, We must all shipwrackt be. A glorious Prince this Parliament The King should be, did swear; But now we understand they meant In Heaven, and not here. Let them invade the Throne, and part His Crown, and vote his Fate; Yet know, in each true Noble Heart, He keeps his Chair of State. Princes may be, like other Men, Imprisoned, and kept under A while, as fire in clouds, but then At length appear in Thunder.
And, as in hidden Caves the wind Sad tremblings doth create; So Monarchs, by their own confin'd, Cause Earthquakes in the State. Farewel the Glory of our Land; For, now the Free-born Blades, Our Lives and our Estates command, And ride us all like Jades. Faith and Religion bleeding lie, And Liberty grows faint: No Gospel, but pure Treachery, And Treason make the Saint. Oh! 'tis a heavenly Cause (I trow) Which first baptiz'd the Round-head In Noble Strafford's Blood! but now Must on the Kings be founded. Yet know, that Kings are Gods on Earth; And those which pull them down, Shall find it is no less than Death To tamper with a Crown. 'Tis true, as Harry Martin said, The Scots away must pack; The Cov'nant shall aside be laid, Like an Old Almanac. Come then, and buy my New, true, New, New Almanac most true, Such Accidents of State to shew, The like no Age ere knew.
Since that we lost our King and Laws, Since Jealousies and Fears, Since Peace, pure Truth, and this Foul Cause, It is full seven years. Poor CHARLES pursu'd in Forty one, Ʋnking'd in Forty seven; The Eighth will place him on his Throne, In Earth, or else in Heaven. Three Kingdoms brought to a fine pass, Whilst that our Saviours Rule, The Country is become an Ass, The City but a Mule. Each Ʋniversity now pines, The Church may hang and rot; They banish all our true Divines, The Lawyers too must trot. Come, Sirs, more Sacks unto the Mill, More Taxes, more Free-quarter; 'Tis fit our Laws be your bare Will, And the Excise our Charter. God speed the Plough: plague Rooks and Crows, And send us years more cheap: For, I am sure, whoever sows, The Houses mean to reap. Money, the Soul of Man and Wit, But yet no Saint of mine! While th' Houses vote, and Synod sit, Thou ne're shalt want a Shrine.
Reforming is a dull Device, Dreads nought but strife and rage: Thou putt'st us into Paradice, And bring'st the Golden Age. Thou art Religion, God, and all That we may call Divine: Thy Temple is Westminster-Hall, And all our Priests are thine. Tush, tell not us the way to Heav'n, Thou juggling Clergy-Elf, That sett'st the World at six and seven's; Money is Heav'n it self. Betwixt those Atheists feign'd of old, And ours, there is no odds; For, both this one opinion hold, That Fear did first make Gods. Hell now is thought an idle Dream To fright Men from their Crimes: Religion but a crafty Theam, Made to Bug-bear the Times. The Bible and great Babels Whore, May both together burn; For the Religious Fit is o're Now they have serv'd their turn. Only, one Text may scape their hands, Since they have ta'en such pains, To lay their Lords in Iron Bands, And bind their Kings in Chains.
Copernicus, thy learned skill We praise, since we have found The truth; for now doth Hea'vn stand still Whilst that the Earth runs round. See how the Wheel of Providence Back Old Confusion brings! Cashires us once of a Prince, To plague's with Petty Kings. They say the Saints all rule must take, And others must have none: Their Privilege it is to make A Foot-stool of the Throne. The Laws o'th Land say, Charles must reign, And Conscience pleads his Cause: But Conscience is a thing most vain, Their Gospel eats up Laws. Never such Rebels have been seen, As since we led this Dance: So we may feast, let Prince and Queen Beg a-la-mode-de-France. Let Conscience pine, and cry 'tis strange, Wee'll say 'tis bravely done, To make the King take in Exchange A Dungeon for a Throne. Away with Justice, Laws and Fear; When Men resolve to rise, Brave Souls must scorn all Scruples where A Kingdom is the Prize.
Then let us what our Labours gain Enjoy, and bless our Chance: Like Kings let's domineer and reign; Thus, a-la-mode-de-France. King and no King, was once a Play, Or Fable on the Stage: But see! it is become this day The Moral of our Age. Newcastle was the first best Scene, Then Holmby, Hampton-Court; Next, from a Palace to a Den Translated, to make sport. Each State-Buffoon a part did take; Some plaid the Fool, some Knave; But still the Plot was laid to make Their King a Royal Slave. Brave Actors! we admire your skill; Your Play none understands; Yet make an Exit when you will, We all shall clap our hands. At Westminster two wond'rous Beasts This day are to be seen,March 14. 1648▪ Call'd Liberty and Privilege, (GOD save the King and Queen) Say▪ Monsters strange, what kin are ye To Tygers or the Lion? For shame boast not your Pedigree From the sweet Sons of Zion.
This Libertie first whelpt the Cause; The Cause then lay at lurch, To gull the City, damn the Laws, And quite cashire the Church. But Privilege (O monstrous Thing!) Eats up poor Cavaliers, Feeds on the Gentry and the King; But next have at the Peers. Once more the Kingdom lies at Stake, No matter then who wins; Two Schismaticks the Wagers make, And now the Game begins. The Scots and Sects, two Godly Cheats, Debar both Ace and Sice: To rook each other with fine Feats, They both bring in false Dice. The first throws for the Covenant, Next who shall rule and sway: For Jocky now doth swear and rant, He'll have no more soul play. The Sectaries cry'd, Have at all, When first the Dice were thrown; But rather than the Scots shall brawl, They 'll part stakes in the Crown. The Devils reign is short, though fierce; Then let our Music▪ found; The Drawers all the Hogsheads pierce, And make the Healths go round.
Here's a Health to the King in Sack, To the Houses in Small-Beer; In Vineger to th' crabbed Pack Of Priests at Westminster Next, to revive our fainting States, Fill out some Aqua vitae: 'Twere pity on the Bridge such Pates Should meet in a Committee. Let's water th' Royal Plants with Tears Of rich, divine Canary: Drink on, Cav'liers, t' all Loyal Peers; Then end with Charles and Mary. Full forty thousand Scots, by Vote, Must visit us e're long: Brave Army sure! when ev'ry Scot Is forty thousand strong! Though th' Houses have deserv'd these plagues, GOD keep our Nation free: Like Egypt, let not us, by Rags And Vermin conquer'd be. For shame, for shame, call home your King, With Honour let him treat: His Nature is without a sting; His Motto, To forget. Return, return, Disloyal Crue Of Men forsworn: if not, Rather than thus we'll stoop to you, We'll Idolize the Scot.
Come, Mahomet, thy Turn is next; Now Gospel's out of date: The Alcoran may prove Good Text In our new Turkish-State. Thou dost unto thy Priests allow The sin of full four Wives: Ours scarce will be content with now Five Livings, and nine Lives. Thy Saints and ours are all alike; Their Vertues flow from Vice: No Bliss they do believe, and seek But an Earthly Paradice. A Heav'n on Earth they hope to gain, But we do know full well, Could they their glorious ends attain, This Kingdom must be Hell. From Prison now return the King, The Queen and Prince from France; For Chosen Charles the Welsh-men sing, And stoutly lead the Dance. The Scotch-Bag-Pipes, the Pulpit-Drums And Priests sound high and big: Once more the Cause and Cov'nant comes To shew's a Scotish Jig The Irish will a Voyage take, To join their force in one; And whilst they frisk a Galliard, make The Houses sing, O Hone.
Three Kingdoms thus must dance the Hay; But ere the Members run, We'll see they shall the Music pay, And then the Dance is done. Seven years by phrentic Votes and Fits, Our Worthies bore command; Then did they run out of their Wits, But now out of the Land. No more shall they the City ride Like a fine Golden Ass; The Navy's rigg'd with Wind and Tide, They stay but for a Pass. But if they linger long behind, And keep their King in Bands, I'll undertake it shall be sign'd By a hundred thousand Hands. For prosp'rous Gales then on the Deep; Let their Priests prate and pray By Order, and at Margarets keep An Humiliation-day. The Factious now each other rout With Jealousies and Fear: The Independents face about, The rest cry, As you were. The Presbyters put forth their Horns To guard their Goods and Homes; The She-Militia likewise scorns Their Cocks should lose their Combs.
Then toll (I pray) the Passing-Bell For our new State-Committee: These monstrous Votes, which made them swell, Are cow'd down by the City. Sweet John-a-Nokes and John-a-Styles, And worshipful Jack-Straws, Of both the Junto's, leave your Wiles, And give's our King and Laws. Betwixt two thieves our Saviour once Suffer'd for us, and di'd: So 'twixt two thievish Factions Our King is crucifi'd. Caesar, not Christ, the ancient Jews Paid tribute of their Treasure; Our Jews no King but Christ will chuse, And rob, and cry down Caesar. Now, for the King the zealous Kirk 'Gainst th' Independent bleats, When as (alass!) their only wirk Is to renew old Cheats. If they can sit, vote what they list, And crush the new States down, Then up go They, but neither Christ Nor King, shall have his own. The Pox, the Plague, and each Disease, Are cur'd, though they invade us: But never look for Health and Peace, If once Presbyt'ry jade us.
When ev'ry Priest becomes a Pope, Then Tinkers and Sow-gelders May, if they can but 'scape the Rope, Be Princes and Lay-Elders. If once the Kirk-men pitch their Tents Without our Assembly-Asses, Synods will eat up Parliaments, Courts be devour'd by Classes. Look to't, ye Gentry, else be Slaves To Slaves that can't abide ye: Though ye have been cow'd down by Knaves, Oh! let not Fools now ride ye. But sev'n years (of a thousand 'tis) Our Saints must Rulers be: So they shall lose in years of bliss, Nine hundred ninety three. No more then let those Rabbies trust Unto the Revelation; For their Interpreter is Lust, And Pride makes Application. Religion but a Pack-horse is, To carry on Designes; The Bible like a Juglers Box, Us'd by our State-Divines. Texts are tormented one by one, Like Votes, now here, now there: Thus Hocus-Pocus is out-done By them at Westminster.
The Banes are askt, the Marriage next Goes forward in the City: For now the Match is made betwixt Them and the State-Committee. Thou Strumpet (London) tell not us Of Babel any more; If from thy King thou partest thus, Thou art the greater Whore. Thy Bags their Portion now are meant, As well as Crown and Church; But when that all is gone and spent, They'll leave thee in the lurch. Thou Bawd of Treason, then for all Thy cursed Fornication, Thou and thy Priestly Panders shall Be Carted through the Nation. The Market's made; the King shall treat, (They say) and buy his own: But is not this a very Cheat. To set the price, a Crown? Alas! the Members run by rote, And shew us many a Feat: Thus all the year they'll vote, unvote, For Money, Cloaths and Meat. 'Tis fit that they uphold their Trades, What ere Malignants speak: So they can thrive, the City-Jades Their Backs and Necks may break.
Poor, What d' lack? small gains can show, With many an empty Shelf: The House spoils Shops; 'tis Aye and No, That brings in all the Pelf. Rebellion makes our Nation bleed With fresh Alarms (we see:) But yet it is not well agreed Who must the Rebel be. The Round-head first the Rebel was, (If truth be in the Laws) Till Treason did for Gospel pass, To bolster up the Cause. The thriving Cause with high disdain, In Fortunes full Career, Throws Rebel in the face again Of King and Cavalier. Thus Prosp'rous mischief makes it good Against all Law and Reason: Not to spill Royal, Loyal Blood, But, to be conquer'd 's Treason. Five months ago, our mighty StatesJune 20. 1648. Were pleas'd to vote No King; But two months since, to act new Cheats, Their Votes the Changes ring. 'Tis time the Bells of Westminster Chime Backwards, and retire To quench the Flame, when as we hear The Kingdom's all on fire
But yet (it seems) they make a stand, And cry it is no matter: What need they care for Fire on Land, Whose Journey lies by Water? GOD send them Ships, fair Winds and Ti With Passage quick and good; Or else I fear (to scourge our pride) They'll swim through Seas of Blood. The Holy War goes on apace, Yet brings the Saints no Pay: In triumph now they ne're say Grace, But only Fast and Pray. They many an hungry Conquest get, But not Thanksgiving Dinners: The City knows they scorn to eat With Publicans and Sinners. The Members cannot spare one Meal; Their Bags lie seal'd in Town: What though they broke the Kings great Seal, They'll not undo their own? The Country bids them starve, or hang, They'll be no more kept under: The Cavaliers will soundly bang Them all, and spoil their Plunder. Reformation, thou Stalking-Horse Of our Hip-shotten State, Th' Appendix of the Public Purse, And Midwife of our Fate!
'Twas Thou, and Beldam-Conscience first, That set the world a madding; And you your selves, like Cain accurst, Have ever since been gadding. Pox take th' unlucky Cause, for me, It is a Wild Vagary; The Bane of Boon Society: For that first rais'd Canary. Poor Sinners now must snap a crust; Ye deadly sev'n, farewel: For since y'are all Excis'd, we must Pay dear to purchase Hell. What, though the Factions are agreed The Kingdom still to cheat? Do what they can, it is decreed The King shall come and treat. Come from the Dungeon to the Throne, (Great Charles) and quell the rage Of th' Iron world; with Thee alone Revives the Golden Age. Those very Saints, which joy'd thy Fall, And said thy day was done, Will now like Persian-Pagans, all Adore the Rising Sun. No more wrapt up in Clouds remain, Secluded from the Nation: May Thou and Thine shine bright, and reign A Glorious Constellation.
It is decreed (Great Prince) thy Fate Shall check their damned Plots; Though London jade it for the State, And bandies at the Scots. The Presbyters now fain would ride, And shew us t' other Feat; Therefore to quell the Saints high pride, They say the King shall treat. Were he in their hands, the Town's their own, The Houses too must work, To vote the Independents down, And mount the Rascal Kirk. Away, ye juggling, paltry Crew Of well-affected Knaves; Rather than free your Sov'raign, you Your selves will live like Slaves. Stand to 't, ye Lords, we'll stand to you, And clip the Commons wings: Let not the Lev'ling Rascal-Crew, Thus domineer like Kings. The Lower is the Ʋpper-House, And hath been so seven years: Your Votes they value not a Lowse, Ye Antichristian Peers. They give you many a Ratling Peal, And bait you one by one; For should a Treaty take, their Zeal And Saintships are undone.
My Lords, of Gotam, not of Greece, Your Wisdoms I shall sing; And sell you all for pence apiece, If you reject your King. No Camel like the LONDON breed, To drudge, pray, pay, and feast; In Body, and in Purse to bleed: O 'tis a patient Beast! If you'll needs pray, pray stay at home; Tell GOD your sad condition: 'Tis Popish to the Saints to come And put up your Petition. This wondrous Idol of the States, The Stomach hath of Bell: Like Moloch it Mankind doth eat, And quick devours like Hell. As th' Horse-Leech (Give) it ever cries, And rages like the Dragon; As the old Serpent it is wise: But it must fall like Dagon. Would you know why the Plauge hath ceas't These last sev'n years now spent? Because GOD knows no greater Pest Than this same Parliament.1648. How many thousands hath it swept Of Bodies, Souls, and Gold! King, Church, and People, (none except) Have all been bought and sold.
Our merry Pipes, for Trumpets shrill; Our Tabers chang'd to Drums: Princes are brav'd by Jac and Gill, Wat Tilers, and Tom Thums. 'Tis time those Bags, which caus'd the War, Should make the War to cease; For the States Music is to jar, But our best Musick's Peace. Now shall the King enjoy his own; And that new Vertue, Treason, Whereby the Saints do claim the Crown, Be baffled with high Reason. Great CHARLES, thy Vertues I desire, Not Solomons, nor his Stores; For who can tell most to admire His Wisdom or his Whores? His Vices so eclips'd his Grace, That wranglers cannot tell, Whether as yet they may him place In Heaven, or in Hell. But all that was in him Divine, And more, to Thee is giv'n; That where so many Graces shine, A Prison must be Heav'n. Another Blow! will not the Scot, And Loyal English do? Sure, Jove himself is of the Plot, An Independent too.
Is he a King, and will he see Rebels assault the Crown? Had they but hands to reach, 'tis he Should next resign his own. Is he a God? and shall this Tribe Go on as they begin? Atheists will say, They do him bribe For Privilege to sin If these be Saints, 'tis vain indeed To think there's Good or Evil: The World will soon be of this Creed, No God, no King, no Devil. Of all those Monsters which we read In Afric, Inde, or Nile, None like to those now lately bred Within this wretched Isle. The Cannibal, the Tygre fell, Crocodile and Sycophant; The Turk, the Jew, and Infidel, Make up an English Saint. By these were Lisle and Lucas crown'd; Two Worlds, both great and good: For Men, Art, Arms, were all here drown'd I'th' Deluge of their blood. The Trump of Fame's too low and weak, That of the General Doom Is only fit their praise to speak, The World to be their Tomb.
The Treaty holds; and some men are Convinc'd the Wars will cease: Fond Folk! To think the Men of War Will e're endure a Peace. Go, bid the Scot quit English Ground, The Swede the German Air; Holland obey the Spanish Crown, The Pope leave Peter's Chair. Woo the great States-man to his Grave, Preach Gospel to the Jews; To Turks, that Mahomet's a Knave, Platonic Love to Stews. Let Citizens loath sacred things, Presbyters pride and ease; When these are done, make Saints love Kings, And then we may have Peace. See in what glory CHARLES now sits, With Truth to conquer Treason; And prove he is the King of Wits, The World, Himself, and Reason. Angels bear witness GOD looks down, The Graces too attend; Sure none but Devils then will frown Upon a blessed end. Ten hundred thousand Loyal Hearts, All bleeding at his Fate▪ As many Wishes from all parts Flie round his Chair of State.
Come then, ye dirty Sainted Elves, Worse than Church▪ window paint: By this fair Glass abhor your selves, Learn here to be a Saint. The King the four great Bills must pass, And none but Saints be free: Th' Irish and Cavaliers (alas!) Must th' only Rebels be. New Lords, new Laws, new Saints are we; Religion's in a fine pickle, When 'tis resolv'd the Church shall be A Three-years Conventicle. Militia too, they needs must gain, Those pretty carnal Tools: For Pauls old Weapons they disdain, As fit for none but Fools. Thus Royal CHARLES lets to Lense, Lays Sword and Scepter down, To shew he values Ʋs and Peace Above a glorious Crown. Give me the Dragons Gall for Ink, His sting to be my Pen, To blast the Scot, and make him stink Worse than the Dregs of men. See now the Reformation-Wirk, For which they made us bleed, Is to cashire King, Church and Kirk, On this and that side Tweed.
Let them with Egypts plagues be crost, Yet still find new and worse; And since I have Jobs patience lost, Give me his skill to curse. At Home and Hell may they e're dwell; And for quick passage thither, As they have juggled all full well, So may they hang together. Let me be Turk, or any thing, But a Scotch Calvinist: First he damn'd Bishops; next, his King; Now he cashires his Christ. Gude faith, Sir, they the Pulpit bang, But let their Gospel down; For, the old Saviour needs must gang Now a new one's come to town. The Saints, whom once their mouths did curse, Dear Brethren are, and Friends: Which proves their Zeal a Stalking-Horse For Knavish-godly ends. Then rail no more at Antichrist, But learn ye to be civil: And since ye have King Cromwel kist, Shake hands too with the Devil. Since they have damn'd all Saints of old, No new shall be for me: Like Jews, they worship Gods of Gold, Their King they crucifie.
Were he the King of Kings, his Crown Could not be safe from Foes: Like Jesuites, they no Gospel own, But Murther and Depose. Like Turks, their Heav'n lies all in Sense, In Wenches, Tarts and Gelly: No Hell they fear, when parted hence; They serve no God▪ but Belly. All this, and more, (by Jove) is true, If they the Treaty cease, To juggle with the Lev'lling Crew That cry, No King, No Peace. No Lord, no Knight, no Gentleman, For Honours now are Crimes: The Saints will form us (if they can) All to the Prim'tive times. Brave days, when Adam was a King Without Crown, Lands, or Riches! So, stript of Royal Robes, they'll bring Great CHARLES, to Fig-leave Breeches. Princes with Plowmen rank shall pass; Ladies, like the first Woman, Must spin, or else be turn'd to Grass, Now all things are in common. Thus Cov'nanting, and Levelling, Three Kingdoms have o'rethrown, And made all fellows with their King, A Foot-ball of the Crown.
Tell me thou Presbyterian Ass, Why thou at first didst jar: Thy peevish Plea (No Bishops) was The first ground of the War. Next, to thy shame, thou didst combine With the Sectarian Routs; Our CHARLES should be no King of thine, Or but a King of Clouts. Both King and Bishops thus exil'd, The Saints not yet content: Now with fresh flames of Zeal grow wild, And cry, No Parliament. Well may we then this Maxime prove, Treason no end can know, But levels at the Gods above, As well as those below. Hark, how for Peace the Kingdom groans, That warr'd they knew not why! Yeild then, or else the very Stones Will out against you cry. For shame, ye Bastard-saints, give oe'r, Or else the world will think Your Mother is great Babels Whore, If blood you love to drink. The State's grown fat with Orphans Tears, Whilst Widows pine and moan; And tender Conscience in sev'n years, Is turn'd t' a heart of Stone.
Return, hard hearts, the Treaty ends, Our breasts with hope do swell; Your Bags are full, then let's be friends, Or bid the World farewel. No Gods above, nor Gods below, Our Saints (I see) will own; Allegiance is Rebellion now, Treason to wear a Crown. Nor King nor Parliament will please, 'Tis Gospel to rebel: Nay, they'll Remonstrate against Peace, Be it in Heav'n or Hell. Pluto, beware, (to thee they come When here their work is done:) For they'll break loose, and beat up Drum, And storm thee in thy Throne. Then John-a Leyden, Nel, and all Their goblin ghostly Train, (Brave Rebel Saints triumphant) shall Begin their second Reign. Brave Reformation! now I see London's a blessed place, To find the Saints chearful and free And nurse the Babe of Grace. Let yellow boys ne're tempt their sight, Of Valour with the sourcis For the tame Slaves will never fight Till they have empty Purses.
Come then, ye lowsie wanton Wags Of sainted Chivalry, And free their poor condemned Bags That groan for Liberty. March on, boon Blades, here's store of Cash, Their King they will not pity: Then spur them on, and soundly lash These Dull-men of the City. Dull Cuckolds! we are dainty Slaves, And well may be content, When Thirty Fools, and Twenty Knaves, Make up a Parliament. They banish all men in their Wits, Vote King, Lords, all Offenders; And authorize the phrentic Fits Of our long-sword State-menders. 'Tis Nol's own Brew-house now, I swear; The Speaker's but his Skinker: Their Members are, like th' Council of War, Car-men Pedlers, and Tinkers. Fine Journey Junto! prety Knack! None such in all past Ages! Shut shop; for, now the godly Pack Will next pay you your Wages. Gone are those Golden Days of yore, When Christmas was an High-day, Whose sports we now shall see no more; 'Tis turn'd into Good-Friday.
Now, when the King of Kings was born, And did salvation bring, They strive to crucifie in scorn His Vice-Roy, and their King. Since th' ancient Feast they have put down, No new one will suffice; But the choice Dainties of a Crown, Princes in Sacrifice. No Powers are safe, Treason's a Tilt, And the mad Sainted-Elves Boast when the Royal Blood is spilt, They'll all be Kings themselves. Like jolly Slaves, ye goodly Knaves, We'll bid th' old year Adieu: Old Sack, and things must pass away, And so shall all your new. Now for a No-King, or a New; For th' old, they say, shall pack; The New may serve a year to view Like an old Almanack. New Houses, new; for th' old ones dote, And have been thrice made Plunder; The Saints do vote, and act by rote, And are a Nine-days-wonder. Then let us chear, this merry New-year; For CHARLES shall wear the Crown: 'Tis a damn'd Cause, that damns the Laws, And turns all up-fide down. FINIS.
