S4450 99829721 34164
VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdomes, assist and defend all those that enter into this League d Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, perswasion, or terrour, to bee divided and withdrawn from is blessed Vnion and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause, which so much concerneth the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the honour of the King; but shall all the dayes of our lives, zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppresse or overcome, we shall reveale and make known, that it may bee timely prevented or re∣moved; All which we shall doe as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof: Wee professe and declare before God and the world our unfained defire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these Kingdomes, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not laboured for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavoured to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walke worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of our sins and transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfained purpose, desire, and endeavour for our selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in publike and in private, in all duties wee owe to God and Man, to amend our lives, and each one to goe before another in the example of a reall Reformation, that the Lord may turne away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of all hearts, with a tru intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall bee disclosed: Most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to blesse our desires and proceedings with such successe, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, and encourage∣ment to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to joyne in the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Je∣sus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Common-wealths. Wil. Lenthal, Speaker Beuchamp St. John Gilbert Gerrard VValter Earle James Cambell Thomas Cheeke Robert Nicholas Benjamin Rudyard John Gurdon Robert Harley Francis Knollys Edward Master John White Anthony Stapley Dennis Bond Laurence Whitaker Michael Noble Pere. Hoby Richard Barwis Edward Baynton William Cawley John Moyle Iohn Pyne George Searle Henry Vane senior Nevill Poole Iohn Yonge Henry Herbert Thomas Sandys William Iesson Philip L. Herbert Thomas Barrington Martin Lumley Iohn Trevor Francis Godolphin Thomas Arundell Edward Stephens Gilbert Pickering Iohn Greve Oliver Cromwell Henry Vane junior William Cage Richard Erisey Philip L. Lisle Wil. Heveninghaw Isaac Pennington Richard Cresheld Thomas Pelham Thomas Parker Iohn Leigh Joh. Harris Augustin Skinner John Venn William Strickland John Franklin Samuel Brown Robert Scawen Roger Hill John Button John Meyrick Ambrose Browne Richard Winn Edward Owner Charles Pym Charles L. Cranborn Ben. Weston Dudley North John Nut Jo. Corbet Roger Burgoyne Peter Temple Benjamin Valentine Thom. Walsingham Oliver Luke William Alenson Humphrey Salwey Richard Moore William Ashurst Thomas Moore Thomas Fountaine William Ellys Henry Shelley Rich. Shuttleworth Henry Ludlow George Gallop Robert Wallop Arthur Hesilrige Oliver Saint-Iohn Thomas Grantham Francis Barnham Wil. L. Fitzwilliams Edmund Dunch Henry Mildmay Hugh Rogers Thomas Hatcher John Wray Simonds D'Ewes Anthony Bedingfield John Ashe William L. Munson Martin Lister Robert Goodwyn Edward Thomas Henry Lucas Miles Corbet Philip Smith Cornelius Holland William Spurstowe John Lowry Peter VVentworth Henry Chomley Philip Stapleton VVilliam Pierrepoint Roger North Alexander Popham Thomas Hodges John Maynard Samuel Vassall Anthony Irby Iohn Clotworthy Iohn Broxolme Richard Iervoyse Iohn Blakiston Walter Long Iohn Rolle Robert Iennor Iohn VVaddon VVilliam Masham Iohn Lisle Edmund Fowell Edward Ashe Thomas Pury Richard Whithead Richard Ienyns Humphry Tufton Thomas Dacres Thomas Erle Iohn Downes Iohn Goodwyn Francis Drake VVilliam VValler Samuel Luke Francis Buller Richard Harman George Buller Arthur Onslowe Richard VVynwood Robert Pye H. L. Gray of Ruthin Richard Knightley Iohn Pym Christop. Yelverton Anthony Nicoll Peter Wroth Robert Reynolds Nat. Barnardiston Henry Heyman VVilliam Purefoy Valentine VValton Michael Oldesworth VVilliam VVheler Hall Ravenscroft T. L. Grey of Groby Thomas Middleton Edw. Hungerford Christopher VVrey Richard Lee Herbert Morley Thomas Lane Robert Cecill William Bell Thomas Some Herbot. Grimstone Symon Snowe Iohn Nash Herbot. Grimstone Ralph Asheton Edward Ayshcoghe Iohn VVylde Iohn Trenchard Thomas Iervoyse Richard Browne VVilliam Playters Nathaniel Stephens Richard Rose Francis Rous Gilbert Millington VValter Young Iohn Brown Iohn Hippisley Edward Poole Henry Pelham William Hay Iohn Driden Nathaniel Fyennes William Lewis Giles Grene William Lytton Iohn Harvey Edward Dowce William Strode Edmond Prideaux Thomas Hoyle Edward Exton Francis Popham Zouch Tate Iohn Curson Alexander Bence Squire Bence Iohn Selden Iohn Glyn Richard Onslow Iohn Coke Tho. L. Wenman Bulstrode Whitelock George Mountague Edward Partheriche Henry Campion William Whitaker Denzel Holles Edward Wingate Iames Fenys Poynings Moore Edward Bisse, Iunior William Jephson Edward Mountague Norton Knatchboll Thomas Eden. Edward Baynton Jo. Evelyn Jo. Potts Sam. Rolls Ralph Asheton William Drake Pereg. Pelham William Brereton Thomas Widrington Natha. Hallowes Joh. Bampfield Symond Thelwall Hen. Worsley Phil. Parker Edw. Boys John Alford. FINIS. Die Veneris, 29 Januar. 1644. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the solemne League and Covenant bee on every day of Fast and Publique Humiliation publiquely read in every Church and Congre∣gation within the Kingdome: And that every Congregation be enjoyned to have one of the said Covenants fairely Printed in a faire Letter, in a Table fitted to hang up in some publique place of the Church to be read. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, 1645.
