S4988 99830649 35102
THE Natures, Uses, & Doses Of Several APPROVED and EXPERIENCED Medicines, Faithfully PREPARED By JOHN SPIRE, junr. Medicinae Professor. To which is Added, A CATALOGUE of Various Chymical PREPARATIONS, By him always ready Prepared. LONDON, Printed by Benja. Harris, Senr. in Great East-cheap, for the AUTHOR, 1698.
TO THE Courteous READER. HAving, thro' the Blessing of God (from whom alone cometh every good and perfect Gift) upon my Endeavours, obtained (thro' much Labour, great Study, and Experience) the Knowledge of se∣veral Specifick Medicines, (or Arcanum's) effe∣ctual for the Extirpating, and Rooting out the Ori∣ginal Causes of Tedious and Chronical Distempers: Being Friendly to Nature, pacifying the inraged Ar∣cheus; thereby Conquering the Fury of most Diseases incident to Human Bodies. I might have Quoted the Names and Places of divers Persons, that have been Cured by these Medi∣cines herein mentioned, but shall Desist, and leave ev'ry Prudent Experiencer to speak of them as they find: (only Desiring they would Communicate their Vertues to their Neighbours) Being Published for the Ne∣cessities of such, who many times Languish under the Burden of Diseases, for want of true Medicines. So to that Eternal, Invisible, and Incomprehensible Word of GOD, by which, All Things were Made, do I Recommend every One, Wishing them Health and Comfort here, and Eternal Happiness hereafter; and Subscribe my Self, Thine in all Real Service, J. S.
THE Natures, Uses, & Doses Of Several MEDICINES, I. Aqua-Vitae Magistralis: Or, Our Magisterial Water. IT is an abstersive Medicine, of a powerful Nature, cleansing and strengthning the Sto∣mach, effectual in opening Obstructions: it is Sudorefick, and Diuretick: 'tis very good in Fevers, especially in the Putrid; in Palsies, Epilep∣sies, and the Plague; resisting Corruption; in Apo∣plexies, Lethargy, and Stupification of the Spirits, stoppages in the Breast, Surfeits, Rheumatism, Stone and Strangury, Chollick, Oppression of Wind, Loathing of the Food, Pleurisies (without Blood-letting;) and for Women with Child, and in their Travail, as also after they be Delivered. This Medicine hath prov'd it self a successful Re∣medy in many of the afore-said Maladies; as ma∣ny in several parts of England can Testify, to their great Satisfaction.
It's Ʋse and Dose. THe ordinary Dose to Man or Woman, (in any of the aforesaid Diseases) is generally 2 or 3 Spoonfuls, [observing for those that cannot bear with the strength thereof, they may allay it with 1 or 2 spoonfuls of Balm or Mint Water, or white Wine, or clean Spring Water] in all Distempers that call for speedy relief, as Surfeits, &c. take it 2 or 3 times in an hour: for the Stone, take it every half hour for 2 hours space, then rest 2 or 3 hours, and repeat it as before, drinking sometimes a little Chamomile posset-drink, i. e. the Flowers boyled. In Pleurisies, take every half hour till Relief be found (observing to apply some hot Chamomile fryed, or heated, being first sprinkled with a little Vinegar, to the side) taking once in 24 hours, a dose of the Balsamick Pill, in the method hereafter prescribed: For Women, when they go with Child, take it in the morning, and 2 hours after Dinner, for a Week together, then rest about 4 days, and repeat as before; in their Travail, the pains being slow, give 2 spoonfuls 3 times in an hour; and for after-pains, give it often. For Chil∣dren that are troubled with Wind, mix a little of it with Fennel, or Spere-mint water sweetned, that it may but just tast of it, and then give a spoon∣ful as often as need requires. In Windiness of the Stomach, which causeth Vapours in the Head, take 2 or 3 times in a Day. In Apoplexies and Le∣thargies, take it frequently, and apply a linnen Cloth dipt in the same to the Temples. In the
Gout pains, apply the same mixed with equal quan∣tity of strong Brandy, often to the place afflicted, and take of it about 4 times in a Day as directed. ☞ Observe. If in any of the aforesaid Diseases, the Medicine provokes Vomiting, repeat the Dose immediately, and so take it again and again, till the last Dose stayes; never be Daunted, but go on with it, always minding to take this Medicine in the beginning of any Sickness, in order to disperse the same. Price Three Shillings the Pint Bottle. II. Pilulae Samech: Or, The Friendly Balsamick Pill. WHose Nature and Virtues are such, that it Operates as Nature would have it, in or∣der to cleanse the Body from the root of Diseases, viz. by Sweat, Urine and Stool, sometimes by Vomit, and other times by insensible Transpiration, according as the Occasional Matter wants to be carried off. 'Tis a most noble Preparation, being exalted to the true Intention of Healing: For such is it's Property, that it first works as an Anodine, and allays the inraged Archeus, and then carries off the poysonous offending matter by Stool, or some other gentle way. It totally corrects and destroys the virulency of vegetable Poysons, either out, or in the Body; and being taken as a Corre∣ctor, shows it's effects: For, if you are assaulted with the violent working of any Potion vomative or purgative, 'twill so take it off, as to settle Na∣ture in her due Decorum: such is the Nature,
Force, and Operation of this Pill, as a Corrector. It's Prevalency will be seen in helping Nature to discharge and expel those things that offend her, for if you take a Pill, drinking a Cup of mull'd Sack after it, and sweat in Bed, 'twill immediately disperse it self thro' the Body, fortifying the Foun∣tain of Life, and so expels Poyson in any part of the Body.—'Tis prevalent in most Diseases inci∣dent to the body, as hath by long Experience been confirmed: For by it's Abstersive Nature, and Pa∣cative Virtue, it pacifies the inraged Archeus, and by this means insinuates it self into the languishing Fountain of Life, and per orms much to the Pati∣ents content and satisfaction; especially in Colds, Coughs, Disenteria, or Fluxes of any sort, or Gri∣pings in the Bowels, Fevers or Agues, as the Ter∣tian, (Quartan) and Quotidian, Plurifies, Calentures, Headach, the distilling of Humors called Catarrhus, which destroyeth the Lungs; also in pains of the Brest, tremblings of the Heart, giving the Blood a Fermentation, and cleansing it from Superflui∣ties; and therefore prevalent in the Dropsie, Ana∣sarca, Ascites, Timpanites, Inflammation of the Reins, difficulty of Pissing: It bringeth forth the small-Pox and Measles. 'Tis a very general Re∣medy, curing many Diseases, and not hurtful in any, &c. In pains of the Limbs, Scurvy, Gout and inveterate Gonorrhaea's, and several other Diseases, as may be seen by
It's Dose and Application. FOr any of the afore-named Diseases, you must take the bigness of a grey Fea, and drink it down with a Glass of mull'd Sack, or hot Mace-Ale, and being in Bed, dispose your self to Sweat: This method does very well in the King's-Evil, Measles, Small-Pox, or Swine-Pox, to bring the Venomn from the Heart. For Agues, take a Pill the bigness of a large grey Pea, and drink it with 2 Ounces of Cinamon Water, and as much Peper as will lye upon a Groat, an hour before the Fit, and Sweat plentifully in bed, drinking a little Rosemary, Marygold, or Cardus Posset-drink; which being continued four or five times, generally takes it off.—For Fluxes, and such Distempers in Women, as debilitate their Strength, take a Pill in a glass of Sack mull'd with Cinamon.-For the Gout and Rheumatisms of the whole Body, take a Pill in a glass of Rhenish-wine, drinking sometimes of our Aqua-Vitae Magistralis; this ge∣nerally eases at twice taking: it divides also clods of Blood, and breaks inward Imposthumes, carry∣ing off their matter, and heals them; as also Brui∣ses and Squats.—For difficulty of making Wa∣ter, the Strangury, Stone or Gravel in the Kidnies, dissolve 2 Pills, the bigness of 2 large grey Peas in a pint of White-wine, and sweeten it with 5 or 6 Ounces of Syrup of Marsh-mallows, and let it be for 2 draughts, with 3 hours Intermission in the most violent pain, drinking often a draught of posset-drink, wherein is boyled some Pelitory
of the wall, and a few Gromwel seeds, at the dis∣cretion of the Patient, keeping your self warm in Bed always when it's taken, and so will the Of∣fending matter be carried off. For Children with∣in 3 or 4 Years Old, you may give the bigness of a Pepper Corn, and so it may be increased or di∣minished in it's Dose, according to the Wisdom and Discretion of the Parent. Price 12d. the Box. ☞ Observe, Always when you take of this Pill, to take some of our Cordial Drops in a glass of Sack, or other Cordial Water to refresh the Spirits. III. Aqua Bezoratica: Our Cordial (or Plague) Water. 1 THis Cordial is good in Sadness, Melan∣cholly, and Dejection of mind, pains of the Spleen, reviving the Spirits. 2. It power∣fully resists Poison, Plague, Small-Pox, and all sorts of malign Fevers: it cures the biting of Venomous Beasts. 3. It is a good Stomachick; Comforts the Head, Brain, and Bowels: it causes a good Appe∣tite, taking away Sickness at Heart and Stomach: it's profitable against Swoonings, fainting Suffoca∣cations, and Fits of the Mother. 4. This Water is Sudorifick, Alexipharmick, and Antifebritick: It is also a Cordial Cephalick, and a great Resto∣rative; and is excellent against cold and moist Di∣seases. It's Ʋse and Dose. YOu may take from half a Spoonful to  Spoon∣fuls, or more, in the morning Fasting, a lit∣tle before Dinner, and at bed time; it may be al∣so
taken at any time of the Day, or Night, upon any Fainting, or Sickness at Stomach as occasion requires, or in any languishing Conditions. It may be taken alone, or in case of great weakness, in a glass of Canary. Price Sixpence the Ounce. IV. Panacea Nostri: Or, Our Prevalent Emetick, and Cathartick Pouder. THe Virtue and Nature whereof is such, that it expells all Contagious and Malignant Hu∣mours by the Emunctories; viz. by Vomit, Stool, Sweat, and Urine, and that after a most friendly and pleasant way, few Doses whereof will radical∣ly cleanse the Body and Blood from the original cause of old chronick and Hereditary Diseases; as the Epilepsie, Convulsion, Madness, Schrophula, (or the Disease called the King's Evil,) Leprosy, or any foulness or corruption of the Blood, French-Pox, and other most grievous Diseases, as Ulcers, Fistula's Noli me Tangere's and in all kinds of Diseases in Men, and Women (except Women with Child) of what Nature soever they be. It's Ʋse and Dose. FOr any of the aforesaid chronick Diseases, let the Body be once or twice well purged with our Sal Lenitium, then after 3 Days respite, take a Paper of this Pouder in the pulp of an Apple, or prune, a little fine Sugar, or Syrup of Gilly-flowers; and if in case at any time this Medicine should not have any visible Operation at all, yet never the less it will perform its Office, and drive forth the Di∣stemper:
Now if the Disease be Rebellious it must be continued to be taken every 5th Day, and the intermitting 3d Day, take a Dose of our Balsamick Pill, as 'tis prescribed; this method doth very well For the Scurvy, Pox, Gonorrheae, and inveterate Ulcers.—For Agues, let it be taken 2 hours before the Fit, to cleanse the Body; and to perfect the Cure, proceed as is directed in the use of the Pill. For Fits and Convulsions in Children, let it be ta∣ken in Breast-milk, and not exceeding the weight of a Rape-seed: It may be given to New-born In∣fants; but as they increase in strength, so may the Dose be somewhat increased, at the discretion of the Parent. For Children of 3 or 4 Years of Age, give the 3d part of a Paper: For those of 7, 8, or 9, give half a Paper, always observing to take Posset-drink freely, during the Operation: The Paper contains 3 Doses, at 2s. 6d. V. Elixer Magnum Cordialis: Or, Our Great and Famous Cordial Drops. BEing a wonderful Arcanum, whose Virtue and Prevalency hath been powerful in these following Diseases; as the Falling-sickness, Apo∣plexy, Lethargy, Palsey, Convulsions; and most other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves; they cure the Vapours in Women, and Fits of the Mother; they remove Ostructions, and pains of Spleen; they are also an admirable Remedy in the Plague, Spotted-fever, Small-pox, and Measles, or any malignant Fever, resisting putrifaction of the
Blood, which have been confirmed by about 19 Years Experience in our daily Practice &c. It's Ʋse and Dose. TAke as follows from 4 drops to 12, 14, 20, 25, or 30, to 60. in Canary, or any other pro∣per Cordial; and for the diseases of the Head, let it be taken in a Cephalick Cordial; and also let the Temples and Nostrils be bathed therewith. For Children that are like to have the Small-pox, give this Medicine to bring out the Distemper; (increa∣sing or diminishing the Dose as you see convenient) in a glass of Sack, hot Mace-ale, or some convenient Cordial, disposing the party for Sweat, drinking of∣ten a good draught of hot posset-drink, and boyl there in Marygold-flowers, a top of Balm, Angelica, and Rosemary; in Surfeits let it be taken in the man∣ner aforesaid, (observing that the Stomach be first cleansed by often taking of our Aq. vitae Magistralis) for Children that are inclined to Rickets, or breed∣ing of their Teeth, give some drops in a little syr. of Cowslips or Poppies.—In intermitting Fevers give above 60 drops in a glass of Sack or Rhenish Wine. In continual Fevers give it every 6 hours in the manner aforesaid; always minding to take at the hour of rest, a small Dose of our Balsamick pill, as also our Pulvis Antefibriticus, according to directions in its place. In Consumptions and great Weakness, take 40 or 50 drops Mornings and Nights in a glass of Canary; as also 2 or 3 times a Day, for the space of 40 Days together. ☞ Observe. Women with Child may safely take
this Medicine. Price four Shillings the Bottle. VI. Pulvis Antifebriticus Noster: Or, our General Febrifuge. 1. AN admirable pouder against Fevers of all sorts: A few Doses thereof (with the use of the other Medicines) takes off the Fever be∣yond Expectation. 2. It is something Sudorifick, but for the most part works downwards first, and af∣terwards provokes Sweat; it is a prevalent remedy against putrid Fevers, Measles, Small-pox, Ca∣lenture, Spotted-fever, and other venemous Disea∣ses. 3. It is good against the Green-sickness, Drop∣sie, Melancholly, Scurvy, Jaundice, and its profita∣ble in Hectick Fevers. 4. It resists Putrifaction, fortifies the Stomach, corrects Crudities, purifies the Blood, cleanses the Bowels of filth and viscous Hu∣mours, by a gentle Purging way. The Dose and manner of Ʋsing it. 1. LEt the Patient drink plentifully of our Aq. Vitae Mag. according to the directions in its place: give a Dose of pouder in the Morning, and at Evening for 8, 12, or 16, days as you see occasion, more or less; you may give it in form of a Bolus in a little Marmalade of Quinces, or pulp of Pruens, Jelly of Harts-horn; or it may be exhibited in a Glass of Canary, or a spoonful of Syr. of Saffron, or Clove-Gilly flowers.
VII. Aqua Ruba Mineralis. IS an excellent Medicine of a preservative Nature, of great benefit in the plague, and other con∣tagious distempers; particularly against the burn∣ing thirst in Fevers: Good against Coughs, Short∣ness of Breath, Ptysick, the diseases of Throat and Mouth; as Angimas, Strumas, Inflammations of the Pallate, or Uvula of the Mouth, Thrush in Children, Quinsies, and such like Inflammations; as also for an unsavory Breath. It's Ʋse and Dose. FOr Thrushes or sore Mouths in sucking Children, or any foulness of the Tongue, or Throat, 2, 3, or 4 drops dropped into a little White-wine, or Plantain-water, sweetned with a little Honey of Roses, and so drink it, and wash their Mouthes with the same; for People of riper Years, they must Gargle their Mouths with it; it being composed to a Gargarism with White-wine, or Plantain-water, and dulcified with Syrup of Mulberries, or Honey of Roses; often taking from 6 drops to 40, or 50, in Beer, White-wine, or Plantain-water. For the burning Thirst in Fevers, give from 6 drops to 40 or 50, or half a Spoonful in so much Beer, or Ale, that it may tast sharpish of the Medicine; if the Fever be violent, it may be given 3 or 4 times in 5 or 6 hours space; but in continual Fevers it may be given as often as the party desires to drink, obser∣ving in such cases to take often to procure Sweat, of my Elix. Magnum Cordialis, and at Night to take
a Dose of Vinum vitae, to cause rest, and expell the venom of the distemper; for shortness of Breath, the Ptysick, and Cough, give it in Hysop-water, with a little Liquorish, and 5 Figs decocted therein; for a stinking Breath, and to create an Apetite, take it Mornings fasting, and 2 hours before dinner; and an hour before supper; about 6 or 8 drops in Beer or Wine. Price One Shilling Six-pence the Bottle. VIII. Potestates Succini: Or, our Powers of Amber. 1. IS a most admirable Remedy against Cold, and moist diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb. 2. They Cure Head-achs, Lethar∣gies, Dulness, and Sleepiness, and other pituitous distempers of the Brain. 3. They are admirable against Cramps, and Convulsions. 4. They are excellent in Palsies, Rheumatisms, and Gouts. 5. Against Fits of the Mother in Women; and takes away pains after their Deliveries, cum multis alijs. The Dose, and manner of Ʋsing them. FOr outward uses bath the place affected very well twice a day, till you find Relief; inwardly, take them from 15 drops, to 30, 40, or 60, in a Glass of Sack, Night and Morning: Continue the same for 40 days or more, as you see occasion. Price one Shilling six-pence an Ounce. IX. Tinctura Hysterica: Or, our Hyste∣rick Drops against Fits. THese Drops are composed against those cal∣led Hysterick Fits, viz. Suffocation of
the Matrix, (alias, Fits of the Mother) for which its a most excellent Remedy; as also against the Collick Megrim, Falling-sickness, palpitation of the Heart, Obstructions, and Weaknesses of the Head, Nerves, and Womb: It attenuates, opens Diseases, resists Poyson, provokes Urine, and the Terms; and is profitably given in the Green-sick∣ness in Virgins, Rickets in Children. The Dose and manner of takng it. IN any of the aforesaid diseases, you may take it in White or Rhenish-wine, or in Shery, or Ca∣nary, or other proper Hysterick Julep; give it when the Fits is off, and in a Morning fasting, and last at Night; but when any Fit comes, give it in the time of the Fit: For young Virgins, let them take in White-wine: For the Rickets in Children, give it in Canary, or old Malago, Bathing the Joynts, and Back-bone with our Ʋnguentum Rachitidem, or Oyntment for the Rickets, twice a day, before the Fits: The Dose is from 20 drops, to 30, 40, or 60, according to Age, and Strength. Price three Shil∣lings the Ounce. X. Arcanum Chalybeatum: Or, our Steel Drops. WHose Virtues are powerful in removing, and carrying off all Obstructions, of what kind soever they be, which are incident to young Virgins; and also a very safe Remedy in the Drop∣sie, provided it be taken with the other.
It's Ʋse and Dose. WHich is from 10 or 12 drops, to 20 or 30, ac∣cording to Age and Strength. Mornings fast∣ing in a draught of Water-gruel, warm Broth, or Mace-ale, keeping the Body stirring by some mode∣rate Exercise, always observing to take every 3d Day, a Dose of our Sal. Lenitium; let it be conti∣nued for the space of forty Days. Price Two Shillings Six-pence the Bottle. XI. Gutta Lythontripticae: Or, our Stone-Breaking Drops. THese Drops are a most incomparable Reme∣dy for the Collick and Stone; being an Arcanum fit for the Closet of a Prince, or any No∣ble Man; and is herewith made publick for the benefit of those that are afflicted with that deplor∣able disease of the Stone, Strangury, Collick, and difficulty of Urine. The Ʋse and Dose of these Drops, with necessary Observations. THe Dose is from 20 to 40, or 50 Drops in a glass of White or Rhenish-wine, every four hours, and in the time of each four hours, drink a Dose of our Aqua Vitae Magistralis, as directed in its place, and at the hour of Rest, take a Dose of our Balsa∣mick Pill, as in the directions of the said Pill in its place; and by the blessing of God upon this Medi∣cine thou wilt find the Stone to break and dissolve, coming away in small pieces, and Sand: proceed in the same manner for the Collick. And I need say
no more it being so effectual an Arcanum; it will sufficiently demonstrate its own Praise. Price Ten Shillings the Ounce. Sal. Lenitivum: Or, A Famous Purging Salt. BEing a Salt prepared of Mineral Subjects by apt mediums, purify'd and reconciled to the Archeus and thereby be∣comes a Salutiferous Remedy, enobled with Virtues sufficient for the Curing of many Diseases. It is neither an Acid nor an Alcaly, but a Salt of a midling Nature, being able to pass the several Digestions unchanged, and in its passage to resolve and absterge all Preternatural Coagulations, for which reason I call it Sal. Lenitivum, it is endowed with these 4 general properties, viz. Cathartick, Dieuretick, Deobstruent, and al∣laying of all Preternatural heat and Acrimony: besides it is a general easer of pain, (and extinguisher of Venom) as is mani∣fest by what it effects in alleviating the Pains of the Gout, Rheu∣matism, Collick, griping of the Guts. 1st. It Purgeth the gross Excrements, and most viscous humours of the first passages without nauseating the Stomach, or the least Griping Pains. 2ly. It is singular in opening Obstructions of the Vessels and Viscera. It is of great use in Fevers, especially those that proceed from Surfeits, occasioned by Eating or Drinking. It also dissolves all Stagnant and Obstructing matter in the Vis∣cera. This Medicine doth not only dissolve and expurge the Excrements of the Stomach and Guts; but it also corrects the violence of all Preternatural Purges, if you put but two drams of it in their Infusion, or drink the same quantity in a draught of warm Ale, or Posset-drink, after any Potion, that will Gripe or Operate Churlishly, &c. This admirable Salt never leaves the Belly bound, as the common Purges do, but always Solu∣ble, therefore excellent against a Costive temper of Body. The 2d. intention of this Salt is to alter and open Obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancras, Reins, Bladder, and Womb, from which proceed many tedious and stubborn Disea∣ses, as the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundice, Hypocondriack Melan∣cholly, Vapours, Green-sickness, Rheumatism, inveterate Head-Ach, Restlesness, Sleepiness, Vertigo, Frenzy, Cramps, Convul∣sions, internal Inflammations, and Aposthumes, Piles, Exul∣cerations of the Kidnies and Bladder, Gravel, stoppage of Ʋ∣rine,
&c. Together with many others, arising from Obstru∣ctions and Acrimony of the Blood, and Vital Juices. This excellent Salt may be taken at all times of the Year, and in all places, without loss of time, or hindrance of business; and although it be of great Use and Service in very many Diseases, yet I have by experience observed, that in some it is Specifi∣cally Potent; as in the Scurvy, Jaundice, Dropsie, Suffocations, Green-sickness, stoppage of the Menses, Piles, Cholick, Diar∣rhaea, Bloody-flux, Worms, Inflammations, and Rheums of the Eyes, Itch, and other Cholerick Eruptions, of the Skin, heat of Ʋrine; in all which cases it hath signaliz'd it self. It's Ʋse and Dose. FOr any of the aforenamed Diseases, to a Man or Woman is, from half an Ounce, to three quarters of an Ounce, a Child of a Year Old, one Dram to two Drams, and so on according to Discretion of the Parent, and Age of the Child, always to be dissolved in Spring water, plain Posset-drink, or thin Water-gruel, (and in Summer-time) in Whey, which the Patient fancies best to take it in. In the Scurvy it ought to be taken daily, or every other day, for a Month or six Weeks together, taking in all their Drink a pure Spirit of Salt, (to the quantity of 40 drops in a Day) which may be had at my House for 12d. the Bottle. For the Jaundice I give it in Sum∣mer in Water or Whey, in Winter in warm Gruel, or Pos∣set drink; 5 or 6 drams while the Jaundice cease, observing to take it every other Day; in the Dropsie in the same man∣ner as the Jaundice, only in a less quantity of the Vehicle, continue it for a Months time. In the Green-sickness in Maids, it is necessary to dissolve an Ounce of the Salt in a Quart of pure Spring-water, and to take half a pint every Night, and the same quantity early the next Morning; continue taking, if need be a Month or 5 Weeks. In the Piles, a quarter of an Ounce of the Salt dissolved in Water or Whey, and taken for some time. In the Cholick, or griping of the Guts, take one Quart of Spring-water, and boyl therein two Drams of each of the Seeds of Annis, Fennil, Caraway, and Coriander, then dissolve therein an Ounce of the Salt, and let the Patient drink fre∣quently thereof a small draught, that the whole Quant may be drank in a Day; if the Party Vomit, continue the Dose while
the Vomiting ceaseth. In a Diarrhaea, or common Loosness, boyl Wheat-bran in Spring-water, and take half an Ounce in the Decoction thereof, daily or every other Day, according to Strength. In a Diassenteria, or Bloody-flux, give it in a Deco∣ction of red Rose-leaves, boyled in Water, giving a Clyster daily, made with the Broth of a Sheeps-head, continue the use till the Party find Relief. For Rheums of the Eyes, take it daily in the ordinary manner. In the Itch, Botches, Boyls, and other Cholerick Eruptions of the Skin, give half an Ounce, or 5 Drams, dissolved in Fumatory-water, or Whey, for a Fort∣night or three Weeks together, taking sometimes in their Beer, a Spirit of Salt, till the Cure be perfected. The Price of this Noble SALT is one Shilling the Ounce. XIII. Vinum Vitae: Or, Our Anodine Drops. BEing a soveraign Medicine against a Diassenteria, or Bloo∣dy-flux, Cholick, Gripes, Vomiting, and Loosness in Young or Old; and to procure quiet Rest. The Ʋse and Dose. FOr a Man or Woman, take always at Bed-time half a spoon∣ful in a draught of Mace-ale, or Mul'd wine. For Chil∣dren in the Month, from 4 drops to 20 in Brest-milk, or Ale; as they increase in Age, so may the Dose be increased; at the Discretion of the Nurse, or Parent. Price one Shilling the Bottle. XIV. Essentia Stomachia: Or, our Stomach Essence. IS a great strengthner of the Stomach, and expells Wind, good against the Cholick, Gripes, Pains at the Stomach, Stitch∣es, and Pains in the Side: It helps indigestions, and cures Sur∣feits, and attracts cold watery Rheums from the Stomach. The Dose is from 4 drops to 25 in a glass of Wine, or Ale, 2 or 3 times a Day, as necessity calls for it. Price Two Shil∣lings Six-pence the Bottle. XV. Spiritus Paragoricus: Or, Our Bathing Spirit. WHich is a safe sure and ready Medicine; it may be ta∣ken inwardly in Paralitick and Appoplectick Cases; but I here chiefly design it, for external Uses; it being a sin∣gular Arcanum in the Erysipelas and Gangrenes (it al∣ayeth
the Pains of the Gout) Cloths being dipt in it and ap∣plyed, if it be laid to the Pulse at the Wrists, its good in ar∣dent Fevers, it helpeth strained Limbs, Pains and Aches in a∣ny part of the Body; with benumed Nerves, the shrinking of the Sinews, and is very good to smell to, and Bath the Tem∣ples and Fore-head for the Head-ach, warming and comforting the parts where there seems to be a decay of Life, or want of Nutriment. Price Two Shillings Six-pence the Bottle. XVI. Pul-vis Antivermis: Or, Our Worm-powder. BEing a certain Remedy killing and destroying the cause of all sorts of Worms in the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children; it ought to be taken generally at the New or Full of the Moon in the Morning Fasting; it works moderately by Stool; you may give it to a Child of a year old a quarter of a Paper, for one of 3 years half a Paper, for those of six or seven a whole Dose; so go on according to discretion; it may be taken in the pulp of an Apple, Sugar, or Syrup of Clove∣gilly-flowers, or warm Ale. Price one Shilling the Paper, which contains 4 whole Doses. XVII. Ʋngt. Anti podigra: Or, Our Famous Oynt∣ment against that Rebellious Disease, the Gout. IN the most violent pains of the Gout, let the part be well bathed before the Fire Night and Morning with a warm Hand for a quarter of an hour, applying soft Brown-paper to the part; then, Flannel-cloaths 2 or 3 times double, and Bind it up, and after it hath been used 3 or 4 Days, usually arises some small Blisters, or Pushes, from whence the morbi∣fick matter will be somewhat discharged, Then cease from using this Ovntment, and proceed thus; first, take every third day a dose of our Panacea, as its directed in its place, till about 7 or 8 doses be taken; then take Nights of our Bal¦samick Pill, as is prescribed, for 2 or 3 Nights, till the pains are abated; and in the day time take every hour after, of our Aq. vitae Magistralis, observing about once in 4 days after you begin to take the Pill to take a dose of our Sal. Lenitium and doubt not by continuing the use of the Oyntment, with the other Prescriptions thou may be relieved from the dolors
thereof with Success. Price Five Shillings the Pot. XVIII. Ʋngt. Rachitidem: Or, Our Oyntment against the Rickets. WHich is excellent for bathing down the Back-bone, and all the Joynts, (giving them daily of our Hysterick Drops in old Malago, and sometimes of our great Cordial Drops, as directed.) —Observe. This Oyntment is of excellent use for cur∣ing any Cut, Rench, or Strain; and for old settled Pains in the Joynts, provided it be well chaffed in by the Fire: For Cuts, or any Green-wounds, melt a little of the same and dip a pledget of Lint and apply it warm once in 24 hours and it will heal the same. Price one Shilling the Pot. XIX. Ʋngt. Viridi: Or, A soveraign Green-oyntment for Burns, and Scalds, &c. THis Oyntment being melted, and the Burn or Seald anoynt∣ed with a Feather Morning and Night, infallibly cures the same, observing after the anoynting to apply a piece of soft White-paper, and cut the Blisters, and if the Burn or Scald be filthy or dirty, let it be washed with warm Milk. For an Erisipleas (or St. Anthony's-Fire) with all other hot Inflam∣mations, let it be used evey six hours, and doubt not the Suc∣cess. Price one Shilling the Pot. XX. Ʋnguentum, & aqua occularis; Or, our wonderful Oyntment and Water for the Diseases of the Eyes. BEing a Remedy inferior to none that is extant of this kind, but is a singular Medicine for Dimness of the Sight, Pin and Web, Pearls, &c. it eases Pains, and cureth Diseases of the Eyes to a miracle; it takes away Suffusions, Clouds, Blood-shot; it cures running Eyes, salt, hot and sharp Rheums &c. (I need say no more) it having cured those that have been almost Blind, which we have often Experienced; and (particularly in our own Family) it ought to be esteem∣ed as a Jewel. The Ʋse thereof as followeth FIrst, Let the Eyes be daily washed 3 or 4 times in a Day, letting some of it drop into the Eyes, and after they have
been well washed (especially at Bed-time) take the quantity of a Pepper-corn of the Oyntment and put it in at the corner of the Eye and lye down, and it will disperse it self, and it causeth no Pain, but effects the cure in a little time; if the Party be afflicted with violent Pains in the Head, we would have them to take a Dose or two of our Balsamick Pill, and to Purge twice a Week with our Sal. Lenitivum. The Price of the Bottle of Water, and Box of Oyntment is two Shillings. Necessary Directions (for the sake of those that are Poor) to make the Pearl Cordial, and the cool∣ing Purple Julep, &c. which any Apothecary's-Shop can furnish you with. And may be pro∣perly taken, either of them, or both, with the Medicines herein Prescribed, at the Pleasure and Discretion of the Patient. XXI. Julapium Perlatum: Or, our Pearl Cordial. TAke the Waters of Borage, Bawm, Black cherries, of each three ounces; Compound, Peony-water, and Theri∣cal-water, of each one ounce; double resmed Sugar, one ounce; Pearls prepared, one Dram and a half; being ming∣led in a Glass-viol, and shaken together; you may take four or five Spoonfuls at a time in any Fainting, it being a good Cordial, and revives the Spirits. XXII. Julapium Purpureum: The Purple Julep. TAke Syrup of Violets four ounces; Oyl of Sulphur, per Campane thirty Drops; Barley-water (or Plantain-wa∣ter) two Pound mixed together, is very good to quench thirst in Burning-fevers, and may be taken three or four Spoonfuls at a time, as often as the Patient shall require.
A Catalogue of the Names and Prises of the Medicines con∣tained in this Tract, which is Published for the sake of those who are not of Ability to give great Fees to a Physitian; I therefore refer them to the use of these Medicines which are able (by the blessing of God) to extirpate the most stub∣born Diseases incident to humane Bodies, provided they are taken in due Method, as they are directed in their proper Places; the charge of which not amounting to much more than some Physitian's Fees, if thou take them all together; which may be had, or any one of them, or more, as People may have occasion at the Prises mentioned. AQua-vitae Magistralis; or our Magesterial Wa∣ter; the Bottle being above a Pint. 3s. The Balsamick Pill, the Box 1s. Panacea, the Paper 2s. 6d. Elixer Mag. Cordialis, the Bottle 4s. Pul. Antifeb. the Paper 2s. 6d. Aqua Ruba Minaralis, the Bottle 1s. 6d. Potestates Succini, or Powers of Amber, the ounce 1s. 6d. Tinctura Hysterica; or the drops against Fits the ounce 3s Gutta Lythontripticae; or our Stone-breaking Drops, by the ounce 10s. Vinum Vitae; or Anodine drops, the Bottle 1s. Esentia Stomachia; or Stomach Essence, the Bottle 2s. 6d. Pul. Antivermis; or the Worm∣pouder, the Paper 1s. Ungt. Antipodigra; or the Gout Oyntment, the Pot 5s. Sal. Lenitivum, the ounce 1s. Arcanum Chalybeatum; or our Steel Drops, the Bottle 2s. 6d. Ungt. Rachitidem 1s. Pot. Ungt. Viridi, for Burns and Scalds, and other Inflammati∣ons. the Pot 1s. Aqua & ungt. Occularis, the Box and Bottle 2s. Spiritus Mundus per ounce 1s. 6d. Spir. Mundus mixt per qut. 6s. Spir. Sedativus per ounce 3s. Aqua Ruba 1s. A Catalogue of various Preparations. 1. ARgentum Cristalum. 2. Arcanum Helibori. 3. Aqua Antiscorbutica. 4. Aqua Regina Hung. 5. Arcanum Goderani; or Dr. Goderd's Drops. 6. Antimonum. Diaphyret. 7 Speties Generalis Ant. 8. Pul. Solaris Ant. 9. Speties Russeli Ant. 10. Tinct. Antimony Emet. 11. Tinct. Antimoni Antisco.
12. Bals. Samech. 13. Bals. Sulpher nost. 14. Elix. Sulpher. 15. Spir. Sulpher. 16. Elix. Propritatis. com. 17. Elix. Propritatis Medium Helmonti. 18. Elix. Prop. cum. cor. cer. 19. Elix. Propritatis volatile. 20. Elix. Propritatis nostri. 21. Elixer Salutis. 22. Ence veneris. 23. Spiritus Odontugiasus; or an excellent Spt. for Teeth. 24. Tinct. Antifebritica. 25. Tinct. Cordialis Amar. 26. Tinct. Corali Rub. 27. Tinct. Cordialis Regale. 28. Tinct. Benzonium. 29. Spirit Lavendulae. 30. Castori. 31. Sambucini. 32. Cochlearae Simplex & purgans. 33. Absinthi. 34. Vini com. 35. Vini. Tartarised. 36. Salis com. 37. Salis Dulci. 38. Nitri. 39. Nitri Dulci. 40. Vitriole Dulci et Volatile. 41. Crani Humani. 42. Cor. Cervi. 43. Salis Armonici. 44. Oleum Salis Tartari. 45. Salis nitri Fixi. 46. Oleum Juniperi. 47. Oleum Succini. 48. Laudanum Volatile. 49. Laudanum Liquid. 50. Laud. Starky vel Pill Mathei. 51. Laudanum nostri. 52. Sal volatile Oleosum Cephalicum. 53. Sal Volat. Oleosum Sto∣machum. 54. Stypticum pro. Gonorrha. 55. Stypticum Pulvis pro. vol. Neribus. 56. Gutt. Stypticum pro. vol. Neribus. 57. Sal. Cathartici Amari. 58. Sal. Lenitivum nost. 59. Sal. Mirabilis. 60. Sal. Solutivum. 61. Sal. Glauberi. 62. Sal. Tartari. 63. Sal. Armonci Volat. 64. Sal. Cor. Cer. Cum Multis Alijs. Published from my House at the two Blew twisted Posts at Horsley-down Fair-street, in South∣wark, by John Spire.
