T1613 99825893 30284
To the Right Honourable Sir PATIENCE WARD Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London. The humble PETITION of the Commons of the City of London, in Common-hall assembled, June 27. 1681. Sheweth, THat We do with all thankfulness acknowledg the great and wonderful mercy of Almighty God, in that notwithstanding the daily Plots and wicked Contrivances of the Papists and their Accomplices, We do still enjoy our ancient and undoubted right and freedom of assembling our selves together for the Choice of some principal Officers of this City for the year ensuing. And whilst we attend upon this duty, We cannot but with all gratitude remember the great care, and faithful endeavours of your Lordship, the Al∣dermen, and Commons in Common-council lately assembled in ordering an humble Address to be presented to his Majesty; wherein was expressed your Lordships and their due sense of the continued danger of his Majesty's Life, (which God long preserve) and of the Protestant Religion, and of all our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, by the Designs and Conspiracies, so long projected and prosecuted by the Councils of Rome and its Adherents; in the pursuit whereof, they are chiefly animated by the continuing hopes of a Popish Successour. And also your and their just apprehensions that no effectual means can be provided against the impending evils therein men∣tioned, but by the wisdom and advice of his Majesty's great Council the Parlia∣ment. And whereas it hath come to our knowledge, that Reports, by mistake or prejudice, have been raised, that the said Address did contein onely the sense and desires of a few persons, and not of the generality of this great City. We do therefore most humbly pray your Lordship, that you will in such manner (as shall seem best to your Lordships discretion) humbly re∣present to his Majesty, that the Subject-matter of the said Address is also the true sense, and doth contain the humble Desires and Resolu∣tions of his true and Loyal Subjects the Citizens of his City of Lon∣don, in this their Common-Hall now assembled. And that his Ma∣jesty would be graciously pleased to esteem it as such. And We having likewise taken notice that the same Common Council did at the time of their voting the said Address, render their thanks to our late worthy Members of the last Parliament, for their faith∣ful endeavours to serve this City, according to the Desires and In∣structions to them given and made by Us at the time of their Ele∣ction. We do think it our duty at this time to testifie our full concurrence therein, and do return unto them our hearty thanks for the same. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. This Petition was delivered to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor immediately af∣ter the declaring Thomas Pilkington Esq Alderman, and Samuel Shute Esq to be She∣riffs of London for the year ensuing; and being read by the command of the Lord Mayor to the Common-Hall, had their general Consent and Approbation of the same, which con∣sisted of some Thousands of Citizens.
To the Honoured Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish Esquires, Sheriffs of this City of London and Middlesex. WE the Citizens of the said City in Common-hall assem∣bled, being sensible of, and greatly satisfied with your faithful Endeavours to discharge those Offices of Trust which we (not long since) called you to; and consider∣ing your wise and prudent conduct and management of our Affairs within this City, especially in maintaining and asserting of our undoubted Rights and Priviledges as Citizens, and continual provision of faithful and able Juries; especially in such a time as this, when Innocency it self is not inrouded from the imputation of the blackest Crimes; and the best and most loyal Protestants are exposed to the utmost hazards by the Perjuries, Subornations, and Villanies of the Popish Party and their Adherents. And we cannot at this time o∣mit the mentioning your fair Proceedings in our present E∣lection of Sheriffs for the Year ensuing, and dispatch of an unnecessary Poll, without putting us off by Adjournments to a troublesome and weary attendance. Do offer and return to you our most hearty Thanks, as the onely Compensation we can at present make you; being confidently assured that you will stedfastly persist in those your most faithful En∣deavours, as long as you shall continue Officers in this Ho∣nourable City. This Address was presented to the Sheriffs at the same time; and being read to the Common-hall, had the like Appro∣bation. LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwyn, in the Old-baily. 1681.
