V580 R34727 14576253 102645
AN APPEAL TO CAESAR: WHEREIN GOLD And SILVER Is Proved to be the Kings Majesties ROYAL COMMODITY. WHICH By the Lawes of the Kingdom, no Person of what Degree soever, but the KINGS MAJESTIE, and his Privy Councel, can give Licence to Transport either Gold or Silver to any Person, after it is Landed in any part of the Kingdome of England. That this Great and Sacred Trust cannot be changed into the Hands of any Person, Persons, or Corporations whatsoever, without changing or diminish∣ing the Sacred Power of his Majestie, it being against his Crown and Dignity. Humbly Presented to his Most Sacred MAJESTIE, and his Most Honourable Privy Councel, in opposition to some Merchants, who are Endeavouring, upon feigned Pretences, to dispossesse his Majestie of this Royal Trust, and to have it Confirmed by Act of Parliament, to Transport at the Merchants pleasure, Forreign Bullion and Coine freely, after it is Imported into the Kingdom, and make it a Free Merchandize for their private profit, to the Damage of the whole Kingdom in general. By THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmith. MATTH. 22. 21. Render therefore unto Cesar the things which are Cesars, &c. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.
TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majestie: And to the LORDS of his MAIESTIES most Honourable PRIVY COƲNCEL. The Humble Petition of THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmith. Most Dread Soveraign! I Your Majesties most Humble, Loyal, and Dutiful Subject, humbly upon my Knees present this insuing Narrative to Your Sacred Majesty, and to Your most honourable and pru∣dent Councell. I had not presumed to have medled, with this cause and Argument, but that▪ I see with what eagernesse some Merchants of London thought to steal one of the prime Flowers of your Majesties Crown, (from your Sacred Ma∣jesty, and Your most honourable Privy Councell) before the Rising of this blessed Parliament. True it is, Gold and Silver all over the World is a currant Merchandize, it answereth all things, and command∣eth all things under the Sun. But so, that in all Kingdoms, Gold and Silver is a Kingly Merchandize, and only at the Kings Dispose and Will, and not at the dispose of the Merchants, to be transported at their plea∣sure. May it please Your Majesty, by Twenty Acts of Parliament, the Lawes of this Kingdom of England in all Ages, hath invested it
in the most Sacred Hands of the Kings of England, and their Privy Councel, and none other (whomsoever, either Lords, Bishops, or Com∣mons). The Reasons upon perusall of this Narrative, Your Majesty will find to have been done, upon most wise, just, and great consideration, both for the Honour, Strength, and Defence of the Kings Sacred Person, His Crown, and Dignity, and Safetie of the people. The Money, Bullion, Gold and Silver of this Kingdom in all A∣ges, (till these perillous head-strong Fanatick daies) hath been counted the chief Strength of the Kingdom, the very Soul of the Militia, and the Sinews of Warre and Peace) in Your Majesties most Sacred Hands, and in Your Privy Councels, the Law of this Kingdom hath invested it, (and in none other of Your Majesties Subjects of what condition soever,) and there let it safely remain to the end of this World. Your Majesties most humble Subject, upon his bended Knees, prayes Your Majesty to keep this Sacred Trust intire in Your Hand, and not to diminish the least tittle, or branch of it. O never suffer it to be at the will of the Merchant (least Your Ma∣jesty, which God defend, giving some fawning spaniels this Authority, as they desire, out of Your Sacred Hands) You give an oppertunity in a few years, that the breed of them may turn Mastives, and so they may have a power to fly in the Face of Your Sacred Majesty, as some of them did to Your Majesties Royall Father of blessed memory, which God defend; Fore-warn'd, Fore-arm'd: I humbly think I deser∣ved not to live, should I not say this. The Gold and Silver of the Nation, either Forreign Coyne, or Ingot, or the currant Coin of the Kingdom, is the soul of the Militia, and so all wise men know it, that those that command the Gold and Sil∣ver of the Kingdom, either Coin, or Bullion, to have it free at their dis∣posall,
to be Judges of the conveniency and inconveniency, or to hinder, or give leave to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, is the great Wheell of the State, a most Royall Prerogative inherent in Your Ma∣jesty, Your Heirs and Successors, (and none other whomsoever, but by Your Majesties Licence, and cannot be parted with to any Persons, but by Your Majesties most especiall Grant;) your Majesty, and your Pri∣vy Councell being by the Law the only proper Judges, to have liberty to send to your Friends the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom. Upon such just Reasons of State, as your Majesty, and Privy Councell shall judg fit for the due relief of your Friends, and Allies, to offend your Enemy, and defend your Imperiall Crown, and Dignity, and strengthen your Friends. As Queen ELIZABETH severall times assisted HENRY the Great King of France, your Majesties Royall Grandfather; and the States of Holland, with vast sums of Gold and Silver. The like Royall prerogative is in the Crown, upon Petition of the Merchants, setting forth their just Reasons, and at your pleasure your Majesty to give them leave to send Forreign Gold and Silver either to the Indies, or any part of Christendom; but so as your Majesty, as all your Royall Predecessors, and your Privy Councell being in Commission by your Majesty for that service, are the only proper Judg∣es of this businesse, and have the Lock and Key to dispence with the penall Statutes, to give leave to send so much Gold and Silver of For∣reign Bullion, or the Coin of the Kingdom, as your Majesty shall please in your wisdom for to grant, and to what Prince, or Country, but not at the will of any other Person whomsoever. Your Petitioner humbly prayes upon my Knees, for your Majesties honor, for your Majesties safety, for the safety and greatnesse of all your Lords and Gentry, for the safety of all your People, that your Majesty keep this Royall Trust intire, and the same always in your Majesty, and
your most honourable Privy Councels hands, as the Appell of your Eye. Gold and Silver is a Merchandize all over the World, true, but in King∣doms it is a Kingly Merchandize, and not to be transported without the Kings leave. What I hear say, I upon my Knees submit to your Sacred Majesties consideration, Novemb. 28. 1660. (and shall pray, &c.)
To the Right Honourable, the Lord High Chancellour of England, the Lord Steward of his MAIESTIES Housh old, the Lord High Treasurer of England, the Lord Roberts, all of his MAIESTIES most Honourable Privie Councell, These humbly present. May it please your Lordships, I Humbly presume for to Acquaint your Lordships, that I understand some Merchants of London, are en∣deavouring to obtain an Act of Parliament, to make Gold and Silver a Merchandize, to trans∣port freely at their will and pleasure, as it is at this day at Amsterdam, and several other Common∣wealths in Christendome. If this do not satisfie your Lordships, I have it at large to shew this mischief, but I hope I shall not need to say more to this businesse to stopit.My Lords, I am none of the Councel or Committee for Trade, and so it may be presumption in me to intermeddle, to say any thing in this businesse; but my Lords, a Stander by may see more in the Game then the Gamesters: I am no Lawyer, yet I humblie say, I know this point concerning the giving libertie to Merchants to transport money, and what the damage may be to his Majestie, to his Lords of the Councel, and to the Kingdom in general, as well as many others that are in Commission for the Regulating of Trade. My Lords, I have bin writing on this Argument above this moneth, and shall be ready to present to his Majestie, and his Privie Councel (within this week) a Paper that shall unfold the many mischiefs and dangers the Merchants would expose the King and the Kingdom into, had they this Power in their hands: the Merchants should they obtain this their desire, and remove this Trust out of his Majestie and his Privy Councels Hands, to be the only Iudges, to give leave to Merchants to transport Gold and Silver, would rob the King of one of his greatest Prerogatives, and Flowers of the Crown, which by twenty Acts of Parliament and Proclamations, is only invested in the Kings Majestie, and his Privy Conncel; the granting the Merchants this Power, will
bring an hundred inconveniences and mischiefs to the King, Nobility, and Gentry, as I have at large to shew your Lordships and the Privy Councel, and if I do not satisfie his Majestie, your Lordships, and all his Privie Councel, of this that I say to be true, never let me have your Lordships good opinion, that I am either an honest man, or one that loves the Kings Safetie, Honour, and Greatnesse, and the Honour of his Privy Councel. And therefore my most Humble Suit is to your Lordship, (my Lord Chancellour) that if this businesse be called on at the Councel of Trade, and your Lordship be present there this day, as I hear you in∣tend to be purposely about this businesse, that your Lordship would be pleased, either to put off this businesse for to have it argued before the Kings Majestie, or his Privie Councel at Whitehall sometime next week, in the mean time I shall be ready to shew to your Lordship and the Pri∣vy Councel, that it concerns his Majestie next to the Militia, to conti∣nue and keep this great Trust in his Majesties Sacred hands, and in the Power of his Privie Councel, and no other person by the Law, can or ought to have the Priviledge, to give leave to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, this being the soul of the Militia, they that have the money and the Peoples purses, have virtually the Command in all Common-wealths of the Government; let who will have the Title, the Bankers have the power; and this priviledge is no where granted, but in Commonwealths, God defend England from the very name of a Commonwealth, for the Tragedies which were lately acted by some Merchants in England. When we had no King in this our Israel, they have robbed the King∣dome of all the Gold, and so now would work iniquity by a Law; but by Gods Assistance, I will diffect them, and lay the danger open to his Majestie, your Lordship, and the Kings most Honourable Privie Coun∣cel, and stand or fall by your righteous Judgement, humbly praying for his Majesties Safety, Honour and Service, that no further proceed∣ing in this great businesse be argued, but before his Majestie, and his most prudent Privie Councel, within lesse then a week I shall be ready with my Reasons for what I say, to shew your Lordship, that so all the Lovers of the King might be satisfied of the Damage and Danger of removing this great Trust, out of his Majesties and his Privy Councels Hands. So I humbly rest Novemb. 27. 1660. Your Lordships Humble Servant THO. VIOLET.
For the Right Honourable the LORD CHANCELLOUR. May it please your Lordship to give Order, That no further proceedings in this business be, but before, His Majesty and his Privy Council at White-hall; and if His Majesty and Privy Council give judgement against what I say to be true, I will lose my life, when they hear this business examiued. WHereas the Merchants of London are endeavouring to get an Act of Parliament, to have liberty to export Gold and Sil∣ver freely without the Kings Majesties and his most Honou∣rable Privy Councils leave, I humbly propound, for His Majesties ser∣vice and the safety, and honour of his Majesty, that these humble Propo∣sals might be considered of before any further proceedings on that busi∣ness be made. That his Majesty and his honourable Privy Council be pleased to keep intire in their own hands the Licencing of all Gold and Silver after it is imported into this Kingdom, to be exported or Coined, as they shall see just cause, for the safety of the Nation, and safety and honour of his Majesty and the Lords of his Council, and the safety and benefit of all his Majesties Subjects of what condition soever; and be∣ing setled in the Crown so many hundred years by Acts of Parliament, as I shall prove it, this great and Sacred trust be no way altered, especi∣ally at this Juncture of time, this Kingdom being robbed of almost all its Gold and a great part of the Silver Coin, for the private profit of particular persons, to the weakning of the Nation and the destruction of Trade▪ this Royal trust being one of the prime flowers of the Crown, and the very soul of the Militia, and it a right inherent onely in the King and his Privy Council, and there onely deposited for many hun∣dreds of Years; whereby the King (only) by the Law can give leave and licence to transport Gold and Silver after it is imported into the King∣dom▪ and that if you ever suffer this Roial trust to be managed by the Merchant, and suffer all persons by Act of Parliament to be free to transport Gold or Silver, either in Coin or Bullion, after it is imported and landed in England. You take away one of the principal Prerogatives and flowers of the Crown, destroying his Majesties Mint in the Tower of London, and
lay a sad foundation to give some factious Merchants of this Kingdom a ground to make new disturbances, and leave the Nation weak and na∣ked of all Gold and Silver. The granting the Merchants this power they desire, will bring a thou∣sand mischiefs both on the King and Kingdom, which God defend. In all ages, till these Phanatick daies, the Gold and Silver after it was landed in the Kingdom, was held the Blood and Sinews of War and Peace, the Militia and strength of the Kingdom. I shall humbly present unto you these following Reasons for keeping this power intire in your Majesty and Privy Council, and the King, Lords, and Commons cannot be safe to suffer any other person, upon any pre∣tence whatsoever of the Crafty Merchant, to have the disposals at their will, and for their private lucre to have the power by Act of Parlia∣ment, to transport Gold or Silver either to the Indies, or other forraign Countries, or to any part of Christendom. Without your Majesties licence and order to take an exact account of what quantity of Gold or Silver is transported, to what Country, the Ship, with the Ships masters name, either to the Indies, or any forraign Princes Country in Christendom, or to any State, or Commonwealth; that so upon reasons of State, they may either inlarg his Licences to the Merchant, or straighten them according as the King and his Privy Council in their great wisdom shall think fit. Your Majesty and Privy Council ever having regard that the King∣dome have alwayes such plenty of Gold and Silver as may be for the honour of the King, and safety of the people, and to maintain Trade and Comerce in the Kingdom, to pay Rents, Customs, Excise, and Subsidies, to be a strength and an honour to the Kingdom, and the King and his Privy Council to take the care to hinder Gold and Silver to be trans∣ported to the Kings enemies. And of all and every part of these Heads and Branches, and real Prero∣gatives; in all Ages the King, and none but the King, and his Privy Council, by Acts of Parliament, are the onely proper Iudges at their will, discretion and pleasure, for the safety of the Kingdom, and no other person whatsoever. Upon the several Reasons of the Merchants to his Majesty and his pri∣vy Council, and upon their petition and request the King can dispence with the penalty of the Law, and give the Merchant licence to trans∣port onely such quantities of Gold or Silver, either forraign Coin or Ingots, or the currant Coin of the Kingdom, either in Gold or Silver, as
the King and his privy Council shall think fit, for to carry on the Mer∣chants trade in Christendom, and out of Christendom, to strengthen his Majesties friends, and offend his foes; and this is an undoubted right of his Majesties Crown, and cannot be dispenced with, or deposited into the Merchants hands, or any other Subjects, either Lords spiritual or tem∣poral, but to the dishonour of his Majesty and all the good people of the Kingdom, I do humbly prove it true for these Reasons follow∣ing. If any person, of what degree soever, transport Gold or Silver without the Kings licence, the Laws and Statutes heretofore hath made it Felo∣ny, both for Bishops, Noblemen, or Commons, as I shall shew by the St atutes hereafter following, afterwards a praemunire, and at this day forfeiture and imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, viz. 9 Edward 3. 2 Henry 4, cap. 4, 2 Henry 6, cap. 6. 18. Edw. 4, 1 Henry 8. 5 and 6 of Edw. 6. When the Kings Majesty hath War with any Prince, by the Law the King may prohibit the Merchant to export Corn, Armes, Ammu∣nition to them, or any other Commodities: the Law provides the pro∣hibiting the exportations of Wool, Fullers earth, and Timber, as be∣ing destructive to the Nation. Gold and Silver by the Law is free for any man to import, at what place he please to land it, without paying any Duty or Custome, the reason whereof is, that the Merchant is obliged to Coin it, and upon the Coinage the King hath his duty paid, but once being landed, it cannot be transported but with leave from his Majesty, or the forfeiture being ta∣ken, and the party claiming the Gold and Silver so taken on shipboard, to be committed to prison without Bail, till the King or his privy Coun∣cil please to discharge him: This is the Law, this the Custome, before these mad Phanatick daies that we had no King in Israel. And this in all Ages was the practice both in your Exchequer and the Star chamber, for otherwise the Merchant, for his private profit would send all the Gold and Silver out of the Nation, and make the Kings pro∣clamation wait upon the Merchants Exchange, as at this day it is with the Gold: The Merchants and some Goldsmiths have raised Gold a∣bove the Kings proclamation: may it please your Majesty, we want a Star chamber to punish them. I humbly leave it to consideration, no Gold to be had under one shilling six pence in twenty shillings, more then silver; I humbly pray an Act might pass this present Parliament against this abuse of the Gold Coin, and several other abuses and cheats
put on the Nobility and Gentry by the adulterating and undue making Gold and Silver Lace in London, whereby the wearers are daily cozened by course flight adulterate Gold and Silver, and by putting a slight body of Silver on a great threed of silk, to the damage of this Nation, above fifty thousand pound a year, as I will prove it to your Majesty and your Privy Council; and this is done for want of a Regulation of the Work-masters and Workmen in London that make Gold and Silver Lace, without an Essay, or Finenesse, or proportion of Silver to Silk. I humbly desire your Lordships to consider what a loss the King will have in his Customes, to suffer Gold and Silver to be exported at the pleasure of the Merchant, and pay no Custome; here will be, for the profit of particular Merchants, a Trade driven both inwards and out∣wards, and the King have neither Excise nor Custome; for all the World knows, Gold and silver payes no duty inwards, it is free to be imported at the pleasure of the Merchant, when and how, and where he please, for the reasons abovesaid: And if you give the Merchant leave to transport the Gold and Silver freely he imports, what is the King the better by this Trade of the Mer∣chants, either inwards or outwards? let this be granted to the Mer∣chants, to send out Silver and Gold freely, for their private profit, and in a few years they will leave neither Gold nor Silver in the Nation. May it please your Majesty, It is profit that is some Merchants guide, not honour, nor the safety of the Nation, and this is most apparent by some mens actions and demands, touching this great businesse; The King will lose in point of His Excise, and Customs, for if the Merchant invest his Silver and Gold in Merchandies, the King hath thereby His Excise and Customs: the King will lose in point of His Mintage; if no money be coyned, no profit by coynage: this hath made the Mint, a great part of their Work-houses fall down: It is for the Kings honour to have His Kingdoms full of Gold and Silver, for His, and the Subjects de∣fence. And if this Fanatick project should take, the King loses one of the principal prerogatives of His Crown, and Dignity; for those that have the command of the peoples purses, have the principal part of the Mi∣litia. This is a Common-wealth trick, but tends to the undoing of a King, in all Countries where the Merchants can set up a banck, and transport money freely, as at Amsterdam; have not these men the command of the Militia, they are the peoples Princes, and virtually the Banckers have the
power, riches, and strength of the Common-wealth, let who will have the Title, the Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Venice, &c. but the Banker, and the hogan mogan Merchants have the power. The reason is clear, they have got the people by the money, and leave them nothing but some Stivers, and base money to buy victuals; and indeed the people have nothing but a paper credit; in a Kingdome the Merchants will never put up a banck, least the King should seize on it all, they will not allow a King to do that they practice. And I humbly say, it is not for the safety of the King, nor Lords, to let the Merchants have liberty to transport Silver or Gold at their plea∣sure, to forreign Bancks, and Common-wealths, least the Merchants in a year or two put the same trick on the King, and Kingdom, for all their current Silver, as at this day they have done for all the Gold of the Na∣tion. Let the greatnesse of the Merchant be as a Hand-maid to the Kings greatnesse, and ever subordinate to the King. Or else a confederation of twenty Merchants and Goldsmiths, shall make the English shilling, in spite of the Kings Proclamation, and against His Crown, and Dignity, and in despite of an Act of Parliament, to go for 13. d. every English shilling; twenty shillings, for twenty one shil∣lings eight pence; let but the Merchants make Silver a Merchandize, as the Goldsmiths and Merchants have already done Gold. I beseech your Majesty to observ your Royal Father of blessed memory, never did by His Proclamation, or at his Mint in the Tower, raise the Gold coined at above twenty shillings a peece in payment. Doth not the Statute 5. and 6. of Edw. the sixth, make it forfeiture of the value, for any person whomsoever, to utter, or put off Gold or Silver money at above the Kings Proclamation, and imprisonment during the Kings pleasure? Do not above ten Proclamations say the same? this is the known Law. Yet at this day, by the confederation of some Merchants and Gold∣smiths, in spite of this Law and Proclamations, for the Merchants and Goldsmiths private profit, the current Gold is not by any person to be had, a twenty shilling peece under 21. s. 4. d. 21. s. 6. d. 21. s. 8. d. Your Majesty shall receive a hundred thousand pounds in Silver, and not have a twenty shilling peece in Gold in a payment in the Exchequer. What is the reason the Merchants and Goldsmiths have made it a Mer∣chandize? they have against your Majesties Lawes, to your weakning, and dishonour, and against your Majesties Imperial Crown, and Digni∣ty, robbed You, and the Kingdom, of all the Gold; broke your Royal Statutes and Proclamations, beggered your Majesties Mint.
And these very men that have thus abused your Majesty, after all this licentiousnesse, are so bold to desire to steal one of the prime Flowers out of your Majesties Crown. Which is by having an Act of Parliament, that they might freely, and at their will transport Gold and Silver, at their pleasure; they will (if they could get this great power into their hands) leave neither Gold nor Silver in the Nation, but light and clip'd money, groats, ninepences, and thir∣teenpence-half-pennies; let this be but taken notice of, how the Merchants have robbed your Royal Father, your Majesty, and the whole Kingdom, of the currant Gold of the Nation. And then I humbly leave it to your Majesties wisdom to consider what a project this is, tending to the weakning of your Majesty, and Kingdom. These men that have transported the Gold and Silver of the King∣dom already, without your Majesties leave, and against the Law, are grown monstrous rich many of them by transporting all the Gold of the Nation, and most of the Silver. And now their riches makes them so bold, thinking to bribe out all businesse, as formerly they did in the Rump Parliament; they would work iniquity by a Law, if your Sacred Majesty, or your privy Councellors should ever permit them, to the ruine and damage of the whole Kingdom, to gratify the greedy avarice of some Merchants, whose co∣vetousnesse will never be satisfied; gain is their godlinesse, and not god∣linesse their gain. May it please your Majesty, your Royall Grandfather, and Father, King JAMES and King CHARLES of blessed memory, gave a stop to this mischief of transporting Gold, by bringing some of the Mer∣chants of London, that transported Gold and Silver into forreign parts, into the Star Chamber in the years 1619. Sir William Curtine, Sir Peter Vanlor, Mr. Delabar, Sir Moses Trian, and some twenty more were fined in the Star Chamber at near two hundred thousand pounds, and paid King JAMES into his Exchequer, for their composition, about one hundred thousand pounds; this sentence gave a stop to the transporters of Gold, and upon this sentence, shortly after the Mint flourished. Your Majesties Royal Father, in the year 1635 King CHARLES of blessed memory, commanded me your Majesties Humble and Loyall Subject, to discover all such as transported Gold or Silver without His leave. I have the Kings Majesties Gracious Letter to me of thanks for my good and acceptable Service, under His Majesties Royal Hand and
Signet, for discovering the transporters of Gold and Silver, which Let∣ter I have ready to produce to your Sacred Majesty.1648. On Fran∣cis Braudgen brought me your Mrajesties Royall Fathers command to put a charge a∣gainst the Trans∣porters of Gold in the Exchequer. Notwithstanding his Majesties for∣mer command to forbid me to dis∣cover the Trans∣porters of Gold 1643. because his Majesty heard that some Mem∣bers of Parliam. in 1648. was sen∣ding away their estates in Gold, he would have them discovered, and made known to the people how they robbed them of their Treasure. I caused the trans∣porters of Gold at my own charge to be fined 24100 pounds, I caused upon command of his late Majesty to be filed in the Exchequer in 1648, as will appear on Record at this day, above a hun∣dred several informations against the Transporters of Gold and Silver, at my charge many hundred pounds, I know the men and their instru¦ments at this day as well as I know my right hand from my left. I cau∣sed an exception, to have all the Transporters of Gold excepted out of the general pardon granted by the Parliament in the year 1651, as will appear in the Act, I put in an exception to have had it excepted in his Majesties general pardon 1660, but there was so many guilty persons that had transported Gold and Silver out of the Kingdom, that I could not get it put into the Bill to have these offences excepted, whereby your Majesty lost one hundred thousand pounds, had I got it excepted out of your Majesties pardon, there was above an hundred Merchants and Gold∣smiths that I have proof against, for transporting Gold and Silver, and rob∣bing the Kingdom of Millions of money; if your Majesty please, I wil give your Privy Council a perfect list of their Names who transported Gold & Silver, that should have paid your Majesty one hundred thousand pounds, and thank God they escaped so too; I have all the charge against them, and the informations in the Exchequer is now on Record, and informations filed, to the just value of six hundred and fifty thousand pounds. This business I acted, by command of his late Majesty of blessed memory, and did lay out of my Purse the sum of nineteen hundred and sixty pounds in discovery of the transporters of Gold in one thousand six hundred thirty six, and had not your Majesty pardoned the offen∣ders, I would not for my share have taken twenty thousand pounds of them. I have it under your Majesties Royal Fathers hand and signet from Ox∣ford, that he would pay me for my great good and acceptable service in discovering the transporters of Gold. This true account I humbly give your Majesty, to shew there is no man in the Kingdom can discover the transporters of Gold so well as my self; I know them as well as the Beggar knows his Dish, and this is done by intelligence. I was for seven years commanded by his late Majesty to give a stop to the transporting of Gold and Silver, and I did effect it, as appears by your Royal Fathers Letter, ready to be produced to your Majesty.
Here followeth your Majesties Royal Fathers Letter verbatim, viz. Charles R. TRustie and Wel-beloved, We Greet you well. Whereas We have formerly imployed you for the Discoverie of all such as Trans∣ported Gold and Silver Coin beyond the Seas, and all such likewise who contrarie to the Laws, and for their own private gain, have melted down great quantities of Silver; Wherein We acknowledg you did Us good and acceptable service, for which (when God shall enable Us) We do hereby promise to give you full satisfaction. And for that We understand that you are pressed by Our Two Houses of Parliament to proceed in the said Discoverie, We do hereby strictly Command you that you intermeddle no further therein, without Our special Direction, As you will answer the contrarie at your peril. And for so doing, this shall bee your sufficient Warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the nineteenth day of November 1643. in the nineteenth year of Our Reign, &c. By His Majestie's Command, GEORGE DIGBIE. To Our Trustie and Well-beloved Thomas Violet Goldsmith in London.
If your Majestie will be pleased at this time to command me to Catch these Moles that work under ground, the Transporters of Gold and Sil∣ver, and will Graciously Impower me with a Commission, and War∣rants to do the same, I will undertake to set your Majesties Mint on work again, and stop the Transporting of Gold and Silver. Vast sums of Mony is Transported daily, both Gold and Silver, which, if not in time prevented by your Majestie, and your Majesties Hono∣rable, and Prudent Councel, will weaken, and destroy your Majestie, and the Nobility, and the Commonalty in general, to make a few Merchants. If it be your Majesties, and the Lords of your Councels pleasure, to impower me to do it, I will (by Gods assistance) remove the obstructi∣ons of the Mint. May it please your Majestie, I shall humbly desire, before any further progresse of this businesse be made, concerning the giving the Merchants leave to transport Gold or Silver. That by your Majesties especial Command, a select Committee of Merchants may meet, with some of the Officers of your Majesties Mint, and my self, and that we may be order∣ed to make a true Calculation of all Forreign Coins, both Gold and Silver, what every Coin will make, being its full weight, in the Tower of London, & that we send for over from beyond the Seas Placcarts, Edicts, and Proclamations, of Forreign Countries; And that a Jury of Artests be commanded upon Oath, to make a true Report how they find Gold and Silver over valued in other Countries, and report as neer as they can the just and true Standard in Forreign Mints, what proportion they hold to the Mint of the Tower of London. When this is done, to consider of what waies and means they use to keep their Mints on work, that such waies as may be advantageous for setting your Majesties Mint on work, may be observed to prevent former abuses. That the waies and means how these Differences, Standards, may be rectified beyond Seas, and all Standards reduced to a pair, and equalitie with England, and this Misterie un∣soulded truly to your Majestie after the essay by fire and water. And so when this businesse, which is very weightie, is truly, and rightly stated by the Essay, Finenesse, and Weight, and is strictly, and exactly stated to your Majestie, and your Privy Councel, then may it please your Majestie, by, and with the advice of your Privy Councel, such waies may be concluded on, as your Majestie in your great wisdom with advice of your Privy Council shall judge best for your service. They being truly informed both by your judicious Merchants, and the Warden, Master, and Comptroller of the Mint, being assisted with a
Jurie of Arrest to make Essay upon Oath. By this way I humbly say, the whole truth of this businesse will be found out. The Law saith that Gold, and Silver, and Corne, and a mans House is every mans own, to have a propriety in it to make use of between party and party, but not to destroy the propriety, but he is finable by the Law: a man cannot lawfully burn his own House, burn his own Corne, Transport his own money, but it is finable; and this was used in the Star Chamber by the Atturny Banks, and the King's Councel at Law, as an Argument against the Transporters of Gold, in the Twelfth year of King CHARLES in the Star Chamber, when I prosecuted the Trans∣porters of Gold and Silver, by command of the late King CHARLES. I had disbursed in causing the Transporters of Gold and Silver to be fined in the Star Chamber 24200l. at my charge 1960l. and never as yet had penny for that service. This very sentence kept the Gold and Sil∣ver in the Nation, till the beginning of the late War 1643. For which Service your Royal Father gave me thanks as aforesaid, but as yet never had penny of Money for doing that Service. May it please your Majestie, whosoever goes about to take the prero∣gative out of your Majesties, and your Privy Councels hands, of hin∣dring the Transporting Gold and Silver without your Majesties licence; I humbly say it is a Jesuitical, Fanatick design, under the specious pre∣tence of Freedom of Trade, to rob your Majestie, and your Privy Coun∣cel, of the priviledg of keeping in the Treasure, and Wealth of this Kingdom, weakning your Majestie, and your Privy Councel, and your Royal Prerogative, leaving the Wealth, and Treasure of this Kingdom, in Gold and Silver, to be guided by the covetous desire of some Mer∣chants, many of them care not two pence for the safety of the Common∣wealth, so they, and their private Families grow rich. I humbly say it is a presumptuous motion of some hot headed Merchants, that would by crafty and sly pretences rob your Majestie of that which is next to the Militia of the Kingdom, nay, it is the very soul of the Militia, Gold and Silver; get to be Master of that, any man may get Shipping, Armes, Mo∣ney, and any thing to make a disturbance in the Kingdom. We lately see upon what slie pretences the Sword was wrung out of your Majesties Royal Fathers Hands; he that cast his eye upon any of the Flowers of your Majesties Imperial Crown, with intent to take them out either by fraud or force, let them fall as Corah, Dathan and A∣biram, and let their end be like Achitophels, who seek to rob your Royal Majestie of this your just Prerogative.
And this I here humbly say, I will with my life maintain before your Majestie, and your Privy Councel, and the Parliament or Committee of Trade: And these following Statutes, Lawes and Proclamations are my Protection, and Warrant for what I humbly say. 1. A Proclamation against giving for Gold, more then it is currant. 21. July. 17. Jacob. 2. A Proclamation against melting, and culling heavy English Money. 18. May. 9. Jacob. 3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver at high∣er Prises then the Mint. 14. May. 1. Jacob. 4. A Proclamation against Transporting of Gold. 23. May 1. Ja∣cob. 5. A Proclamation against Profit for Gold and Silver; And melting. English Money. And to prevent the abuses and wast, in making Gold and Silver Threed, and Laces. 4. Feb. 3. Caroli. 6. A Proclamation against Transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the Currant Silver Coins of the Nation, for Plate, or Gold, or Silver Threed. 15. May. 3. Carolus. May it please your Majestie, to observe with what care the wisdom of former Parliaments intrusted the Kings of England, and their Privy Councel, to keep carefull watch that the Gold and Silver once import∣ed into this Nation, should be converted into Coin, for the Strength and Honour of the Kingdom; that those that did Transport Gold and Silver without the King's Licence, were Felons. And in the Tryall in the Star. Chamber, 12. Caroli Primi, which I followed by Order of his late Majestie of blessed memory. The Atturney-General Banks, and the King's Councel, read many Presidents, wherein the Transporters of Gold and Silver had judgment, and suffered execution of death, as Felons. Your Majestie will finde transporting Gold or Silver without the Kings licence to be Felony, and by several Acts of Parliament, 17 Edw. the 4. and the 4 Henry, cap. 13. And I humbly conceive the Kingdom is in as great scarcity of Gold and Silver now as it was then, for al∣most all the Gold and Silver is transported without the Kings licence by the disturbance of the late War, and now some Merchants are grown so presumptuous, that they would have an Act of Parliament to make it to be at the will of the Merchants to transport what Gold or Silver freely they please without licence from the King, it were better for the King∣dom that these that go about to take this prerogative from the King,
were blind, rather then the rest of the Kingdom should ever see that day these Merchants should have their will, Stat. 9. Edw. the 3. against the transporting of Gold or Silver without the Kings licence, or the melting down the currant silver coin by Goldsmiths or others into plate Stat. 2. Hen. 4. cap. 4. No person ought to presume to transport Gold or Silver either in coin or bulion, upon pain of forfeiture of as much as they might, which I take to be lives and estates. 2 Henry 6. cap. 6. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parliament, That great sums of gold and silver was transported without the Kings li∣cence out of this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, That no gold, or silver should be transported out of the Realm, and because it is sup∣posed the gold and silver is transported by Merchant aliens, it is order∣ed, That the Mercheant aliens shall find security in the Chancery that they shall not transport the gold or silver monies out of the Kingdom upon pain of forfeiture of the sum or value, and if any do contrary and that duly proved, his pledges shall pay the forfeiture, though the Mer∣chant stranger be gone beyond the Seas: If this Law had been put in ex∣ecution this last twenty years, the Kingdom had had millions of gold and silver, which it is now robbed of, and the offenders are now grown so impudent to hope to get an Act of Parliament to rob the kingdom of all the gold and silver, as the greedy Merchant shall find and see his op∣portunity to send away what gold and silver they please, without the Kings majesty or his privy Councils licence for the future. 18 Edw. the 4. No person to carry gold or silver, or jewels out of the kingdom upon pain of Felony. 1 Henry the 8. cap. 13. An Act made that whosoever shall carry any gold or silver out of the Realm without the Kings licence, shall forfeit double the value. The 5th. and 6th. of Edward the 6th. cap. 16. An Act touching the exchange of gold or silver, that whosoever gave more for gold or sil∣ver, then it is or shall be declared by the Kings Proclamation, shall suf∣fer imprisonment for the space of a year, and make fine at the Kings pleasure, the one moity to his Majesty, and the other moity to the Par∣tie, that shall seize the same, or will sue for it by the Bill of infor∣mation; were the Gold-smiths of London sued on this Statute it would ruine most of them. Had not the Act of Oblivion pardoned them, but that gives them no licence or protection now at this day to act as they do, to sell gold for 21 and 22 shillings for a Twenty shilling peice.
Till this be remedied and the rule for the price of gold set by your Majestie, the Mint will never coin gold to any considerable quan∣tity. If this desire of the Merchants should go on, the Kingdom of England which in all Kings raigns abounded with gold and silver, and famous for their pound sterlings, the true guide and measure of our monies will be put to use the Rooking tricks of the Bankers of Amsterdam, and other Commonwealths. Feed the people with a paper credit and the Merchants have all the peoples money; I beseech your Majesty to consider of this monstrous design and proposals of the Merchants, should by your Majesty be gran∣ted, which God defend, in whose hands your Majesty disposeth the Mi∣litia of the kingdom, even truly your Majesty would surrender the Mili∣tia of the kingdom into the Merchants power. To send away all the treasure of the kingdom, by which means, they will so fetter and impoverish the people of the kingdom, that when your Majesties loving Subjects would give you aid by consent of Parliament, they have no monies to do it but at the Merchants plea∣sure, who will be the onely Judges of the price they shall pay by ex∣changing, and the quantity in coin they will please to let the peo∣ple have. Should the Parliament now grant your Majesty a paiment of a hun∣dred thousand pounds in coined English gold, at twenty shillings the peice of gold, according to the Lawes and Statutes and your royal Fa∣thers Proclamation, which forbids all either Forreigners or Natives whomsoever, to pay, give, or utter the currant coins of gold or silver at above the Kings proclamation, upon pain of forfeiture and imprison∣ment during the Kings pleasure. See the Statute law 5, 6, Edward 6. Yet for all your Maiesties lawes and proclamations, your Maiesty nor the Parliament shall not receive a hundred thousand pounds in gold or a hundred pound, but at the Merchants price, viz. 21 shill. 4 pence, 21 shill. 6 pence, 21 shill. 8 pence, 22 shill. for a twenty shillings piece of gold. This is done in contempt of your Majesty and the law, because the Merchants have got all the coined gold into their hands, and transport∣ed it to forraign parts, and they will not let it come back again but at their pleasure and price make silver a free merchandize, the merchants will guide the prize and send it all away, to the destruction of your Ma∣iesties Mint.
The Merchants of London, had they this power they desire, would by tricks, either by Security or Exchange, get all the Gold and Silver into their hands. And then I tremble to think what will follow, if the Merchants be Masters of all the money: your Majesties Fleet will lie at Chatham, at Portsmouth, &c. and no moneys to be raised, but at the will of their Ban∣kers; Your people in Parliament shall grant your Majesties Subsidies, and when it comes to be paid, they have no money but what is in the Merchants Banks, or upon the Merchants Security, they having gotten into their hands all the money. All the world knows, the whole stock of the money of the King∣dom, is to be disposed of by the credit of the City of London; the City of London gives the Rule to the Kingdom, and the Merchant of Lon∣don for credit upon money rules the City, now if your Majestie should put this power into the Merchants hands, to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, it would be a ready way to see the late Tragedies act∣ed over again; and it is granted by all persons, that Gold and Silver commandeth all things; if your Majestie should part with this Royal Prerogative, I humbly desire your Majestie, upon my knees, to con∣sider where you will lodge this great Jewel, which is the quintessence of the Mllitia: I humbly say many Merchants of London are recovered but lately out of the madness of a dangerous Rebellion, and wise men use to watch such as have been once frenzie afterwards in all their actions, lest being let goe at their own pleasure they one time or another do either themselves or some others a mischeif; this I now humbly say, is to preserve your Majesties Greatness, Honour, and safety of your Majesty, and your most honourable Privy Council. I study not to please some Merchants, but to serve your Majestie in truly stating this business, I being formerly imploied in this service by your Royal Father he would have believed me in this point, and concern∣ing the regulating of Gold and Silver lace, and removing the obstructions of the Mint for seven years, I had the onely care of this business by his Majesties order, to prevent the transporting Gold or Silver. If your Majestie suffer the Merchants to obtain this their desire, all the paiments of the Kingdom will be unfixed, and your Majesties Subjects will have no money left but Groats, and some odd monies, to buy But∣ter and Eggs; the Tenants must pay their Rents after the Barbarious way in SCOTLAND, in Boules of Corne, and Chaldrons of Victualls, Coles, Horses, Cowes, and Sheep. Your Majesties Privy Councel,
and your great Lords, and Gentry, must truck with their Tenants instead of a thousand pound Sterling, to be paid them in current Gold and Sil∣ver, according to 20. s. the pound Sterling for Gold, they must at this day pay 21. s. 6. d. if they will have a twentie shillings peece; is not this a wrong and dimunition to all the Lords in ENGLAND, seven pound ten shillings in the hundred, in all the Rents they are out of by Lease. But let Silver be made a free Merchandize, to Transport at their plea∣sure, without your Majesties leave, farewell all Land-Lords payments in money (then, which God defend your Majestie should expose all the Nobilitie to be at the will of the Merchants, for to receive either their Rent in Money or Ware.) All payments in Silver will raise the price of your English shilling shall be set against your Majesties Crown, and Dignitie by the Merchant, as at this day, all the world know they have presumed without your Majesties leave, and against your Lawes, to send away all your Majesties current Gold of the Nation, and to make it a Merchandize here in London, in contempt, despite, and affront of your Majestie, the Parliament, and your Majesties Lawes and Statutes, and now are so brazen Fac'd, that they look, and sue to have libertie to rob the King of this great priviledg▪ I humbly hope the Merchants bribe∣ing daies are past, they had once a time in the long Parliament to make their Gold and Silver break thorough all Barrs, all Lawes; a Corporati∣on of London, with a joynt Purse, was such a Roman Ram, that it batter∣ed down all the Lawes, and Statutes. I humbly hope this businesse, and the mischiefs that would follow, if they should obtain, their desire is so clearly stated, to be only in your Majestie, and your most Honourable Privy Councel, that you will never part with it to any Corporation of Merchants, or others, but to keep it safe where the Law hath disposed it, it is a Iewel the Law hath invested in the Crown, and cannot be va∣lued, it is an inestimable Pearl, and Riches. That if the Merchants could by confederation pay down a Million of Money to your Majestie presently, to have it in their hands; Your Ma∣jestie would be a loser, Your Majestie would part with that which is Your Honour, Your Safetie, Your Lords, and all Your Peoples safetie, the Soul of the Militia. I pray God upon my Knees, your Majestie, and your Privy Councel, would consider what is here said, and set a mark on these men that at∣tempt under sly and fained pretences, by subtiltie and craft, to under∣mine your Majesties Throne, Crown, and Dignitie; these men that de∣sire this to be in their Power, are like Water men, look one way, and Row another.
These men many of them have designed in their heart the moddle of a Common-wealth, to be the fittest Government for this Kingdome; God hath delivered your Majestie from the Sword-man, the Club man, and hath restored your Majestie to the Glory, and Greatnesse of your Royal Father, and your Predecessors, with the Hearts of all your good Subjects, and a large increase of the Revenues of your Crown, to the joy of all your Majesties good Subjects. This Glory troubles some Mungrels of LONDON, that dare not bark, but are at this day cunning fauning Spaniels, that would by fauning co∣zen your Majestie of this Great, atd Royal Prerogative, which had they it, in seaven years they may lay such a Foundation, that the Child un∣born may rue it. I have read of a little Fish that sticking to a Ships side shall stop a great Ship under sail. The Merchants of a Kingdom or Common∣wealth that are Bankers and have libertie to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, rule the Commonwealth both for War or Peace, and have virtually the sovereign power, being Masters of all the peoples mo∣nie. These Bankers can hang a Pad-lock on the Commonwealths Sword when they please: God defend your Majestie and your Lords from suffering them to do so in your Kingdom of England, for all the rea∣sons before and after following. The Merchants of London have transported all the Gold and most of the Silver out of England, principally by the confederation and assist∣ance of the Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet, who are just in the nature of the Bankers at Amsterdam, and the Goldsmiths is your Merchants Jac∣call as the Jac-call is to the Lion, they hunt for the Lions prey. The Goldsmiths lay up Gold and Silver for the Merchants to transport, some Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet, keeping at this day many great Mer∣chants of London cashes, and some Noble mens cash by this credit of several mens monies, the Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet are in the nature of Bankers, and have a great stock of Treasure by them alwayes of Gold, forraign coines, and Silver. And as these and the Merchants please to truck and and chaffer, set the price of the currant Gold of your Kingdom at above the price cur∣rant by Proclamation of your Royal Father, and above the price of your Mint, to the destruction of your Majesties Mint, and against your Crown and Dignities; your Majesties Mint is tied to a certain rule both for the weight and fineness of the Standard of your Majesties Gold and Silver, and cannot by the Law exceed; now here is the mischief.
The Goldsmiths they go between the Mint and the Merchants that transports Gold and Silver, and out-bids the Mint, 1. d. and sometimes 2. d. and more the Ounce in Silver, and five shillings the Ounce in Gold at this day, and so catch up all the Gold and Silver to transport, being Factors, and Purveyors to the Merchants that transports Gold and Silver. And by this confederation between the Merchants, and Goldsmiths, contrary to the Lawes, and Proclamations of the Kingdom, they have cheated, and robbed the Kingdom, and your Majesties Mint in the Tower of London, and for these last fifteen Years have destroyed, and made desolate the same. Your Majesties Mint in all times, by the Law, should have the pre∣heminence, and first served. Your Majesties Mint at this day is neglected, your Majesties Lawes despised, and your Majestie, and the Kingdom of England, Lords, Gen∣try, Commons, cheated, and robbed of all your Gold, and almost all your Silver, to the weakning, and impoverishing of the Kingdom. This wickednesse is done onely for the inriching of a few particular Persons, Goldsmiths, and Merchants, to the destruction of the whole Kingdom, and if not timely prevented, to the ruine, and destruction, and decay of Trade. This was done when we had no KING in Israel, God forbid your Majestie now should suffer it. If your Majestie by your justice do not make some of these Offen∣dors an example, and timely prevent it, by the grave advice of your most Honourable Lords of the Councel for the time to come, to prevent these abuses by a Law, or renewing the old Laws by your Majesties Procla∣mation, making it losse of Estate for any Goldsmiths to sell any Mer∣chants Gold or Silver to transport, or to convert Gold or Silver into a∣ny other use then Plate, and Gold, and Silver Wyer, the Offendor for ever after to lose his Freedom. And that no Merchant, or Goldsmith, shall give for Gold or Silver more then it shall be declared for by Proclamation, upon pain of forfei∣ture. And that all Goldsmiths that are Exchangers of Forreign Bullion, shall enter into securitie with the Officers of your Majesties Mint, to your Majesties use, to Coin the same, and to convert it to no other use. That no Merchant obtain a Licence from your Majestie, to transport Gold or Silver, nor the East-India Company, other, or more then they them∣selves cause upon their own proper accompt, to be truly imported, ac∣cording to their Charter; and that all Warrants for transporting Gold
or Silver be Registred, and the Goldsmiths to be tyed to Coin all the Gold and Silver they shall hereafter buy, such Goldsmiths that will not to be debarred, the liberty to have power to exchange Forreign Gold and Silver, this being a Prero∣gative of the Crown, and never granted the Company of the Goldsmiths, as I can prove by the Law, that the Warden of your Majesties Mint is your Majesties Exchanger, and he may Licence any whom he please to buy Forreign Bullion, provided they put in securitie to Coin it in the Tower, and convert it to no other use but to coin upon the pain of forfeiture of his Bonds to your Majestie. May it please Your Majesty, my most humble prayer to Your Majesty, and Privy Councel is, that at this juncture of time the late Lord Cottingtons Rules & Obser∣vations may be made use of for bringing of Gold and Silver into the Kingdom, that State-man about the year 1630. made a most advantageous Contract with the King of Spaine, for the bringing in Silver from Spaine in English, bottoms and Landing the Silver at Dover, one third part to be Coyned in Your Majestyes Royal Fathers Mint in the Tower of London, and the other two parts by Your Majestyes Royal Father, and his Privy Councels Licence to be transported at the will of the Importer, this Commission was granted under the Great Seal of Your Majestyes Royal Father, by the advice of his Privy Councel, and above ten milli∣ons of Silver Coyned upon that Contract, from the year 1630. to 1643. This Silver hath bin almost all transported away for the private profit of the Merchant, and little currant Silver Coyne left in the Kingdom, but light and eliped, and Coun∣terset mony in abundance. All the Gold sent away, to the destruction of the King∣dom, for the private profit of the Merchants. If Your Majesty please to inquire of Your Officers of the Mint they can certifie this is the truth. And what a dangerous Project this was of some men, to goe about to steal so Royal a Flower out of the Crown, such pilferers are Enemies to Your Majesties Crowne and Dignity, and ought to be watched as men newly recovered out of a Lunacy, kept from doing either themselves or others mischefe. May it please Your Majesty, the King of Spain having peace with Holland, and France, will not have occasion to Export so much Mony for Flanders, as He had when He had Wars with Them. Yet great Summes of Silver will dayly be Ex∣ported to Flanders from Spaine, to pay the Spanish Garrisons in Flanders, and the Trade from Spaine to Antwerp, to pay the Bankers there, will dayly cause great quantities of Silver to be Exported from Spain. I humbly desire, that upon Treaty with the Spanish Ambassador, the Lords of the Councel would take order to Carry the King of Spaines Silver, as the Lord Cottington setled it; and that by the Law it should be made Felony, for any Person that did not Coyne one full third part of all Silver that by agreement with the King of Spaine should be coyned, this Licence to be Canstantly allow∣ed to any Person upon the King of Spains Composition for Trade from Spaine; And for all other Persons whomsoever, that Import Silver or Gold, to have it by Act of this Parliament, after the said Silver is Landed, that any Person that Transports Gold or Silver, it should be Confiscation of Ship and Goods, and Imprisonment during the Kings pleasure. Besides, the Forfeiture of all Gold and Silver so put on Ship-board to Transport without Your Majesties, or your Privy
Councels Licence; And that all Gold-smiths, or others whomsoever, that Culleth and Melteth down the Currant heavy Silver Coyns, for any Manufa∣cture, or to Transport, it shall be Felony, and that without Mercy. If These Lawes by this Parliament be Revived, and I your Majesties Loyal Subject Impowered, and Commanded by your Majesties Most Honourable Privy Councel, to See to the due Execution of them; By the Blessing of God, I wil in a few Yeares Replenish the Great want, and Scarcity of Gold and Silver, in the Kingdom againe; And Remove the present Obstructions of the Mint. May it please your Majestie, It is the Execution of the Law quickens and gives life to the Law, when knowing persons shall be intrusted to see to the Execution. There are Laws and Proclamations against transporting gold, but no incou∣ragement considerable for a mans time, all the Laws in the world will never re∣form this abuse, if some Trusty persons be not appointed to look in a particular manner, and make it their business, and a man cannot imploy several people to do this service but at great charge, vigilance and diligent attendance to keep his watches, and intelligence in London, and the Ports; this mischief daily increases, because no knowing person is impowred and commanded to take care of this great business. Queen Elizabeth would not admit the East India Company, at her first grant∣ing them to be a Corporation, to transport the King of Spains silver coin into the East Indies, though the Merchant pressed it very often; telling her Majesty that her Silver Coin and Stamp was not known in the East Indies, they think∣ing by that to get a License to send what Silver they pleased: This most pru∣dent Queen, and her wise Privie Councel replyed, to the Merchants of the East-India Company, that for the very reason the Merchant alledged, to transport the King of Spains silver to the East Indies; It was her fixed reason and re∣solution unalterable, she would not grant the East India Company leave to send the King of Spains, or any forreign Princes coin into India, but such Silver as was coined with her Effigies and Picture on the one side, and the Percullis on the other side, of the just weight and fineness of the Spanish peeces of eight, and peeces of four Royals, and no other Silver should by her Merchants be sent to India. And this was her Majesties prudent reason for the doing thereof, that because the Indians did not know her, nor see her greatness on her Silver, her Majesty gave the East India Company leave to transport Gold or Silver, but so as she would for the time to come give them a just occasion to reverence and honour her, and bow at her Effigies, declaring she would all the world over, where she gave her Merchants leave to Trade, be known to be as great a Prince as the King of Spain: And that none should presume to send a greater quantity of Silver then she in her wisdome should judge fit, to the East Indies, as will appear by their Charter, both for the quantity, and with her Figure, Motto, and Percullis upon the Silver: The Queens Majesty declaring she held it as a speciall and chief Pre∣rogative of her Crown and Dignity to put the Percullis upon all the Silver the East India Company should send to the Indies: Nor would she admit the Mer∣chants of the East India Company to send more Silver then she and her Privie
Councel did approve of; as appears in the Journal Books, the yearly Licences de∣claring she would have her Merchants in that point to be subordinate to her will, not her will to be ruled at the Merchants pleasure. And so during all her prosperous Reign to her death, this great and prudent Queen ruled her Merchants, and not the Merchants her; this was according to the Law of England, the Queen would ever be known to be a Queen. This Narrative will appear to be true, by the Stamps, Weights, and Standard of this Silver that was coyned in the Tower ready to be produced to your Majesty, and the most Honourable Privie Councel, if your Majesty require the same; this course con∣tinued all Queen Elizabeths Reign, and it would be for the honour and greatness of your Majesty, that all Silver transported to the Indies should be coyned of the weight of Pieces of Eight, with your Majesties Royall Effigies, and the Percullis in the Tower of London, that so all the world over, the Nations might see your Royal stamp, and bow down, and do reverence; What an honour had it been to your Maje∣sties Grandfather and Father to have had sixty hundred thousand pounds transported in Silver to the Indies, with their stamp; which would have been done had Q. Elizabeths honourable Rule been observed: I humbly desire it may be done hereafter, though your Majestie get nothing but fame, no profit. I dare undertake the East India Compa∣ny shall have their silver coined in the Tower for 12 pence the pound weight, that is 60000 l. coyned for one thousand pounds. The East India Company by monie got this Royal Priviledge laid down at the beginning of King James his Reign, to the great impairment and losse of his Im∣perial royal Crown and Dignity; and to the great losse of his Majesty in his Mint∣age and Coynage and the losing and diminution of your Royal Grandfather and Fa∣ther of Blessed memory, in their Revenue at this day above an hundred thousand pounds in the total sum in the duty of coyning, there being since King James his Reign by that Company above sixty hundred thousand pounds in Silver and Gold sent to the East Indies, were their Books of Entries examined, and their Books of Account to their several Factories in India; what they have sent yearly to every particular factory, and some Auditors appointed to make the inspection upon Oath. I humbly say, there would be found many hundred thousand pounds transported both of English Gold, and Silver, more then ever they had licence from the King to send to the great weakning, damage and decay of this Nation, they being a Company that heretofore used to bribe out all their abuses by one course or other. Had not your Majesty by your Royal pardon pardoned them, they should before this time have found the East India Company charged by me in the Exchequer with many hundred thousand pounds of English Gold and Silver, and of half Crowns and foreign Gold and Silver transported, against the Laws and Statutes of the King∣dome, let them have got off as well as they could. May it please your Majesty, That company pretends a debt your Royal Father should owe them for Silks and Pepper delivered unto one Burlemack, a Merchant, a∣bout the Year, 1630. upon your Royal Fathers account, had not your Majestie in your great mercy pardoned this very Company of Merchants in your gracious and free Pardon, 1660. I could have chalked out the way to have peppered the East India
Company, it had never been so peppered since it was a Company, they are pardoned for what is past, but they have no Priviledge for the time to come. But if your Majesty command me to watch the East India Company that they for the future send no more gold or silver then they have licence for from your Majesty; I shall faithfully do it, and give a stop to these mischiefs they have formerly committed. If your Majesty command, I shall not fear the riches or greatness of the East In∣dia company, or Merchants of London, but I will tramel them and reduce them to the due obedience of your Majesties commands, and the Law of the Kingdom. For the longer this business is not looked after, makes some Merchants think to get leave to weaken the Kingdom in general, and incroach upon your Majesties sacred Pre∣rogative to send what silver and gold they list away for the future, without any Comp∣troller. May it please your Majesty, a Court in the nature of the Star chamber, would Frost-bite these Gentlemen, and make them pluck in their Horns, and submit to your Maiesties Lawes, which will be for the good of the Nation in general, that these men may be curbed, and not left to rob the Kingdom of all its Gold and Silver, as some Merchants have taken the boldness to do, when we had no King in this our Israel for this last se∣venteen years. Never School-boyes plaid such tricks in the absence of their School-ma∣sters, as some of the London-merchants have done: When the books of the Common council of London, copied out together with the East India Companies books, be throughlie inspected, your Maiestie and your ho∣nourable Privie Council will see incredible passages, fit for Your maiestie to know, such as is for Your maiesties honour and safetie for the future to prevent, viz. I most humbly pray your Majestie and your honourable Privie Coun∣cil, to command true Copies of all the Acts of the Common Council of London, from one thousand six hundred and thirty eight, to one thou∣sand six hundred and sixty, and the true copies of the East Indies Com∣panies books of Envoys sent to their Factors, of all the Gold and Silver they sent yearly, the ships name, and by what Factor, and to what Fa∣ctors in India and Persia, ever since one thousand six hundred and twen∣tie, to one thousand six hundred and sixty: Not that I have the least thought that any of them should be punished for what is past, by reason of your Majesties gracious pardon, but that an Eye might be kept over them to keep them from committing the same or the like offences again against your Majestie, your Crown, and Dignity. I humbly say, I am so charitable to them, that I had rather see them
alwaies upright in all their actions, then ever to hear that your Majestie should put your Royal self to that trouble to pardon them again; when they have offended, it is better, I humbly say, for the Merchants, that your Majesty take all course to keep some Merchants from falling; then to take them up after they are down, if they be watched that they shall have no opportunitie to offend, it saves the labour of punishing any of them. Some Merchants I have heard say at the Council of Trade one thou∣sand six hundred and fiftie, that it is an old Heresie to hinder the trans∣porting of gold and silver freelie, and to retain it in the Kings hands he only to give a licence to transpor: Sure I am it is a Phanatick opinion for the Merchants to labour to obtain it out of your Majesties and your privie Councils hands. Some Merchants are great magnifiers of Commonwealths, their Poli∣cies and Governments, those that are for an Amsterdam model both in the Church and Kingdom; but in our Kings sacred hands this great Trust in all Ages hath happilie continued, and no Merchant never durst ask such a request to have it at their own dispose; these Merchants covet more profit and gain then they do the Kings Majesties greatness, and that makes them so busie to get this Royal flower out of the Crown. May it please your Majesty, your standard of Gold and Silver is fixed to all your Subjects of all your Nations▪ the pound sterling is a fixed paiment, and is the guide to all the Bankers in Christendom; for till they return their Bills of Exchange for England, no Banker or Merchant can tell certainly the true intrinsecal value they shall receive for a hun∣dred pounds delivered in their Banks, by Bills of Exchange to any place but onely England, where these paiments are fixed and paied ac∣cording to the pound sterling, which is by shillings, pence, and half∣pence, without any fraud or bankmonie, from the paiment of one hun∣dred pound, to the paiment of one hundred thousand pounds, no man can be wronged of a penie, but it will exactlie appear upon the casting up of the accompt. Commonwealths and Bankers go upon Merchants subtilties, that is not for the Honour and Dignitie of your Majestie, to make your monie go high, when you are to paie your Armies and Fleets, and then presently to call it down in Kingdomes; Kings are Sa∣cred, and cannot act such dirty tricks, as Commonwealths do. Englands Tragedy from one thousand six hundred fourtie three, to one thousand six hundred and sixtie, may serve as a warning to all good sub∣jects,
how to turn Kingdomes into Commonwealths, or to leave power of transporting Gold or Silver at the will and pleasure of the merchant. Merchants are like fire and water, Good Servants, but bad Ma∣sters; in their proper spheers good, but to get a head destructive to man∣kind; witness the late horrible Tragedies fomented and continued onely by the pleasure and power of the Merchants and the wealth of London: The burnt Child dreads the fire. I lost twentie thousand pounds by the late Rebellion, which was hatched and kindled for the greatest part by those of London. They surfeited with Plenty, Riches, and Trade, the late Royall King Charles the first, by his late Royall Fleets, laid the Foun∣dation of the Merchants of Londons greatness and reputation all over the World, no Prince nor Commonwealth daring to injure the Merchants of London, but the King with the first winde had his Royal Fleets in their Harbours to demand reparation to the Merchants con∣tent, else their harbours debarred Trade▪ The late glorious King got the envy of the Ship monies; but never a penny of it in his Exchequer. The Merchants of London got the profit, advantage, and security by Trading safely, and the Seas scoured from Pyrates: How unthankfully the Merchants required his Majesty, was shown in this late Rebellion. I speak not this that any should be punished, but that they might be pre∣vented for the future to do the same things again, as they did this last seventeen years. In King James and King Charles their raigns, those good Kings was got into the Citie of Londons debt, and to come out of it they did part with their Lands at half the value. When Masters borrow Money of their Servants, it makes them generally overvalue themselves and slight their Masters. I hope in a few years his Majesty will be in that condition to lend the City of London money, upon their Charter, the like to the East India Company and other Companies to have their Lands bound. This was King Henry the sevenths way, he would alwaies have his Exchecquer full of money, finding it to be the greatest security to prevent all mis∣chief, to have the King richer then his people. In the year one thousand six hundred fourty seven, your Royal Fa∣ther being informed that many Members of Parliament, and factious Citizens was transporting and packing away their estates in Gold be∣yond the Seas, which these had in aboundance cozened the Kingdom of, your Royal Father commanded me by one Mr. Francis Brogdou, of London Gentleman, on whom his Majesty constantly imploied to go between him and his loyal Subjects, then Prisoners in the Tower:
This Mr. Francis Brogden brought me his Majesties, your Royal Fathers pleasure, that I should labour in the pretended Parliament-house to ob∣tain a commission to discover the transporters of Gold and Silver, but so that if I obtained it, I should use my diligence to discover the Parlia∣ment-men, and their factious Merchants of London, to make them odious to the Kingdom that transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation: I used my endeavour to make them publick to the World, for several years, to get this Commission to pass by the pretended Act of Parlia∣ment, and it is well known to many of the then Parliament, Sir James Harrington, Fleetwood, and several others; but was particularly opposed by both the Ashes, Allen, Harvey, Sir Henry Vane, Strickland, and many others of the Parliament, and by swarms of Sectaries of the City of London: which men had transported the Gold and Silver out of the Nation; and therefore to be sure to have them within compass of the Law, I caused a Gentleman to file in the Exchequer a hundred informa∣tions against the transporters of Gold and silver, and to let them remain on record, till your Majesties Royal Father did come to London (this was about one thousand six hundred and fourty eight) at that time being the hopes and prayers of all good men. But God had decreed it other∣wise, by taking your Royal Father out of this World, the World espe∣cially, this unthankful Nation, not being worthy of him; so all things rested till your Majesties happy arrival in May 29. 1660. Concerning the transporting of Gold and silver, though your Majestie hath pardoned the transporters of Gold till 29. May 1661. I humbly say, your Majesty hath declared that for the future you will have all men conformable to your Laws, without respect of persons, if this rule be stri∣ctly observed, your Majesty will never put this great business of trans∣porting Gold and Silver to be at the Merchants will and pleasure, least the same tumults and troubles be played over again by some Phanatick Merchants, as they have done within twenty years; your Majesty may as safely put a Sword into a Madmans hand, or a Knife into a Childs, as trust the Merchants to transport Gold or Silver without your Maje∣sties licence, after it is once landed.
TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majestie: And to the most Honourable the LORDS of his MAIESTIES most Honourable PRIVY COƲNCEL. The Humble Petition of THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmith. Most Dread Soveraign! I Your Majesties most Humble and Loyall Subject for your Majesties service humblie pray, that the East-India and Persia Companie, bring in their Charter, whereby your Majestie and your Pri∣vie Councel will inform your selves, by the Charter your Roy∣all Father and Grand-Father passed with what priviledge they have granted them, & upon what conditions and restrictions. 2. That your Majestie and your Privie Councel would be pleased to require an accompt of the East-India and Persia-Companie, of all the summes of monie, Gold or Silver, either Forrain or English, which they have sent into India and Per∣sia, ever since July 1620. this is no new thing, for they did in 1620. give an accompt, and made it by their Books appear, that from the Originall and first foundation of their Trade, in Anno 1601, to July 1620. they had shipped awaie for India onelie, 548090l. sterling in Spanish monies, and some Fle∣mish
and Germane Dollars, which accompt was presented in Parliament at that time. 3. Your Petitioner desires your Majesty to take notice, that if the State in Parliament were then so carefull in times of peace, and the Trade of the Nation flourishing, to call the East-India Company to an accompt for twentie years, and to cause them to make their accompts plainly to appear by their Books for twentie years; surely, I humbly conceive, your Majesties and your Privy Councell will exspect for the ser∣vice of the Kingdom, to have an exact accompt of all the Treasure the East-India and Persia Companie have exported; and to have them to Produce a just accompt, what quanti∣ties of Gold or Silver they have bought in Holland, and in other Forrein places, immediately upon their proper accompt; and what quantitie of English melted Silver in Bars, they have bought of Gold▪ smiths in London; what quantities of Gold in Bars, they bought of the Guinie and Barbarie Companies, what quantities of English coined Gold they have sent into the East-Indies, and to Persia; what quantities of Cardques, Rix-Dollars, Rials of Spain, or any other Forrein Silver, they have bought up in London, of Merchants, Goldsmiths, or others, which without the East-India Company so buying, would have been brought into the Mint and coined, to the great augmentation of the stock of this Nation. And that they be required to give your Majesty, and your Privie Councel, an Accompt of what quantity of Spanish Pistollets, Dutch Ri∣ders, Hungarian Duckets, Gold Gilders, Gold Albertus of Flan∣ders, Italian Pistolets, Turky Sultels, and all other Forrein Gold and Silver, they have bought up in London, of Goldsmiths, Merchants, Natives, and Strangers, which have not been
members of their Companie, and transported to India and Persia, since 1620. All which, I am sure they have perfect Accompts of. And that the aforesaid Companie be re∣quired to send your Majestie, and your Privie Councel, in all the Warrants and Licences for their doing of the same, and for a true discoverie of the premisses. 4. That your Majesty, and your Privie Councel, would require the Books of Envoies, of the same Lading of everie ship, of all the Gold and Silver, in Bars, or Coin, that bath been sent to the East-Indies and Persia, since 1620. for by them your Majestie and your Privie Councel shall see what Gold and Sil∣ver each ship carried, and the Ships, Factors, and Master's names, and to what Factorie in Persia or India, and the several years, and so your Majestie and your Privie Councell will quicklie see the just quantitie to a pennie what they have trans∣ported, and in what sort of Coin, either English Gold or Silver, or Forrein Gold or Silver, for these fourtie years; the giving your Majestie and your Privie Councell a true ac∣compt thereof, will be of great concernment to the Kingdom in many respects. 5. That your Majestie and your Privie Councell would appoint a Committee to view over the Journal Books: for out of them there will be gathered businesses of great concern∣ment to the Nation; and if some able Book-Keepers be ap∣pointed with me, to take out what I shall observe in them, it will tend highly to the service of your Majestie and give a stop to great mischefs that is daily practised on the Kingdom. 6. If your Majestie and your Privie Councel please to in∣form your selves by this waie, your Majestie and your Privie Councel will see clearlie manie other secrets, upon perusal of
these Books, then I will speak of, and so your Majestie and your Privie Councel will be able to rectifie and settle the Trade in a flourishing condition, that it may be benificiall to the Kingdom, and all the Adventurers, whereas heretofore, and now as it is managed, none getteth by it, but the Com∣mittees of the said Companies, and the Companies Fa∣ctors and their Officers. The Adventurers having been blind∣ed ever since it was a Companie, and led by the nose by their servants, or else how could their Factors and servants be so rich, and the Companie's stock so poor. 7. May it please your Majestie and your Privie Councel, I humblie conceive, upon the Examination of all the premi∣ses, When that the Books of the Companie are examined, it will be found that the East-India Companie hath sent awaie the Kingdoms Coin, both in Gold and Silver, manie hun∣dred thousand pounds more then ever they had warrant for to do; from your Majesties Grand-Father or Father, though your Majestie and your Privie Councel hath forgiven it, yet It ought to be prevented for the future this mischief; which your Petitioner most humblie praies for your Majesties and your Privie Counsels service, also That your Majestie and your most honourable Privie Councel command a true Transcript under the hand of the Town-Clerk of the Citie of London; to be transmitted to your Majestie and your Privie Councel, of all the Acts, and Orders of the Common Councel from the year 1638. to the 25. March 1660. It is true, your Majestie by your gratious pardon hath pardoned all offences, but for the future there will be great use made of their Orders, to know by what degrees, and steps the late confusions got to a head, and poisoned that great bodie of your Citie of London;
I humblie saie, your Majestie and your most honourable Privie Councel will make great use of the sight of them, to prevent anie the like disturbance again and to nip them in the bud (this will be for the generall good and quiet of the whole Kingdom) for as London pipes, so the greatest part of the Kingdom dances, especiallie all Cities and corporations, keep the spring head clear from being disturbed, the streams will run alwaies clear, they have your Majesties most gratious pardon for what is past, but that gives them no priviledge to act the like things again, eitherby fraud, feined pretences, or by force. The East-India Companie formerlie having made it their common practice by giving great summes of monie for Bribes, to have libertie to oppress the good people of the Na∣tion, and to have Licence with Authoritie to deceive the King∣dom; all which abuses, I praie God, by the wisdom of your Majestie, and your most honourable Privie Councel, may be carefullie found out, and such Order and Regulation made for the future for all Traders, as may be most for the prosperitie of this Kingdom in generall, without anie regard to parti∣cular Interest, when it shall be found destructive to the King∣dom, and your dutifull and loyal Subject shall pray for your Majesties long and prosperous Reign over us. Novemb. 28. 1660. Signed, Tho. Violet.
I charged the East-India Company before the Councel of Trade, 1650. with robbing the Nation of many hundred thousand pounds of Gold and Silver, more then they had Licence to send; and severall other Misdemeanours. Thereupon the Councel of Trade made these Or∣ders. Die Mercurii Sept. 11. 1650. At the Councel for Trade at White-hall. Ordered, THat the East-India Company be desired to produce their Origi∣nall Charter before this Councel. Ordered, THat the East-India Company be desired to bring into this Councel, what Licences they formerly have had granted them for the Transporting of Bullion, or Coin, since the year 1620. Ordered, THat the East-India Company be intreated likewise to produce the direct and true. Accompts of all the severall summes of Bullion and Coin, in any specie to the full, that hath been year∣ly transported by them, since the year 1620. Ex. Ben. Worsly, Secret. But these Orders were never obeyed, but some of the Rump Parlia∣ment was brib'd, and no Reformation, I only got the Envy for making
this Discovery, I humbly hope the East-India Companies time of bri∣bing out all Business is expired, now in your Majesties blessed Reign; Truth shall prevaile, especially such as are for your Majesties Honour, and Safety. I shall humbly shew your Majestie the damage the Kingdom suffered by sending all the Silver to the East-Indies in Spanish monie, before it was coined with King Jame's, and King Charle's Face, and the Per∣cullisses, as it was coined in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and hum∣bly recommend it to your Majestie, and your Privy Councel, to have all Silver so coined before it goes to the Indies. It is for the Greatness, and Honour of the King, to have the Silver, his Merchants Trade with, first coined with the Percullises, and His Ef∣figies and Motto, all over the World; For the Kings greatnesse is the Mer∣chants securitie, and protection, and to be made of the weight of peices of Eight, and of the same Standard, as it was in the Queens time; the King loses in point of Coinage by not Coining, the Silver is sent to the East-Indies, as Queen Elizabeth did, the East India Companie had paid to the Kings Grandfather, and Father of blessed memory, a hundred thousand pounds, which would have bin clear profit since King James, in his Majesties Exchequer, and all his Officers for Coining payd, if Queen Elizabeths Rule had been observed, to Coin all the Silver sent beyond Seas. If the East-India Companie Books be looked over, they have sent above sixtie hundred thousand pounds in Silver to the East-Indies, since the first of King James in Spanish Silver, more monie by farre then is at this day in England. I humbly recommend it for your Majesties Honour and Profit that your Majestie for the future may coin all Silver, or Gold, that so the Indian Princes may see your Effigies, and bow at the sight thereof; As Queen Elizabeth made the Merchants to do, or else they should not send her Silver. The true safetie and protection of
the Merchant is, that they are Subjects of such a great King, that can cause Justice and Right to be done to His Merchants, as far as the Seas ebbs and flowes round about the World, it is truly for the Merchants se∣curitie if they would consider rightly of all things, and love the King's Honour, as well as their own Profit. MAY it please your Sacred Majestie, I here humbly give your Majestie, and your Privy Councel an accompt concerning my staying the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, 15. Decemb. 1652. The day the Judges had resolved in the Admiraltie to clear these Ships, their Silver and Lading, there being three hundred thousand pounds in them. I saw about that time Don Asonso Decar∣denis the Spanish Ambassador Extraordinary, come to the Rump Parliament, and owned their power, as a free State and Parliament. I heard that many in Amsterdam was playing the same prancks there with the Prince of Orange, as the Londoners had plaied with Your Majesties Royal Father, and your Majestie, I saw the Face of all things look very sadly, both in France, Holland and Spain, the Royall par∣tie being banished from home, put to great extremities abroad, and al∣most insufferable wants: At which time I had advice from one of Do∣ver that the three hundred thousand pounds in Silver in the aforesaid Ships, part of it appertained to Amsterdam Merchants, and other parts to Spaniards, and some to Hamburgers; and I had the Copies of the Original Commission under the Great Seal of Holland, to de Witt, and de Ruter, the Vice Admirals of Holland, to require them to guard all Ships coming from Spain to Ostend, or Dunkirk, from the English, the Dutch and Parliament being at Warre; and this was done upon the Petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, to the high and mightie Lords the States, to guard the Ships from the English;
which Commission, and Petition at this day remains in the Admiraltie. I cast about how I might first divide the pretended Councel of State, in Decemb. 1652. amongst themselves, about this Silver, in the aforesaid Ships, and set them to stay it, which I knew would ingage the Rump Parliament in a forreign War, and so though the Kings Partie were op∣pressed at home, the Rump might wast their Souldiers, and have more hands about their Ears then they were aware of, and in time be beaten out of breath, and so the Royal Partie might rise again. I divided the Councel so as there was ten for sending me to the Tower, and clearing the Silver, and twelve for the staying the Silver, and giving me thanks. I made some of my secret Friends acquainted with this design, they approved thereof; and so having promised secretly one to a∣nother, for it concerned my life. I told them from time to time how I laid my design, till at last I ingaged Cromwel to take up the Silver from aboard the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, and that he would dissolve the Parliament; the same night that he dissolved the long Parliament, he could not sleep for it about the 15. April 1652. Cromwel sent Mr Sadler the Town-Clerk of LONDON, and Coll▪ Bingham to me, to come presently to him at the Cock-pit, to give him the Coppies of all the Bills of these Ships Lading, and the value of the Silver, which I did; and after he had them, Cromwell could not sleep till he had the Silver in Bark steads custody in the Tow∣er. I found him to be forward in it, to get the Silver into his possesion in the Tower, being 29. April 1653. Oliver Cromwell sent a guard of Souldiers to seize on the Silver aboard these Ships, the Sam∣pson, Salvador, and St. George, the 20. day of April 1652. Brad∣shaw tore his Hair before me, and a Friend of mine, Bradshaw telling him that Cromwell had undone them all by forcing the Par∣liament, and that now he saw apparently he was an undone man. Bradshaw storming at me Tho. Violet, saying, I was the fatallest
man that ever was to the Councel and Parliament for staying this Silver, and that had I not set the Councel and Parliament to stay this Silver, till that every mans claim was particularly proved, the Silver had been all Transported, and Cromwell never durst have dissolved the Parliament, had he not got the Silver in these Ships, being three hun∣dred thousand pounds into his hands. All which I did premeditately to set them, and the Councel, Parliament, and altogether by the Ears, to divide and weaken their Councels. And I made several per∣sons acquainted with my design, who are wel known to your Majestie, both for their Service and Fidelity, if I be required I will name them. Before ever I undertook this Businesse, I had their advices, and approbation under secresie, for it had cost us all our lives had it bin known, I had given the Parliament this vomit to undo them. This I can prove to be the truth, and Sir James Harrington, Frances Allen, and Tho. Scot used to say, it was Violet destroyed the Parliament, and not Cromwell; for had I not stayed the Silver Cromwell durst not have forced the Parliament. But whereas Doctor Walker, and some others have declared to some Merchants, and o∣thers of London, I stayed the Spaniards Silver, and would not consent to the dis∣charge; I was so far from hindring the Spaniards of their right, that I Petitioned Cromwell and his Councel to discharge the Spaniards Silver. But Doctor Walker opposed me in it, as appears by Doctor Walkers Certificate to Cromwells Councel. Mr. Jessop Clerk of the Parliament delivered it to me upon condition I should return it to him when I had done with it, I humbly pray your Majesties most Honourable Councel to take the pains to peruse it, and they will see only Doctor VValker staid all the Spaniards silver, I stayed the Dutch silver. At last when Oliver Cromwel saw his Error, in taking on himself the go∣vernment in his single person, and in looking after the silver mines in Hispaniola, and seizing upon the silver, as I had set him to do, he cursed me often times bit∣terly; Mr. Beck of VVestminster, being Oliver Cromwels Sollicitor, and Master Francis Bacon the Master of his Request: I used them to sollicit my business to Cromwel, for to get satisfaction for my estate unjustly taken away, but they both told me, he would never do nothing for me, for he hated my name and remem∣brance; and that whensoever they moved him of my name concerning any busi∣ness, he would be in a rage; Mr. Beck, and Mr. Bacon several times have asked me whether I could imagine the reason? I told them No, I wondred at it. But indeed I know the reason, he did see I had set him on those things which he was not able to master, and though I put on it the face of innocency I knew from the first hour that Cromwell took the 278250 l. into his custody, that he would destroy the Parliament, and divide and subdivide among themselves, till all ended in confusion: I thought it my duty to give your Majestie, this true Accompt and can prove it as aforesaid, and several other services, your Petitioner hath done for your Majestie, where in every on he ventured his life for your Majesties ser∣vice, and never had farthing either of the Parliament or Cromwell, but expended his own money for several years, to the value of fifteen hundred pounds. And twen∣ty thousand pounds taken from me by the Parliament as aforesaid. There are many of the then Honourable Prisoners in the Tower can tell your Majestie, how active I was always in your Majesties Fathers service in the Tower: I humbly refer my self to this following Certificate for the loss of my Estate.
THese are to Certifie, whom it may concern; That I William Du-Gard of London, Clerk, have known Thomas Vio∣let of London Goldsmith many years; and have been privy to his Applications to the Parliament, for restoring him to his estate, taken from him by the Parliament in 1643. for his bringing up a Let∣ter of Peace to the City of London, from Oxford, from his late Majestie CHARLES the I. of blessed Memory; And I have seen Mr. Violets Original Petitions, Accounts, and Demands of the Long Parliament, for satisfaction for his Estate, in Lands, Houses, Offices, Bonds, Debts, Goods, to the value of above eleven thou∣sand pounds; so much hath been confessed to me by several of the Committee of Parliament, that Examined the said Tho. Violets sufferings, that they found it fully proved Mr. Violets Losses to be above the summe of eleven thousand pounds, besides his Imprisonment and forbearance. And I have heard several Parliament men confesse, that Mr. Violet was unjustly oppressed, contrary to Gods Law and mans, for being sequestred for bringing up the Kings Letter for Peace; and several Members of Parliament, upon my Solicitation promised him from time to time satisfaction, but abused him by delays, making him for many years lose both time, and expend much money in waiting on them to my knowledge; but never received farthing from them. I do further testifie, upon the Perusall of Mr. Violets Papers, and the Confession of several of his Neighbours, who knew him before the Year 1643. that I do esteem his Losses to be far above eleven thousand pounds since 1643. besides his Imprisonment, and losse of his Calling, to his damage at this time above twenty thousand pounds. In witnesse whereof I have here to subscribed my Hand. WILL. DU-GARD.
The same is in Effect certified by several other Gentlemen, whose Names are subscribed, viz. ALEXANDER HOLT of London, Goldsmith. WILLIAM BOURNE of London, Brewer. PAUL SMITH of London Gentlemen. ROBERT EMERY of London Gentlemen. Witnesses. Josiah Smith. Paul Edwards. John Wegewood. Henry Goldston. VVilliam Barnes Knight ey Freeman. A true Coppy of Doctor Walkers report concer∣ning the Silver Ships the 14th of Aprill 1654. To OLIVER CROMWELS Councel. May it please your Honours, IN the business concerning the Ships and Silver goods in the three Ships in the Samson, Salvador, and S. George upon attending your Lordships, with Mr. Violet, severall particular were proposed, and I was directed by your Honours summarily, to state them, and to give my humble opinion upon every of them. The particulars were, 1. Concerning the Silver in these three Ships, which was the bulk of the whole matter upon which I argued, when I procured the Onus pro∣bandi to be cast on the other side. Mr. Violet devided it thus, that there was one Boschard a Hamburger, and one Stephen de Balderos, and one Lewis Fardinandes Hagelo, and one Losa Berona; and one Mexico Herera, and one Michaell Severino Lozenso de Eucle; and one Thomas Sauches, de Urise Anthonio de Puntho Spani∣ards, and one Dony Martin Native of Galloway in Ireland, that laid particular claims every of them, to some parcels of the Silver laden for their accompts all whom (as Mr. Violet Stated it) came along in the said Ships and have attended their claims here ever since upon the place, in making their proofs and sollicitings; for bringing it on to a hearing for their particulars and are as Mr. Violet states it, by their long attendance and spending in diet and otherwise reduced to such extremity as they for want are ready to starve.
For these Mr. Violet, hath proposed that his Highness and your Lord∣ships would direct that their claims would come on to a present hear∣ing; that so what was found to be justly and really theirs might be ad∣judged them: not onely for their present relief, but for the vindicating (as Mr. Violet terms it) the justice of the Nation, and preventing any Imbargoes abroad for want of justice here. Now for this my Lords being as I conceive, rather the prudential part then the legal, I must not take upon me to give any opinion in it, but submit it wholly to your Lordships to consider the prudence of it, whe∣ther you will hold it fit that these particulars shall come on before the rest of the claims; for the other Silver in the said Ships and so to handle by pieces, or whether to have all the Silver directed by tryall and hear∣ing altogether. For the rest being the great bulks of the Silver, Mr. Violet proposed that pleas should be put in, to be a ground for Commissioners to be pro∣cured to go into Spain and Flanders to examine witnesses there; against the several claimers, and their claims supposing that in respect the Laws of Spain prohibit the carrying out of Silver under great penalties, the claymors would not dare to own it in Spain, if Commissioners for his Highness, should be sent over thither and that much discoveries would there be made, and witnesses be found in Spain if active persons be im∣ployed and sent over thither. Mr. Violet proposed that there would be this farther use made of it, by procrastinating the businesses, and gaining of so long time as for Com∣missions to go into Spain, and be executed there and returned. As to the last of these it is evident, that it must of necessity gain time, and delay the hearing. But whether upon the main matter, it will produce any thing or countervaile the charge, which must needs issue out of purse and cannot but be vast in exceuting so many Commissions by the Magistrates of Spain, and imploying such as must necessarily, be sent over to look af∣ter it, I have often told Mr. Violet, that I much doubt and must submit it to your Lordships, not daring of my self to venture upon it; without a special warrant, for several reasons. 1. For that we yet know of never a particular witness by name to ex∣amine when we came thither. 2. And for that it will be uncertain whether after so great acharg spent to make inquiry there, any positive witnesses would be there or not. 3. If any there shall be found it will be uncertain whether upon the
clay mors cross interogatories they may not say more against us, then upon ours for us, being there in a Countrey where the claymors will in all likelihood finde more means, friends and opportunities, then those that shall be sent over from hence against them. 4. For that the claymors have already upon their own Commissi∣ons, owned their claims in Spain, and examined witnesses by the Magistrates publickly there upon; and therfore no doubt, but they may again publickly avow them at ours, if any new Commissions go from hence for his Highness: as well as they did upon their own claims when Commissions issued to Spain, for them which they have procured to be there speeded and returned back again hither into Court. And therefore what your Lordships proposed to me as first in ex∣pedient, that is, to endeavour that publication for the claimors might so pass, that liberty might be given to see their proofs, and yet if occasion were to plead and examine witnesses notwithstanding, which Albeit, the rule be that contrary matter may not be examined upon after pub∣lication and sight of the witnesses; yet in those cases of the Silver in the said three Ships, I have since I waited upon your Lordships, upon de∣bates with the adverse Proctors and Councels publickly in Court pro∣cured such a Salvo by their consents to be entred and publication is so past that now the despositions and proofs for the claimors may be per∣used, and yet liberty to plead and examine for his Highness (if there be occasion) notwithstanding; but there being so many Commissions returned for the claimors, and the depositions so extream long, It will ask a good time to puruse and consider them. As to the rest of the goods in those Ships, not being Silver, many of them, being much decayed and perished by so long lying, and some of them having been heard already and for what remaines, I see no reason at all to put off the hearing of them any longer; for that the main charge suspicions and grounds were against the Silver: and had not (as I hum∣bly conceive) any such reflex upon the Tobaccoes, Hides, and other goods; & besides such special provisions may be made (as hath also been already done in what hath been heard) that they may have no manner of consequence at all, as to any of the Silver. And as to the Ships themselves, viz. The Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, for as much as the publick Agent for Hamborough hath often pressed it, that they might be permitted to come to hearing, & for that by this long lying, one of the said Ships hath been already sunk in the River; and that if the said Ships should be continued much longer
without repairing and imployment, it is publickly (and hath been of∣ten) affirmed in Court, that they will decay, perish and come to nothing.Truly Doctor Walker, if ei∣ther you or O. Cromwel had known upon what grounds or reasons I staid this sil∣ver, you (as O. Cromwels Fis∣cal or Judge Advocate) would have paid me as you did the Kentish men for de∣claring for the King. I was forewarned of trusting of you by several of the Kings friends, who remembred how you ser∣ved your Ma∣ster Bishop Williams in the Star-chamber. Indeed you told me Crom∣wel nor the Parliament would never give mee any thing, and se∣ing they would be ad∣vised by me & give me no∣thing, after they had rok∣bed me of all my estate they could finger, I was resolved to give them that advice to be revenged of them, that if they took it, it should de∣stroy both the Parliament and Cromwel. God it was that incouraged me and blinded them, that they should ever trust a mans advice that they had ruined. They should have remembred that advice, Trust not a pretended reconciled adversary; especially keeping him from his estate, as they did me to this day to my dammage Twenty thousand pounds. Sir Henry Vane junior having a better nose than the rest, ever said I was not to be trusted, telling Bradshaw I had several times made my application to him, but he would have nothing to do with me: and when I stayed the Silver, Vane moved to send me to the Tower; for (said he at the Council) this Villain will set us against al the world at once, to bring in the King of Scots; I wonder the Council claps him not up. Thereupon it was put to the question: whereof 10 of them were for laying me in prison, and 12 for giving me thanks; all those that were of the then Council of State knows this to be true, That I made a fraction between Bradshaw and Vane. Cromwel and Bradshaw with the rest of their party about the staying the Silver, but Vane, Strick∣land and Nevil were for letting of it go. This Silver which I stayed was the only cause of blowing up the Long Parliament, which I knew at that time an Army of 40000 men could not have done. I do humbly conceive submitting it nevertheless to your Lordships that for the avoiding of further perishing of the said Snips, and other lading (not being Silver) and for avoiding claimour and scandal in de∣lay of justice, The said Ships, and remainder of the lading (except the Silver) may if your Lordships please, be permitted to come to a hear∣ing and judgement. As for Mr. Violet himself, I can onely say that by severall Orders of the former Councell of State; he was directed to sollicite and look after this businesse of the Silver Ships, and that he hath often attended and spoken in Court, and many times repaired to me, and consulted about it; and that it hath appeared to me (and may also to your Lordships by perusing what he hath printed) he hath spent much time about it, and I verily believe hath drawn much envy upon himself, and run some ha∣zard and danger and spent his own monies in going up and down to make his enquiries. But I cannot determine what the produce or effect thereof will be, or amount unto untill some particular and positive proofs be brought in to prove the Silver, or at least some part thereof really and truely to belong to some Hollanders, specifying their names, and the parcells, and discovering the fraud, in colouring it in other feigned names. For as I have humbly declared unto your Lordships, for as much as the Onus probandi is by Law cast upon the claimors. The result is, that for so much as the claimors shall not positively and certainly make spe∣ciall and particular proofs of: there the judgement will be for confil∣cation in default of their proof, in respect of the Onus Probandi so cast. But for so much as the claimors shall make, & have made positive par∣ticular & concludent proofs, of their real property. There I humbly con∣ceive unless more proofs be brought in, then yet are, or that Mr. Violet can bring in certain and particular proofs, to encounter the other that in references and arguments will be of no more force, then the casting of the Onus probandi alone will do of it self, so that I dare not take upon me to give any opinion, But must leave the considera∣tion of Mr. Violet and his service to your Lordships. All which I humbly Submit Walter Walker. April 14. 1654.
By Command from King CHARLES the First, of blessed Memory, as ap∣pears by Warrant under his Royal Hand and Seal, I caused these men following to be fined in the Star-Chamber, for transporting Gold and Silver, and culling and melting down the heavie Coine of the Nation. The 25th. of Ian. 12. Car. The 17th. of Febr. 12 Car. Charles Frank 4000 l. Peter Hern 2000 l. Robert Ellis 4000 l. John Tere 2000 l. Isaac Romeer 3000 l. Timothie Eman 2000 l. Jacob Delew 1000 l. Isaac Brames 1000 l. Roger Fletcher 1000 l. Henry Futter 500 l. Richard Cockram 1000 l. Henry Sweeting 500 l. John Parrat 1000 l. John Perrin 100 l. The Total of the said Fines amount to the summe of 23100 l. This Sentence awed the Transporters of Gold, till these Troubles, they durst not transport Gold or Silver, for fear I should meet with them. Sir John Wollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the City of London, being informed against in this Information, by the then Attur∣ney-General, procured a Pardon from your Majesties Royal Father, and so were discharged. These two villains betrayed your Royal Father. 1643. As aforesaid. And Mr. Peter Fountain, who was informed against for Transporting of Gold by me, procured his Pardon upon paiment of 1100 l. to the Lord of St. Albanes, then Master Jermyn. And all these I did bring to a Trial, at my own charge. That besides the fourteen offenders sentenced in the Star-Chamber, and par∣doned, as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Gold-smiths, and others, that have transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation. Die Mercurii 1 Sept. 1647. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That it be referred to the Committee of the Navie to consider of, and take some effectual course to prevent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to re∣port what they have done herein, to the House. H. Elsing. Cler. Parl,
May it please your Majesty, to peruse your Royal Fathers letter, which I have printed in this book, folio 14, wherein his late Majesty of glorious memory, commands me that I should not dis∣cover the transpotters of Gold and Silver to the Parliament, without his Majesties especial licence. His Majesty knew the fines and compositi∣on of the offenders would bring the Parliament in great sums of mo∣ney, which they would then imploy against him, being then upon the point to call the Scotch then to invade the Kingdom of England, destroy his Majesty, and the Royal party. At the same time I had in the Parliament my Patent under examinati¦on in the House of Commons, for an Office I have for two lives, un∣der your Royal Fathers great Seal of England, for the essaying and seal∣ing all Gold and Silver Wire, and Silver, and Gold Thrid, and to war∣rant the same to the Wearers, that it be good Silver, and a due proportion of Silver to Silk. This Patent was commanded by Sir Ro∣bert Harlow, being Chair man to a Committee, to be brought into the House and referred to a Committee, who after several daies hearing re∣ferred all parties to the Law, concerning the regulation of Gold and Silver wier. And I justified my Patent to be for the good of the Kingdom in gene∣ral, and that it saved fifty thousand pounds a year by my said office, and by my regulation and tying the workmen to work good Silver, and a due proportion of Silver to Silk; and this I humbly say at this day to be true, as I will prove it at the Council for Trade. There was a Committee appointed, and Pim, Hamden, Whittaker, Corbet, &c. to article with me for to discover the transporters of Gold and Silver, and if I would do that, and raise the Parliament monies by the fines of the offenders, then I was by their procurement that the com∣mittee of Parliament should report the legalty and justice of my afore∣said Patent and Office; and it should have been confirmed by Parlia∣ment, but first I was to raise the Parliament fourty thousand pounds by the fines of the transporters of Gold. This agreement was made between the Committee of Parliament and me, in the Court of Wards, about the 10th. of November 1643. and I prepared to make my discovery accordingly. But then, may it please your Majestie, comes your Majesties Fathers Letter, of blessed memorie, and commands me not to do this service for the Parliament at my peril, as I have it to shew under his Majesties hand and Seal. There∣upon presently I obeyed his Sacred Letter, and chose Poverty and Loy∣alty
before Riches, and to be a Rebel for my Loyalty I have been most Barbarously used. I told the Committee, that upon enquiry after the business, I found the French and Dutch Merchants, and strangers, that had transpor∣ted the Gold and silver out of the Nation; were removed from Do∣ver, and I could not for the present do them that service I had promised them. Whereupon Whittaker and Corbet took that but for a flam, and said, I was your Majesties Royal Fathers Spie, a Cavalier, and a Malignant, and moved the House against me▪ and they sent me to the Kings∣bench; and there I remained a Prisoner, till I made an exchange for Mr. Heslerig, then Prisoner at Beaver Castle 1643. in December. In January after his late Majestie had exchanged me, presently he commands me to bring up the Letter aforesaid, from his late Majesty to the Citizens of London, which I did, and the barbarous abuses which I received from Citie and Parliament, for bringing the same up, I have humbly declared. My humble request unto your Maiesty is, that you would be pleased to observe, all my suffering is only for my loyalty to your Maiesties Royal Father, would I have obeyed the Parliament, and discovered the Transporters of Gold at that time, 1643. I had inioyed all my estate, and been setled in the Office which I have for two Lives for the regulating Gold and Silver Thred and Wyer. And all this damage I suffered for obeying your Maiesties Royal Fathers com∣mand, to my damage at this day above twenty thousand pounds: My most hum∣ble Petition to your Majesty is, That seeing I was oppressed and traduced by the tyranny of Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir Arthur Haselrig, and Mr. St. John, they being the principal Actors that ruined me, that I may have by your Majesties goodness, bounty, and mercy, allotted out of Sir Arthur Haselrigs, and Sir Hen∣ry Vanes estates such satisfaction and reparation as your Maiesty in your Roy∣al wisdom shall think fit and just for my support, after so sad an oppression for my loyalty to your Royal Father, the petition to the Parliament, and my charge against Vane, St. John, Haslerig, was put into the Parliament before your Maje∣sties gracious Letter from Breda, the Lords in Parliament ordered me to respite my Petition to them, until your Maiesties happy arrival into England, and ever since I watched my opportunity to shew what I have done and suffered for your Royal Father, and what I can and will do for Your Majesties Royal service, if you please to command me, I am at your service, as far as my life and estate will go.
MAY it please your Majesty, in the year 1636. your Majesties Royal Father gave Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs his Gratious pardon, Sir Henry Mildmay, and the Company of Goldsmiths, charged Alderman VVol∣laston for buying the Kings stollen Plate, and Alderman Gibbs, for refining and melt∣ing of Silver contrary to the Lawes, as will appear in the Records of the Councel-Table, about March 1635. Had not his Royal Majesty of blessed memory pardoned the then Lord Major Wollaston, the Law had hanged him before ever he had come to have been Lord Major of London; and then he should have prevented this VVollaston from being such a Traitor to his Majesty, the Proverb saith, Save a Thief from the gallows and he will hang thee: This VVolla∣ston proved a bloody enemy to the King to his dying day, and Gibbs as bad as he, but is yet living. For as soon as ever I delivered his Majesties Message unto my Lord Major, he sent for his fellow Traitor Alderman Gibbs, and they presently concluded to make Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr Sollici or St. John, and Francis Allen, acquainted with the Kings Letter, and ordered presently to apprehend me, Sir Basil Brook, and Mr. Rily to seize upon our Estates and sequester us: And so presently I was that night apprehended, and for four years so used, that never any man that brought up a Letter from any King of England to London, for a Peace, was so barbarously and cruelly used, that Evening the aforesaid persons and some others examined me they carried me to Goldsmiths Hall, they sent for Sir Basil Brock, and Mr. Rily, and St. John the Kings Sollicitor caused all our Pockets to be searched, and found their Letters in Sir Basil Brocks and Rilies, but none in mine, and as Sir Basil Brook presented him with the Kings Letter, which I brought up from Oxford; St. John asked Sir Basil Brook for another Letter, which the Kings Majesty had sent up, the day before I went to Oxford to presse Rily and his party, to act their business as soon as they could, with a Letter from my Lord George Digby, which the Officers found about Sir Basil Brook. Touch∣ing this business when they had these Letters, St. Johns, Vane, Haselrig, Mr. Allen, Lord Major Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs, and several others, made themselves very merry with them. There was Mr. Jackson the Essay-Master of Goldsmiths Hall, a very honest man, and one that saved my life at that time, in discovering to me what was confessed by Rily, that he had not discovered any thing, and that the aforesaid Committee were resolved to face me down Rilie had confessed all, and so would have me to discover, and I should have mercie. They found in Mr. Rilies pockets Reads two Letters aforesaid, and threatned him to have him racked, if he would not discover the bottom of the businesse, and who they were in the Citie, that plotted to oppose the Scots coming in. But there was an Oath of Secrecy amongst them all, and Rilie knew them all, but I was not privy to the number that was but only to act with Sir Basil Brook, Read, and at Oxford with his Majestie, the Queens Majestie, the Dutchess of Buc∣kingham▪ and Lord Digby, and to bring the Kings Letter from Oxford. Had Rily but confessed those Gentlemen in London that wete privie with him
in this business he had made many score of men in the City of London, lose their Lives and Estates. And had the Lord Major VVollaston concealed the business twenty four hours, it had been out of his power to have stopped this design for peace: His late Majesty of blessed memory told me at Oxford, That Rily had sent him down by one that came purposely to Read from London, a List of above two hundred of the principal men that had ingaged in this business, every man upon an Oath of secresie: The late King commanded me to tell Mr. Rilie Scoutmaster-gene∣ral of the City, that he should follow his former Directions, which was to be careful whom he imparted this business to, and to treat with them severally, and not together, for all their security depended thereon, that it did concern all our Lives and Estates to be circumspect: We had former Presidents to make us wa∣ry, Tomkins and Challenor and others, and though he was careful of all his Sub∣jects, yet of those that were most forward to serve him, he was most tender that they should venture themselves, telling me he did know more of this design then I did, by Gods blessing it will take saith his Majestie, I have laid it so with Mr Rily, that I am assured of a happy success, go thy way, I will make thee a man, and tell my Lord Major, and Mr. Rilie, I will make them famous for ever. Rily was by all parties trusted to carry on this design, and had not the sins of the Nation pre∣vented us of such a mercy (for it was not Gods time) for our deliverance, there was never in all these troubles a design for putting an end to the War without bloodshed, so laid and contrived as Sir Basil Brook, Col. Read, Mr. Rily, had laid every man his part severally; and so secretly, that though the principal men in the City were ingaged in the business to make the City of London to declare for the King, and to oppose the Scots invading of England, and the Cities Declara∣tion which they intended to publish; I brought it to his Majesty my self 1643. and re∣ceived my Orders and Directions thereupon my self from his Majesty, and the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Dutchess of Buckingham, and the Lord Georgs Digby his Majesties Secretary and Coll. Read, were only privie to this businesse; to my knowledge, at the Court, and no other. Two Letters of Col. Read's, sent to Mr. Theo∣philus Rily, Scout-master of the City of London, from Oxford, to incourage the Common-Councel of the City of London, to Petition his late Majesty for Peace; and to consider the sad Effects that would follow, upon the Scots invading-England. Jan. 1643. SIR! I Wrote to you formerly, but never had any Answer, I assure you faith∣fully I have not been wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceiv by the effects) & if you have not your desire, blame your self,
and give me leave to tell you, that if you neglect the opportunity now of∣fered to you, it may be you shall never have the like again; for I have made those whom you have given just occasion to be your worst friends, to be your best, and the only instruments to procure what here is sent you, and be you confident shee shall still be so, provided you do your part;The Queens most Excel∣lent Majesty, in my hearing, (I being sent down to Ox∣ford, by order of Rilie and some others, to bring up his Majesties Let∣ter Decemb. 1643.) did most earnestly intercede for the City of London. The King there∣upon replied, that he had there the best and worst sub∣jects of any King in Chri∣stendom; and hereupon the Queen replied, Violet it shall be my care to see the Gentle∣men that come from the City with a Petiti∣on to the King shall be well accomodated, and have a most Gratious Answer to all their just de∣mands▪ God blesse them, & God increase their number, and thereupon the Queens Majesty wept, and the King drew his hand∣kerchief out of his pocket, and the tears stood in the Kings eyes, which made both Read and I fall a weeping, and thereupon the Queen commanded Col. Read to lift up the Hangings, to see no body stood behinde the Hangings to hear what shee said, which Read did, and when the Queen see no body behinde the Hangings; Ah Violet said she the King and I am in a most sad condition, we have Traytors about us, that watch all our Words and Actions, we speak nothing, nor do nothing, but it is seat up to the Parliament, and they interpret it in the worst Sence: The Queens Majesty at that time was very ill, and lookt very carefully, and was nothing but Skin and Bones. God be thanked for the blessed change that is here at this day, the Kings Majesty her Son, in the Throne of his Royal Father, and King of the hearts of his People; these two Papers was found in Rilies pockets, and was printed by Order of Parliament, and Col. Read charged to be a Jesuite, I am sure of it these Papers makes him a true Prophet, I saved Reads life in getting him exchanged of the General Essex by a wrong name. con∣sider I beseech you, what a gap is opened by bringing in of the Scots, for the destruction of this Kingdom, if there be not a Peace (which I pray God Almightie to send speedily) you must expect Armies of Strang∣ers from several Places, who are now preparing, who certainly at their coming in will over-run the whole Kingdom, and when it is past remedy, you will see your own Errors, and therefore to prevent more misery then I am able to expresse to this deplorable Kingdom, and the effusion of the bloud of thousands of men, women, and children, which must inevitably be this Summer; apply your selves in an humble and submissive way to his Majestie, whom I know you will finde ready with Arms out-stretch∣ed to receive you to favor and mercy, and grant you favors, even beyond your expectation. Defer no time (for God's sake) and what you will do, do it speedily; I say again, do it speedily, for reasons, I may not write. Oxford Dec. 10. 1560 Col. Read's Paper to Mr. Rilie, Scoutmaster of the City of LONDON. SIR! I Assure you that I have not been wanting to further your good desi∣res, and if it be not your own faults, I make no doubt but things will have an happy issue; for I finde those that are most concerned in it, for∣ward
enough. Reflect now upon the miserie of the times, and upon the groans and sufferings of those you see not, which yet have been nothing to what they will be, if not speedily prevented by a Peace; which to obtain I beseech you, let it not only be your own care, but the care of all those you love, or have power with, otherwise be confident of a generall ruine, which certainly will be inevitable both to your selves and posteritie; and therefore take it into your serious consideration, and let no causless jea∣lousies hinder you to apply your selves in an humble and submissive man∣ner to his Majestie, who I am sure will yet look upon you with a gracious eie; lose no time, for the longer you delay, it may prove the more diffi∣cult, no doubt. This last Letter I Tho. Violet delivered from Read at Oxford, to Mr. Rilie in London Decemb. 20. 1640. This Coll. Read I got exchanged by a wrong name, for a private Souldier, at the intreatie of Sir Basil Brook, who told me I should do a very good service for his Majestie, and the Queens Majestie, to get Read to be discharged, but that must be done by a wrong name, or else said Sir Basil Brook the Parliament would never admit of his exchang; I did effect it, and sent this Coll. Read to the King at Oxford, upon condition he would returne to Mr. Rilie the Scout-master of London, how he found his Majestie inclined to receive a Petition from the City of London for peace, that they would declare themselves for a peace, and Petition his Majestie for a cessation of Arms; and an accommodation be∣tween the late King of Glorious memory. And I Tho. Violet was sent down to Oxford Decemb. 29 1643 to bring up his Majesties Grati∣ous Letter, the Copie of the Citie of London▪ desire, being sent to his late Majestie, wherein they desired upon the Copie I brought to Oxford,
to have his Majestie directed his Letter to the Militia of London, but his late Majestie would not own the Militia, to treat with them as the Militia of the Citie, because his Majestie told me at Oxford they were not impowred by his Commission, and he would not own them: I told his late Majestie, and the Lord Digbie, it was contrary to my instructi∣ons which I received from Mr. Rilie, to alter the superscription of His Majesties Letter, but seeing His Majestie would not but direct his Letter, To our Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of our City of London, and all other our well affected Subjects of that our Citie. I would venture my life to bring up this Letter to London, and going according to my instructions I received from his Maiestie, to acquaint Wolla∣ston then Lord Mayor of London, and Alderman Gibbs, they caused me some few houres after I was gon from them, to be apprehended upon a Charge of High Treason. MAy it please your Majesty to peruse this ensuing Narrative, viz. in Sept. 1657. I being sick sent to Bradshaw to write to the preten∣ded Protector Cromwell, that if he would not pay me the ele∣ven thousand pounds he promised me, to pay me some considerable sum for my support. Bradshaw at that time wrote to Cromwell very ear∣nestly to pay me a considerable sum in part, using this as his argument, and telling Mr Beck (Cromwels Solicitour) Mr Tho. Hewet, and Mr Yates my Chirurgeon (who were all three by when Bradshaw wrote to the pretended Protector about me) Bradshaw said, Remember my service to my Lord Protector, and desire him in my name to pay Violet a consi∣derable part of his money for his support, according to his quality; my Lord Protector knowes not Violet so well as I do: If the man should go to Charls Stuart, he would do us more mischief than a hundred thousand pounds would do us good: there are some Kings would give an hundred thousand pounds for to have such an Engine for their turn, and they knew him as well as I do. This message was sent to Cromwel from Bradshaw by Mr Beck the Protectors Solicitour; Mr Hewet, Mr Yates, and these Gentlemen are all in London to justifie this to be true. Mr Beck upon this message moved Mr Francis Bacon▪ the master of the Request, to move Cromwel the Protector effectually about me, and
he would also move him; which they did, and they both told mee when my name was but mentioned for my money I petitioned for, Cromwel was so incensed against me, that he bestowed all the bad words in the world, and said, that he took me to be a dangerous person, and an Arrant Villain against him; and, in a word (saith Mr Bacon and Mr Beck) he takes thee to be an Arrant Knave. They often asked me if I could i∣magine the reason that the Protector, and some of his Council, was so bitter against me, that they never heard man have a worse character than Cromwel did give me, and some of his Council that were intimate with him, as Thurloe, &c. I replyed, I received good for evil, the Pro∣tectors payment to me is not currant to revile me for venturing my life in his service, and laying out of my purse 1500l. to get him 278250l. so much money Baxter paid him clear for the silver I staid him in the ships Sampson, Salvador and St George, as will appear by an Ordinance of Parliament for Baxters discharge for the payment of that money. I knew Cromwels reason, but would not tell it to them. For I found (when it was too late) he knew he had undone himself, by seizing on this Silver and breaking up the Parliament; and that I was the fatal In∣strument that advised him to take the Silver into his own custody, either under the Ban quetting house to lodg it, or in the Tower. He did be∣lieve I did it innocently and for his good; for had he believed I had done (as truly I did) malitiously to destroy him, he would have caused me to have been torn in pieces. Mr Strickland asked one Capt. Swan, a Gentleman of Kent, an inti∣mate friend of mine, what he thought I was, and whether I was not a Cavaleer; Strickland telling Captain Swan, Many of us of the Coun∣cil of State take Violet to be a sly and dangerous fellow, he is alwayes presenting Propositions unto us which may bear double interpretati∣ons; he pretends for the Councils profit, but I am sure it is for their danger; he hath staid Three hundred thousand pounds in Silver, and hath set us together by the ears amongst our selves, and with Holland: Cromwel and Bradshaw makes use of him, promising him from day to day to give him his Estate, but they but abuse him, they will never give him a farthing. I heard Bradshaw say, I could wish Violet had his Estate or the value, but there is no trusting him therein. If he should run to the King of Scots, he would do us more mischief than a hundred thousand pounds. Keep him poor, and that will keep him honest to us: for if he had his Estate, he would be with the King of Scots.
The King of France hath a standing Councel for to Regulate his Mints, and to hinder the Transporting of Gold or Silver. VVere the like Orders setled in England, it would be for your Majesties service, and keep your Majesties Mint on work. IN an Ordinance and Declaration of the King of France, printed at Paris, 30. Oct 1640. Fol. 8, 9. We expresly forbid, that all Materials of Gold or Silver, either coin∣ed or uncoined, shall not be bought and sold at higher Rates, then is ex∣presly set down in this Declaration, which doth declare the true value that must be paied for the Mark of Silver. We expresly forbid every one of what qualitie or condition soever, to Transport out of our Kingdom any Gold or Silver, coined or uncoined, or any other Goldsmiths work, upon penaltie of forfeiture of the Mate∣rials and Merchandize, and other things therein they shall be found to be packed up in, besides the penaltie of fiftie pounds, and bodily punish∣ment.
In an ORDINANCE and PLACCART, For the Regulating of the Mint; Published in Brussels the last day of May, 1640. ARTIC. XI. WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents every one, of what quality or con∣dition soever, as well our Subjects as others, to transport any Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or to cause the same to be transported, Minted or unminted, without having obtained from us before hand express leave and consent to do the same, upon penalty of forfeiture the Gold and Silver and Bullion, and to pay besides the double worth, as also the Waggons that shall willingly have conveyed the same, the offenders to be banished out of our land for five years, and the second time for ever. Ordinance and Placcart at Brussels the 18th. of March, 1643. ARTIC. LVII. WE expresly forbid any person of what quality or condition soever to buy or sell any Gold or Silver, either Bullion or currant, at a higher price then the Ordinance of our said Mint permitteth, upon penalty of the forfeiture of all Gold and Silver the first time, the second four times as much and severe correction. Placcart and Ordinance for Flanders and Antwerp. 4 Octob. 1585. ARTIC. XV. WE forbid and interdict expresly that no one of what quality, or degree, or condition soe∣ver, shall transport or carry any Gold or Silver of our Coins or Bullion, melted or in mass, nor any Gold or Silver to coin money, upon forfeiture of the said Gold and Silver, besides two hundred Gold Rose Nobles, for every Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden Rose-Nobles for every Mark of Silver, and the second time to be bodily punished. ARTIC. XIII. ANd we do expresly forbid all and every one henceforth to buy or sell any wares of Gold or Silver money at above the price of the Mint; for profit or gain, upon pain of the
seller to forfeit the pieces sold, and the buyer as much as the seller; besides, for the first time both buyer and seller to forfeit threescore pounds, and the third time to be arbitrarily punished. Placart and Ordinances concerning the general course and regulating of the Mint and Monies, as also concerning the Exchangers, Refiners, and Goldsmiths, and others in the united Provinces, 1646. ARTIC. XI. ANd as for the Gold and Silver money whose value is rated by this Ordinance, we ex∣pressly forbid every one to present or pay, or receive the same at higher rates then are here ordered, upon forfeiture of such money so exchanged, besides arbitrary punishment. ARTIC. XV. VVE forbid every one to cull any Gold or Silver moneys, to sort the weighty and good ones, from the light, for private and particular profit upon pain of forfeiture, or to buy any Silver for Work at higher rate then the Ordinance, upon pain of forfeiture double the value. ARTIC. XVII. VVEe expressly forbid from henceforth to transport or cause to be transported out of our above-said Province towards any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver, Monies or Mass or Ingots, fit to coin money, upon pain of Confiscation of the above said money and materials: And beside the penalty of 100 golden Angelots upon every mark of Gold, and 20 Angelots for every mark of Silver, besides for the second time to suffer bodily punish∣ment. ARTIC. XXII. VVEe forbid from henceforth every one to melt any Gold or other Moneys of her Ma∣jestie of Englands stamp, valued by these Presents upon penalty of life and goods, and the monies that shall be light, shall be brought to the Exchange according to the old Custome. If the Merchants please they may send to Amsterdam, and have all these Pro∣clamations, and there they will see whether these Laws are not made according to the dates here abovesaid, in France, Flanders, Holland: The whole business I humbly submit at your Majesties and your Priviy Councels feet, and humbly pray, I may ever live to see this Royall Prerogative of giving leave to transport Gold and Silver to be only in the Power of your Majestie, and your most Honourable Privie Council, that the Merchants greatness may be as a Handmaid to your Sacred Majesty, and at your command always.
POSTSCRIPT. I Do desire the judicious Reader to pardon the mistakes of the Press, and to mend them with his Pen, and the disorder of sorting my Notes, being streightned in time, and fane to use two Presses for expedition, least the Merchants should have surprized his Majesty, and gotten leave by Act of Parliament to Transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, to the damage of the Kings Majesty, and his imperial Crown, and dig∣nity. Grant me this just Request, to mend the Errors with your Pen, and I shall be incouraged to present you with that which will be advantagi∣ous to all the English Merchants, which is, I do in∣tend to make an exact pare, and calculation of all the Gold and Silver Coins in Christendom, their just weights and fineness, and what they will make, being full weight in his Majesties Mint in the Tower of London, and all the Figures, and Coins, Arms, and Mottoes severally Engraven, which will be a work of charge, and pains, and will be a guide to all Merchants, to know all Forreign Coins of Gold and Silver in Christendom, as well as our currant Coin of the Kingdom of England. FINIS.
