W2196 (ESSAY) 12295865 59027
Monday 13th. of April 1668. At a Meeting of the Council of the ROYAL SOCIETY: Ordered, That the Discourse presented to the Royall So∣ciety, Entituled, An Essay towards a Real Character, and Philosophical Language, be Printed by the Printer to the Royal Society. BROVNCKER Presi.
AN ESSAY Towards a REAL CHARACTER, And a PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE. By JOHN WILKINS D.D. Dean of RIPON, And Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY. NVLLIVS IN VERBA insignia of Royal Society LONDON, Printed for SA: GELLIBRAND, and for IOHN MARTYN Printer to the ROYAL SOCIETY, 1668.
To the Right Honourable WILLIAM LORD VISCOUNT BROUNCKER, PRESIDENT; Together with the rest of the COVNCIL and FELLOWS of the ROYAL SOCIETY. My Lord, I NOW at length present to your Lordship those Papers I had drawn up concerning a Real Character, and a Philosophicall Language, which by severall Orders of the So∣ciety have been required of Me. I have been the longer about it, partly because it required some considerable time to reduce the Collections I had by me to this purpose, into a tolerable or∣der; and partly because when this work was done in Writing, and the Impression of it well nigh finished, it hapned (amongst many other better things) to be burnt in the late dreadfull Fire; by which, all that was Print∣ed (excepting only two Copies) and a great part of the unprinted Original was destroyed: The repairing of which, hath taken up the greatest part of my time ever since. I mention this by way of Apology for that slack∣ness and delay, I may seem to be guilty of in my obedience to your Orders.
I am not so vain as to think that I have here com∣pletely finished this great undertaking, with all the ad∣vantages of which such a design is capable. Nor on the other hand, am I so diffident of this Essay, as not to b∣lieve it sufficient for the business to which it pretends, namely the distinct expression of all things and notions that fall under discourse. I am sensible of sundry defects in the severall parts of this Book: And therefore would make it my humble mo∣tion to your Lordship and this Society, that you would by your Order appoint some of our number, thoroughly to examin & consider the whole, and to offer their thoughts concerning what they judge fit to be amended in it. Par∣ticularly in those Tables that concern the species of Na∣tural bodies; which, if they were (so far as they are yet known and discovered) distinctly reduced and described, This would very much promote and facilitate the know∣ledg of Nature, which is one great end of your Institu∣tion. And besides, the ranging of these things into such an order as the Society shall approve, would afford a very good method for your Repository, both for the disposal of what you have already, and the supplying of what you want, towards the compleating of that Collection, so generously begun of late, by the bounty of Mr. Daniel Collwal, a worthy Member of this Society. And by this means, I should not doubt, but that in a very short space, you would have the most usefull Repository in the World. It is no easie undertaking to Enumerate all such mat∣ters as are to be provided for in such a design; But the business of Defining, being amongst all others the most nice and difficult, must needs render it a very hard task for any one to attempt the doing of this, for all kinde of
Things, Notions, and Words, which yet is necessary to the design here proposed. Vpon which account I may be excused for being so sollicitous about the assistance of others in these matters, because of their great difficulty and importance. The compleating of such a design, being rather the work of a College and an Age, then of any single Person: I mean, the combined Studies of many Students, amongst whom, the severall shares of such a Work should be distributed; And that for so long a course of time, wherein sufficient experiments might be made of it by practice. It has been sayd concerning that famous Italian Aca∣demy styled de la Crusca, consisting of many choice Men of great Learning, that they bestowed forty years in fi∣nishing their Vocabulary. And 'tis well enough known, that those great Wits of the French Academy, did begin their Dictionary in the year 1639. And for the hast∣ning of the Work, did distribute the parts of it amongst severall Committees; and yet that undertaking is (for ought I can understand) far enough from being finished. Now if those famous Assemblies consisting of the great Wits of their Age and Nations, did judge this Work of Dictionary-making, for the polishing of their Language, worthy of their united labour and studies; Certainly then, the Design here proposed, ought not to be thought unworthy of such assistance; it being as much to be preferred before that, as things are better then words, as real knowledge is beyond elegancy of speech, as the general good of mankind, is beyond that of any particu∣lar Countrey or Nation. I am very sensible that the most usefull inventions do at their first appearance, make but a very slow progress in the World, unless helped forward by some particular ad∣vantage.
Logarithms were an Invention of excellent Art and usefulness; And yet it was a considerable time, before the Learned Men in other parts, did so farr take notice of them, as to bring them into use. The Art of Shorthand, is in its kind an Ingenious device, and of considerable usefulness, applicable to any Language, much wondered at by Travailers, that have seen the experience of it in England: And yet though it be above Three∣score years, since it was first Invented, 'tis not to this day (for ought I can learn) brought into common pra∣ctice in any other Nation. And there is reason enough to expect the like Fate for the design here proposed. The only expedient I can think of against it, is, That it be sent abroad into the World, with the reputation of having bin considered and approved of, by such a Soci∣ety as this; which may provoke, at least, the Learned part of the World, to take notice of it, and to give it such encouragement, as it shall appear to deserve. And if upon such an amendment and recommen∣dation by this Society, the design here proposed, should happen to come into common use, It would requite the Honour you bestow upon it, with abundant Interest. The being Instrumental in any such discovery as does tend to the Vniversal good of Mankind, being sufficient not only to make the Authors of it famous, but also the Times and Places wherein they live. He that knows how to estimate, that judgment infli∣cted on Mankind in the Curse of the Confusion, with all the unhappy consequences of it, may thereby judge, what great advantage and benefit there will be, in a re∣medy against it. Men are content to bestow much time and pains in the Study of Languages, in order to their more easy conversing with those of other Nations. 'Tis
said of Mithridates King of Pontus, that he was skilled in Two and twenty several Tongues, which were spoken in the several Provinces under his Dominion: Which, tho it were a very extraordinary attainment, yet how short a remedy was it against the Curse of the Confusion, considering the vast multitude of Languages that are in the World. Besides that most obvious advantage which would ensue, of facilitating mutual Commerce, amongst the se∣veral Nations of the World, and the improving of all Natural knowledge; It would likewise very much con∣duce to the spreading of the knowledge of Religion. Next to the Gift of Miracles, and particularly that of Tongues, powred out upon the Apostles in the first plant∣ing of Christianity, There is nothing that can more effe∣ctually conduce to the further accomplishment of those Promises, which concern the diffusion of it, through all Nations, then the design which is here proposed. To which it will be proper for me to add, That this design will likewise contribute much to the clearing of some of our Modern differences in Religion, by unmask∣ing many wild errors, that shelter themselves under the disguise of affected phrases; which being Philosophically unfolded, and rendered according to the genuine and na∣tural importance of Words, will appear to be inconsisten∣cies and contradictions. And several of those pretended, mysterious, profound notions, expressed in great swelling words, whereby some men set up for reputation, being this way examined, will appear to be, either nonsence, or very flat and jejune. And tho it should be of no other use but this, yet were it in these days well worth a mans pains and study, con∣sidering the Common mischief that is done, and the many
impostures and cheats that are put upon men, under the disguise of affected insignificant Phrases. But what ever may be the issue of this attempt, as to the establishing of a real Character, and the bringing of it into Common use, amongst several Nations of the World (of which I have but very slender expectations;) yet this I shall assert with greater confidence, That the reducing of all things and notions, to such kind of Tables, as are here proposed (were it as compleatly done as it might be) would prove the shortest and plainest way for the attainment of real Knowledge, that hath been yet of∣fered to the World. And I shall add further, that these very Tables (as now they are) do seem to me a much better and readier course, for the entring and training up of men in the knowledge of things, then any other way of Institution that I know of; which I should not presume to assert, before such able Iudges as those of this Society, were it not a thing I had well considered and were con∣vinced of. I have nothing further to add, but only the declaring myself to be most Zealously devoted to the Honour and Welfare of the Royal Society, And particularly (My Lord,) Your Lordships most Humble Servant, JO. VVILKINS.
TO THE READER. IT may perhaps be expected by some, that I should give an account of my ingaging in a Work of this nature so unsuitable to my Calling and Busi∣ness. For the satisfaction of such, they may please to take notice, that this Work was first undertaken, during that vacancy and leasure which I formerly enjoyed in an Academicall station, to which the endeavours of promo∣ting all kind of usefull knowledge, whereby Learning may be improved, is a very suitable imployment. In the time of that daily and intimate converse which I then injoyed, with that most Learned and excellent Person Dr. Seth Ward, the present Bishop of Salisbury. I had frequent occasion of conferring with him, concerning the various Desiderata, proposed by Learned men, or such things as were conceived yet wanting to the advancement of several parts of Learning; amongst which, this of the Universal Character, was one of the principal, most of which he had more deeply considered, than any other Person that I knew. And in reference to this particular, he would say, That as it was one of the most usefull, so he judged it to be one of the most feasible, amongst all the rest, if pro∣secuted in a regular way. But for all such attemps to this purpose, which he had either seen or heard of, the Authors of them did generally mistake in their first foundations; whilst they did propose to themselves the framing of such a Cha∣racter, from a Dictionary of Words, according to some particular Language, without reference to the nature of things, and that common Notion of them, wherein Mankind does agree, which must chiefly be respected, before any attempt of this nature could signifie any thing, as to the main end of it. It was from this suggestion of his, that I first had any distinct apprehension of the proper course to be observed, in such an undertaking; having in a Treatise I had published some years before, proposed the Hebrew Tongue as consisting of fewest Radicals, to be the fittest ground work for such a design.
Besides the many Private conferences to this purpose, I must not forget to mention, that Publique account which he hath given to the World, of his thoughts upon this subject, in that Learned and Ingenious discourse styled Vindiciae Academiarum; wherein he endeavours to Vindicate those Ancient and famous Schools of Learning, from such reproaches, whereby some Ig∣norant and ill-natured men (taking the advantage of those bad Times) would have exposed them to contempt and ruine. In which Treatise there is mention made of some considerable preparations, towards the Design here proposed, which if his other necessary imployments would have permitted him to have prosecuted, would without doubt, long ere this, have been ad∣vanced to as great a Perfection, as the first Essay in so difficult a matter could have attained. It was some considerable time after this, before I had any thought of attempting any thing in this kind: The first occasion of it was, from a desire I had, to give some assistance to another person, who was willing to ingage in this design of framing a real Character, from the Natural no∣tion of things; for the helping of whom in so worthy an undertaking, I did offer to draw up for him, the Tables of Substance, or the species of Natural Bodies, reduced under their several Heads; which I did accord∣ingly perform, much after the same Method, as they are hereafter set down: Though in the doing of it, I found much more labour and difficulty, then I expected, when I undertook it. But he for whom I had done this, not liking this method, as being of too great a Compass, conceiving that he could sufficiently provide for all the chief Radicals, in a much briefer and more easy way, did not think fit to make use of these Tables. Vpon which, being my self convinced, That this which I had begun, was the only course for the effecting of such a work, and being withal unwilling to loose so much pains as I had already taken towards it, I resolved (as my leasure would permit) to go on with the other Tables of Accidents. And when after many reviews and changes I had reduced (as well as I could) into these Tables, all simple things and notions, by a Considera∣tion of them a Priori, I then judged it necessary to attempt the redu∣ction of al other Words in the Dictionary to these Tables, either as they were Synonymous to them, or to be defined by them, which would be a means to try the fulness of these Tables, and consequently to supply their defects; And besides a great help to Learners, who without such a direction, might not perhaps at first be able to find out the true place and notion of many Words. For the farther compleating of this Work, I found it necessary to take into consideration, the framing of such a Natural Grammar, as might be suited to the Philosophy of Speech, abstracting from those many unnecessary rules belonging to instituted Language; which proved a matter of no small difficulty, considering the little help to be had for it, from those few Authors who had before undertaken to do any thing in this kind. In the doing of these things, I have not neglected any help that I could procure from others, and must acknowledge my self much ingaged to sun∣dry Learned Men of my acquaintance, for their directions, and furtherance in such matters, as were most suitable to their several Studies and Profes∣sions. Amongst the rest, I must not forget to make particular mention of the special assistance I have received, in drawing up the Tables of Animals
from that most Learned and Inquisitive Gentleman, a worthy Member of the Royal Society, Mr. Francis Willoughby, who hath made it his particular business, in his late Travails through the most considerable parts of Europe, to inquire after and understand the several species of Animals, and by his own Observations is able to advance that part of Learning, and to add many things, to what hath been formerly done, by the most Learned Authors in this kind. And as for those most difficult Tables of Plants, I have received the like assistance, from one of his Companions in Travail, Mr. John Wray, Late Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, who besides his other general Knowledge, hath with great success applyed himself to the Cultivating of that part of Learning. And as for the principal difficulties, which I met with in any other part of this Work, I must acknowledge my self obliged to the continual assistance I have had, from my most Learned and worthy Friend, Dr. William Lloyd, then whom (so far as I am able to judge,) this Nation could not have afforded a fitter Person, either for that great Industry, or Accurate judgment, both in Philological, and Philosophical matters, required to such a Work. And particularly I must wholy ascribe to him that tedious and difficult task, of suting the Tables to the Dictionary, and the drawing up of the Dictionary it self, which upon tryal, I doubt not, will be found to be the most perfect, that was ever yet made for the English Tongue. And here I think it proper to give notice that there are several Words mentioned in the Dictionary, and frequently used amongst some Authors, which are yet very questionable as to their fitness and propriety: Each of these were in the Original Coppy marked with an Asterisk, for the better distinction of them; but by some oversight, these marks have been omitted in the Im∣pression. If any shall suggest, that some of the Enquiries here insisted upon (as par∣ticularly those about the Letters of the Alphabet) do seem too minute and trivial, for any prudent Man to bestow his serious thoughts and time a∣bout. Such Persons may know, that the discovery of the true nature and Cause of any the most minute thing, doth promote real Knowledge, and there∣fore cannot be unfit for any Mans endeauours, who is willing to contri∣bute to the advancement of Learning. Vpon which Account some of the most eminent Persons, in several Ages, who were Men of business, have not disdained to bestow their pains about the First Elements of Speech. Julius Caesar, is said to have written a Book de Analogia. And the Emperour Charles the Great, to have made a Grammar of his vulgar Tongue. So did St. Basil for the Greek; and St. Austin for the Latin, both extant in their Works. Besides divers of great reputation both Ancient and Modern, who have Written whole Books on purpose, concerning the just Number of the Letters in the Alphabet; Others have applyed their disquisitions to some particular Let∣ters: Messala Corvinus, a Great Man, and a famous Orator amongst the Romans, Writ a Book concerning the Letter S. Adamantius Martyr, was the Author of another Book, concerning the Letters V. and B. Our Learned Gataker has Published a Book concerning Dipthongs. And Jovianus Ponta∣nus esteemed a Learned Man▪ hath Two Books de Adspiratione, or the Letter H.
Mr. Franklyn hath published a particular Discourse concerning Accents, And Erycius Puteanus hath Written a Book purposely, de Inter punctione, of the true way of Pointing Clauses and Sentences. And these Generally well esteemed for their great usefulness in the Promoting of Learning: Which may be a sufficient Vindication against any Prejudices of this Nature.
THE CONTENTS. The First Part Containing the Prolegomena. CHAPTER, I. I. THE Introduction. II. The Original of Languages. III. The First Mother Tongues. IV. Their several Offsprings. Page, 1 CHAP. II. I. Concerning the various Changes and Corruptions, to which all vul∣gar Languages are obnoxious. II. Particularly concerning the Change of the English Tongue. III. Whether any Language for∣merly in use, be now wholly lost. IV. Concerning the first rise and occasion of New Languages. pag. 6 CHAP. III. I. The Original of Letters and Writing. II. That all Letters were derived from the Hebrew. III. The use of Letters is less Antient, and the Kinds of them less numerous, than of Languages themselves. IV. Of Notes for secrecy or brevity. V. Of a Real Character. VI. Of Alphabets in General. pag. 10 CHAP. IV. I. Of the defects in Common-Alphabets, as to the true Order of the Letters, II. Their just Number, III. Determinate Powers, V. Fitting Names, V. Proper Figures. VI. Of the Imperfections belonging to the Words of Languages, as to their Equivocalness, Variety of Synonymous Words, Uncertain Phraseologies, Improper way of Writing. pag. 14 CHAP. V. I. That neither Letters nor Languages, have been regularly established by the Rules of Art. II. The Natural ground or Principle of the se∣veral ways of Communication amongst Men. III. The first thing to be provided for, in the establishing of a Philosophical Character or Language, is a just enumeration of all such Things and Notions, to which Names are to be assigned. pag. 19 The Second Part Containing Universal Philosophy.
CHAPTER. I. I. THE Scheme of Genus's. II. Concerning the more General No∣tions of Things, The difficulty of Establishing these aright. III. Of Transcendentals General. IV. Of Transcendentals Mixed.  V. Of Transcendental Relations of Action. VI. Of the several No∣tions belonging to Grammar, or Logic. Page, 22 CHAP. II. I. Concerning God. II. Of the several Things and Notions reducible under that Collective Genus of the World. pag 51 CHAP. III. I. Of Elements and Meteors. II. Of Stones. III. Of Metals. pag. 56 CHAP. IV. I. Of Plants, The difficulty of enumerating and describing these. II. The more general distribution of them. III. Of Herbs considered ac∣cording to their Leaves. IV. Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers. V. Of Herbs considered according to their Seed Vessels. VI. Of Shrubs. VII. Of Trees. pag. 67 CHAP. V. I. Concerning Animals, The General distribution of them. II. Of Exan∣guious Animals. III. Of Fishes. IV. Of Birds. V. Of Beasts. VI. A Digression concerning the capacity of Noah's Ark. pag. 121 CHAP. VI. I. Of Parts of Animate Bodies, whether I. Peculiar, or II. General. p. 168 CHAP. VII. I. Concerning the Predicament of Quantitie. I. Of Magnitude. II. Of Space. III. Of Measure. pag. 181 CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Predicament of Quality, and the several Genus's belong∣ing to it. I. Of Natural Power. II. Of Habit. III. Of Manners. IV. Of Sensible Quality. V. Of Disease; with the various differences and spe∣cies under each of these. pag. 194 CHAP. IX. Of the Predicament of Action; The several Genus's under it. viz. I. Spi∣ritual Action. II. Corporeal Action. III. Motion. IV. Operation. p. 225 CHAP. X. Concerning Relation more private, namely I. Oeconomical, or Family Re∣lation; together with the several kinds of things belonging to those in that capacity, either as II. Possessions, or III. Provisions. pag. 249 CHAP. XI. Concerning Relation more Publike, whether I. Civil. II. Iudiciary. III. Naval. IV. Military. V. Ecclesiastical. pag. 263 CHAP. XII. I. A General Explication of the design of the fore-going Tables. II. Par∣ticular Instances in the six principal Genus's of it. III. Something to be noted concerning Opposites and Synonyma's. IV. An Account of what kind of things ought not to be provided for in such Tables. p. 289 The Third Part Containing Philosophical Grammar. CHAPTER. I. I. COncerning the several Kinds and Parts of Grammar. II. Of Etymologie, The more general Scheme of Integrals and Parti∣cles. III. Of Nouns in General. IV. Of Substantives common, denoting either Things, Actions, or Persons. V. Rules concerning Nouns of Action. VI. Of Substantives Abstracts. VII. Of Adjectives according to the true Philosophical notion of them. VIII. The true notion of a Verb. IX. Of derived Adverbs. X. A general Scheme of the forementioned Derivations. page, 297 CHAP. II. I. Of Particles in General. II. Of the Copula. III. Of Pronouns more generally. IV. More particularly. V. Of Interjections more gene∣rally. VI. More particularly. p. 304 CHAP. III. I. Of Prepositions in general. II. The particular kinds of them enu∣merated. III. An Explication of the four last Combinations of them, relating to Place or Time. p. 309 CHAP. IV. I. Of Adverbs in general. II. The particular kinds of them. III. Of Conjunctions. p. 312 CHAP. V. I. Of Articles. II. Of Modes. III. Of Tenses. IV. The most distinct way of expressing the differences of Time. p. 315 CHAP. VI. I. Of Transcendental particles, The end and use of them. II. The usual ways for inlarging the sense of Words in instituted Languages. III. The general Heads of Transcendental Particles. p. 318 CHAP. VII. Instances of the great usefulness of these Transcendental Particles, with directions how they are to be applyed. p. 323 CHAP. VIII. Of the Accidental differences of Words. I. Inflexion. II. Derivation. III. Composition. p. 352 CHAP. IX. Of the second part of Grammar called Syntax. p. 354 CHAP. X. Of Orthography. I. Concerning Letters. The Authors who have treat∣ed of this Subject. II. A brief Table of all such kinds of Simple sound, which can be framed by the mouths of Men. III. A fur∣ther Explication of this Table, as to the Organs of Speech, and as to the Letters framed by these Organs. p. 357
CHAP. XI. Of Vowels. p. 363 CHAP. XII. Of Consonants. p. 366 CHAP. XIII. Of Compound Vowels, and Consonants. p. 370 CHAP. XIV. I. Of the Accidents of Letters, I. Their Names. II. Their Order. III. Affinities and Oppositions. IV. Their Figures, with a twofold Instance of a more regular Character for the Letters, The later of which may be styled Natural. V. Of Pronunciation. VI. The several Letters dis-used by several Nations. p. The Fourth Part Containing a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language. CHAPTER I. The proposal of one kind of Real Character (amongst many other which might be offered) both for all Integrals, whether Genus's, Dif∣ferences or Species; together with the derivations and Inflexions be∣longing to them, as likewise for all the several kinds of Particles. page, 385 CHAP. II. An Instance of this Real Character, in the Lord's Prayer and the Creed. p. 395 CHAP. III. How this Real Character may be made effable in a distinct Language, and what kind of Letters or Syllables may be conveniently assigned to each Character. p. 414 CAHP. IV. Instance of this Philosohical Language, both in the Lord's Prayer and the Creed: A comparison of the Language here proposed, with fifty others, as to the facility and Euphonicalness of it. p. 421 CHAP. V. Directions for the more easy learning of this Character and Language, with a brief Table containing the Radicals, both Integrals and Particles; together with the Character and Language, by which each of them are to be expressed. p. 439 CHAP. VI. The Appendix containing a Comparison betwixt this Natural Philoso∣phical Grammar and that of other Instituted Languages, particu∣larly the Latin, in respect of the multitude of unncecessary Rules and of Anomalisms, concerning the China Character: The several Attemps and Proposals made by others, towards a new kind of Character and Language. The advantage in respect of facility, which this Philosophical Language hath above the Latin. p. 441
ERRATA. PAGE 6. Line 17. Read Instituted by Art. p. 15. l. 9. r. 3. By assigning, &c. p. 16. l. 11. (Y) p. 27. l. 39. dele relief. p. 32. l. 43. dele poor. p. 40. l. 28. r. defer. p. 41. l. 21, 22. add administer, disperse, distribute Token, Fairing, to the preceding line. p. 70. l. 38. r. dryer. p. 73. l. 3. r. Laciniae. p. 91. l. 7, 8. r. of this Tribe. p. 94. l. 19. r. expand. p. 97. l 21, 31. r. Chichling. p. 133. l. 31. r. Oxyrhynchos. p. 134. l. 8. r. Iozo. p. 139. l. 18. Channa. p. 147. l. 20. r. Cariocatactes. p. 150. l. 20, 21. r. Coccothrauctes. p. 153. Of Birds. p. 156. l. 13. Avosetta. p. 157. l. 48. Strepsiceros. p. 159. l. 5. r. Shrewmouse. p. 177. l. 10, &c. r. More properly Organical; Whether such parts as are External; used for the Senses, &c. Internal; used for Tasting, Speaking, or Eating. p. 181. l. 40. after superficies add imyply∣ing a respect to the sides or limits of it. p. 291. l. 49. dele the, l. 50. r. the word Change. p 292. l. 22. r. Arts. p. 299. l 35. r. Lux. p. 301. l. 14. r. Quantity. p. 309. l. 19. r. this. p. 324. l. 38. r. abber. p 346. l. 29. r. Flat. p. 368. l. 12. r. Thin. p. 390. l. 8, 9. r. upward, downward, above, below. Pag. 91. lin. 13.  p. 395. number, 71.  n. 74.  p. 399. n▪ 33.  p. 400. n. 37, 45.  p. 404. l. 3. n. 23.  n. 27  n. 37.  n. 109.  p. 413. l. 20.  p. 422. l. 3. . p. 427. n 37. c{ou}abys. p. 428. . l. 2. dele 86. l. 6. t{ou}alti. p 429 l. 19 for {ou}. r. s. In the MARGIN. PAge 70. Read Muscus. p. 72. Oryza. p. 76. Petasites. p. 86. Conyza. p. 89. Perfoliata. Erygium. Sphondylium. p. 90 Charephyllon. p. 91. Thysselinum. Chamadrys. p. 92. Chamaepitis. p. 93. Stachis. Bugula. p. 95. Caryophyllata. p. 99. Scorpioides. Bupleurifolio. p. 102. Caryophyllus. Ascyrum. p. 103. Chamaedrys. p. 104. Vola. Hyoscyamus. p. 106. Ebulus. p. 107. Grossularia. p. 108. Mahaleb. p. 109. Philyrhea. Pyracantha. Thymea. p. 115. Laurocerasus. p. 116. Pistacia. Corylus. p. 123. Proscarabaus. p. 142. Luciscus. p. 148. Ruffa, Corylorum. p. 150. Alauda. Cenchramus. p. 152. Troglodytes. p. 158. Gazellus.
CHAP. I. I. The Introduction. II. The Original of Languages. III. The first Mother-tongues. IV. Their several Off-springs. IN the handling of that subject,§. I. I have here proposed to treat of, I shall digest the things which to me seem most proper and material to be said upon this occasion, into four parts; according to this following Method. In the first Part I shall premise some things as Pracognita, concerning such Tongues and Letters as are already in being, particularly concerning those various defects and imperfe∣ctions in them, which ought to be supplyed and provided against, in any such Language or Character, as is to be invented according to the rules of Art. The second Part shall contein that which is the great foundation of the thing here designed, namely a regular enumeration and description of all those things and notions, to which marks or names ought to be assigned according to their respective natures, which may be styled the Scientifical Part, comprehending Vniversal Philosophy. It being the pro∣per end and design of the several branches of Philosophy to reduce all things and notions unto such a frame, as may express their natural order, dependence, and relations. The third Part shall treat concerning such helps and Instruments, as are requisite for the framing of these more simple notions into continued Speech or Discourse, which may therefore be stiled the Organical or In∣strumental Part, and doth comprehend the Art of Natural or Philoso∣phical Grammar. In the fourth Part I shall shew how these more generall Rules may be applyed to particular kinds of Characters, and Languages, giving an instance of each. To which shall be adjoyned by way of Appendix, a Discourse shewing the advantage of such a kind of Philosophical Chara∣cter and Language, above any of those which are now known, more par∣ticularly above that which is of most general use in these parts of the World; namely, the Latine. Lastly, There shall be added a Dictionary of the English tongue, in which shall be shown how all the words of this Language, according to
the various equivocal senses of them, may be sufficiently expressed by the Philosophical Tables here proposed. I begin with the first of these. §. II.The design of this Treatise being an attempt towards a new kind of Character and Language, it cannot therefore be improper to premise some∣what concerning those already in being; the first Original of them, their several kinds, the various changes and corruptions to which they are ly∣able, together with the manifold defects belonging to them. This I shall endeavour to do in the former part of this Discourse. There is scarce any subject that hath been more throughly scanned and debated amongst Learned men, than the Original of Languages and Letters. 'Tis evident enough that no one Language is natural to mankind, because the knowledge which is natural would generally re∣main amongst men, notwithstanding the superinduction of any other particular Tongue, wherein they might be by Art. Nor is it much to be wondred at, that the ancient Heathen, who knew nothing of Scri∣pture-revelation, should be inclined to believe, that either Men and Languages were eternal; or, that if there were any particular time when men did spring out of the Earth, and after inhabit alone and dispersedly in Woods and Caves, they had at first no Articulate voice, but only such rude sounds as Beasts have; till afterwards particular Families increasing, or several Families joyning together for mutual safety and defence, under Government and Societies, they began by degrees and long practice to consent in certain Articulate sounds, whereby to communicate their thoughts, which in several Countries made several Languages, according to that in the Poet, Cùm prorepserunt primis animalia terris, Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 3.Mutum & turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter Vnguibus & pugnis, dein fustibus, atque ita porro Pugnabant armis, quae post fabricaverat usus, Donec verba quibus voces sensúsque notarent Nomináque invenêre; dehinc absistere bello, Oppida coeperunt munire, & ponere leges, Ne quis fur esset, neu latro, neu quis adulter, &c. But to us, who have the revelation of Scripture, these kind of scru∣ples and conjectures are sufficiently stated. And 'tis evident enough that the first Language was con-created with our first Parents, they immedi∣ately understanding the voice of God speaking to them in the Garden. And how Languages came to be multiplyed, is likewise manifested in the Story of the Confusion of Babel.Gen. 11.1, 6. How many Languages, and which they were that sprang up at that Confusion, is altogether uncertain; whe∣ther many of them that were then in being, be not now wholly lost; and many others, which had not the same original, have not since arisen in the world, is not (I think) to be doubted. The most received Conjecture is, that the Languages of the Confusi∣on were according to the several Families from Noah, which were 70 or 72. though there be very strong probabilities to prove that they were not so many, and that the first Dispersion did not divide mankind into so
many Colonies. But now the several Languages that are used in the world do farre exceed this number.Nat. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 5. Strabo, lib. 11. Pliny and Strabo do both make mention of a great Mart-Town in Colchos named Dioscuria, to which men of three hundred Nations, and of so many several Languages, were wont to resort for Trading. Which, considering the narrow compass of Traf∣fick before the invention of the magnetic Needle, must needs be but a small proportion, in comparison to those many of the remoter and un∣known parts of the world. Some of the American Histories relate,Mr. Cambden's Remains. that in every fourscore miles of that vast Country, and almost in every particular valley of Peru, the Inhabitants have a distinct Language. And one who for several years travelled the Northern parts of America about Florida,Purchas Pilg. lib. 8. sect. 4. chap. 1. and could speak six several Languages of those people, doth affirm, that he found, upon his enquiry and converse with them, more than a thousand different Lan∣guages amongst them. As for those Languages which seem to have no derivation from, or de∣pendance upon, or affinity with one another,§. III. they are styled Linguae ma∣trices, or Mother-tongues. Of these Ioseph Scaliger affirms there are ele∣ven, and not more, used in Europe;Diatribe de Europaeorum linguis. whereof four are of more general and large extent, and the other seven of a narrower compass and use. Of the more general Tongues. 1. The Greek was anciently of very great extent, not onely in Europe, but in Asia too, and Afric,Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 1. where several Colonies of that Nation were planted; by which dispersion and mixture with other people it did de∣generate into several Dialects. Besides those four that are commonly noted, the Doric, Ionic, Aeolic, Attic, Herodotus doth mention four several Dialects of the Ionic. The inhabitants of Rhodes, Cyprus, Crete, had each of them some peculiarity in their Language. And the present Coptic or Aegyptian seems, both from the words and the character, to be a branch of this family, and was probably spred amongst that people in the days of Alexander the Great, upon his conquering of them: Though some conceive that there were at least 30000 families of Greeks planted in that Country long before his time. 2. The Latin, though this be much of it a derivation from the Greek, (of which the now French, Spanish, and Italian are several off-springs and derivations) had anciently four several Dialects,De honesta disciplina, lib. 3. cap. 3. as Petrus Crinitus shews cut of Varro. 3. The Teutonic or German is now distinguished into Vpper and Low∣er. The Vpper hath two notable Dialects. 1. The Danish, Scandian,Verstegan, chap. 7. or perhaps the Gothic, to which belongs the Language used in Denmark, Norway, Swedeland, and Island. 2. The Saxon, to which appertain the several Languages of the English, the Scots, the Frisians, and those on the North of Elve. 4. The Slavonic is extended, though with some variation, through many large Territories, Muscovia, Russia, Poland, Bohemia, Vandalia, Croa∣tia, Lithuania, Dalmatia;Gesuer. Mi∣thridates, cap. 21. and is said to be the vulgar Language used a∣mongst 60 several Nations. The Languages of lesser extent are, 1. The Albanese, or old Epirotic, now used in the mountainous parts of Epirus. 2. The Europaean Tartar, or Scythian, from which some conceive our
Irish to have had its original. As for the Turkish Tongue, that is original∣ly no other but the Asiatic Tartar, mixed with Armenian and Persian, some Greek, and much Arabic. 3. The Hungarian, used in the greatest part of that Kingdom. 4. The Finnic, used in Finland and Lapland. 5. The Cantabrian, used amongst the Biscainers, who live near the Ocean on the Pyrene hills, bordering both upon France and Spain. 6. The Irish, in Ireland, and from thence brought over into some parts of Scotland. Though Mr. Camden would have this to be a derivation from the Welsh. 7. The old Gaulish or British, which is yet preserved in Wales, Corn∣wall, and Britain in France. Enquiries, chap. 4.To this number Mr. Brerewood doth add four others, viz. 1. The Arabic, now used in the steep mountains of Granata; which yet is a Dialect from the Hebrew, and not a Mother-tongue. 2. The Cauchian, in East-Friseland. 3. The Illyrian, in the Isle of Veggia. 4. The Iazygian, on the North side of Hungary. Besides this difference of Languages in their first derivation, every particular Tongue hath its several Dialects.§. IV. Though Iudaea were a re∣gion of a very narrow compass, yet was it not without its varieties of this kind: witness the story concerning Shibboleth and Sibboleth; and that of the Levite,Judges 12. Judges 18.3. Matth. 26.73. who was discovered by his manner of speech; and S. Pe∣ter's being known for a Galilaean. 'Tis so generally in other Countries, and particularly with us in England, where the Northern and Western inhabitants do observe a different dialect from other parts of the Nati∣on, as may appear from that particular instance mentioned by Verstegan. Whereas the inhabitants about London would say, I would eat more cheese if I had it. A Northern man would speak it thus, Ay sud eat mare cheese gyn ay had et. And a Western man thus, Chud eat more cheese an chad it. Every one of these reputed Mother-tongues, except the Arabic, (and perhaps the Hungarian) was used in Europe during the time of the Ro∣man Empire. But whether they were all of them so ancient as the Con∣fusion of Babel, doth not appear; there wants not good probability to the contrary for some of them. Georg. Hornii Epist. in Box∣hornii Origi∣nes Gallic.It hath been the opinion of some, particularly Boxhornius, that the Scythian Tongue was the common mother from which both the Greek, Latin, German and Persian were derived, as so many Dialects; and 'tis said that Salmasius did incline to the same judgment. And Philip Cluverius conjectures, that both Germans, Gauls, Spaniards, Britans, Swedes and Norwegians, did anciently use one and the same Language. One princi∣pal argument used for this is, the agreement of those remote Nations in some radical words. Ioseph Scaliger observes that the words, Father, Mother, Brother, Bond, &c. are used in the Persian tongue, with some lit∣tle variety, in the same sense and signification as they are used with us. And Busbequius relates, that the inhabitants of Taurica Chersonesus have divers words in the same sense common with us,In Epist. as Wine, Silver, Corn, Salt, Fish, Apple, &c. But this might be merely casual, or else occasioned by a mixture of Colonies, and will not argue a derivation of one from
another. So there are several words common to the Turks, Germans,Boxhorn. Ori∣gin. Gallic. cap. 6. & 8. Greeks, French, sometimes of the same, and sometimes of several signifi∣cations; which is not sufficient to argue that all these were of the same Original. Besides these Europaean, there is likewise great variety of Languages in other parts of the world. As for the Hebrew Tongue, which is by many learned men supposed to be the same that Abraham learnt when he came into Canaan, to which that expression Isai. 19.18. The language of Ca∣naan, is thought to allude; this is supposed to be the first Mother tongue amongst all those that are now known in the world, from which there are sundry derivations, as the Chaldee, Syriac, Punic, Arabic, Persian▪ Aethiopic. When the Iews were in Captivity at Babylon, mixed with the Chalde∣ans for 70 years,Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 9. in that tract of time they made up a Language distinct from both, which is sometimes called Syriac, and sometimes Chaldee, and sometimes Hebrew. Those passages in the Gospel, which are said to be in the Hebrew tongue, as Talitha Kumi; Elohi, Elohi, Lamma sabachthani,John 5.2. & 19.13, 17. Acts 21.40. Bochart. Geog. l. 1. cap. 15. are properly Syriac; onely they are called Hebrew, because that was the Language which the Hebrews then used. A great part of this Syriac tongue is for the substance of the words Chaldee, and Hebrew for the fa∣shion, so degenerating much from both. After the Captivity the pure Hebrew ceased to be vulgar, remaining onely amongst learned men, as appears by that place in Nehem. 8.7, 8. where we find the Priests, upon reading of the Law to the people after their coming out of Babylon, were fain to expound it distinctly to them, and to make them understand the meaning of it; the common people, by long disuse, being grown strangers to the Language wherein 'twas written. So in our Sa∣viour's time, the unlearned Iews, whose vulgar Tongue the Syriac was, could not understand those parts of Moses and the Prophets read to them in Hebrew every Sabbath-day. Which was the reason of those public speeches and declarations of any learned men, who occasionally came into the Synagogues, after the reading of the Law:Luke 4.15, 16. Acts 13.15. though neither Priests, nor Levites, nor Scribes, yet was it ordinary for them to expound unto the people the meaning of those portions of Scripture that were appointed to be read out of the Hebrew, which the people did not un∣derstand; and to render their meaning in Syriac, which was their vul∣gar Tongue. As for so much of the pure Hebrew as is now in being, which is onely that in the old Testament, though it be sufficient to express what is there intended, yet it is so exceedingly defective in many other words requi∣site to humane discourse, that the Rabbins are fain to borrow words from many other Languages, Greek, Latin, Spanish, &c. as may appear at large in Buxtorf's Lexicon Rabbinicum, and a particular Discourse written to this very purpose by David Cohen de Lara. And, from the several defects and imperfections which seem to be in this Language, it may be guessed not to be the same which was con-created with our first Parents, and spoken by Adam in Paradise. What other varieties of Tongues there have been, or are, in Asia, Afric, or America, I shall not now enquire.
CHAP. II. I. Concerning the various changes and corruptions to which all vulgar Languages are obnoxious. II. Particularly concerning the changes of the English tongue. III. Whether any Language, formerly in use, be now wholly lost. IV. Concerning the first rise and occasion of new Languages. THere are three Queres which may deserve some farther disquisiti∣on.§. I. 1. Whether the purest of those Mother-tongues, which yet remain, be not now much changed from what they were at the first Con∣fusion. 2. Whether and how any of the Mother-tongues have been quite lost since the Confusion. 3. Whether and how other new Langua∣ges have since arisen in the world. 1. To the first, Besides the common fate and corruption to which Lan∣guages as well as all other humane things are subject, there are many other particular causes which may occasion such a change: The mix∣ture with other Nations in Commerce; Marriages in Regal Families, which doth usually bring some common words into a Court fashion; that affectation incident to some eminent men in all ages, of coining new words, and altering the common forms of speech, for greater elegance; the necessity of making other words, according as new things and in∣ventions are discovered. Besides, the Laws of forein Conquests usually extend to Letters and Speech as well as Territories; the Victor com∣monly endeavouring to propagate his own Language as farre as his Dominions; which is the reason why the Greek and Latin are so uni∣versally known. And when a Nation is overspread with several Colo∣nies of foreiners, though this do not alwaies prevail to abolish the former Language, yet if they make any long abode, this must needs make such a considerable change and mixture of speech as will very much alter it from its original Purity. Those learned Languages which have now ceased to be vulgar, and remain onely in Books, by which the purity of them is regulated, may, whilst those Books are extant and studied, continue the same without change. But all Languages that are vulgar, as those learned ones for∣merly were, are upon the fore-mentioned occasions, subject to so many alterations, that in tract of time they will appear to be quite another thing then what they were at first. Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 2. & 6.The Liturgies of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, which are yet used in the Greek Churches in their publick worship, the one for solemn, the other for common days, have been a long time unintelligible to that people; so much is the vulgar Greek degenerated from its former purity. Histor. lib. 3.And Polibius testifies, that the Articles of truce betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians could scarce be understood by the most learned Ro∣man Antiquaries 350 years after the time of their making. §. II.If any English man should now write or speak as our forefathers did about six or seven hundred years past,Alex. Gill Lo∣gonom. An∣glican. Pre∣ace. we should as little understand him as if he were a foreiner; of which it were easie to give several proofs
by instance, if it were not inconsistent with my present design of brevity. What the Saxons Language was at their first arrival into England about the year 440, doth not appear; but 'tis most probable that the changes and differences of it, have been somewhat proportionable in several Ages. About the year of Christ 700 the Lord's Prayer in English was thus rendred: Uren fader thic arth in heofnas, sic gehalgud thin noma:Cambden's Remains, pag. 23. to cymeth thin ric: sic thin willa sue is in heofnas and in eortho. Uren hlaf ofer wirtlic sel us to daeg; and forget us scylda urna, sue we forgefen scyld∣gum urum; and no inlead usith in custnung. Ah gefrig urich from ifle. Amen. About 200 years after, it was changed thus: Thu ure fader the eart on heofenum. Si thin nama gehalgod. Cum thin ric. Si thin willa on eorthen swa, swa on heofenum.Lisle's Saxon Monuments. Syle us to daeg urn daegthanlican hlaf. And forgif us ure gyltas swa, swa we forgifath tham the with us agyltath. And ne led the us on costnung. Ac alys us from yfle. Si it swa. About the same time it was rendred in the Saxon Gospels, said to be Translated by King Alfred, after this manner. Faeder ure thu the earth on heofenum, si thin nama Gehalgod to be cume thin Rice, Gewurthe thin willa on eorthan swa swa on heofnum, urne ge daeghwanlican hlaf syle us to daeg. And forgyf us ure gyltas, swa swa we forgivath urum gyltendum. And ne gelaedde thu us on cost∣nung. Ac Alyse us of yfle. About 260 years after, in the time of King Henry the 2d, it was ren∣dred thus, and sent over by Pope Adrian, an English-man, turned into meter, that the people might more easily learn and remember it. Ure fadyr in heaven rich, Thy name be hallyed ever lich, Thou bring us thy michell blisse: Als hit in heaven y. doe, Evar in yearth beene it also. That holy bread that lasteth ay, Thou send it ous this ilke day, Forgive ous all that we have don, As we forgivet uch other mon: Ne let ous fall into no founding, Ac shield ous fro the fowle thing. Amen. And about a hundred years after, in the time of Henry the third, it was rendred thus: Fader that art in heavin blisse, Thin helge nam it wurth the blisse, Cumen and mot thy kingdom, Thin holy will it be all don, In heaven and in erdh also, So it shall bin full well Ic tro. Gif us all bread on this day, And forgif us ure sinnes, As we do ure wider winnes: Let us not in fonding fall, Oac fro evil thu syld us all. Amen.
About two hundred years after this in the time of Henry the VI. (as appears by a large manuscript Velume Bible in the Oxford-Library, said to have been this Kings, and by him to have been given to the Carthusi∣ans in London;) It was rendred thus. Oure fadir that art in hevenes, halewid be thi name, thi kingdom come to thee, be thi wil don in eerthe, as in hevene, give to us this day oure breed over othre substanc, and forgive to us oure dettis, as we forgiven oure dettouris, and lede us not into temptation, but delivere us from ivel. Amen. In another M. S. of Wickliffes Translation, who lived in Richard the 2ds time, it is rendred with very small difference from this. About a hundred years after this, In a Bible set forth with the Kings licens, translated by Thomas Mathew, and printed in the year 1537, it was rendered thus: O oure father which arte in heven halowed be thy name. Let thy kingdome come. Thy will be fulfilled, as well in erth, as it is in heven. Geve us this daye oure dayly bred. And forgeve us our treaspases, even as we forgeve oure trespacers. And lead us not into temptacion, but de∣lyver us from evyll. Amen. After the same manner it is rendered in the Translation of William Tyndall, with some little differences in the spelling. This one instance may sufficiently manifest by what degrees this Lan∣guage did receive its several Changes, and how much altered it is now from what it hath been, and consequently what is to be expected in fu∣ture times. Since Learning began to flourish in our Nation, there have been more then ordinary Changes introduced in our Language: partly by new artificial Compositions; partly by enfranchising strange forein words, for their elegance and significancy, which now make one third part of our Language; and partly by refining and mollifying old words, for the more easie and graceful sound: by which means this last Centu∣ry may be conjectured to have made a greater change in our Tongue, then any of the former, as to the addition of new words. And thus, in all probability, must it have been with all other vulgar Languages. So that 'tis not likely that any of these Mother-tongues now in being, are the same that they were at the first Confusion. So true is that of the Poet: Horat. de arte poëtica.Vt sylvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos, Prima cadunt; ita verborum vetus interit aetas, Et, juvenum ritu, florent modò nata vigéntque. Debemur morti nos nostráque— And a little after, Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadéntque Quae nunc sunt in honore vocabula, si volet usus, Quem penes arbitrium est, & vis, & norma loqundi. 2. As to the second Quere, Whether any of the Ancient Languages be now quite lost;§. III. it may be answered, That if in some few hundreds of years a Language may be so changed as to be scarce intelligible; then, in a much longer tract of time it may be quite abolished, none of the most radical and substantial parts remaining: For every change is a gradual corruption.
Before the flourishing of the Roman Empire, there were several native Languages used in Italy, France, Spain.Ludov. Vives Annot. in Au∣gust. Civ. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 17. In Italy we read of the Messapi∣an, the Hetruscan, the Sabine, the Oscan, the Hetrurian or Tuscan Langua∣ges; which are now thought by Learned men to be utterly lost, and no∣where to be found in the World. 'Tis probable that there was not onely one Language in so vast a Ter∣ritory as France, but that several Provinces spake several Languages:Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 6. But what those Languages were, or whether yet extant, is uncertain. As for the Celtae, who, inhabiting the inner part of the Country, were less sub∣ject to forein mixtures, 'tis most probable that their Language might be the British or Welsh, which is yet spoken in some parts of France.De Bello Gal∣lico, lib. 6. Caesar reports that the Gauls were wont often to pass over into Britain, to be instructed by the Druids, amongst whom there was then no use of Books or Writing, and therefore they must communicate by Discourse. And Tacitus affirms that the Speech of the British and Gauls, differed but little. It is conceived that one of the ancient Tongues of Spain was the Cantabrian, which doth now there remain in the more barren mountain∣ous, inaccessible parts, where Conquerors are less willing to pursue, or desirous to plant; as our British doth in Wales. But 'tis probable that there might be several other Languages besides this in so great a Continent, as well as in Italy, which are now wholly lost and unknown. 3. As to the third Quere, concerning the first Rise and occasion of new Languages,§ IV. that may be sufficiently answered by what was before suggested, concerning those many particular emergencies which may contribute to the introducing a change in Languages. Some think that the Italians, Spaniards and French, after they were to∣tally subdued by the Romans, and planted with their Colonies, did, after a certain space of time, receive the Latin Tongue as their most vulgar Speech, and retained it; till afterwards, being several times overrun by the Northern barbarous Nations, the Goths and Vandals, and other Tribes of the Germans, who mixed with them, and after several Conquests resi∣ded amongst them, sometimes 20, 60, 200 years together; this afford∣ed time enough for such a thorough coalition betwixt them and the Na∣tives, as could not but introduce a great change in the common Lan∣guage, whilst the Nations were forced to attemper their Speech for the mutual understanding of one another. Others conceive that those Countries did not at first perfectly receive the Latin from the Romans, but did onely make use of the most principal radical words; neglecting the Grammatical rules of composition and in∣flection, and withall varying the way of pronunciation, according to the unusualness and difficulty of several sounds to several Countries: And that this was the first and chief occasion of those various Medleys or se∣veral Dialects now in use; which were afterwards somewhat farther changed from their Originals, by those several Inundations of the Bar∣barians 'Tis not much material to dispute, which of these causes had the prin∣cipal influence in the extraction of these modern Tongues, so long as 'tis granted that both of them might contribute and suffice for this effect. As for our present English, this seems to be a mixture of the British, Ro∣man,
Saxon, Danish, Norman, according to the several vicissitudes of Plantations and Conquests,Cambden's Remains. that this Nation hath undergone. And ac∣cording as such Conquests have been more or less compleat and abso∣lute, so have the Languages been more or less generally altered: which is the reason why the Saxon Tongue was by our progenitors more fully introduced in England, then either that of the Franks amongst the Gauls, or that of the Goths or Lumbards in Italy, or that of the Goths, Vandals or Moors in Spain. Linschotten voage, chap. 18.That which seems to be the newest Language in the World, is the Ma∣layan, which is now as general and common amongst the Natives of the East-Indies, as Latin or French is in these parts of the World. 'Tis said to be but of late invention, occasioned by the concourse of Fishermen from Pegu, Siam, Bengala, and several other Nations, who meeting toge∣ther at a place convenient for Fishing, and finding that it was by situati∣on exceeding commodious for Traffick from several parts, did agree to settle there a Plantation; and accordingly built the Town of Malacca, which hath since, for many years, been governed by the Portuguez, and is now under the power of the Hollander. And, for the more facil con∣verse with one another, they agreed upon a distinct Language, which pro∣bably was made up by selecting the most soft and easy words belonging to each several Nation. And this is the onely Language (for ought I know) that hath ever been at once invented; if it may properly be styled a distinct Language, and not rather a Medley of many. But this being invented by rude Fishermen, it cannot be expected that it should have all those advantages, with which it might have been furnished by the rules of Philosophy. Additamen∣tum de Reg∣no atayae.I know that the Learned Golius doth affirm the China Language to be invented by Art; but, upon the best discovery to be made of it at this distance, from those who have lived many years in that Country, and pre∣tend to understand the Language, it appears to be so exceedingly equivo∣cal, and in many respects so very imperfect, that there is little reason to be∣lieve it had any such Original. CHAP. III. I. The Original of Letters and Writing. II. That all Letters were de∣rived from the Hebrew. III. The use of Letters is less ancient, and the kinds of them less numerous, then of the Languages themselves. IV. Of Notes for Secrecy or Brevity. V. Of real Characters. VI. Of Alphabets in general. HAving laid down this brief and general View of Languages, 'tis re∣quisite that something should be also premised concerning Letters,§. I. the Invention of which was a thing of so great Art and exquisiteness, that Tully doth from hence inferr the divinity and spirituality of the hu∣mane soul,Tuscul. Qu. lib. 1. and that it must needs be of a farr more excellent and abstract∣ed Essence then mere Matter or Body, in that it was able to reduce all articulate sounds to 24 Letters.
Though the Scripture doth not mention any thing concerning the in∣vention of these; yet 'tis most generally agreed, that Adam, (though not immediately after his Creation, yet) in process of time, upon his ex∣perience of their great necessity and usefulness, did first invent the anci∣ent Hebrew Character: whether that which we now call the Hebrew, or else the Samaritan, is a question much debated by several Learned men, which I shall not now inquire into, or offer to determine. As for those particular Alphabets which are by some ascribed to Adam, Enoch and Noah, mentioned by several Authors,Coelum Ori∣entis. and in a late Discourse by Thomas Bangius, they have so little foundation in any probable reason or story, that I shall not so much as make any farther mention of them. It hath been abundantly cleared up by many Learned men, that the ancient Hebrew Character hath the priority before any other now known;§. II. which is confirmed by the concurrent testimony of the best and most an∣cient Heathen Writers. And 'tis amongst rational arguments none of the least, for the Truth and Divine Authority of Scripture,Grotius de Veritate Re∣lig. lib. 1. to consider the general concurrence of all manner of evidence for the Antiquity of the Hebrew, and the derivation of all other Letters from it. Pliny affirms in one place,Nat. Hist. l. 7. cap. 56. Lib. 5. cap. 12. that the first invention of Letters ought to be ascribed unto the Assyrians; and in another place he saith, that under the name of Syria he understands the Regions which were styled Pale∣stine, Iudaea and Phoenicia; and in the same Chapter he ascribes the inven∣tion of Letters to the Phoenicians. So doth Lucan likewise;Bell. Pharsal. lib. 3. Phoenices primi (famae si credimus) ausi Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris. With these agree Terpsicho∣re. Herodotus, Strabo, Symposiac. lib. 9. Plutarch, Histor. lib. 4. Curtius, Mela, &c. who all consent, that the Grecians did first receive their Letters from the Phoenicians by Cadmus, who lived about the time of Ioshua. And that the Punic or Phoenician Tongue was the Canaanitish or the Hebrew, though somewhat altered from its original pronunciation,Scaliger. Ap∣pendix de E∣mendat. Temp. Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 7. Geograph. l. 2. (as is wont in tract of time to befall Colonies planted far from home, amongst stran∣gers,) is sufficiently manifested from the remainders of it that are ex∣tant in Plautus and other prophane Authors, as they are cited by the learned Bochart. And that the Phoenicians were Canaanites hath proof also in Scripture, because the same woman who in Mark 7.26. is styled a Syrophoenician, is said Matth. 15.22. to be a Canaanite. That the ancient Greek Character was of very near affinity to the Samaritan, and that the Latin Letters were of such an affinity to the Greek, and derived from them, being in a manner the same with the an∣cient Ionic Letters, is made very plain by Scaliger,Animad vers. in Eusebium, Anno 1617. Nat. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 56. Histor. lib. 1. Annal. 11. and owned by Pliny and Dionysius Halicarnassensis. And Tacitus doth acknowledge that the ancient Latin Characters were in their shape and figure almost the same with the Greek. And as for the other Letters that are known, namely, the Syriac, Arabic, Aethiopic, Armenian, Coptic, Illyric, Georgian, Gothic, there is this cogent Argument to prove them to be of the same Origi∣nal, because their Alphabets do generally observe the same order of Let∣ters, which, being in it self exceedingly irrational, cannot probably have any other reason but imitation. Except onely that of the Arabs,De Origine Scribendi, cap. 5. saith Her∣mannus Hugo, who, that they might not seem to have borrowed Letters
from others, did purposely disturb the order of the Alphabet; to which he might have added the Aethiopic and Armenian. §. III.There are two general things to be observed concerning these deri∣ved Letters. 1. That they are not of so great Antiquity. 2. That they are not so numerous as Languages are. 1. They are not so ancient, many Nations remaining a long while be∣fore they grew so far civilized as to understand the use of Letters, which to this day are not known amongst many of the American Nations, nor the Inhabitants of Lapland: and after they have been known, and of some public use, it hath been yet a considerable space, before persons have written any Discourse in their own Language. 'Tis observed by Tschudas of the German,Enquiries, chap. 5. and by Genebrard of the French Tongue, (saith Mr. Brerewood) that 'tis not much above 400 years, since Books began to be written in those Languages. 2. And because the use of Letters in particular Countries is not so an∣cient as Language, therefore are they not of so numerous kinds; several Nations taking up the use of Letters from their neighbours, and adapting them to their own Tongue. Thus the Spanish, French, Italian, German, British, English, Irish, &c. do all of them use the same Latine Character, it being probable that they had none of their own, before they learnt this of the Romans. The Coptic or Egyptian Character, ever since Egypt came under the Dominion of Macedon, hath been the Greek, excepting only seven Letters proper to their Tongue, which the Greek Alphabet did not sufficiently express; The Muscovites likewise and the Russians, the Georgians and Iacobins, do use the Greek Character; the Persians and Turks use the Arabick: though the Letters of any Tongue do not al∣waies remain the same, but are subject to the like fate and mutability, to which Languages are exposed. Besides this common way of Writing by the ordinary Letters, the An∣cients have sometimes used to communicate by other Notes,§. IV. which were either for Secrecy, or Brevity. 1. For Secrecy: such were the Egyptian Hieroglyphicks, (as they are commonly esteemed) being the representation of certain living Crea∣tures, and other Bodies, whereby they were wont to conceal from the vulgar the Mysteries of their Religion. But there is reason to doubt whether there be any thing in these worth the enquiry, the discoveries that have been hitherto made out of them being but very few and in∣significant. They seem to be but a slight, imperfect invention, sutable to those first and ruder Ages;Vid. Purchas book 5. chap▪ 7. sect. 1. much of the same nature with that Mexi∣can way of writing by Picture, which was a mere shift they were put to for want of the knowledge of Letters. And it seems to me questionable, whether the Egyptians did not at first use their Hieroglyphicks upon the same account, namely, for the want of Letters. Those waies of writing treated of by the Abbot Trithemius, were likewise for occult or secret communication: And though some Learn∣ed men have suspected and accused him to have thereby delivered the Art of Magic, or Conjuring; yet he is sufficiently cleared and vindicated from any such prejudice in that very learned and ingenious Discourse de Cryptographia, under the feigned name of Gustavus Selenus,
by which the noble Author, the Duke of Lunenburg, did disguise his true name of Augustus Lunaeburgicus. 2. For Brevity: There were single Letters or marks, whereby the Ro∣mans were wont to express whole words. Ennius is said to have inven∣ted 1100 of these; to which number Tullius Tyro, Cicero's Libertus, (o∣thers say Cicero himself,) added divers others,Trithemius de Polygraphia, to signifie the particles of speech; after whom Philargyrus the Samian and Macaenas, added yet more. After these Annaeus Seneca is said to have laboured in the regu∣lating and digesting of those former notes; to which adding many of his own, he augmented the whole number to 5000, published by Ianus Gruterus; though amongst his there are divers of a later invention, re∣lating to Christian institutions, which have been added since (as 'tis said) by S. Cyprian the Martyr. The way of writing by these did require a vast memory and labour; yet it was far short of expressing all things and Notions, and besides, had no provision for Grammatical varia∣tions. Of this nature is that Short-hand-writing by Characters so fre∣quent with us in England, and much wondered at by Foreiners; which hath a great advantage for speed and swiftness in writing; those who are expert in it being able this way to take any ordinary discourse verbatim. Besides these, there have been some other proposals and attempts a∣bout a Real universal Character, that should not signifie words,§. V. but things and notions, and consequently might be legible by any Nation in their own Tongue; which is the principal design of this Treatise. That such a Real Character is possible, and hath been reckoned by Learned men amongst the Desiderata, were easie to make out by abundance of Testi∣monies. To this purpose is that which Piso mentions to be somewhere the wish of Galen,Histor. Nat. Indiae, lib. 4. c. 3. That some way might be found out to represent things by such peculiar signs and names as should express their natures; ut Sophistis eriperetur decertandi & calumniandi occasio. There are se∣veral other passages to this purpose in the Learned Verulam, in Vossius,De Augment. lib. 6. cap. 1. Orig. scriben∣di, cap. 4. in Hermannus Hugo, &c. besides what is commonly reported of the men of China, who do now, and have for many Ages used such a general Chara∣cter, by which the Inhabitants of that large Kingdom, many of them of different Tongues, do communicate with one another, every one understanding this common Character, and reading it in his own Lan∣guage. It cannot be denied, but that the variety of Letters is an appendix to the Curse of Babel, namely, the multitude and variety of Languages. And therefore, for any man to go about to add to their number, will be but like the inventing of a Disease, for which he can expect but little thanks from the world. But this Consideration ought to be no discourage∣ment: For supposing such a thing as is here proposed, could be well established, it would be the surest remedy that could be against the Curse of the Confusion, by rendring all other Languages and Characters useless. It doth not appear that any Alphabet now in being, was invented at once or by the rules of Art; but rather that all, except the Hebrew,§. VI. were
taken up by Imitation, and past by degrees through several Changes; which is the reason that they are less complete, and liable to several ex∣ceptions. The Hebrew Character, as to the shape of it, though it appear solemn and grave, yet hath it not its Letters sufficiently distinguished from one another, and withall it appears somewhat harsh and rugged. The Arabic Character, though it shew beautiful, yet is it too elaborate, and takes up too much room, and cannot well be written small. The Greek and the Latin are both of them graceful and indifferent easie, though not without their several imperfections. As for the Aethiopic, it hath no less then 202 Letters in its Alphabet; namely, 7 Vowels, which they apply to every one of their 26 Conso∣nants, to which they add 20 other aspirated Syllables. All their Cha∣racters are exceedingly complicated and perplexed, and much more dif∣ficult then those proposed in this following Discourse for the expressing of things and notions. Martinii At∣las Sinensis.This is said likewise of the Tartarian, that every Character with them is a Syllable, having each of the Vowels joyned to its Consonant, as La, Le, Li, &c. which must needs make a long and troublesome Alphabet. But it is not my purpose to animadvert upon these Tongues that are less known, so much as those with which these parts of the world are bet∣ter acquainted. CHAP. IV. I. The Defects in the common Alphabets, as to their true Order. II. Iust Number. III. Determinate Powers. IV. Fitting Names. V. Pro∣per Figures of the Letters. VI. The Imperfections belonging to the Words of Language, as to their Equivocalness, variety of Synonymous words, uncertain Phraseologies, improper way of Writing. ONe special Circumstance which adds to the Curse of Babel is that difficulty which there is in all Languages,§. I. arising from the various Imperfections belonging to them, both in respect of 1. their first Elements or Alphabets, 2. their Words. 1. For Alphabets, they are all of them, in many respects, liable to just exception. 1. As to the Order of them, they are inartificial and confused, without any such methodical distribution as were requisite for their particular na∣tures and differences; the Vowels and Consonants being promiscuously huddled together, without any distinction: Whereas in a regular Alpha∣bet, the Vowels and Consonants should be reduced into Classes, according to their several kinds, with such an order of precedence and subsequence as their natures will bear; this being the proper end and design of that which we call Method, to separate the Heterogeneous, and put the Homo∣geneous together, according to some rule of precedency. The Hebrew Alphabet, (the order of which is observed in several Scriptures, Psal. 119. and in the Book of Lamentations) from whence the others are derived, is not free from this Imperfection.
2. For their Number, they are in several respects both Redundant, and Deficient.§. II. 1. Redundant and superfluous; either 1. By allotting several Let∣ters to the same power and sound. So in the Hebrew ( & ) and so perhaps ( & ) ( & ) ( & ) ( & .) So in the ordinary La∣tin, (C & K) (F & Ph.) Or 2. by reckoning double Letters amongst the most simple elements of Speech: as in the Hebrew ; in the Greek ξ and ; in the Latin (Q. Cu) (X. cs.) and I Consonant or Jod which is made up of (dzh) by assigning several Letters to represent one sim∣ple power, as th, sh, &c. So that none of these can regularly be rec∣koned amongst the simple elements of Speech. 2. Deficient in other respects, especially in regard of Vowels, of which there are 7 or 8 several kinds commonly used, (as I shall shew after∣wards) though the Latin Alphabet take notice but of five, whereof two, namely (i and u.) according to our English pronunciation of them, are not properly Vowels, but Diphthongs. And besides, that gradual difference amongst Vowels of long and short is not sufficiently provided for. The Ancients were wont to express a long Vowel by doubling the Character of it; as Amaabam, Naata, Ree, Seedes, Sanctissimiis, Mariinas:Vossius. though oftentimes the Vowel I, instead of being doubled, was onely pro∣longed in the figure of it; as AEDILIS, PISO, VIVUS. For the ways used by us English for lengthning and abbreviating Vowels, viz. by adding E quiescent to the end of a word for prolonging a Syllable, and doubling the following Consonant for the shortning of a Vowel, as Wane, Wann; Ware, Warr, &c. or else by inserting some other Vowel, for the lengthning of it, as Meat, Met; Read, Red, &c. both these are upon this account improper, because the sign ought to be where the sound is. Nor would it be so fit to express this by a distinct Character, because it denotes onely an accidental or gradual difference, as by an Accent; the chief use of Accents, for which they are necessary in ordinary speech, being to sig∣nifie Quantities and Elevations of voice. 3. For their Powers, they are very uncertain, not alwaies fixed and de∣termined to the same signification:§. III. which as to our English pronunciati∣on may be made to appear by abundance of Instances both in the Vow∣els and Consonants. 1. As to th Vowels: It is generally acknowledged that each of them have several sounds. Vocales omnes plurisonae, saith Lipsius. And the learn∣ed Vossius doth assure us,De Pronunc. cap. 5. Grammat. lib. 1. cap. 12. Ios. Scal. Diat. De varia pro∣nunciatione. that the Ancients did use their Vowels in very different wayes, aliquando tenuiùs exiliúsque, nunc crassiùs, nunc inter∣medio sono. The power of the Vowel () treated of afterwards, is expressed in writing no less then six several waies; by e. He, me, she, ye. ee. Thee, free, wee. ie. Field, yield, shield, chief. ea. Near, dear, hear. eo. People. i. Privilege. So is the Power of the Vowel (α;) as in All, aul, aw, fault, caught,
brought. These are all various waies of writing the same long Vowel; besides which there are other distinct waies of expressing the same Vowel when it is used short, as in the words of, for, &c. And for the Power of the Vowel () that is likewise written five se∣veral waies. o. To, who, move. oe. Doe. oo. Shoo, moon, noon. ou. Could, would. wo. Two. And as for the Power of the Vowel () this also is written five seve∣ral waies; namely, by the Letters i. Sir, stir, firmament, &c. o. Hony, mony, come, some, love, &c. oo. Blood, flood. u. Turn, burn, burthen. ou. Country, couple. 2. As to the Consonants, these likewise are of very uncertain Powers: witness the different pronunciation of the letter (C) in the word Circo, and (G) in the word Negligence. I know 'tis said that the letter (C) before the Vowels a, o, u, must be pronounced like (K,) as in the words cado, coram, cudo; and before the Vowels e, i, as S, as in the words cedo, cilium. But there is no reason why it should be so. Upon which account our learned Country man,De Linguae Anglicanae pronunciati∣one. Sir Tho. Smith, doth justly censure it as mon∣strum literae, non litera; ignorantiae specimen, non artis; modò serpens, modo cornix. Cessio, Sessio, Gratia.The letters C, S, T, are often used alike, to denote the same Power, and that both in English and French; and the letter (S) is most frequent∣ly used for (Z) which must needs be very improper. And, which is yet more irrational, some Letters of the same name and shape are used sometimes for Vowels, and sometimes for Consonants; as I▪ V, W, Y; which yet differ from one another sicut corpus & anima, and ought by no means to be confounded.Priscian. To which may be added, that from this equivocal power of Letters, it so falls out, that 1. Some words are distinguished in writing, and not in pronunciation: as Sessio, Cessio; Sera, Cera; Servus, Cervus; Syrus, Cyrus; Boar, Bore; Come, Lat. Cum; Done, Dun; Dear, Deer; Hear, Here▪ Heart, Hart; Meat, Mete; Son, Sun; Some, Lat. Sum; Toes, Toze; Toe, Towe; To, Too, Two. 2. Some words are distinguished in pronunciation, but not in writing; as the words Give, i. Dare, Give, i. Vinculum; Get. i. Acquirere, Get, i. Ga∣gates; is and his in English, and is and his in Latin. So the Latin word Malè, i. evilly, is a dissyllable; whereas the English word Male, which signifies the masculine Sex, is but a monosyllable. All which are very great incongruities, and such as ought to be avoided in any regular esta∣blishment of Letters. 4. Their Names in most Alphabets, are very improperly expressed by words of several syllables;§. IV. as Aleph, Beth, Gimel, &c. Alpha, Beta, Gamma, &c. And thus it is in 15 several Alphabets mentioned by Her∣mannus
Hugo. In which respect the Roman Alphabet, and our English,De Origine Scribendi c. 7. which follows it very near, are much more convenient then the rest, where each Letter is named simply by its Power. Though herein like∣wise there be some defects: for the letter C should not be named See, but Kee; and G, not, as usually we do, Iee, but : and so R, to con∣form it with the rest, should be called er, not ar; and Z should be styled ez, not zad. 5. Their Figures have not that correspondency to their Natures and Powers which were desirable in an artificially-invented Alphabet,§. V. wherein the Vowels ought to have something answerable in their Chara∣cter unto the several kinds of Apertion which they have in their sound. And so for the Consonants, they should have some such affinity in their Figures as they have in their Powers. 'Tis so in some of them, whether purposely or casually, I know not; as BP. bp. CG. SZ. and perhaps TD, td: but not in others. To this may be added, the manner of writing as to the Oriental Tongues, from the right hand to the left, which is as unnatural and incon∣venient, as to write with the light on the wrong side. The Iews them∣selves write their particular strokes of Letters from the left to the right hand; and therefore it would be much more rational,Scaliger de Causis L. L. cap. 46. that their words should be written so too. Besides these Defects in the usual Alphabets or Letters, there are seve∣ral others likewise in the Words of Language,§. VI. and their Accidents and Constructions. 1. In regard of Equivocals, which are of several significations, and therefore must needs render speech doubtful and obscure; and that ar∣gues a deficiency, or want of a sufficient number of words. These are ei∣ther absolutely so, or in their figurative construction, or by reason of Phra∣seologies. Of the first kind there are great variety in Latin. So the word LIBER apud Literatos significat Codicem. LIBER apud Politicos significat Libertate fruentem. LIBER apud Oratores significat Filium. LIBER apud Rusticos significat Arboris corticem. So the word Malus signifies both an Apple-tree, and Evil, and the Mast of a ship; and Populus signifies both a Poplar-tree, and the People, &c. Besides such Equivocals as are made by the inflexion of words: as Lex, legis, legi; Lego, legis, legi: Sus, suis; Suo, suis; Suus, suis: Amarè the Adverb; Amo, amas, amavi, amare; and Amor, amaris vel amare: with abundance of the like of each kind. Nor is it better with the English Tongue in this respect, in which there is great variety of Equivocals. So the word Bill signifies both a Weapon, a Bird's Beak, and a written Scroul: The word Grave signifies both So∣ber, and Sepulcher, and to Carve, &c. As for the ambiguity of words by reason of Metaphor and Phraseology, this is in all instituted Languages so obvious and so various, that it is need∣less to give any instances of it; every Language having some peculiar phrases belonging to it, which, if they were to be translated verbatim in∣to another Tongue, would seem wild and insignificant. In which our
English doth too much abound, witness those words of Break, Bring, Cast, Cleare, Come, Cut, Draw, Fall, Hand, Keep, Lay, make, Pass, Put, Run, Set, Stand, Take, none of which have less then thirty or forty, and some of them about a hundred several senses, according to their use in Phra∣ses, as may be seen in the Dictionary. And though the varieties of Phra∣ses in Language may seem to contribute to the elegance and ornament of Speech; yet, like other affected ornaments, they prejudice the native simplicity of it, and contribute to the disguising of it with false appearan∣ces. Besides that, like other things of fashion, they are very changeable, every generation producing new ones; witness the present Age, espe∣cially the late times, wherein this grand imposture of Phrases hath almost eaten out solid Knowledge in all professions; such men generally being of most esteem who are skilled in these Canting forms of speech, though in nothing else. 2. In respect of Synonymous words, which make Language tedious, and are generally superfluities, since the end and use of Speech is for hu∣mane utility and mutual converse;Scaliger de Causis L. L. cap. 188. magìs igitur refert ut brevis, & rectus, & simplex sit quàm longus & varius. And yet there is no particular Lan∣guage but what is very obnoxious in this kind. 'Tis said that the Arabic hath above a thousand several names for a Sword,Bp. Walton Prolegomena de Lingua Arabica, sect. 6. and 500 for a Lion, and 200 for a Serpent, and fourscore for Hony. And though perhaps no other Language do exceed at this rate, as to any particular; yet do they all of them abound more then enough in the general. The examples of this kind, for our English, may be seen in the following Tables. To this may be added, that there are in most Languages several words that are mere Expletives, not adding any thing to the Sense. 3. For the Anomalisms and Irregularities in Grammatical constructi∣on, which abound in every Language, and in some of them are so nu∣merous, that Learned men have scrupled whether there be any such thing as Analogy. 4. For that Difference which there is in very many words betwixt the writing and pronouncing of them, mentioned before. Scriptio est vocum pictura: And it should seem very reasonable, that men should either speak as they write, or write as they speak. And yet Custom hath so ri∣vetted this incongruity and imperfection in all Languages, that it were an hopeless attempt for any man to go about to repair and amend it. 'Tis needless to give instances of this, there being in divers Languages as ma∣ny words whose sounds do disagree with their way of writing, as those are that agree. What is said of our English Tongue is proportionably true of most other Languages, That if ten Scribes (not acquainted with the particular Speech) should set themselves to write according to pronunciation, not any two of them would agree in the same way of spelling. 'Tis an observation of a Learned man concerning the French Tongue, that it is ineptissimè confusa, aliàs ad fastidium otiosis suffarcta literis; ali∣às ad mendicitatem inops & jejuna;Sir Tho. Smith de recta Scriptione. nunquam sibi constans, & raro rationi consona. 'Tis said that Peter Ramus did labour much in reducing it to a new Orthography, but met with much discouragement in this attempt from Learned men; besides the invincibleness of general Custom, a∣gainst which (for the most part) men strive in vain. What better suc∣cess those Learned ingenuous persons of the French Academy may have,
who have been for several years ingaged in this Work,Gregorius Tu∣ronesis. I cannot conje∣cture. 'Tis related of Chilperick King of France, that he did, for the com∣pendiousness of writing, add to the French Alphabet these five Letters, θ. χ. ο. ξ. ψ. injoyning by a strict and solemn Edict the reception and use of them through his Dominions; and that in all Schools Youths should be instituted in the use of them. And yet, notwithstanding his Authority in imposing of them, they were presently after his death laid aside and disused. As to our own Language, several persons have taken much pains a∣bout the Orthography of it. That Learned Knight Sir Thomas Smith, Se∣cretary to Queen Elizabeth, and sometime her Embassador into France, hath published an elegant Discourse in Latin, De recta & emendata Lin∣guae Anglicanae scriptione. After him, this Subject was in another Discourse prosecuted by one of the Heralds, who calls himself Chester; who was followed by one Wade, that writ to the same purpose. After these, Bul∣laker endeavoured to add to, and alter divers things in those others that preceded him; who was succeeded in the same attempt by Alexander Gill, in his English Grammar. And yet so invincible is Custom, that still we retain the same errors and incongruities in writing which our Fore∣fathers taught us. CHAP. V. I. That neither Letters nor Languages have been regularly established by the rules of Art. II. The natural Ground or Principle of the several ways of Communication amongst men. III. The first thing to be pro∣vided for in the establishing of a Philosophical Character or Language, is a just enumeration of all such things and notions to which names are to be assigned. FRom what hath been already said it may appear, that there are no Letters or Languages that have been at once invented and established according to the Rules of Art; but that all, except the first,§. I. (of which we know nothing so certain as, that it was not made by human Art upon Experience) have been either taken up from that first, and derived by way of Imitation; or else, in a long tract of time, have, upon several emergencies, admitted various and casual alterations; by which means they must needs be liable to manifold defects and imperfections, that in a Language at once invented and according to the rules of Art might be easily avoided. Nor could this otherwise be, because that very Art by which Language should be regulated, viz. Grammar, is of much la∣ter invention then Languages themselves, being adapted to what was al∣ready in being, rather then the Rule of making it so. Though the Hebrew Tongue be the most ancient, yet Rabbi Iudah Chiug of Fez in Afric,Vossius de Ar∣te Grammat. lib. 1. cap. 4. who lived A. D. 1040. was the first that reduced it to the Art of Grammar. And though there were both Greek and Latin Grammarians much more ancient; yet were there none in either, till a long time after those Languages flourished: which is the true reason of
all those Anomalisms in Grammar; because the Art was suted to Lan∣guage,Vossius ibid. cap. 3. Polydor. Virgil. lib. 1. cap. 7. and not Language to the Art. Plato is said to be the first that con∣sidered Grammar: Aristotle the first that by writing did reduce it into an Art: and Epicurus the first that publickly taught it amongst the Grecians. And for the Latin, Crates Mallotes, Embassador to the Roman Senate from King Attalus, betwixt the second and third Punic War, presently af∣ter the death of Ennius, U. C. 583. was the first that brought in the Art of Grammar amongst the Romans, saith Suetonius. These being some of the Defects or Imperfections in those Letters or Languages, which are already known, may afford direction, what is to be avoided by those who propose to themselves the Invention of a new Character or Language, which being the principal end of this Discourse, I shall in the next place proceed to lay down the first Foundations of it. As men do generally agree in the same Principle of Reason, so do they likewise agree in the same Internal Notion or Apprehension of things.§. II. The External Expression of these Mental notions, whereby men com∣municate their thoughts to one another, is either to the Ear, or to the Eye. To the Ear by Sounds, and more particularly by Articulate Voice and Words. To the Eye by any thing that is visible, Motion, Light, Colour, Figure; and more particularly by Writing. That conceit which men have in their minds concerning a Horse or Tree, is the Notion or mental Image of that Beast, or natural thing, of such a nature, shape and use. The Names given to these in several Lan∣guages, are such arbitrary sounds or words, as Nations of men have agreed upon, either casually or designedly, to express their Mental notions of them. The Written word is the figure or picture of that Sound. So that if men should generally consent upon the same way or man∣ner of Expression, as they do agree in the same Notion, we should then be freed from that Curse in the Confusion of Tongues, with all the unhap∣py consequences of it. Now this can onely be done, either by enjoyning some one Language and Character to be universally learnt and practised, (which is not to be expected, till some person attain to the Vniversal Monarchy; and per∣haps would not be done then:) or else by proposing some such way as, by its facility and usefulness, (without the imposition of Authority) might invite and ingage men to the learning of it; which is the thing here attempted. In order to this, The first thing to be considered and enquired into is, Concerning a just Enumeration and description of such things or notions as are to have Marks or Names assigned to them.§. III. The chief Difficulty and Labour will be so to contrive the Enumera∣tion of things and notions, as that they may be full and adaequate, without any Redundancy or Deficiency as to the Number of them, and regular as to their Place and Order.
If to every thing and notion there were assigned a distinct Mark, to∣gether with some provision to express Grammatical Derivations and In∣flexions; this might suffice as to one great end of a Real Character, name∣ly, the expression of our Conceptions by Marks which should signifie things, and not words. And so likewise if several distinct words were assigned for the names of such things, with certain in variable Rules for all such Grammatical Derivations and Inflexions, and such onely, as are natural and necessary; this would make a much more easie and conveni∣ent Language then is yet in being. But now if these Marks or Notes could be so contrived, as to have such a dependance upon, and relation to, one another, as might be sutable to the nature of the things and notions which they represented; and so likewise, if the Names of things could be so ordered, as to contain such a kind of affinity or opposition in their letters and sounds, as might be some way answerable to the nature of the things which they signified; This would yet be a farther advantage superadded: by which, besides the best way of helping the Memory by natural Method, the Vnderstanding likewise would be highly improved; and we should, by learning the Character and the Names of things, be instructed likewise in their Na∣tures, the knowledg of both which ought to be conjoyned. For the accurate effecting of this, it would be necessary, that the Theo∣ry it self, upon which such a design were to be founded, should be exact∣ly suted to the nature of things. But, upon supposal that this Theory is defective, either as to the Fulness or the Order of it, this must needs add much perplexity to any such Attempt, and render it imperfect. And that this is the case with that common Theory already received, need not much be doubted; which may afford some excuse as to several of those things which may seem to be less conveniently disposed of in the follow∣ing Tables, or Schemes proposed in the next part. The End of the First Part.
The Second Part, Conteining a regular enumeration and description of all those things and notions to which names are to be assigned. CHAP. I. I. The Scheme of Genus's. II. Concerning the more general notions of things, the difficulty of establishing these aright. III. Of Transcenden∣tals general. IV. Of Transcendental relations mixed. V. Of Tran∣scendental relations of Action. VI. Of the several notions belonging to Grammar or Logic. HAVING dispatched the Prolegomena in the former part, I proceed (according to the method proposed) to that more difficult attempt of enumerating and describing all such things and notions as fall under di∣scourse. In treating concerning this, I shall first lay down a Scheme or Analysis of all the Genus's or more common heads of things belonging to this design; And then shew how each of these may be subdivided by its peculiar Dif∣ferences; which for the better convenience of this institution, I take leave to determine (for the most part) to the number of six. Unless it be in those numerous tribes, of Herbs, Trees, Exanguious Animals, Fishes and Birds; which are of too great variety to be comprehended in so narrow a compass. After which I shall proceed to enumerate the several Species belonging to each of these Differences, according to such an order and dependance amongst them, as may contribute to the defining of them, and determining their primary significations These Species are com∣monly joyned together by pairs, for the better helping of the Memory, (and so likewise are some of the Genus's and Differences.) Those things which naturally have Opposites, are joyned with them, according to such Opposition, whether Single or Double. Those things that have no Oppo∣sites, are paired together with respect to some Affinity which they have one to another. Tho it must be acknowledged that these Affinities are sometimes less proper and more remote, there being several things shifted into these places, because I knew not how to provide for them better.
All kinds of things and notions, to which names are to be assigned, may be di∣stributed into such as are either more General; namely those Universal notions, whether belonging more properly to Things; called TRANSCENDENTAL GENERAL. I RELATION MIXED. II RELATION OF ACTION. III Words; DISCOURSE. IV Special; denoting either CREATOR. V Creature; namely such things as were either created or concreated by God, not excluding several of those notions, which are framed by the minds of men, considered either Collectively; WORLD. VI Distributively; according to the several kinds of Beings, whether such as do belong to Substance; Inanimate; ELEMENT. VII Animate; considered according to their several Species; whether Vegetative Imperfect; as Minerals, STONE. VIII METAL. IX Perfect; as Plant, HERB consid. accord. to the LEAF. X FLOWER. XI SEED-VESSEL. XII SHRUB. XIII TREE. XIV Sensitive; EXANGUIOUS. XV Sanguineous; FISH. XVI BIRD. XVII BEAST. XVIII Parts; PECULIAR. XIX GENERAL. XX Accident; Quantity; MAGNITUDE. XXI SPACE. XXII MEASURE. XXIII Quality; whether NATURAL POWER. XXIV HABIT. XXV MANNERS. XXVI SENSIBLE QUALITY. XXVII SICKNESS. XXVIII Action SPIRITUAL. XXIX CORPOREAL. XXX MOTION. XXXI OPERATION. XXXII Relation; whether more Private. OECONOMICAL. XXXIII POSSESSIONS. XXXIV PROVISIONS. XXXV Publick. CIVIL. XXXVI. JUDICIAL. XXXVII MILITARY. XXXVIII NAVAL. XXXIX ECCLESIASTICAL. XL.
In this precedent Scheme, all the several things or notions, to which names are to be assigned, are reduced to forty Genus's. The first six of which do comprehend such matters, as by reason of their Generalness, or in some other respect, are above all those common heads of things called Predicaments; The rest belonging to the several Predicaments, of which I reckon only five. Amongst these, Substance doth take in fourteen Genus's, Quantity three, Quality five, Action four, and Rela∣tion eight. This being supposed to be a sufficient general Scheme of things, that which is next to be enquired after, is how each of those Genus's may be subdivided into its proper differences and species. In order to which I shall offer that which follows. In the enumeration of all such things and notions as fall under di∣scourse, those are first to be considered which are more general or com∣prehensive, belonging either to Metaphysic, or to Grammar and Logic. Tho particulars are first in the order of Being, yet Generals are first in the order of Knowing, because by these, such things and notions as are less general, are to be distinguished and defined. Now the proper end and design of Metaphysic should be to enume∣rate and explain those more general terms, which by reason of their Universality and Comprehensiveness, are either above all those Heads of things stiled Predicaments, or else common to several of them. And if this Science had been so ordered, as to have conteined a plain regular enumeration and description of these general terms, without the mixture of nice and subtle disputes about them; It might have been proper e∣nough for learners to have begun with. But men having purposely strained their Wits to frame and discuss so many intricate questions, as are commonly treated of in it: 'Tis no wonder that it should hereby be rendred, not onely less fit for young beginners, but liable also to the pre∣judice and neglect of those of riper judgments. That which I aim at in treating concerning these things, is to offer some brief and plain de∣scription of them, as being conscious that such matters as are prim nota, and most obvious, are most hard to be defined. And the multiplying of words, about things that are plain enough of themselves, doth but con∣tribute to the making of them more obscure. The right ordering of these Transcendentals is a business of no small difficulty; because there is so little assistance or help to be had for it in the Common Systems, according to which this part of Philosophy (as it seems to me) is rendred the most rude and imperfect in the whole bo∣dy of Sciences; as if the compilers of it had taken no other care for those General notions, which did not fall within the ordinary series of things, and were not explicable in other particular Sciences, but only to tum∣ble them together in several confused heaps, which they stiled the Sci∣ence of Metaphysic. And this is one reason why the usual enumeration of such Terms is very short and deficient in respect of what it ought to be, many of those things being left out, which do properly belong to this number; which defects are here intended to be in some measure suppli∣ed. Tho it must be granted, that by reason of the exceeding compre∣hensiveness of some notions, and the extreme subtilty of others, as like∣wise because of the streightness of that method which I am bound up to
by these Tables it will so fall out, that several things cannot be disposed of so accurately as they ought to be. The several things belonging to Metaphysical or Transcendental no∣tions may be comprehended under these three Heads, namely such as are either more Absolute; conteining the Kinds, Causes, Differences and Modes of things, which I take the liberty to call TRANSCENDENTAL GENERAL. Relative; whether Mixed; and common both to Quantity, Quality, Whole and Part, stiled TRANSCENDENTAL MIXED. Simple; and proper to Action, viz. TRANSCENDENTAL re∣lation of ACTION. The most Universal conceptions of Things are usually stiled TRAN∣SCENDENTAL, Metaphysic-all. To which may be annexed by way of affinity, that general name which denotes those highest and most common heads, under which the several kinds of things may be reduced in an orderly series: viz. PRE∣DICAMENT, Category. Transcendentals general may be distributed into such as do concern the nature of things according to their KINDS. I. CAUSES. II. Differences; ore ABSOLUTE and Common. III. Relative to Action; considering THE END. IV. THE MEANS. V. MODES. VI.
I. KIND.I. That common Essence wherein things of different natures do agree, is called GENUS, general, common Kind. That common nature which is communicable to several Individuals, is called SPECIES, Sort or special kind, specifie, specifical. Breed. These common kinds may be distinguished into such as are either more properly Transcendental; namely, those most universal and comprehensive Terms which fall under Discourse; relating to The first and most general Conception, of which the Vnderstanding takes notice, as most known. 1. BEING, Entity, Essence, Existence, subsist, am, is, extant. NOTHING, Nought, null, none, annul, disannul, annihilate, abrogate, abolish, void, undoe, cancel, evacuate, Ciphre. Those Beings which ‖ are truly such, or those which our Senses mistake for Beings. 2. THING, Affair, Matter, Business, Case, real-ly, indeed. APPARENCE, Apparition, Phantasm, Shew, Vision, Elusion and vanish. Similitudes of Beings; formed in our Minds either ‖ by apprehension of things that are, or imagination of things that are not. 3. NOTION, Conception. FICTION, Figment, make, feign, frame, devise, counterfet, forge, coin, mint, Fa∣ble, Apologue, Romance, Tale, Legend, Mythology, Fairy, Nymph, Centaur, Griffin, Bugbear, Goblin, Chymera, Atlantis, Vtopia. The words assigned for the signifying of several Things and Notions: to which that common name for the signifying of particular rational Beings may be an∣nexed, though less properly. 4 NAME, Style, Title, Titular, Compellation, Appellation, nominate, denominate, Sirname, Inscription, Nomenclator, anonymous, call, Nown, Term. PERSON, Age, Party, No-body, Wight. Predicamental; those chief Heads, under which other Terms may be reduced; denoting either Such things as ‖ subsist by themselves, or which (according to the old Logical definition) require a subject of inhesion: Though they are indeed nothing but the modes of Substance. 5. SUBSTANCE, subsist. ACCIDENT-all. That habitude of things whereby they may be said to have parts distinct and ca∣pable of division, or the general disposition of things either to Action or Passion. 6. QUANTITY, Much, Deale, Mathematick. QVALITY, Disposition, Endowment, indue, parts, qualification, manner, con∣dition, estate. The application of the Agent to the Patient, or the reception of the force of the Agent. 7. ACTION, doe, perform, commit, practise▪ proceeding, function, exercise, at∣chieve, dealing, Act, Fact, Deed, Feat, Exploit, Passage, Prank, Trick, play the Part. PASSION, abide, ail, bear, endure, suffer, undergo, sustain, feel, capable. Such things as ‖ cannot be, or cannot be known, without a respect to something else; or which may be, or may be understood of themselves, without any such refe∣rence. 8. RELATION, refer, Regard, Respect, Habitude, correlative. ABSOLVTENESS, irrespective, peremptory, flat, positive.
II. That which any way contributes to the producing of an effect,II. CAUSE. is styled CAUSE, Reason, Ground, Principle, proceed from, procure, produce, make, constitute, In∣fluence, raise, put, set, bring to pass. That which proceeds from, or depends upon the Cause, is styled EFFECT, Event, Issue, Fruit, accrue, Success, spring from, become, grow, come of it, impression, Product. Causes are commonly distributed into External, such as are without the Effect. By which things are done; whether More immediate and absolute; either ‖ more principal, of which the first Acti∣on is, or less principal, and subservient to the chief Agent. 1. EFFICIENT, Author, Maker, Efficacy, effectual, Energy, Virtue, Validity, Force, Vigour, Operation, Influence, frame, constitute, beget, effect, do, make, cause, work, render, create, bring to pass. INSTRUMENT, Tool▪ Organ-ical, Implement: More remote and relative; being either in The Agent; serving either to Excite, or restrain it. 2. IMPULSIVE, Incentive, Motive, Reason, Ground, Concitation, Instiga∣tion, Inducement, impell, stimulate, stir up, prick forward, spur on, rouse, quicken, irritate▪ provoke, excite, egging, incite, Instinct, Conside∣ration, put on, set at or on, move, urge, draw in. COHIBITIVE, restrain, check, curb, with-hold, keep short or back, in∣hibit, repress, hold in, bridling, stint, coerce, confine, limit, no ho, stay, staunch, moderate, master, controle. Direct and regulate its Action; either ‖ by that Idea which the Agent hath in his mind of some like case, or by some Pattern before his eyes. 3. EXEMPLAR, Example, Instance, Idea, Precedent, Cause. TYPE, Pattern, Platform, Model, Last, Mold, Prototype, Antitype, Extract, Original, Copy, Counterpart, Draught, Sampler, Proof, Duplicate, exem∣plifie, prefigure. The Patient; relating to ‖ some peculiar capacity in the thing, or some fitness in respect of time. 4. CONDITION, Proviso▪ Salvo, in case, Term, Case, State, liking, Habit, Qua∣lification. OCCASION-al, Exigence, Emergence, Advantage, Opportunity, draw, provoke, scandal. Some third thing, by which the force of the Efficient is either ‖ increased or abated, 5. ADJUVANT, Help, Aid, Assistance, Succour, Relief, Support, Advantage, auxiliary, subsidiary, avail, conduce, promote, farther, stand in stead, supply, accommodate, serve, Co-adjutor, abet, take ones part, stand by, a stay to one, forward, minister, relief, back one. IMPEDIENT, hinder, Obstacle, Remora, Clog, Bar, debar, obstruct, cum∣ber, Rub, Check, Dam, Luggage, Lumber, Baggage, Prejudice, Disadvantage, foreslow, lett, stop, Disservice, stay, stand in the way, trigg, keep back, re∣strain, with-hold, interfere. For whose sake a thing is: to which may be annexed the general name of such things as have any tendency to the promoting of it. 6. END, Aim, Mark, Goal, Drift, Intent, Effect, Purpose, Design, Scope, sake, Reach, Reason, final, tend. MEANS, Way▪ Shift, Expedient, accommodate. Internal, such as are within the Effect as its chief constituent parts; ‖ out of which a thing is made, and of which it consists; or by which a thing is constitu∣ted in its being, and distinguished from all other things. 7. MATTER-ial, Stuff, Substance, Argument, Subject, Boot as fire-boot, &c. FORM-al, Essence.
III. DIVER∣SITY.III. Those general Names which may be styled Differences, are too numerous to be placed under one common Head according to the method designed in these Ta∣bles, and therefore are they here reduced unto three Heads: whereof the first con∣tains such as do not immediately imply any relation to Action, and are therefore sty∣led more absoute and common; namely, those more universal Affections of Entity whereby several things are differenced, so as to make them DIVERS from one ano∣ther▪ (another, several, sundry, varyety dissonant, to and fro▪ up and down, multiplicity, choice, different others Heterogeneous;) to which the notion of IDENTITY, Very, sameness▪ all one, unvaried, may be properly opposed, importing an Unity or Agree∣ment in the same ssence. These are distinguishable into such Differences of things as imply a respect unto Something without the things themselves. The Vnderstanding; in regard of the ‖ congruity, or incongruity of things to our ap∣prehensions of them. 1. TRUTH, true, Verity, verifie, very, Right, Sooth, irrefragably, likely, probable. FALSHOOD, false-ifie, Error, erroneous, untrue. The Will; as to the ‖ agreement, or disagreement of things with that Faculty, so as to be rendred desirable or avoidable. 2. GOODNESS, Weal, Welfare, right, regular, well, rectifie, better, best. EVILNESS, ill, bad, naught, wrong, amiss, shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid, horrible, corrupt, Pravity, deprave, Sin, Fault, Trespass, Transgress-ion, Peccadillo, worse. The nature of things in themselves; as to ‖ Their naked being, or not being. 3. POSITIVENESS, Thesis. PRIVATIVENESS, Privation, bereave deprive, depose, put out, or forth, take away, strip, devest, disseise, dispossess, disfurnish. Their being▪ or not being what they are pretended to be. 4. GENUINENESS, right, arrant, rank, very, native, legitimate, true, currant. SVRIOVSNESS, mongrel, bastard, false, illegitimate, improper, adulterine, base, misbegot, sophisticated. Their degrees of being; whether ‖ present, or future and in possibility. 5. ACTUALNESS, Existence, extant. POTENTIALNESS, Reversion, may▪ can. Their Extension; being ‖ circumscribed by bounds, or not so circumscribed, 6. FINITENESS, definite determined, limited, bounded, Term, Confine, Stint, conclu∣ded. INFINITENESS, endless, indefinite, unbounded, immense, indeterminate, unli∣mited, unmeasurable, inexhaustible. Their Causes. Efficient; whether ‖ the order of common Providence, or the skill of some in∣feriour Agent. 7. NATURALNESS, right, native, wild, carnal, praeternatural, supernatural. FACTITIOVSNESS, artificial, technical, made. Material; being either ‖ without all parts and composition, or being such, to the fra∣ming of which several parts and ingredients do concurr. 8. SIMPLICITY, mere, sheer, clear, fine, plain, right, pure, unmixed, Ingre∣dient, single, uncompounded. MIXEDNESS, mingle, compound, blend▪ shuffle, Medly, Miscellany, promiscuous, temper, Commixtion, complex, complicate, confound, intermingle, Hodg-podge, Gallimaufry, Rhapsody, Centon, dash, brew. Formal; ‖ being in such a state to which nothing is wanting, or else wanting some∣thing of what they may and should have. 9. PERFECTION, absolute, intire, full, accurate, exact, exquisite, punctual, precise, complete, consummate, accomplish. strict, plenary, throughly, mature, up at the top. IMPERFECTION, incomplete, lame.
IV. That kind of Difference betwixt things,IV. DIF∣FERENCE relating to the END of Action. which relates to Acti∣ons considering the End, may be stiled DISAGREABLENESS, unsuta∣ble, discrepant. To which may be opposed the Notion of CONVENIENCY, agree∣ment, agreable, sutable, serving, cmmodious. These may be distinguished into such as are More Simple; denoting their Fitness to ‖ promote, or hinder our well-being. 1. PROFITABLENESS, Advantage, Benefit, Emolument, Interest, Concern, Boot, Fruit, Vtility, Commodious, Edifie, stand insted, good for. avail. HVRTFVLNESS, Harm, Prejudice, Disadvantage, Dammage, Disprofit, Nusance, Mischief. discommodious, nocent. shrewd turn, pernitious, noxious, noisom, damnifie, endammage, impair, an∣noy, displeasure, naught for, vermin, weed. Sutableness or unsutableness to our appetites. 2. PLEASANTNSS, Delight, Complacence, injoyment, satisfaction, sweet, taking, delicious, Paradise. VNPLEASANTNESS, Regret, displeasing, offensive, trouble, grievous, uneasie▪ painful. Agreableness or Disagreableness of things to Right reason. 3. DUENESS, Duty, ought, should, Honest, owe, part, incumbent on. VNDVENESS, ought not, dishonest. More mixed implying a respect to the nature of the end, as to its Capacity or Incapacity of existing. 4. POSSIBILITY, Feasible, may, can. IMPOSSIBILITY, cannot be. Degrees of goodness; whether such as are like to answer the desires, by proving very great and considerable or such as are like to disappoint the desires▪ by proving to be very little or none. 5. IMPORTANCE, of Moment, Consequence, Strength, Force, Weight, material, considerable, pithy, pregnant, essential, it mattereth. VANITY, Trifle, trivial, frivolous, Foppery, Gewgaw, Knack, Toy, sleeveless, slight, light, fruitless, fidling, void, Trumpery, Bauble, Quillet, Quirk, Gambol, to no boot, to no purpose, Esteem amongst good men; whether such as they are like to think well of, as deserving praise and reward, or to think ill of, as deserving shame and punishment. 6. WORTHINESS, Merit, Desert, Value, demerit, cheap, dear, price, precious, depreciate. VNWORTHINESS, Vile, Mean, Poor, undeserving, indign.
V. DIFFE∣RENCE re∣lating to the MEANS.V. DIFFERENCES of things relating to the MEANS, may be di∣stributed into such as are More Simple, denoting the being of things Good; as good is determined by Law; whether according to Law, or not against it. 1. LAWFULNESS, legitimate, right, legal, canonical, orderly. INDIFFERENCE, adiaphorous. Custom or opinion; whether such as the generality of men do think well of and practise, or dislike and avoid. 2. DECENCY, Decorum, meet, fit, seemly, handsome, becoming, comely, goodly. INDECENCY, Indecorum, unmeet, unfit, unseemly, unhandsome, uncomely, misbeseeming, ugly. Free from evil; whether of Hurt; 3. SAFETY, Security, sure, tutelary, innoxious, save, protect, in∣sure, indemnifie, warrant, Sanctuary, Shelter, Refuge. DANGER, Hazard, Peril, Ieopardy, unsafe, risk, venture, ad∣venture, endanger, expose, incur. Labor and Pain; in the Agent; the Doing of things with little or much labor. 4. EASINESS, Facil-ity-itate, clear, gentle, light, DIFFICVLTY, Hard, uneasie, crabbed, intricate, laborious, streight, Perplexity, rub, knot, graveling, hard put to it. Patient; The suffering of things with little or no labor, or with much. 5. GENTLENESS, Easiness, softness, still, tenderly, gingerly. VIOLENCE, boisterous, rough, harsh, blustering, impetuous, force, ravish. Comparative; of the Nature of the means to one another; whether mutually agreeing as ha∣ving the same kind of affections, or disagreeing as having such kind of affections as are apt to exclude one another out of the same subject. 6. CONGRUITY, Sutableness, Agreableness, Sympathy, consonant, compatible, right, apposite, fit, meet, apt, adapt, consistent, accord, conform, accommodate, comply. CONTRARIETY, Repugnance, withstand, against, unsutable, Anti∣peristasis, counter, cross, incongruous, inconsistent, incompatible, interfere. Vsefulness or Vnusefulness of means to an end, whether in Lower degrees; when there is a fair probability that a means may either promote or hinder the end. 7. EXPEDIENCE, Convenience, behoovful, meet, fit, perquisite, requisite. INCONVENIENCE, Inexpedience, unmeet, unfit, incommodious. Higher degree; when there is a certain dependance betwixt the means and the end. To which may be opposed that kind of nexus betwixt means and end, which is altogether uncertain and doubtful. 8. NECESSITY, needful, requisite, essential, should, must, streight, exigent, force, perquisite, pressing. CONTINGENCE, Venture, adventure, may, Accident, peradventure, adventitious, fortuitous, incident, happen, perhaps.
VI. Those more general respects and habitudes which several things or notions have to one another, are stiled by the name of MODE,VI. MODE. man∣ner, way, sort, fashion, guise, wise, garb, course, form-ality, kind. These may be distinguished into such as are Internal; denoting that In which another thing exists, or the thing so existing in another 1. SUBJECT, liable, obnoxious, exposed, matter, Text, Theme, under∣goe, capable. ADIVNCT, Epithete, inherent. About which a thing is imployed. 2. OBJECT, mark, scope, butt, treat, handle, meddle with, have to do with. External; With which things are accompanied or done; according to the Kinds of them, either in General, or specially of such things, as are remarkable for Extraordinariness and Greatness. 3. CIRCUMSTANCE, Rite, Ceremony. SOLEMNITY, Grandeur, state, Pomp, Port, celebrate, solemnize, Rite. Consequence of them; or that habitude resulting to any thing from the consideration of all its circumstances together. 4. STATE, Estate, Condition, Case, Iuncture, Liking, manner, pass, pickle, plight, point, in good repair. By which any thing is known. 5. SIGN, Badge, Token, Mark, Note, Symptome, Symbol, Index, Indica∣tion, Cue, Print, Scarr, Track, Signature, signifie, Beacon, becken, Boad, foretoken, presage, Prodigie, portentous, ominous, auspicious. According to which any thing is, or is done; relating either to the Order observed in the being or doing of things; whether by One person or thing after another who hath left his place, or for ano∣ther who is onely absent from his place. 6. ROOM, as Successor, Caliph, supply, place. STEAD, as substitute, subdititious, serve for, succedaneous, De∣puty, Surrogate, Vicar, Delegate, Vice-gerent, Attourney, Broaker, Factor, in lieu, Lievtenant, Proctor, Proxy. Two persons or things either one after another, or one with another. 7. TURN, Course, alternate, second, bout. RECIPROCATION, mutual, interchangeable, intercourse, correspond. Measures of Being; whether the more General name for such mea∣sures, differenced according to more and less, or that special kind which denotes the sodain and short Being or Doing of any thing according to a greater measure. 8. DEGREE, gradual▪ a spice, a strein, gradation, leasurely, by little and little. IMPETUS, Fit, Paroxysm, brunt, crash, effort, pang. Affections of Being; with reference either to some common agree∣ment and mutual dependance, or to some inconsistency betwixt them. 9. COGNATION, Affinity, Nearness. OPPOSITION, Disagreableness, contrary, counter, repugnant, with∣stand, against, cross, thwart, other side, adverse, Antagonist, An∣tithesis, confront, impugn, oppugn.
TRANSCENDENTAL Relations MIXED, may be distributed into such as do belong either to QUANTITY, as considered More GENERALLY. I More restrainedly, to CONTINUED QUANTITY. II DISCONTINUED QUANTITY. III QUALITY, as considered more LARGELY IV STRICTLY. V WHOLE and PART. VI I. Transcend. Relations of QUANTITY MORE GE∣NERAL.I. TRANSCENDENTAL mixed Relations belonging to QUANTITY considered MORE GENERALLY, may be distributed into such as do concern the measure of things compared ei∣ther with Other things of the same kind or company Indefinitely; as to Being or Substance, namely when the things compared are considered Singly and intire, Being either of an ordinary size, or more or less then ordinary. 1. INDIFFERENCE, Pretty big, passable, reasonable, so so. GREATNESS, Magnitude, ample, large, vast, huge, immense, grand, monstrous, pro∣digious, sound, swinging, whisker, main, much, magnifie, aggravate, exaggerate, a filthy deal, a foul deal, Gyant. LITTLENESS, Smalness, Petty, Minute, Modicum, Scautling, diminutive, less, least, poor, abate, allay, extenuate, Elf, Dwarf, Shrimp, Tit, Dandiprat, Pigmy. Conjunctly; as consisting of several individuals or parts, whereof there are together an ordinary number, or more or less then ordinary. 2. MEDIOCRITY, a pretty deal, an indifferent quantity, mean, reasonable. ABOVNDANCE, a great deal, much, a world, affluence, plenty, store, copious, flush, satiate, flow, fluent, luxuriant, enough and to spare. SCARCITY, Little, want, dearth, pinching, scant, bare, jejune, lack. Vse, with respect to the quantity of it, whether such as may by its just proportion promote the end, or such as may hinder it, by being too much, or too little. 3. SUFFICIENCY, enough, big or much enough, competency, moderate, satisfie, serve, well, full. EXCESS, Redundance, superfluity, needless, exuberance, too much, overmuch, over∣charge, cloy, glutt, surfet, satiety, extreme, immoderate, luxuriant, rank, out of reason, wast, fly out, lash out. DEFECT, Not enough, lack, need, penury, indigent, necessitous, destitute, want, fail, fall short of, slender, jejune, incompetent, insufficient. Quality of it, denoting the being of a thing of an ordinary goodness, or more or less then ordinary. 4. INDIFFERENCY, Pretty well, tolerable, not amiss. EXCELLENCY, extraordinary good, eminence, preheminence, egregious, eximious, incom∣parable, superlative, soveraign, transcendent, singular, heroic, high, noble, gallant, choice, passing, rare, remarkable, notable, Paragon, Mirrour. SORRINESS, mean, poor, vile, trivial, contemptible, despicable, frippery, Trash, Trum∣pery, Raff, Scum, Drugg, silly, slight, paultry, scurvy, poor, course, flat, pedling, cheap, worthless, Fellow, Sirrah, Companion, Rascal, Varlet, Wretch, Scoundril, Skip-jack, Scrub, Vrchin, Flirt, Gill, Iade. Definitely; as to Being; either of the same degree, or more or less. 5. EQUALITY, Evenness, parity, peer, match, fellow, adaequate, aequipollent, adjust, halves with, as many, all one. INEQVALITY, unequal, odds. SVPERIORITY, above, upper, advantage, odds, preheminence, surmount, overpass, surpass, exceed, go beyond, out-go, get the start, top, excell, prevail, predominant. INFERIORITY, under -ling, disadvantage, allay, come short of, low. Vse; as means to an end, when one thing hath the same degrees of fitness for an end as another, or more or less. 6. EQUIVALENCE, countervail. BETTERNESS. WORSENESS. Themslves; in respect of their Being or substance, either continued the same, or changed to more or less. 7. AT A STAND. INCREASE, Augmentation, progress, increment, enlarge, magnifie, amplifie, aggravate, im∣prove, rise, grow, gain, come forward, crescent. DIMINVTION, Abate, Bate, swage, asswage, decrease, extenuate, mince, mitigate, allay, retrench, rebate, shrink. QUALITY in general, either continuing in an ordinary degree, or being changed to more or less. 8. JUST TEMPER. INTENTION, heighten, strein, raise, aggravate, exaggerate, exasperate, enhaunce, acute, cutting, keen, sore, piercing, vehement, urgent, eager, earnest, deep sleep, amain, greatly, much. REMISSION, Abate, allay, slake, slacken, swage, asswage, diminish, mitigate, slight, cold, slender, weak, dead, dilute, dull, faint, gentle, light. Vse; when things either continue as they were, or else become more or less good. 9. KEEPING AT A STAY. MENDING, emendation, bettering, Reparation, Reformation, Restauration, correct, redress, Improve, Edifie, botch, cobble, clout, patch, Progress, advance. MARRING, Spoiling, Deprave, Impair, spill, taint, alloy, wear, corrupt, vitiate, wast.
II. Transcendental Mixed elations belonging to CONTINUED QUANTITY,II. Transcend. Relations of CONTINU∣ED QUAN∣TITY. may be distinguished into those various measures of di∣stance according to the difference of more or less, with respect ei∣ther to Line; from END to End. 1. LENGTH, -en, Longitude, prolong, protract, eeke out, extend, te∣dious, prolixness. SHORTNESS, Brevity, Conciseness, abbreviate, curtal, abridge, restrain, compendious, succinct. Superficies; from side to side. 2. BREDTH, Wideness, Latitude, Largeness, Ampleness, spacious, di∣late, enlarge, extend. NARROWNESS, Streightness, Scantness, close, compressed, pink-eyed, restrain. Body; reckoning from Top to Bottom. 3. DEEPNESS, profound, Abyss, farr into, high. SHALLOWNESS, Ford, Scoure, Depression, low, flat. Bottom to Top. 4. HIGHNESS, Altitude, exalt, elevate, Soar, sublime, tall, lofty, proper, towring, advance, raise, aloft. LOWNESS, abase, bring down, depress, demiss, nether Any Superficies to the opposite. 5. THICKNESS, Crassitude, gross, deep, incrassate, roun∣cival. THINNESS, slender, fine, slim, lank, slank, slight, tenuity, gaunt, rare, subtle, attenuate.
III. Transcen. Relations of DISCON∣TINUED QUANTI∣TY.III. Transcendental Relations of DISCONTINUED QUANTITY or Number, may be distributed into such as are either Comparative; denoting either a greater or lesser number then ordi∣nary. 1. MULTITUDE, many, numerous, a world of, multiply, increase, propagate, store, swarm, thick, press, crowd throng, rout. FEWNESS, Paucity, decrease, small number, thin, diminish∣ing. Positive; concerning the Number of things, whether One, or more then one. 2. SINGULARITY, Individual, numerical, single. PLVRALITY, more Some or All. 3. PARTICULARITY, special, peculiar. VNIVERSALITY, Generality, Catholick, Oecumenical, utmost. Kinds of things, whether One kind, or All kinds. 4. SPECIALNESS, peculiar, particular. GENERALNESS, All. Parts of which number consists, whether Equal or Vnequal Units. 5. EVENNESS, Parity. ODNESS, Imparity, uneven. Position of things numbred, denoting their Being in a state of separation from others, or in a state of conjun∣ction with several others. 6. SEGREGATENESS, sever, set apart or aside, Analysis, Ana∣tomy, piece-meal, by retail, dispence, distribute, one by one, Parcels, by pole. AGGREGATENESS, Train, Troop, Company, Party, Scull, Swarm, Team, Flock, Heard, Pack, Covy, Sheaf, Bale, Bundle, Fardle, Bunch, Cluster, Gross, by the great. Order, belonging either to Things, or to Words. 7. SERIES, Rank, Row, Class, successive, Chain, Course, Race, col∣lateral, Concatenation, Alphabet. CATALOGVE, Index, Table, List, Role, Bill, Scrole, Terrier, a particular, Cargo, Inventory, Muster, impannel, Genealogy, Pe∣digree, Vocabulary, Dictionary, Lexicon, Nomenclator, Alma∣nack, Calendar. Parts of an aggregate being all together. 8. SUIT, Pack, Set, Mess, a Ring.
IV. Transcendental Relations belonging to QUALITY,IV. Transcen. Relations of QUALITY at large. as considered MORE LARGELY, may be distributed into such kind of Relations as are either Single; containing a respect to the Cause of a thing, whether none or any, The being of a thing, the first of its kind, or not. 1. PRIMITIVENESS, Root, original, simple, underived. DERIVATIVENESS, conjugate, Notation, Etymology, transmission. Distance of a thing, whether without or with any other between. 2. IMMEDIATENESS, Next. MEDIATENESS. Manner of being, whether intirely of it self, or by virtue of something else. 3. ABSOLUTENESS, Independent, Freehold. DEPENDENCY, Vnder. Degrees of Being or Causality, whether superior and before all others, or inferior, and after some others. 4. PRINCIPALNESS, Chief, Special, Ring-leader, soveraign, supreme, paramount, first, main, arch, prime, primary, capital, cardinal fundamental, Top, Head, Master. ACCESSORINESS, Abet, adherent, second, Companion, Party, Copart∣ner, Complice, Appendage, Label, Appurtenance, adventitious, col∣lateral, conscious, privy, side with, back, partake, participate, by the way, by the by. Mutual; whether more Positive; signifying one thing either to have or not to have Relation to some other. 5. PERTINENCY, belong, appertain, apposite, to the purpose, touching, concern, material, relate to, serve for, incumbent on. IMPERTINENCY, not to the purpose, extravagant, sleeveless, wide from the matter, wild, idle, improper. Comparative, denoting such relation to belong onely to one or few, or to many. 6. PROPERNESS, incommunicable, owner, peculiar, concern. COMMONNESS, usual, vulgar, currant, general, prostitute.
V. Transcend. Relations more strictly.V. Transcendental Relations of QUALITY considered MORE STRICTLY, may be distributed into such as do concern either their Being; The same or divers. 1. LIKENESS, Similitude, similar, assimilate, resemble, representation Species, Idea, Image, Effigies, Portraiture. VNLIKENESS, Dissimilitude, dissimilar, degenerous. Circumstances; whether Special, relating to their Place, either the being of things in their due positions, or out of their due places. 2. ORDER, Regular, Method, array, imbattle, marshal, rally, in frame, dispose, digest, range. CONFVSION, Disorder, Rhapsody, Chaos, Gallimaufry, tumult, rout, coyl, disheveled, disranked, out of frame or order, promiscuous, Preposterous, Ruffle, Shuffle, scamble, clutter, blunder, jumble, hurry, hurly burly, pell mell. Time, either the being of things as usually they are, or their being otherwise then commonly they use to be. 3. ORDINARINESS, common, usual, trivial, currant. EXTRAORDINARINESS, strange, uncouth, unusual, unwonted, of note, notable, notorious, Odness, Paradox. General, The being of things according to certain rules or not so. 4. REGULARNESS, right, rectifie, rule. EXORBITANCY, Irregularness, Enormity, Disorder, extravagant, li∣centious, wild, faulty, wrong, loose, immoderate, unruly, unbridled, out of square, lash out, Heteroclyte, Anomalous. Being known; either to many or few. 5. PUBLICKNESS, Notorious, famous, common, extant, open, being out, or abroad, Declaration, Manifesto, Remonstrance, Edition, Promul∣gation, set forth or out, shew, spread, blazon, publish, proclaim, di∣vulge, denounce, produe, post up, come to light, high way. PRIVATENESS, underhand, clancular, clandestine, retire, between themselves. Mixture with or addition of other things; when they are Better for such mixture, or Worse for being without it. 6. ORNATENESS, adorn, set out, Deck, beautifie, embellish, trimm, trick, tire, garnish, flourish, dress, prank, Ornament, Grace, flo∣rid, neat, smug, spruce, elegant, quaint, fine, polite, gay, gaudy, gor∣geous, flaring, garish, flaunting, Gallant, Spark, Bracelet, Plume, Garland, Ouch, &c. HOMELINESS, simple, rough, rude, untrimmed, plain, bald. Better for being without such mixture, or worse for it. 7. PURITY, Cleanness, undefiled, defecate, fine, refine, try, furbush, scoure▪ purge, purifie, clarifie, depuration, neat, abstersive. DEFILEMENT, Filthiness, Impurity, unclean, fowl, squalid, bedawb, besmear, bewray, contaminate, slabber, slubber, smear, soil, sully, pollute, daggle, slurry, smutch, smutt, stain, alloy, em∣base, dash.
VI. That thing which is made up of several lesser things united toge∣ther is called by the name of WHOLE, Total, Integral, Intire, Summ,VI. Transcen. Relations of WHOLE and PART. All, Vtterly▪ Quite and clean, full, plenary. Those lesser things, by the union of which another greater thing is made up, are stiled by the common name of PARTS. Particle, Parcel, partial, Divide, share, distribute, driblet, portion, piece, pittance. The transcendental relations of whole and part are such as denote a respect to Quantity Continued; in regard of the Quality; of Goodness or Badness of such parts. 1. BEST PART, Quintessence, Cream, Flower, the heart, Top. WORST PART, Refuse, Scumm, Dreggs, Raff, draft, dross, rubbish, tare, bran, chaff, recrement, trash, garbage, offal. Time; either that which is first taken, whereby the goodness of the whole is to be measured, or that which is superadded after the whole. 2. SAY, taste, touch, scantling. VANTAGE, surplus, overplus, to boot, over and above, over-weight, corollary, supplement, vails. Place; specially in liquids, either that part which in separation doth rise to the top, or that which falls to the bottom. 3. SCUM, Sandever, Mother. SEDIMENT, setling, caput mort, grounds, lees, dregs, feculent, rack, defecate. Figure; specially in solids; whether Roundish; in greater parts, or in lesser parts. 4. LUMP, Bole, Morsel, Bit, Cantle, Luncheon, Gobbet, Mammock, Stub, stump, grumous, clotted, clod, turfe, sod. POWDER, Mote, Dust, Corn, Grain, Crum, Grate, moulder. Oblong; made ‖ either by Cutting, or by Breaking, 5. CHIP, Lamin, Scale, Flake, Flaw, Flitter, shive, shiver, splinter. FRAGMENT, Piece, Scrap, Sheard, tatter, Flitter, rag, shread, snip, slive, slice, collop, cut. Discontinued; denoting the respect of A Part put to another, or the whole as being made up of such parts. 6. ADDITUM, item, put to, insert, eke out. SVMM, lay or couch together, cast up, count, draw to a head, come to, amount, result, total, in the whole. A Part taken out from others, or the whole remaining after such taking out. 7. ABLATUM, abate, defalk, retrench, deduct, subduct, substract, take away. RESIDVE, overplus, surplussage, arrear, remainer, remnant, left be∣hind, the other, the rest, relicks, orts, scraps, reversions, gleaning, offal, odd-ends, stubs, stumps, stubble. A Part repeated a certain number of times, so as to equal the whole, or the whole considered as it is so made up. 8. MULTIPLIER, Side. PRODVCT, rectangle. A Part taken out such a certain number of times as leaves nothing of the whole, or that number of times which is the correspondent part. 9. DIVISOR. QVOTIENT.
TRANSCENDENTAL RELATIONS OF ACTION, may be distributed into such as are more General.— SIMPLE. I COMPARATE. II Special; denoting either Kinds of Action. Solitary; wherein more then one person is not necessarily supposed. BUSINESS. III. Social; wherein more then one person is necessarily supposed. COMMERCE. IV EVENTS. V ITION. VI I. TRANS. RELAT. of ACTION SIMPLE.I. Transcendental respects of ACTION SIMPLE or relating to single things, are such as do concern The General condition of a thing, denoting the making of it ‖ to be so, or to be otherwise. 1. PUTTING, Set, Lay, Make. ALTERING, Change, Vary, Mutation, shift, Revolution, Vicissitude, Catastrophe, Metamorphosis. Ones right in a thing; whether Making it ‖ to be his, or not to be his. 2. APPROPRIATING, own, set apart, engross, monopolize. ALIENATING, transferr, estrange, pass away ones right. Declaring it to be his, or not to be his. 3. CLAIMING, Owning, Challenging, Demand, arrogate, assume, profess, attribute ascribe, take upon him, declare for. ABDICATING, disclaim, disown, renounce, relinquish, refuse, reject, repudiate, desert, forsake, disavow, disherit, execrate, forswear, de∣stitute, cast off, lay aside, put away. Ones Possession; with respect to the Causing of a thing to be in ones Possession or not. 4. TAKING, Seising, Apprehending, resume, surprize, assume, intercept. LEAVING, Relinquish, Residue, forsake, spare. Being of a thing in ones possession, or the not being of such a thing in ones possession as he ought to have. 5. HAVING, in hand, hold, possess. WANTING, indigent, lack, miss, necessity, need, penury. Continuing a thing in ones Possession or not. 6. HOLDING, Detain, Retain, Keep. LETTING GO, Dismiss surrender, give up, Shed, Cast, mew, resign. The Knowledge of things, with respect to the Endeavour of knowing, or the good success of such endeavour. 7. SEEKING, search, feel for, grope, ransack, rummage, Quest. FINDING, retrive, sift out, smell out, Foundling. Causing a thing to be known, or hindring it from being known. 8. SHEWING, disclose, detect, betray, reveal, discover, declare, de∣monstrate, remonstrate, render. CONCEALING, Hide, Shelter, Suppress, Sculk, lurk, Secret, Private, Latent, occult, underhand, close, clancular, clandestine in a corner, in hugger mugger, recess, retire, slink, mich, sneak, slip, or steal away, cloke, veil, hoodwink, mask, muffle. Causing others to be perfectly known, or to be thought so. 9. MANIFESTING, Apparent, Evident, plain, flat, open, conspicuous, perspicuous, obvious, certain, clear, palpable, shew, declare, certifie set forth, come to light. SEEMING, Semblance, Shew, Pretence, Pretext, Vmbrage, Colour, a shew, a blind, Formal, Appear, palliate, fain, bear in hand, make s if, make shew of, specious, disguise, Ey-service.
II. Transcendental Relations of Action COMPARATE, are such as do concern.II. Trans. Relat. of Actions COMPA∣RATE. Divers things at the same time; whether such kind of Actions as from the nature of the Agents or Patients, may be called Corporeal; denoting the Causing of things to be together or asunder. 1. JOINING, annex, Connexion, couple, link, copulation, concatenation, conjun∣ction, Coalition, coherent, copulative, conglutinate, combine, compact, set or put together. SEPARATING, Segregate, sunder, sever, dissever, divide, disjoin, disunite, dis∣sect, dissolve, part, take in pieces, disjunctive. Continuing them together or asunder. 2. ADHEARING, Cleave, stick to, cling to, hang together, coherent, inseparable. ABANDONING, Forsake, Desert, Relinquish, Leave, Forgo, Flinch, Quit, Dereli∣ction, forlorn, destitute, shake or cast off, start back, give over. Mental; Putting of things together or asunder 3. APPLYING, lay or put to. ABSTRACTING. Both Corporeal and Mental; with respect to the Taking in of several things, or the leaving out of some. 4. COMPREHENDING, Contain, Comprize, Imply, Involve, Inclose, Include, inclusive, hold, Complication. EXEMPTING, Except, restrain, seclude, exclude, save, salvo, set aside. Putting of things together, the better to judge of their likeness or unlikeness, or examining of them for the distinguishing of that which is right and true. 5. COMPARING, Conferr, Collation, resemble. TRY, Prove, Search, Temptation, Experiment, test, touch, examin, gage poise, pose, probe. The same things at divers times, whether the same as to Substance; signifying either the doing of the same thing several times, or the making of a thing to be different at one time from what it was before. 6. REPEATING, Iterate, reiterate, recite, render, rehearse, redouble, reduplicate, inculcate, ingeminate, recapitulate, renew, afresh, again, Tautology, the burden. CHANGING, Mutation, Vary, Alter, Shift. Quantity; The giving back of the very same thing, or of something else equal to it. 7. RESTORING, Give back, Restitution, refund, return, Restauration. COMPENSATING, Recompense, award, make amends, remunerate, quit, re∣quite, retaliate, retribute, reparation, paying, fit, being even with, meet with, make good, cry quittance, like for like, one for another. Quality; endeavouring to shew how another thing is, or to do the like. 8. REPRESENTING, declare, shew, exhibit, present. IMITATING, Mimick, personate, take forth, follow. Vse; as means to an end, The making of a thing more fit or less fit for its end. 9. REPAIRING, Mending, Bettering, Improving, correct, rectifie, renew, reedifie, Emendation, Instauration, Redress, set to right, make good, make up, patch up, piece up. SPOILING, Marring, corrupting, deprave, impaire, raze, scrape or cross out, sleight works.
III. Trans. Relat. of BUSI∣NESS.III. Those kind of Actions about which men bestow their time and labour, are called by the general name of BUSINESS, Affair, Task, Chare, Transaction, Matter, Fa∣ctor, Agent, negotiate, occupie, stickle, meddle, intermeddle, dealing, imployment, active. To which may be opposed the Negation or being free from such Actions stiled LEASVRE, Vacation vacant, idle or spare time, unoccupied, respite. Transcendental relations of BUSINESS, may be distributed into such as are Previous to it. Mental or Verbal. 1. DESIGNING, allot, appoint, plot, preordein, project. UNDERTAKING, enterprize, take in hand set upon, task. Real; either more general or more special, with respect to the providing of requi∣site materials. 2. PREPARING, Parade, previous, ready, make way, fitting, Tuning, Harbinger. FURNISHING, Aequipage, fitting, ready. Parts of it; whether Initial; with respect to the First entrance upon a business; either Real or Seeming. 3. BEGIINNING, Inchoate, initiate, commence, Inceptor, Spring, Rise, Origi∣nal, first, set about, set forth, set a foot, go in hand with, enter upon. OFFERING, Propose profer, tender, bid, propound, overture. Application of the labor, either to the doing of any thing, or to know whether it can be done. 4. ENDEAVOURING, Devoir, bestir, adoo, coyl, stickle, strein, strive, struggle, effort, make a stir, do ones best, reach after, lay out for. ESSAYING, Trying, say, attempt, prove, tempt-ation, Test, Experience, enter∣prize, venture, sound, tast, touch, run the risk or adventure. Medial; with respect to the time bestow'd in the doing of it, whether shorter or longer time. 5. DISPATCHING, Hasten, quick, high, forward, hurry, precipitate, speed, Cle∣rity, Expedition, sodain, apace, out of hand, cut short. PROTRACTING, Delay, desert, retard, slacken, respite, tarry, foreslow, linger, prolong, lengthen, prorogue, procrastinate, dally, lagg, stand about, whiling about▪ shift off, put off▪ post off, spin out time. Final; with respect to the End of the Action; ‖ either the effecting of what we undertake and profess, or our failing in it. 6. PERFORMING, Accomplishing, Atchieve, fufil, verifie, discharge, execute, keep, observe, exploit, make good bring to pass. VIOLATING, infringe, break, trespass, transgress. Action it self; whether Perfect or Imperfect. 7. FINISHING, Concluding, ending, accomplishing, fulfil, performing, cease, give over, Period, Term, ultimate, last, consummate, determine, dispatched, done, Catastrophe, clap up, shut up, wind up, close up, draw to an issue, go through with, run his course. MISCARRYING, Failing. Hinderances of it; either not rightly using the means, or not using some of them. ERRING, Swerve, slip, stray, astray, mistake, oversight, deviate, falter, fallible. heterodox, Fallacy, wrong, amiss, awry, being out, beside the mark. OMITTING, Pretermit, Wave, decline, default, escape, lapse, leave, miss, forbear, balk, supersede, overlook, overpass, preterition, overslip, overskip, let pass, pass by or over, lay aside, hold ones hand. Helps of it; denoting either avoiding mistakes at the beginning, or rectifying mi∣stakes afterwards. 9. PREVENTING, Anticipate, Previous, aforehand, forestal, Foregame. REMEDYING, Redress, Shift, Aftergame, Help.
IV. Transcendental relations of Action concerning such things as are alienated from one Person to another,IV. Transcen. Relations of COM∣MERCE. are usually called by the General Name of COMMERCE, Entercourse, Traffick, Prattick, have to do with. These may be distributed into such as are Free; and not upon consideration Passive; Not hindring one to take or to do. 1. YIELDING, Suffering, permitting, give way, give place. SUBMITTING to. Active; Imperfect; denoting a willingness to part with, or a desire to have a thing. 2. OFFERING, Proffer, tender, exhibit, present, recommend, Oblation. DEMANDING, Require, Challenge. Perfect; with respect to the Possession of a thing; the Parting with it, or Taking of it. 2. DELIVERING, Surrender, transferr, resign. RECEIVING, Take, entertain, capable, reception, receptacle. Right of a thing; the Parting with it, or Taking of it. 4. GIVING, Bestow, confer, render, grant, contribute, endow, con∣sign, Gift, Boon, Largess, Collation, Donation, Donative, Gratis. ACCEPTING, Receiving, administer, dispense, distribute, To∣ken, Fairing, take in good part. Conditional; and upon consideration, whether such as concern the Causing of Relations by Actions that are Real; The Parting with something of ones own for the use and in the stead of another, or the restoring what another hath so parted with. 5. DISBURSING, Bestow, defray, extend, lay out, Bursar, Principal. REFUNDING, Repay, return, reimburse. Verbal; the Comparing and measuring of particulars, or reducing them to an equality. 6. RECKONING, Compute-ation, count, account, cast account, Cal∣culate, Audit, Score, Tally. BALLANCING, Evening of Accounts, Quitting scores, Adjust. Relations themselves ensuing upon such Actions, whether as having somewhat of ones own in anothers possession, or something of anothers in ones own possession. 7. BEING CREDITOR, Lending, Loan. BEING DEBTOR, Owing, Debt, upon score, in ones books, behind hand, Arrear. Ceasing or dissolution of such relations by some Act of the Debitor; either by restoring what is due, or by being rendred unable for it. 8. PAYING, Defray, discharge, satisfie, reimburse, Annuity, Poun∣dage, Shot, responsible. FAILING, Break, Bankrout. Creditor; Acknowledging restitution, or Giving away his right to it. 9. ACQUITTING, Discharge, Quittance, Receipt, clear accounts. FORGIVING, Remitting, pardoning, put up,
V. EVENT.V. The General name for that which follows upon Actions, especially as it relates to the end for which Actions are done, is EVENT, Vpshot, issue, result, emergence, accrue, occurr, come to pass, fall out, befall, betide, en∣sue, prove, redound, happen, light, succede, Luck, Fortune, End, Sequel, Suc∣cess, incident, coincident, intervene, supervene, take effect, how fares, goes, speeds it, come of it, come to good or to naught. Transcendental relations of Action belonging to Event, may be distri∣buted into such as do concern the Existing or not existing of the End designed. 1. OBTEINING, Acquire, get, procure, attain, reach, gain, compass, re∣cover, take, win, catch, come by, pick up. FRVSTRATING, Fail, disappoint miss, defeat, deceive, elude, cross, come short of, shift off, put by, of no effect, to no purpose, vain, void, nullity. Good or Evil accrewing to us by it, with respect to the Increasing or Diminishing of our Possessions. 2. GAINING, Lucre, Advantage, Profit, Emolument, Stock, the proceed, acquire, get, win, recover, extort. LOOSING, Dammage, decrement, detriment, disadvantage, disprofit, wrack, spoil hurt, hinderance, out of ones way. Diminishing or Increasing of our Want. 3. SAVING, Sparing, take up. SPENDING, Lay out, bestow, expend, dispend, expence, charges, cost, sumptuary, run out. Continuing, or not Continuing of a thing in our Possession. Imperfect; denoting the Endeavour and care we use about it, whe∣ther any or none. 4. LAYING UP, Treasuring, Preserving, Stow, Hoord, Store, Re∣pository. SQANDRING, Lavish, profuse, careless, mispend, embezel, wast, unthrifty, ill husbandry, spendthrift, flying out. Perfect; Consisting in the Good or Ill success of such Endeavour. 5. KEEPING, Preserve, retain, Custody, holding, promptuary, Cellar. LOOSING, Perdition, loss, wrack, shed, spil. Applying of a thing; whether more Simply; denoting the applying of a thing to its proper end, or the not applying of it so. 6. USING, Imploy, improve, exercise, occupy, manage, treat, handle, entertain, useful, serviceable, stand in good stead. ABSTEINING, Forbear, refrain, spare, withdraw, wean, hold ones hand. Relatively; as to that satisfaction or dissatisfaction of mind which we have in the use of a thing. 7. INJOYING, Fruition. BEING SICK OF, Nauseate, loath, tedious, surfet, weary of. Result of such application, in the diminishing or increasing of our Pain. 8. REFRESHING, Recreate, relieve, recruit, relaxation, refection, Bait. WEARYING, Lassitude, tyring, tedious, faint, fatigue. Hinderances. 9. QUIETING, Tranquillity, rest, compose, sedate, serene, still, calm, set or be at rest. TROVBLING, Molest, disturb, annoy, disquiet, incumber, infest, in∣terrupt, pester, cumber, turbulent, stirs, coil, broil, turmoil, garboil, perturbation.
VI. The General name denoting Transcendental Motion or rest,VI. ITION. is ITION, Going, Passing, Remove, betake, repair, transmission, Penetrate, Flitt. STAYING, Abide, remain, tarry, continue, reside, rest, stop, stick, damm, detain, hold at a bay, Mansion, Stage, Remora. The Relations belonging to this motion, may be distinguished into such as are Solitary, supposing but one Person or Thing, with respect to its Moving towards or from the Speaker. 1. COMING, Arrive, Access, Resort, repair to, frequent, recourse, concourse, confluence, return. GOING, Depart, recede, return, regress, ingress, egress, be packing, be jogging, retire, retrograde, withdraw, dislodge, avant, void, slip away, slink or sneak away, fling away, fall off, get gone, set forth, rub along. Continuing of Motion; whether Simply; Towards the same term, or changing of the Term. 2. PROCEEDING, Persist, prosecute, persevere, progress, pass, ad∣vance, hold or go on, set forward or on. TURNING, Winding, Veare, Double, tack, about, face about, wheel about. With Design; either to some certain place, or to no certain place. 3. TRAVAILING, Expedition, Voyage, Iourney, Progress, Peregrinati∣on, Itinerant, Passenger, Wayfaring, March, set out, Palmer, Pilgrim, Pass, Pasport. WANDRING, Stray, astray, range, rove, straggle, err-ant, Vagrant, Vagabond, random, ramble, rome, prole, gad, Gypsie, Rogue, Land∣loper, Labyrinth, Ambages. Social; supposing several persons or things. Causing another To go or to come, 4. SENDING, Mission, missive, Token, convey, dismiss, Remit, dispatch, Messenger, Embassador, Legat, Envoy, Lieger, Emissa∣ry, Currier, Arrant. FETCHING, Bring, reduce, forth-coming. To come after, or to go before. 5. LEADING, Guide, Conduct, bring, convey, draw, Manudu∣ction. DRIVING, Chase, drift, expel, repel, repulse, goad, beat back, Ferret out. Coming after another thing in motion, or coming up equal to it. 6. FOLLOWING, Ensue, come after, pursue, dogging, trace. OVERTAKING, Reach, Top, Catch, fetch up. Coming of things together from several terms, or the Preterition of something in our way. 7. MEETING, Obviate, obvious, encounter, occurr, Randevouze. AVOIDING, Decline, Fly, shun, eschew, Wave, beware, escape, evade, shift off, out of the way.
Of DISCOURSE, Or the several notions belonging to Grammar or Logick. THE most general name for those external expressions, whereby men do make known their thoughts to one another,§. VI. is DI∣SCOURSE, Commune, Communication, Parly, Talk, Colloquie, Tract, Treatise, handle, Stile. To which may be annexed that particular way of discourse, most in use, namely by articulate voice and words, called LANGUAGE, Tongue, Speech, Linguist, dialect. The several things and notions belonging to discourse, may be distribu∣ted into such as do concern either the Parts of it; or those primary ingredients of which it consists, whether More Simple; stiled ELEMENTS. I Less Simple; WORDS. II Kinds of it; or those secondary parts belonging to it, whether such as are Proper, to GRAMMAR. III. LOGIC. IV. COMMON TO BOTH. V MODES of it. VI
I. The first and more simple ingredients required to the framing of Discourse or Language, are stiled ELEMENTS. Abedarian.I. ELE∣MENTS. These may be distinguished into such as do concern either the Sounds made by the Organs of speech, according to the General name; denoting either ‖ that which is spoken, or the picture of it in writing. 1. LETTER, literal. CHARACTER, Figure, Note, Letter, Cyphre, Orthography. Particular kinds; relating to such as are More primary and simple; whether ‖ such apert sounds as are fra∣med by a free emission of the breath through the organs of speech, or such closed sounds in the pronouncing of which the breath is intercepted by some collision or closure amongst the in∣struments of speech. 2. VOWEL. CONSONANT. Less primary and mixed; either that which (for the most part) doth consist of several letters, pronounced in one continued motion, or of more Vowels coalescing in one sound. 3. SYLLABLE. DIPHTHONG. Time or pause to be observed in the pronouncing of several words or sentences, according to the General name; denoting that mark which serves, either ‖ for sepa∣rating such words as belong to several clauses or sentences, or for uniting those words which are to be pronounced as one. 4. INTERPUNCTION, Period, Point. HYPHEN, Maccaph. Particular kinds; Lesser; according to the degrees of Less or More 5. COMMA. SEMICOLON. Greater; according to the degrees of Less or More. 6. COLON. PERIOD, full point, stop, pause, rest. Manner of Pronouncing; with reference to Distinction of such words or clauses as are Less material; denoting that such a passage, either ‖ is not necessary to make the sense perfect, or is added by way of Explication of some∣thing preceding. 7. PARENTHESIS. PARATHESIS, Exposition. More material; either that which serves to distinguish such words, wherein the force of the sense doth more peculiarly consist, or that which denotes the words to be intended to a contrary sense, to what they naturally signifie. 8. EMPHASIS. IRONY—call. Prolongation of Vowels, or Elevation of voice in the pronouncing of any syllable. 9. ACCENT. ACCENT, elevate.
II. WORDS.II. Those particular sounds or Characters, which are agreed upon to signifie any one thing or notion, are called by the general name of WORD, Verbal, verbatim, term, endite. That which is intended by any such sound or Character, is called MEAN∣ING, Sense, Signification, Purport, Acception, Import, tenor, denote, moral Words may be distinguished according to the General name; given to the chief kinds of them, whether ‖ the more Principal such as signifie some intire thing or notion, or the Less Princi∣pal, such as consignifie and serve to circumstantiate other words with which they are joyned. 1. INTEGRAL. PARTICLE. Particular kinds; whether of Integrals; considered according to their Natures; being either more Absolute; denoting either ‖ the naked Essence of a thing, or the Ens and thing it self. 2. ABSTRACT, separate. CONCRETE, complex. Relative; to the Names of things; whether such as signifie more simply and of them∣selves, or such whose signification doth import their being ad∣joyned to something else. 3. SUBSTANTIVE. ADJECTIVE. Actions or Passions of things; (which is here taken notice of in compliance with instituted Grammar, tho it be not properly one simple part of speech, but rather a mixture of two, namely the Predicate and Copula.) To which may be annexed that which is commonly adjoyned unto this, to signifie the Quality or affe∣ction of the Action or Passion. 4. VERBE. ADVERBE DERIVED. Place and Order in a proposition, whether that which according to natural construction doth precede the Copula, or that which doth follow it. 5. SUBJECT. PREDICATE, Attribute, asscribe, impute. Particles; whether the Most necessary and essential to every proposition. 6. COPULA. Less necessary; Substitutive; in the room either of some Integral word, or of some sentence or complex part of it. 7. PRONOUN. INTERJECTION. Connexive or declarative; whether such as are more Proper to Substantives; being usually prefixed before them, ei∣ther ‖ that whose office it is to join integral with integral on the same side of the Copula, or that which serves for the more full and distinct expression of Substantives. 8. PREPOSITION. ARTICLE. Common to other words; either that kind of particle which is usually adjoined to Verbs, to signifie some kind of Mode or Cir∣cumstance belonging to them, or that which serves chiefly for the joyning of clauses or sentences. 9. ADVERBE UNDERIVED. CONJUNCTION.
III. COMPLEX GRAMMATICAL NOTIONS of Speech,III. COM∣PLEX GRAMMA∣TICAL NO∣TIONS. may be distinguished into such as concern the Portions into which a discourse may be divided, whether more Imperfect; Absolute; either that which denotes onely some part of the sense, or that which signifies some complete sense. 1. CLAUSE, Passage. SENTENCE, Period, Text, Aphorism, Apophthegm, Axiom, Im∣press, Motto, Posie, Phrase, Stile. Relative; to the number and order of such parts, either the less, consisting of one or more sentences, or the Greater being an Aggre∣gate of these. 2. VERSE, Staffe, Stanza. SECTION, Paragraff, Article, Scene. Perfect; conteining either a Principal part, or an Intire discourse. 3. CHAPTER, Act. BOOK, Tract, Treatise. Kinds of such discourse; with respect to the Matter or Words, according to the General name; denoting either a more loose and free way of putting the words together, or that which is bound up to measure. 4. PROSE. VERSE, Lyrick, Pindarick, Ode. Particular kinds of Verse; either that which depends only upon some stated measure of words, or that which doth likewise sup∣pose a similitude in the sound of the ending Syllables. 5. MEETRE-ical. RIME. Form or signification of words, whether Natural and according to the first intention of them, or Artificial and borrowed, containing a reference to something else of near affinity and similitude. 6. PROPER. TRALATITIOUS, Metaphor, Trope, Parable, Simile, Homely, or Ornate. 7. SIMPLE. FIGURATE. Allegory, Improper, Riddle, Aenigmatical. Full, or Defective; having something left out. 8. EXPRESS, Plain, open, flat, explicite, Hint, Inkling, mention, set form. UNDERSTOOD, Implied, implicite, tacit, intimated. Easie, or Difficult to be understood. 9. PLAIN, Evident, Perspicuous, clear, express, obvious, easie, facil, explain, explicate, unfold, illustrate, open, make out. OBSCURE, Dark, abstruse, riddle, aenigmatical, deep, profound, hard, difficult, mysterious, intrigue.
IV. COM∣PLEX LO∣GICAL NO∣TIONS.IV. COMPLEX LOGICAL NOTIONS of discourse, may be di∣stributed into such as are Positive; concerning Words; with respect to their Ambiguity; Shewing the different senses which they are capable of, or using them in a fallacious sense. 1. DISTINCTION, discriminate. AEQUIVOCATION, Ambiguous, Amphibole. Vniversality; Restraining a word unto some more proper and peculiar sense, or enlarging of it as there may be occasion, to its full scope and comprehensiveness. 2. LIMITATION, Restriction, stint, bound, terminate, determine. AMPLIATION, Inlarge, dilate, expatiate. Things; declaring either their Natures; more or less perfectly. 3. DEFINITION. DESCRIPTION, Character, delineate, pourtray, plot, platform, model. Kinds; more or less perfectly. 4. DIVISION, Parting, Dichotomy. PARTITION, Distribution, parting. Affections; namely such common principles of knowledge whereby men are to be directed in their judging. To which may be op∣posed the excluding of such particulars as do not properly belong to those generals. 5. RULE, Maxim, Axiom, Principle, Theorem, Canon, Rubric, A∣phorism, regulate. EXCEPTION, Exempt, reservation, restrain, exclude, seclude, salvo, save, set aside. Comparate or disputative, General; when from somethings already known and granted, we en∣deavour to prove some other thing, or the taking of that other thing as being so proved 6. ARGUMENTATION, Reason, argue, dispute, debate, discuss, dissertation, ratiocination, demonstration, sophistry, captious, cavil, polemic, mooting, Problem, chop Logic. ILLATION, Inference, consequence, consectary, deduction, sequel, Conclusion, Corollary, result, follow, imply. Special; as respecting the Forms most Artificial, whether that which is most full, or that which is defective. 7. SYLLOGISM. ENTHYMEM. Matter; Intrinsic from the nature of the things themselves, signifying the proving of a General, whether ‖ from many or all the particu∣lars, or from some one or few particulars. 8. INDUCTION, Particularize. EXAMPLE, Instance, exemplifie, specifie, leading case. Extrinsic; from the Authority of some other person, or a resem∣blance to some other thing. 9. CITATION, Quotation, testimonies, alledge. ALLUSION, Glance.
V. MIXED NOTIONS OF DISCOURSE belonging both to Grammar and Logic may be distributed into such as are Less complex; denoting such a compleat sentence,V. MIXED NOTIONS OF DI∣SCOURSE. wherein something is either affirmed or denied, To which may be adjoyned such kind of sentences, as by common use and long experience have obtained to be of authority amongst men. 1. PROPOSITION, Thesis, Assertion, Point, Doctrine, Observation, Position, Problem. ADAGE, Proverb, Old-say or saw, By-word. More complex; whether Kinds of discourse; Positive; More general; denoting something to be spoken in presence, or written to be sent to others. 2. ORATION, Speech, Harangue, Declamation, Oratory, Panegyric. EPISTLE, Letter. More special; relating to matters of Fact, ‖ either the more usual name, or that which denotes what is commonly said by many. 3. NARRATION, Relate, Story, History, Tale, tell, Tidings, Report, recite, recount, rehearse, impart, inform, Tradition, Annunciati∣on, Commemoration, Diary, Diurnal, Gazet, Chronicle, Legend, bring word, give notice, or intelligence. RUMOR, Brute, Hear-say, Report, common Fame, Noise, Vogue. Explicative; according to the General name; 4. INTERPRETATION, Exposition, construction, explain, expli∣cate, unfold, Trouchman. Particular kinds; whereby the words are Altered; by putting them into another language, or into other words of the same language. 5. TRANSLATION, Construe, version, interpret, turn, render. PARAPHRASE, Descant, Metaphrase, Circumlocution. Enlarged; by adding several other words for further explication, or Contracted; into fewer words. 6. COMMENTARY, Gloss, Note, Annotation, Stricture, Scholiast, Expositor. EPITOME, Compendium, Brief, abbreviate, breviate, a∣bridge, Breviary, succinct, concise, Abstract, Synopsis, Sy∣stem, couch, contract, Summary, extract, recapitulate. Appendages of discourse, whether the Extreme; either the Beginning or the End. 7. PROLOGUE, Exordium, Preamble, Proem, Introduction, Pre∣face, Prelude. EPILOGUE, Conclusion. Intermediate; either that which is more necessary, whereby one part is to be connected to another, or such additional part as is less necessary to the main scope of the discourse. 8. TRANSITION, Pass-age. DIGRESSION, On the by, by the way, Diversion, Excursion, Ex∣travagant, glance.
VI. MODES OF DI∣SCOURSE.VI. MODES OF DISCOURSE▪ may be distributed into such as con∣cern the business of proving or perswading, either Antecedently; denoting such forms of speech as imply Doubting, or a desire of being informed by others, to which may be op∣posed the general name for those returns which others make to such forms of speech. 1. QUESTION, Ask, Interrogate, demand, examin, expostulate, Inquisition. ANSWER, Responsal, Reply, Rejoinder, Return. Knowing or acknowledging, whether Positive; saying a thing to be so, or not to be so. 2. AFFIRMATION, Assert, averr, avouch, profss, Asseveration, Position. NEGATION, Deny, renounce, refuse, Recusant, disavow, gainsay, repulse, say nay. Conditional; allowing a thing to be so for the preset, that we may thereby the better judge of the consequences from it, or owning the truth asserted by another. 3. SUPPOSITION, Admit, premise, presuppose, Condition, Proviso, Hypothesis, put case. CONCESSION, Grant, yield, allow, acknowledge, admit, agree. Concomitantly; as the Acts or parts of it. More general; Saying something against what another affirms, or saying what is most contrary to it. 4. OPPOSITION, Gainsay, thwart. CONTRADICTION. Arguing against another, to which is opposed, The shewing an insuffi∣ciency in such arguments. 5. OBJECTION, Impugn, Cavil. SOLVTION, Solve, Answer, Resolve, Subterfuge, Evasion, Casuist. More special; relating to Our own arguments or opinions, by shewing the truth of them, or se∣conding such proof, by further evidence. 6. PROBATION, Prove, demonstrate, evince, Evidence, verifie, Reason, Presumption. CONFIRMATION, Stablish, establish, ratifie. Our adversaries arguments, by shewing the weakness of them, or turn∣ing the force of them against himself. 7. CONFUTATION, Refell, refute, disprove, reason against. RETORTION, Invert, recriminate. Subsequently,; whether Reall; by rendring an adversary unable to defend his own opinion, or making him to submit to ours. 8 POSING, Puzzle, nonplus, baffle, confound, gravel, run down. CONVICTION, Satisfie, evince. Verbal; acknowledging the truth of our opinion, or renouncing the error of his own. 9. CONFESSION, Acknowledge, own, yield, grant, profess, cry mercy. RECANTATION, Renounce, retract, recal, revoke, unsay, bite in.
CHAP. II. I. Concerning GOD. II. Of the several things and notions reducible under that collective Genus of WORLD. THose more special kinds of beings to be treated of Antecedane∣ously to the Predicaments,§. I. because they are not (as Predicaments are) capable of any subordinate species, are GOD and WORLD. That which the Heathen Philosophers stile the first Mover, the first and supreme cause of all things, and suppose to be a Being of all possible perfections, is GOD, Lord, Iehovah, Deity, Divine-ity, Deifie. And because of that absolute Simplicity and Purity of the Divine na∣ture, whereby 'tis distinguished from all other things, and therefore inca∣pable of being divided by Parts, or by Differences and Species as the rest are; hereupon, under this Head there is onely provision to be made for that great Mystery of Christianity, the Sacred Persons of the Blessed Trinity FATHER. SON, Christ, Iesus. HOLY GHOST, Holy Spirit. To the name of God that of IDOL may be opposed, by which is meant any False God; according to the Acception of the word in that Scripture, All the Gods of the Heathen are Idols. To the Second Person the name ANTICHRIST may be adjoyned by way of Opposition; the true Notion and Importance of the word so requiring. By WORLD, Vniverse, is meant the Compages or Frame of the whole Creation,§. II. with more especial reference to those Principal and more Gene∣ral parts of which it consists; whether SPIRITUAL and immaterial. I. Corporeal, considered according to the Parts into which it is divided, whether CELESTIAL. II. Terrestrial: either Inanimate.— LAND. III. WATER. IV. ANIMATE. V. CIRCLES by which it is divided. VI. I. By SPIRIT is meant Immaterial Substance:I. SPIRIT. to which may be ad∣joyned, as its proper Opposite, the word BODY, Corporeal, Matter-ial, Car∣cass, Corps, corpulent. A Created Spirit is either such as Doth not relate to a Body; and that considered according to its General Name, as being a ministring Spirit. 1. ANGEL-ical, Daemon. Special kinds, as Good or Evil. 2. GOOD ANGEL, Cherub, Seraphim, Good Genius. DEVIL, Satan, Fiend, Diabolical, Daemon, Fury, Goblin, bad Genius. Doth relate to a Body; and that considered according to its General Name, as being designed for the enlivening and quickning of a Body. 3. SOUL, Animate, Spirit, Mind. Special kinds, as rendring its Body capable of Nutrition and Growth; 4. VEGETATIVE, grow. Sense; 5. SENSITIVE. Discourse and Religion, together with a sense of moral good and evil. 6. RATIONAL, reasonable.
II. HEAVEN.II. Amongst Corporeal Substances, that which is esteemed most Simple and most Perfect, whose general name is therefore frequently used to signifie a place or a state of the greatest Perfection and Happiness, together with that which in both these respects is opposite, are commonly styled HEAVEN, Celestial, Firmament, Skie. HELL, Infernal, Stygian. Those parts of Heaven which fall under our Senses may be considered ac∣cording to their. General Name; denoting such parts as are more Solid and Luminous. 1. STARR, Stellate. Particular kinds; either Fixed, that is to say, which do alwayes keep the same distance from one another. And these, for the better distinction and remembrance of them, are usually distributed into divers parcels or little Aggregates, called Constellations: the received names of which are, according to their imaginary Resemblances, either the proper names of Per∣sons, as Perseus, Andromeda, Orion, &c. or the names of brute Ani∣mals, as Bear, Lion, Ram, &c. or the names of Inanimate things, as Balance, Arrow, &c. which may each of them be sufficiently expres∣sed, as the things themselves are to which they are resembled, with∣out being particularly provided for in the Table. And because that great Luminary which rules the Day, with us in this System is, by the most received Hypothesis, thought to belong to this number; there∣fore may it be adjoyned, as the most considerable Particular be∣longing to this General. 2. FIXED STARR, Constellation. SUN, Solar. Wandring, viz. which do not alwaies keep the same distance from one a∣nother; to which may be adjoyned that other kind of Luminous Body, which is now by sufficient observation and experiment discovered to be above the Atmosphere; according to the General names. 3. PLANET, Wandring starr. COMET, Blazing starr. Particular kinds of Planets, being either Primary; Seen by us at a distance, either more Frequently, Higher pair 4. SATURN-ine. JUPITER, Iovial. Lower pair, 5. MARS. VENUS, Morning star, Evening star, Day starr. Rarely, as being near the Sun, 6. MERCURY-ial. Inhabited by us, 7. The GLOBE OF SEA AND LAND, Earth, World, Oecu∣menical, Terrestrial, Terrene, Vniverse, Geography. Secondary; whether moving ‖ about the Earth, or about any other Planet, 8. MOON, Lunar. SATELLES.
III. By EARTH, Land, World,III. EARTH. is meant the habitable parts of this Globe; to which may be adjoyned the more general name of the Greater parts of the Earth, denoted by the word COUNTRY, Region, Land, Tract, Quarter, Coast. The most considerable Notions belonging to Discourse, which refer to this, may be distinguished with respect to its Figure, ‖ whether equal or unequal, Convex or Concave. 1. PLAIN, Champion, Level, Flat, Even. MOVNTAIN, Hill, Ascent, Rising, Vpland, Downs, Knoll. VALLEY, Vale, Dale, Bottom. Boundaries, or adjacent Waters; which are either On all sides, whether Great, ‖ more great, or less great. 2. CONTINENT, Firm-land, Main-land. ISLAND, Isle, Insular. Less, ‖ whether roundish and high, or oblong. 3. ROCK, Cragg. CLIFF. On three sides, which, according to a higher or lower situation, as it is conspicuous ‖ more or less, is called 4. PROMONTORY, Cape, Fore-land, Head-land, Point, PENE-ISLE. On two sides, conspicuous, ‖ more or less. 5. ISTHMUS, Streight, Neck of land. BANK, Shelf, Flat, Ridge, Shallow, Shole, On one side, either according to the more general name, or that parti∣cular kind which is sometimes covered with Sea. 6. SHORE, Strand, Sea-coast, Bank-side. WASHES, Sands. Motion or Rest. 7. QUICKSANDS, Drift, Syrtis. OAZ.
IV. WATER.IV To the word WATER, as it denotes the watry part of this Terre∣strial Globe, may be adjoyned the word SEA, Marine, Maritim; which de∣notes the more general name of the greater parts of Water, as Country or Region does of Land. The more considerable Notions under this Head may be distinguished as the other, with respect to its Figure, ‖ whether equal or unequal, Convex or Concave. 1. AEQUOR, Calm Sea, Smooth Sea. WAVE, Billow, Surge, Vndulation, Rough. WHIRL-POOL, Vorago, Gulf, Swallow. Boundaries, or adjacent Land; which is either On all sides, whether Great, ‖ more great, or less great. 2. OCEAN, Main-sea. LAKE, Meer, Pond, Plash. Less, ‖ whether obround and deep, or oblong. 3. WELL, Head. SPRING, Fountain, Source, Rivulet. On three sides, ‖ greater, or less. 4. BAY, Gulf, Creek, Arm of the Sea, Harbour, Port, Key. PENE-LAKE, Haven, Harbour, Port, Key. On two sides, ‖ greater, or less 5. FRETUM, Streight, Narrow sea, Sound. CHANNEL. On one side, either according to the more general name, or that parti∣cular kind which is sometimes higher, and sometimes lower upon the Land. 6. SHORE, Margo aquea. TIDE, Ebb, Flow, High-water, Low-water, Neap-tide, Spring-tide. Motion or Rest; whether constantly moving, or generally at rest 7. STREAM, River, Brook, Current, flow, pour, gush, Bourn, Rill, Rivulet, Eddy, Gullet, Flood, Deluge, Inundation, Torrent, Ca∣taract, Water-course, Running-water. STAGNUM, Pool, Puddle, Pond, stagnate, standing-water, Dead-water. V. ANI∣MATE PARTS OF THE WORLD.V. The ANIMATE PARTS of the World do comprehend such Bodies as are endowed with Life or Spirit; whether Vegetative, more Imperfect; such Bodies as grow in Veins of the Earth, which though they are not commonly owned and reckoned under this Rank, yet several Learned men have heretofore reduced them hither, as being a more imperfect kind of Vegetable; because when Mines have seem∣ed to be totally exhausted of them, yet there hath remained behind some kind of Seminal or Spermatic parts, whereby they have in pro∣cess of time been renewed again, and continued to propagate their kinds. 1. MINERAL. Perfect; whether according to the General name; 2. PLANT, Vegetable. Special kinds; denoting either, that tribe of Plants that are most small, tender and numerous; Or those kinds, amongst these, which are com∣monly fed upon by beasts, &c. 3. HERB, Wort, Weed, Botanic. GRASS, Grase, Greensword. Sensitive, 4. ANIMAL, Brute-ish. Rational, 5. MAN, Woman, Human-ity, Folk.
VI. Besides those General parts into which the World may be divided,VI. IMAGI∣NARY CIR∣CLES. there is likewise consideration to be had of those Imaginary CIRCLES by which men have agreed to divide both the Celestial and Terrestrial Globe, for the better explaining of the Distances and Motions of the Starrs, and the several Climates of the Earth; to which may be adjoyned for Affinity the Notion of ORBE, Sphere. These Circles are either Greater, dividing the Sphere into two equal parts; Indeterminately; namely that which separates the upper and visible part of the Globe, from that which by reason of its being below us, we cannot see, terminating our vision. 1. HORIZON-tall. Determinately; as to Northern and Southern parts; whether Directly; wherein the Sun makes every-where equal day and night: 2. AEQUATOR, Aequinoctial, the Line. Obliquely, namely, that Line wherein the Sun is supposed constant∣ly to move in its Annual course: to which may be adjoyned that Circular superficies, on each side of this, which terminates the motion of the Planets; 3. ECLIPTIC. ZODIAC. Eastern and Western parts; wherein the Sun makes mid-day or mid-night: to which those other Circles correspond which pass through the Poles of the Horizon, as the former do through the Poles of the World; 4. MERIDIAN, Colure. AZIMUTH. Lesser, dividing the Sphere into two unequal parts; whether Polar described by the supposed motion of the Poles of the Ecliptic; ‖ ei∣ther Northern or Southern. 5. ARTIC. ANTARTIC. Tropic, terminating the motion of the Sun in its greatest Declination; ‖ Northern, or Southern. 6. TROPIC of ♋ Summer Solstice. TROPIC of ♑ Winter Solstice. Parallels, relating ‖ either to the Aequator, or to the Horizon. 7. PARALLEL. ALMACANTAR.
CHAP. III. I. Of Elements and Meteors. II. Of Stones. III. Of Metals. §. I.WHereas men do now begin to doubt, whether those that are called the Four ELEMENTS be really the Primordia rerum, First Principles, of which all mixed Bodies are compounded; therefore may they here be taken notice of and enumerated, without particular restriction to that Notion of them, as being onely the great Masses of na∣tural Bodies, which are of a more simple Fabric then the rest: For which reason the word METEOR may be annexed to Element, for its affinity in this respect, signifying the several kinds of Bodies which are of a more imperfect mixture. These are, according to the common Theory, distin∣guishable into More simple; whether Real, such as do actually exist. Lighter; FIRE. I. AIR. II. Heavier; WATER. III. EARTH. IV. APPARENT. V. More mixed; denoting various modes of Air. WEATHER. VI.
I. The hottest and lightest kind of those that are counted Elements,I. FIRE. is called FIRE: Burn, Scald, Singe, Kindle, Tind, Light. The several Notions referring to the Parts or Kinds of it, are distin∣guishable by their Magnitude, Place, Duration, Shape, &c. The General parts or kinds of Fire, are ‖ either greater, which seem to be enkindled Air; or less, being a small separated portion of Fire. 1. FLAME, Blaze, Coruscation, Flash, Leam, Light fire. SPARK, Strike fire. The Special sorts of Fiery Bodies, to which custom hath given particu∣lar names, are such as are either More considerable; in respect of their Lastingness, continuing for some time in the same place; and then ‖ va∣nishing, or falling. 2. COMET, Standing, Blazing starr. FALLING STARR. Suddenness; being ‖ either the Shining and flash of inflamed Exha∣lations, or the Sound made by such Inflammations, 3. LIGHTNING, Flash, Coruscation. THUNDER, Fulminate. Less considerable; More high in the Air; Of Coherent parts, in the shape of ‖ a standing perpendicular Co∣lumn, or of a Dart in motion. 4. BEAM, Trabs. DART, Iaculum. Of Disjoyned parts, of a shape ‖ bigger, or lesser. 5. CAPRA SALTANS. SCINTILLAE VOLANTES. More low in the Air, loose, wandring; ‖ as that which appears often to Mariners at Sea: and if single, it is called St. Hermo, Helena, and is thought to portend Storms; if double, 'tis styled Castor and Pollux, signifying good weather: Or that which adheres to, and encompasses several Animals, without hurting them, being probably an Inflammation of their Effluvia. 6. IGNIS FATUUS, Will with a Wisp, Iack with a Lanthorn. IGNIS LAMBENS. Within the Earth; 7. DAMP.
II. AIR.II. The General name for that kind of Body, which, for its Levity and Warmth, is counted the next Element to that of Fire, is AER-eal, Wind, Breath. It is distinguishable by its Purity; being ‖ either more remote from the Earth and its Exhalations; or adjoyning to the Terrestrial Globe, and impregnated by the Steams and Efflluvia that proceed from it. 1. AETHER, or aethereal Air, Firmament, Skie, Welkin. ATMOSPHERE. Kinds of mixture, according to the more General name, or that particular kind which signifies a mixture of Watry parts. 2 EXHALATION, Steam, Reek, Effluvium, volatile. VAPOR, Evaporate, Breathe. Particular kinds in respect of its mixture with ‖ Earthy, or Fiery parts. 3. FUME. SMOKE, Suffumigation, bloting, fume. Motion, Above ground; ‖ Direct, or Circular. 4. WIND, Blow, Gale, Breath, Blast, Puff, Gust, Flaw, Monsoon, Trade∣wind, Bellows, Eolipile, Fan, Ventiduct. WHIRLWIND, Hericano, Tornado. Vnder ground; ‖ Violent, or Gentle. 5. EARTHQUAKE. DAMP. III. The third of those greater Masses of Body, considerable for its Gra∣vity and Moisture,III. WATER. is styled WATER: Aqueous, Dip, padle, Drein. The names belonging to this are such as concern either The smaller Particles of it; ‖ whether Solid, or Hollow. 1. DROP, Drip, drible, drizle, trickle, sprinkle, run, shed, instil. BUBBLE, Froth, Spume, Fome, Mantle, Ebullition. The Mixture of it with Air, ‖ Vpper, or Lower. 2. CLOUD, Overcast, gloomy. MIST, Fogg, nebulous. The Condensation of it, ‖ from a Cloud, or from a Mist. 3. RAIN, Drizie. DEW. The Congelation of it, according to its more General acception, or according to that special kind of it relating to the smaller particles of a Cloud, styled 4 FROST, Freeze, Ice, congele, Isicle. SNOW. Particular restriction to the Drops ‖ of Rain, or of Dew. 5▪ HAIL. RIME, Hoarfrost. The Kinds of Dew: More Concrete; of a sweet tast: to which may be adjoyned that pe∣culiar kind of physical Dew mixed with the Exudations of the Plant Ladanum. 6. MANNA. LADANUM. More Liquid; gathered from Plants by Bees: to which may be ad∣joyned for its affinity, that other natural Body gathered likewise by Bees, and of a clammy consistence. 7. HONY. WAX.
IV. That which is commonly described to be the Coldest, Thickest,IV. EARTH. Heaviest, of any of those Bodies counted Elements, is called EARTH, Land, Mold. This is distinguishable by its Smaller Particles; Alone and without mixture. 1. DUST. Mixed with Water. 2. DURT, Mud, Mire, daggle, puddle: Separated by Fire, ‖ descending, or ascending. 3. ASHES, Embers, Cinders. SOOT, Fuliginous. Bigger Masses of it, serviceable for building, and of a Cold, clammy consistence, to which that common mixture which is made of this may be adjoyned for its affinity. 4. CLAY. MORTAR, Lome. Hot and dry consistence, usually made of burnt Stone; to which, for the same reason, may be adjoyned that other common mixture made of this. 5. LIME. PLASTER, Parget, Tarras, daube. The placing of that Pair, Flame, Spark under the first Difference;NOTE. and that other Pair, Drop, Bubble, under the third Difference; with those other Species under the fourth Difference, must be granted to be besides the common Theory; But there is this account to be given of it, That there seems to be the like kind of resemblance and affinity in these to their Genus'es, as there is in some of the other Species, which are com∣monly received. V. APPEARING METEORS are such as onely seem to be, and have not any real existence.V. APPEAR∣ING METE∣ORS. These are either of a Determined Shape; Part of a round. 1. RAINBOW, Iris. Round wholly; Encompassing any of the Planets or bigger Starrs. 2. HALO. Representing ‖ the Sun, or the Moon. 3. PARELIUS. PARASELENE. Straight. 4. VIRGAE, Streaks, Rays of Light. Vndetermined Shape, being a seeming Hollowness or Opening in the Heavens 5. CHASM, Gaping.
VI. WEA∣THER.VI. By WEATHER is meant the state and condition of the Air; the several kinds of which, not sufficiently expressible by any words in the precedent Table, are considered either as to The Air's ‖ Transparency, or Opacity. 1. CLEARNESS, Open, serene. HAZINESS. The various Meteors wherewith it may be affected; whether Rain, Simply and by it self; either Drops, ‖ little, or great. 2. MIZLING, Drizzle. SHOWR. Stream. 3. SPOUT. Mixed, ‖ with violent Winds, or with Snow. 4. STORM. SLEET. Winde, considered according to its Quality; whether excessively cold, or mixed with noxious va∣pours. 5. BLASTING. Quantity; being either Little, or not sufficient to ruffle the waters. 6. GENTLE GALE, Breez. CALM, Still, Halcyon. Much; whether equal, or unequal. 7. STIFF GALE, High wind. TEMPEST, Storm, Flaw, blustering, boisterous.
OF STONES. SUch kind of Minerals as are hard and friable are called STONES,§. II. Petrifie, Quarry: to which EARTHY CONCRETIONS may be annexed by way of affinity, being more soft and brittle, and of a middle nature betwixt Stones and Metals. Stones may be distinguished into such as are VULGAR, and of no price. I. MIDDLE-prized. II. PRECIOUS; either LESS TRANSPARENT. III. MORE TRANSPARENT. IV. Earthy Concretions are either DISSOLVIBLE. V. NOT DISSOLVIBLE. VI. I. VULGAR STONES, or such as are of little or no price, are distin∣guishable from their different Magnitudes, Uses, Consistences,I. VULGAR STONES. into the Greater Magnitudes of Stone; used either about Buildings; whether of Walls; chiefly, being of a Softer consistence; ‖ whether natural, or factitious. 1. FREE-STONE. BRICK. Harder consistence; not easily yielding to the Tool of the Work∣man, growing ‖ either in Greater masses; 2. RAGG. Lesser masses; whether such as are for their figure More knobbed and unequal; used for the striking of fire, ‖ ei∣ther the more common which is less heavy, or the less common which is more heavy, as having something in it of a metalline mixture. 3. FLINT. MARCHASITE, Fire-stone. More round and even; 4. PIBBLE, Thunderbolt. Roof or Pavement; being of a laminated figure, ‖ either natural, or factitious. 5. SLATE. TILE. Metals, either for the Sharpning or trying of them. 6. WHET-STONE. TOUCH-STONE. Polishing or cutting of them; ‖ being either of a more spungy and soft, or of a more hard consistence. 7. PUMICE. EMRY. Lesser Magnitudes; ‖ either more, or less minute. 8. SAND, Grit. GRAVEL.
II. MIDDLE PRIZED STONES.II. MIDDLE-PRIZED STONES are either of a Shining Politure, or capable of it; whether of a Simple white colour, and more soft consistence. 1. ALABASTER. Sometime white, sometime black or green, and sometime variegated with veins; growing in ‖ greater, or lesser Masses. 2. MARBLE, Porphyrie. AGAT. Spotted; ‖ with Red upon a Greenish colour, or with spots of Gold-colour upon Blew. 3. JASPIS, Heliotrope. LAZUL, Azure-stone. Transparency: either Brittle; ‖ whether natural, or factitious. 4. CRYSTAL-ine. GLASS, Vitrifie. Fissil, into Flakes, ‖ either greater, or lesser. 5. SELENITE, Muscovia glass, Isingglass, Sparr. TALC. Relation to Metals; ‖ attracting of Iron, or making of Brass. 6. LOAD-STONE, Magnet-ical, Compass. CADMIA, Calaminaris. Incombustible nature. 7. AMIANTUS, Asbestus. Strange Original; not being properly Minerals, though usually rec∣koned amongst them; but either a sub-marine Plant; or supposed to proceed from a liquid Bitumen. 8. CORAL-ine. AMBER. There are several other kinds of Stony Consistences mentioned in the Authors who write de Lapidibus. Some that are found in the Bodies of Animals, their Stomachs, Guts, Bladders, Kidneys, &c. several of which are denominated from the Animals in which they are found; as Alectorius, Chelidonius, Bezoar, &c. Others have peculiar names from their shapes; as Astroides, Glossopetra, &c. Others made of Animals or parts of Animals petrified, which may be sufficiently expressed, without being particularly provided for in the Tables.
III. PRECIOUS STONES, Gemms, Iewels, are such as,III. PRECI∣OUS STONES LESS TRANSPA∣RENT. for their rarity and beauty, are every where more esteemed: amongst which some are LESS TRANSPARENT, which are distinguishable chiefly by their Colours: either Representing variety of Colours with dimness, ‖ less, or more. 1. OPAL. CATS-EYES. Of particular Colours. Whitish and shining; though this be not properly a Mineral, but a part of a testaceous Fish. 2. PEARL. Red. 3. SARDIUS, Cornelian, Bloud-stone. Pale Fleshy colour, like that of a man's nail. 4. ONYX. Blewish. 5. TURCOIS. Pale Purple. 6. CHALCEDONY. As for that which is commonly styled a Toadstone; this is properly a tooth of the Fish called Lupus marinus, as hath been made evident to the Royal Society by that Learned and inquisitive person Dr Merit. IV. MORE TRANSPARENT Gemms;IV. PRECI∣OUS STONES MORE TRANSPA∣RENT. may be distinguished into such as are either Colourless: ‖ either most hard and bright; or that which is very like to this in other respects, but onely less hard and bright. 1. DIAMOND, Adamant. SAPHIRE WHITE. Coloured; to be ranged according to the order of the colours in the Rainbow. Red; of a lustre ‖ greater, or less. 2. RUBY, Carbuncle. RANATE. Yellow▪ whether paler, or deeper. 3. CHRYSOLITE. TOPAZ. Green; ‖ either most bright and pleasant, or of a darker kind of Sea-green. 4. EMERALD, Smaragd. BERYL. Blewish. 5. SAPHIRE. Purple or Violaceous; more inclining ‖ to Blew, or to Yellow. 6. AMETHYST. HYACINTH.
V. EARTHY CONCRETI∣ONS DIS∣SOLVIBLE.V. Such EARTHY CONCRETIONS as commonly grow in Mines, together with such other factitious Substances as have some analo∣gy to these, and are DISSOLVIBLE by Fire or Water, may be distin∣guished by their being Not inflammable: More simple; being several kinds of Salt, ‖ whether of the Sea-water, the most necessary Condiment for Meat; or of the Air, used as a chief ingredient in the making of Gunpowder. 1. SALT, Brine. NITRE, Salt-peter. Earth; ‖ of a styptic quality and abstersive, proper for the drying of Wounds, commonly boiled up into a consistence from a mine∣ral water; or that other kind of Earthy Salt dug up in great lumps. 2. ALUME. SAL GEMMAE. Metals of all kinds, sometimes called Sugars and Crystals; but a∣greeing in the common nature with that which is styled 3. VITRIOL, Chalchanthus, Copperas. Vegetables; made ‖ either by fermentation, or by burning. 4. TARTAR. ALCALI. Animal Substances, made by Distillation, called 5. URINOUS SALT. More mixed of other Salts; ‖ more volatile, or fixed. 6. SAL AMMONIAC. CHRYSOCOLLA, Borax. Inflammable; of a more Dry consistence, and Yellowish colour. 7. SULPHUR, Brimstone. Clammy and tenacious consistence Not sweet-sented; ‖ more solid, or more liquid. 8. BITUMEN-inous. NAPHTHA. Sweet-sented. 9. AMBERGRIS, VI. EARTHY CONCRE∣TIONS NOT DISSOLVI∣BLE.VI. EARTHY CONCRETIONS NOT DISSOLVIBLE may be distinguished by their various Colours; being either White and soft according to degrees, ‖ more, or less. 1. CHALK. MARLE. Yellowish red, whether more yellow, or more red 2. OKER, Yellow oker. RED OKER, Ruddie. Black; of a finer or courser grain. 3. JETT. PIT-COAL, Sea-coal. Gold-colour, of a poisonous nature, ‖ either as it is dug out of the Earth, or as it is sublimed. 4. ORPIMENT, Auripigmentum. ARSENIC, Rats-bane. Reddish; often found in the same Mines with Orpiment. 5. SANDARACH.
OF METALS. METAL is a Mineral, for the most part, of a hard consistence, close, ductil, and fusil:§. III. It is distinguishable into Perfect▪ NATURAL. I. FACTITIOUS. II. Imperfect, with reference to METALLINE KINDS. III. RECREMENTITIOUS PARTS. IV. I. By NATURAL METALS are meant such as of themselves grow in the Earth, without any kind of mixture, or other help by the Art of men.I. NATU∣RAL ME∣TALS. These are either More rare and precious; of a Yellowish colour, most heavy, not growing in any particular Mines, where 'tis imbased with any drossy mixture: but found pure, either in small sands, or rocky branches. 1. GOLD, Gilt, Or. Whitish, and next in value to Gold, not subject to rust, and of a plea∣sant sound. 2. SILVER, Argent. Of a middle value; of a Whitish colour, and more soft consistence. 3. TINN, Stannery. Reddish colour, the first material of Mony. 4. COPPER. Most base and common: Of a softer consistence, and a darkish colour, not sonorous. 5. LEAD, Plummer. Of a harder consistence, being the common matter for Weapons and Tools. 6. IRON. II. By FACTITIOUS METALS are meant such as are made by the Art of men.II. FACTI∣TIOUS METALS. These may be distinguished into such as are made of Copper and Lapis calaminaris. 1. BRASS, Brasier. Tinn, Lead, and Tin-glass. 2. PEWTER-er. Iron depurated by frequent heating, and beating, and boiling with Salts. 3. STEEL.
III. IMPERFECT kinds of METAL, are either Fluid. 1. MERCURY, Quick-silver. Solid and consistent; used for Purging, and chiefly for Vomiting. 2. ANTIMONY-al. Making of Pewter, being of shining brittle substance. 3. BISMUTE, Tin glass. Making of Soder, being like Tinn, but more hard and brittle. 4. SPELTER, Zink, Spalt. Painting; ‖ considered according to its natural state, being the Oar of Quick-silver, and of a Dark red: or else as it is prepared by grinding, which renders it of a Bright red. 5. CINNABAR, Rudle. VERMILION. Writing; not known to the Ancients, and therefore without any Latin or Greek name. 6. BLACK-LEAD. IV. RECREMENTITIOUS PARTS OF METAL, are such as are cast off; either in the Preparation of them, by Melting; being of parts More large and united; a kind of scum arising from the separation of impurer mixtures in the fusion of Metals, chiefly in the pur∣ging of Silver from Lead. 1. LITHARGE. More minute and separate; being a concretion of the lesser parts of Copper, which fly out when that Metal is in fusion; ‖ either the heavier parts, which by their gravity descend to the floor: or the more light and volatile parts, which adhere to the roof or walls. 2. SPODIUM. POMPHOLYX. Beating or hammering. 3. SCORIA, Scales. Corruption of them; according to the General name. 4. RUST, Canker. Particular kinds; proceeding either of Copper and Brass, or of Lead. 5. VERDIGREECE, Aerugo. CERUSE, White lead.
CHAP. IV. I. Of Plants, The difficulty of enumerating and describing these. II. The more general distribution of them. III. Of Herbs considered accor∣ding to their Leaves. IV. Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers. V. Of Herbs considered according to their Seed-vessels. VI. Of Shrubs. VII. Of Trees. THe more perfect kind of Vegetables are called by the name of Plants,§. I. the several kinds of which are so exceeding numerous, as must needs render it a very difficult task for any man who is most versed in the study of them, either to enumerate them so fully or to order them so acu∣rately, as will not be liable to many exceptions; especially considering the streining and force that must sometimes be used, to make things com∣ply with the institution of these tables into which they are to be re∣duced. Gaspar Bauhinus doth in his Pinax reckon up about six thousand seve∣ral plants, the particular names of which do amount to almost twice the number of words here intended for the whole body of language. And there is reason enough to believe, that there are many more besides those he mentions, since we find by daily experience, in sowing the seeds of Flowers and of Trees, and the different wayes of culture used about them, that new kinds of Flowers and of Fruits are continually produ∣ced, such as were not before described by any Author, and such as do afterwards propagate their kinds; insomuch that it may well be doubted whether there be any determinate number of these subordinate Species. I design in these following tables to take notice only of the chief fa∣milies of Plants, to which the others are to be reduced. In the descripti∣ons of which, there will be no small difficulty, by reason of their great number, and the want of proper words to express the more minute dif∣ferences betwixt them, in respect of shape, colour, tast, smell, &c. to which instituted languages have not assigned particular names. I men∣tion this by way of Apology for the several defects, which I am sensible of in the following tables. In the description of those Plants which are heads of numerous fami∣lies, I take notice only of that Communis ratio, which belongs to all the subordinate varieties of them, unless it be when there is no such common agreement belonging to them all: or where several things are reduced under the same head, some for their agreement in one Accident, and o∣thers for their agreement in some other Accident; in which cases the de∣scriptions here mentioned, are to be understood of the chief and most common Plants of that name. As for the various particulars contained under each family, as suppose Tulips, Roses, Apples, Pears, Plums, &c. These need not be particularly provided for, both because the just number of them is not yet stated, every year producing new ones: And because they may as well be expressed Periphrastically here as in all other Languages; either by their
Seasons; whether Early or Late, Vernal, Autumnal, Hyemal. Lastingness; being either Annual or Perennial. Bigness or Littleness, Talness or Lowness. Manner of growth; whether Erect, Trailing, Creeping, Climbing, Twisting. Place of growth; either Terrestrial, Hilly, Sandy, Stony, Clay▪ &c. Aquatic, belonging either to Sea or Rivers, Marish, Moorish, Fenny grounds. Several parts; whether in respect of the Root; being either Fibrous, of bigger or lesser strings, more or less numerous, spreading sidewise or tending more directly down∣wards: Or Bulbous, of one single bulb or several, whether Ob∣round, Compressed, Oblong, Coated or Scaly: Or Tuberous, having its thicker parts contiguous, or hanging more at a distance by small strings. Stemm or stalk; whether Solid or Hollow, Smooth or Rugged, Round or Angular, Knotted or Jointed more or less frequently, being free from leaves, or having leaves. Leaves; whether as to their Superficies; being Smooth, Unctuous, Shining, Rough, Prickly, Hairy, Woolly, &c. Shape and figure; Round Angular, Broad Narrow, Long Short, of smooth or of indented, jagged, waved, curled edges, being either sharp or round pointed. Substance or Bulk; Thick Succulent, or Thin Dry, being inter∣spersed with nerves either direct or transverse. Colour; whether the same on both sides or different, clear or spotted, of a brighter or darker green. Number; One, Two, Three, &c. Manner of growth; whether singly, or in pairs opposite to each other: or having more then two encompassing the stalk, Win∣ged, Fingered, &c. Flowers; as to their Shapes; consisting of one single undivided leaf, either divided at the edge or not: or having several leaves, three, four, five or more. Colour; whether simple, as Red, Yellow, Purple, &c. or Mixed, Striped, Speckled, Edged. Number; Bearing either One or Many, and these either single or double. Manner of growth; whether of single flowers, being Erect, Hang∣ing, Reversed, &c. or of several flowers, Verticillate, Spicate, Umbelliferous. Seed-vessels; whether Oblong, Closed or Open, Round, Hollow▪ So∣lid, Smooth, Rugged, Prickly, Scaly, conteining few or many seeds. Seeds themselves; Round, square, flat, oblong, downy, &c. smooth, Echinate, black, white, shining, &c. Fruits; Apples, Berries, &c. Iuice; Waterish, Gummy, Milky, Yellow.
To all which may be added their different smells and tasts, and the several uses they are commonly applyed unto; by some of which Acci∣dents all other Plants may be sufficiently described. I had formerly distributed the kinds of Herbs, according to those se∣veral ends and purposes for which they are commonly used, into these three heads; 1. Such as are for pleasure, being usually cherished in Gardens, for their flowers, or beauty, or sweet sent. 2. Such as are Alimentary, being used by men for food, either in respect of their Roots, their Leaves or Stalks, their Fruit or their Seed. 3. Such as are Medici∣nal, being either Hot and biting, or Cold and Stupefying, Purgative, Al∣terative, Vulnerary. But upon further consideration I am satisfied, that though these heads may seem more facil and vulgar; yet are they not so truly Philosophical, but depend too much upon the Opinions and customs of several times and Countries. As for the usual distinction betwixt Shrubbs and Trees▪ it doth not seem (at least so farr as these things have been hitherto described) to have any such distinct limits in nature, as were to be desired, and as is to be found betwixt other things, there being several under each head, which seem to be of a doubtful condition. Some that are reckoned for Shrubbs, which have a fair pretence to be placed amongst Trees: and others ac∣counted Trees, which without any injury might be reduced to the Genus of Shrubbs. I do in the following tables comply with that opinion, which seems most common and probable. The reason why the two last differences of Trees, is not from their fruit (as the others are) but from their Woods and Rines, or from their Rosins and Gumms, is because these are the only things that we yet know of them, their natures in other respects being not yet (for ought I know) described by any Authors. As for any new species of Plants that shall hereafter be discovered, 'tis probable they may by analogie be reduced either to some of the fami∣lies here mentioned, or at least to some of the Tribes. I have added to the several species of Plants and Animals, their Latin names in the Margin, because many of them are as well, if not better, known by such compellations; and because they are most frequently treated of by the Authors who write in that Language. Plants may be distinguished into such as are more§. II. Minute and tender, called Herbs, to be considered according to their Leaves. Flowers. Seed-vessels. Large and hard being wooddy plants, whether the Lesser, which commonly grow up from the root in several stemms called Shrubbs. Larger, which of themselves do grow up in one single stemm, called Trees.
§. III,HERBS CONSIDERED ACCORDING TO THEIR LEAVES, may be distinguished into such as are Imperfect; which either do want, or seem to want some of the more es∣sential parts of Plants, viz. either Root, Stalk or Seed. I. Perfect; having all the essential parts belonging to a Plant, to be distin∣guished by the Fashion of the leaf; whether Long; as all Gramineous herbs, having a long narrow leaf without any foot-stalk. Not flowring; (i.) not having any foliaceous flower. FRUMENTACEOUS; Such whose seed is used by men for food, either Bread, Pudding, Broth, or Drink. II. NOT FRUMENTACEOUS; III. Flowring; Being of BULBOUS ROOTS; Having no fibers from the side, but only from the Bottom or the Top; whose leaves are more thick, undivided, smooth-edged, and generally deciduous. IV. AFFINITY TO BULBOUS ROOTS; V. ROUND; VI. Texture of the Leaf; being either NERVOUS; having several prominent Fibers. VII. SUCCULENT; having thick juicie leaves, covered with a close membrane, through which the moisture cannot easily transpire, which makes them continue in dry places. VIII. SUPERFICIES of the Leaf, or MANNER of Growing. IX. I. IMPER∣FECT HERBS.I. IMPERFECT HERBS may be distinguished into Terrestrial; whether Most imperfect; which seem to be of a spontaneous generation. Having no leaf, With a Stemm and Head; the Greater or the Less. The later of which hath by Mr. Hook been first discovered to consist of small stemms with little balls at the top, which flitter out when ripe. 1. Fungus. Mucor.MUSHROOM, Toadstool, Fungus, Touchwood, Spunke. MOULD, Horiness, Vinnewd. Without a Stem, of a roundish figure ‖ growing either in the ground, being esculent, & counted a great delicate: or on the ground▪ being (when dry) full of an unsavory hurtful dust. 2. Tuber. Fungus plve∣rulentus.TRUBS, Trufle. FUZBALL, Puchfist. Having a leaf; being generally deeper then other plants and curled, growing in such barren places where no other plants will thrive, ‖ either that which grows, both on the ground, and on walls and trees, of which there are great varieties: or that which grows only in moist grounds and shady places. 3. MOSS. Moschus. Lichen.LIVER WORT. Less Imperfect; being counted Insoecund, whose seed and flower (if there be any) is scarce discernable, commonly called Capillary Plants, whether such as Have several leaves; Divided; Doubly; or subdivided, Greater; of a brighter or a darker green, the latter being less and more finely cut. 4. FEARN, Brake. Filix. Diyopteris.OAK-FEARN. Lesser; either that which grows commonly on walls and dry pla∣ces,
somewhat resembling Rue both in the colour and figure of the leaf: or that which grows in moist shady places, having small slender black stalks. 5. WHITE MAIDENHAIR, Wall-rue,Adianthum album. Capillus Vene∣ris. Tentwort BLACK MAIDENHAIR. Singly; or not subdivided, Greater; of a broader leaf, and purgative root: or of a narrower and longer leaf. 6. POLYPODI. ROUGH SPLEENWORT.Polypodium. Lonchitis. Lesser; either that which hath a black stalk and winged leaves like those of a Vetch: or that which hath a thicker shorter leaf, not divided to the middle ribb. 7. ENGLISH BLACK MAIDENHAIR.Trichemas. Asplenium. SPLEENWORT, Miltwast. Vndivided; either that whose leaves are somewhat broader towards the bottom, where they encompass the stalk like a half moon: Or that whose leaf is more equal. 8. MULE FEARN. HARTSTONGUE.Hemionitis. Phyllitis. Have but one leaf; either that whose leaf is like the others of this tribe, with a tuft of very small flowers: or that which hath an undivi∣ded succulent leaf, with a small spike standing off from it. 9. MOON WORT.Lunaria. Ophioglossum. ADDERS TONGUE. Aquatic; belonging to Fresh water; either that which consists of small round leaves, floting on the top or immersed in the water, having little strings shooting down from them: Or that which consists of long small slmy fila∣ments, resembling green raw silk. 10▪ DUCKWEED.Lens palustris. Conferva. HAIRY RIVER WEED. Salt water; being either of a Softer consistence; having some resemblance to Mushrooms; either the Greater, being more round and thick, with pores every way: or the Less, having long slender stalks with round leaves growing at the top of them. 11. SPUNGE.Spongia. Androsace. SEA NAVELWORT. Moss, or ground Liverwort, having green curled leaves spreading on the ground. 12. SEA-LETTICE.Lactuca ma∣rina. Mushrooms and Moss; either that which is flat and roundish, hard and tough, with several lines parallel to the circumference: or that whose leaves grow out of one another without any stemm. 13. SEA-EAR.Auris marina. Opuntia ma∣rina. ROUND LEAVED OYSTER WEED. Capillary Plants; having a soft membranaceous tough leaf, growing commonly upon Stones and Rocks in the Sea. 14. WRACK.Alga. Harder consistence; being tough, with many filres or ribbs elegantly distributed somewhat like the Mashes of a Net, growing to a great bredth.Corallina ma∣rina Reticu∣lata. 15. SEA FANN.
II. GRAMI∣NEOUS FRUMEN∣TACEOUS HERBS.II. GRAMINEOUS FRUMENTACEOUS HERBS, may be di∣stinguished into such, whose seeds are Greater; being covered either with a Thin membrane; without any husk adhering, of a figure. Oblong; either that of a more turgid grain and brighter colour, every seed in the ear being covered with three loose husks: Or that which bears a more black, lank, oblong seed, having always a beard adhering to the husk of each grain in the growth. 1. Triticum. Secale.WHEAT. RY. Roundish and somewhat compressed; being the biggest of this tribe, the ears growing out of the sides of the stalk, the top of it ha∣ving a chaffy panicle without any seed. 2. Frumentum Indicum.MAIZE, Indian-wheat. Husk; growing in a Spike; either that whose grains in the growth of them are bearded, their husks adhering close to them, being the lowest: Or that whose grains are more turgid and round, growing at a greater di∣stance in a kind of compounded ear, which seems to consist of se∣veral lesser spikes. 3. BARLY, Malt. Hordeum. Oriza.RICE. Panicle; or dispersed tuft, at a distance from each other, upon long weak-stemms, not above two together, hanging down. 4. Avena.OAT. Lesser; growing either in a Spike; or ear, having short beards, the grain being of a yellowish colour. 5. Panicum.PANIC. Panicle or tuft; having a roundish shining seed, ‖ either that which is a more tall large Plant, whose panicle stands upright: or that which is a less Plant, whose panicle hangs down. 6. Sorgum. Milium.INDIAN MILLET. MILLET.
III. GRAMINEOUS PLANTS NOT used by men FOR FOOD,III GRAMI∣NEOUS PLANTS NOT USED BY MEN FOR FOOD. may be distributed into such as are More properly called Grasses; (i.) such as have a hollow jointed, and not branched stalk, and a tamineous floer, whether such as are Spicate; considerable for the Largeness of the seed; being nearest to those of the frumentaceous kind; either ‖ that of a short spike, squamous and shining seed: or that resmbling Panic. 1. CANARY-GRASS.Phalaris. Gra. Pance∣um. PANIC-GRASS. Figure of the spike; whether Full, compact and round; either that whose spike is more soft and downy, resembling a fox-tail: or that which is like this but more rough. 2. FOX-TAIL.Alopecuros. Gr. Typhinum. CATS-TAIL. Not full, but lank; resembling either Wheat; 3. WHEAT-GRASS.Gr. Triticeum. Ry; either ‖ the greater used for the making of frails: or the lesser. 4. MATWEED.Spartum. Gr. Hordeace∣um. WILD BARLY. Not compact, but loose, in which the parts are not close set together; ‖ ether that whose spike is more flat and long, the seeds growing only on two ides alternately, having an inebriating quality: or that whose spike hath some resemblance to wheat, the plant being apt to spread it self by the root. 5 DARNELL, Tares.Lolium. Gr. Caninum. DOGS-GRASS, Quitch, Couch. Not round; but having the husks inclining one way, being divided into many parts, each whereof resembles the comb of a Cock. 6. CRSTED-GRASS.Gr. Cristatum. Paniculate; considerable for the Largeness of the Leaves; having jointed stalks; either ‖ that whose stalks is commonly bigger and taller then other Grasses: or that which bears a large perforate shining seed of an ash colour. 7. REED.Arundo. Lachrimae Iob JOB'S-TEARS. Figure of the Panicle; comprehending such kind of plants as are Less common; whether such as have Some resemblance to the panicle of Oats, or to the claws of a bird. 8. OAT-GRASS.Gr. Avenace∣um. Dactyloides. FINGER-GRASS. Many squamous shining hollow heads hanging upon slender stalks: or having hairy leaves, with long woolly strings on the sides of them, the seed being conteined in a close seed-vessel. 9. PEARL-GRASS, Quaking-grass. HAIRY-GRASS.Gr. tremulum. Gr. hirsutum. Most common; both in Pastures and Meadows, yielding the best food for Cattel, both when growing, and when made into hay. 10. MEADOW-GRASS. Less properly called Grasses; considerable either for the Sent of the plant being sweet; either that which grows in watery places,Gr. pratense paniculatum. having a leaf like a flag, bearing a Iulus hard and close: or that whose stalks have a spongy pith, bearing flowers like those of Reeds. 11. SWEET SMELLING REED. CAMELS HAY.Calamus Aro∣maticus, Schoenanthus, Stalk; being Lesser; either that which is triangular: or that which is round, being full of a spongy pith 12. GALINGAL. RUSH.Cyperus. Iuncus. Greater; of a woody substance, porous, used for walking staves. 13. CANE. Head or spike;Canna. whether more Loose; having a soft downy substance; ‖ either on each side of the spike, making it to re∣semble a feather: or intermixed with the panicle. 14. FEATHER GRASS. COTTON GRASS.Gr. plumosum. Gr. tomento∣sum. Close; whether Greater; either that which hath a round cylindrical head, being a tall plant, whose spke is blackish and soft like velvet; or that which bears several spherical burrs. 15. REED MACE. BURR REED.Typha. Sparganium. Lesser; having a naked stalk, bearing a small spike resembling the tail of a Mouse. 16. MOUSE-TAIL.Myosuros.
IV. GRAMI∣NEOUS HERBS of BULBOUS ROOTS.IV GRAMINEOUS HERBS of BULBOUS ROOTS, may be distinguished into such as are considerable for their Flowers; which are generally made up of six leaves, or divided into six lascinia: either these whose fibres grow from the Bottom of the bulb; having the Roots Scaly; divided into many squamous laminae. The Greater; whose root hath a strong sent like that of a Fox, the flowers hanging down round the top of the stalk, with a tuft of green leaves above them. 1. CROWN IMPERIAL. Corona Impe∣rialisThe Lesser; having the stalk set with leaves, ‖ either that whose flower is more large and hollow: or that whose flowers are smaller, having the leaves reversed backwards. 2. Llium. Martagon.LILLY. MARTAGON, Turks-cap. Coated; made up of several coats encompassing one another. Bearing the flower upon a stem; to be further distinguished by the Shape of the flower; whether Large and Hollow; resembling a cup, ‖ either that which doth generally bear but one flower upon a stalk, standing upright, having an esculent root: or that which doth sometime bear two flowers upon a stalk, with checkered streaks, hanging down their heads, the root consisting of two lobes. 3. Tulipa. Fritiliaria.TULIP. FRITILLARY. Having a cup in the middle of the flower, which comes out of a skinny husk: or that which hath many small flowers together upon the same stalk. 4. Narcissus. Hyacinthus.DAFFODILL. HYACINTH. Colour of the flower; being generally white and marked with green, ‖ either that with a starr-like flower, marked with a streak of green on the back of the leaf: or that which hath a hanging pendulous flower, whose leaves are tipt with green. 5. Ornithogalum. Viola bulbosa.STARR OF BETHLEHEM. BULBOUS VIOLET, Snow-drop. Figure of the leaf; resembling the blade of a sword, ‖ either that which bears a Flower de luce, having nine leaves, three of which stand up: or that whose flow∣ers grow in a row under one another. 6. Iris bulbosa. Gladiolus si∣getum.BULBOUS IRIS, Flower de luce. CORNFLAGG. Having naked flowers, without any stem; whether that of a larger flower and broader leaf: or that of a lesser flower and narrower leaf. 7. MDOW SAFFRON, Naked Lady. Colchicum. Crocus.CROCUS, Saffron. Top of the Bulb; whose root doth usually consist of two bulbs, the flowers growing in a kind of spike, of great variety of colours and shapes. 8. Ochs.ORCHIS, Satyrion. Strong sent; whether such whose leaves are more. Long; their sent being Less strong; the Greater; whose roots grow single, ‖ either that with hollow tubulous leaves, the stlk swelling out in the middle: or that of a broader leaf, rising higher in the stalk and continuing green all winter. 9. ONYON. Cpa. Porrum.LEEK. Lesser; whose roots grow commonly in clusters, ‖ either that which bears no seed: or that which doth bear seed, having very small tubulous leaves. 10. Ascalonitis. Porrum sectile.SHALOT, Echalole. CIVES. More strong; either that whose root is divided into Cloves: or that of an entire root, and in some esteem for the flower. 11. Allium sati∣vum. Moly.GARLICK. MOLY. Broad; having the root either Allium Vrsi∣num. Victorialis on∣ga.Oblong and small▪ either that which is lower with an Vmbell of large flowers: or that which is taller, having a round head. 12. RAMSON. MOUNTAIN RAMSON. Round and great; growing upon the Sea-coasts. 13. Scylla.SQUILL, Sea-onyon.
V. HERBS OF AFFINITY TO BULBOUS PLANTS,V. HERBS OF AFFI∣NITY TO BULBOUS PLANTS. upon account of their leaves or flowers, may be distinguished into such as are either Esteemed for their flowers; growing in Dryer places; whether such Plants as are more properly Europaean; whose flowers are Lesser; bearing 1. Many flowers; Starr-like, ‖ either that of a Tuberous root, whose flowers grow in a spike: or that of a Fibrous root. 1. KINGS SPEAR. SPIDER WORT.Asphodelus. Phalangium. One single flower; hanging the head, having a tuberous root, bearing two long spotted leaves. 2. DOGSTOOTH. Larger; of a tuberous root,Dens caninus▪ ‖ either that of a fading flower re∣sembling a Lilly: or that whose leaf is like the blade of a sword. 3. DAY-LILLY. TUBEROUS FLOWER DE LUCE.Liliasphodelus▪ Iris tuberosa. American; of a tuberous root, ‖ whose flowers are either Less sweet; either that of broad leaves, bearing a scarlet flower like that of Corn-flagg, with a geniculate stalk: or that which hath long thick dry leaves, sharp pointed, growing immediately from the root, bearing a stem of large flowers, hanging down their heads. 4. FLOWRING REED. JUCCA, Indian bread.Canna Indica. Iucca. More sweet; growing in a spike, resembling the flowers of a Hyacinth. 5. INDIAN HYACINTH.Hyacinthus. Inditu e∣rosu. Watery places; the flowers coming forth in an Umbell, being of a pur∣plish colour, having six leaves; the leaves of the Plant being long and triangular. 6. FLOWRING RUSH.Iuncus flori∣dus. Not esteemed for their flowers; being distinguishable by their Having no perfect leaves; but some little scaly substances resembling leaves, whether of Fibrous roots; matted together, resembling a birds nest. 7. BIRDS NEST.Nidus avis▪ Scaly roots; with little protuberances somewhat resembling teeth, ‖ ei∣ther that whose root is more Round or more Branched. 8. BROOMRAPE. TOOTHWORT.Orobanche. Dentaria aphyllos. Having a naked stile or pestle instead of a flower, whether the Greater; of a Tuberous root, ‖ either that which hath a spotted thick stalk like a Snake, with a jagged leaf: or that of a Triangu∣lar undivided leaf. 9. DRAGON.Dracontium, WAKE ROBIN, Cuckoo-pintle.Arum. Lesser; having either Broad or Narrow leaves. 10. BROAD LEAVED FRIARS COWLE.Arisarum la∣tsol. Arisarum an∣gusifol. NARROW LEAVED FRIARS-COWLE.
VI. ROUND LEAVED HERBS.VI. HERBS OF ROUND LEAVES, may be distinguished into such whose leaves are Larger; Terrestrial; Lying on the ground; the flower coming up before the leaf and soon fading, ‖ either that whose leaf is white underneath, of a yellow flower, growing one upon a stalk: or that which hath a spike of purplish flowers, being the larger plant. 1. Tussilag. Petasitis.COLTSFOOT. BUTTERBURR. Standing from the ground; bearing Burrs, the Greater or the Lesser. 2. Bardana ma∣jor. Bardana mi∣nor.GREAT BURDOCK. LITTLE BURDOCK. Growing upon mountainous places; having a purplish flower, and a pappous seed. 3. Caaha.HORSEFOOT, Mountain-Coltsfoot. Aquatic; of smooth shining leaves, ‖ either that whose leaves are of a light green and not serrate: or of a dark green and serrate, bearing yellow flowers. 4. Nympea. Caltha palu∣sris.WATER-LILLY. MARSH-MARIGOLD. Lesser; whose flowers do stand either Singly; on long foot-stalks, growing in Dryer places; distinguishable by the Flower; having a bending head and a short heel, ‖ either that of a bigger leaf and the flower of a more simple colour: or that of a lesser oblong leaf and the flower of several colours. 5. Viola. Herba Trinita∣is.VIOLET. PANSY, Hearts-ease Leaf; being more thick, somewhat resembling Ivy, ‖ either that whose leaves are of a strong purgative quality, the flowers small, of a dirty purple: or that which is esteemed for the flower, having a great tuberous root, the leaf for the most part spotted. 6. Asarum. Cyclane.ASARABACCA. SOWBREAD. Fenny and boggy places; either that of pale yellowish leaves, which feel unctuously, the flower like a Violet: or that which hath a large white flower, the leaves being like those of a Violet, but less. 7. Pinguicula. Gramen Par∣nassi.BUTTERWORT, York-shire Sanicle. GRASS OF PARNASSUS. Many together; Terrestrial; distinguishable by The flowers; growing in a Spike, being white, ‖ either that which is bigger, having green leaves like those of a Pear-tree: or that which is less, with red hairs upon the leaves retaining the Dew, growing in moist places: 8. Pyrola. Ros solis.WINTERGREEN. SUN DEW.
The leaves; Indented; and divided into several Angles, ‖ either that which hath smooth shining leaves and seeds like small burrs: or that whose leaves are somewhat hairy, being of an elegant stru∣cture, bearing yellowish green flowers. 9. SANICLE.Sanicula. Alchymilla. LADIES MANTLE. Scolloped about the edges; ‖ either that which is taller, of a white flower, the root consisting of many small reddish kernels: or that which is lower, of a yellow flower and fibrous root, grow∣ing in moist places. 10. WHITE SAXIFRAGE.Saxifraga alba. Saxifraga aurea. GOLDEN SAXIFRAGE. The manner of growing; whether Creeping on the ground; either that with a hairy leaf, of an ill sent; bearing a blew hooded flower: or that of a small leaf, bearing a yellow flower. 11, GROUND IVY, Alehoof, Tunnhoof.Hedera terre∣stris. Nummularia. MONYWORT, Herb twopence. Climbing; of a hot biting tast, and an elegant flower with a long heel. 12, INDIAN CRESS.Nasturtium. Indicum. Marine; growing in salt places near the Sea, ‖ either that of a salt juicy leaf, bearing a spike of small white flowers: or that which hath a large bell flower, the plant running upon the ground, being Purgative. 13. SCURVY-GRASS.Cochlearia. Soldanella, SEA-BINDWEED.
VII. HERBS OF NER∣VOUS LEAVES.VII. HERBS OF NERVOUS LEAVES, may be distributed into such as are Terrestrial; growing in dryer places, which are distinguishable accor∣ding to the Fashion of their leaves; whether More broad; to be further considered according to their Manner of growth; having Leavy stalks; viz. the leaves embracing the stalk, ‖ either that which hath pleited leaves, whose root is a vehement purgative: or that other, having a spike of flowers like those of Orchis. 1. Helleborus al∣bus. Helleborine.WHITE HELLEBORE, Neezwort. HELLEBORINE, Bastard white Hellebore. Naked stalks; and flowers in a spike, ‖ either that whose leaves are undivided: or that whose leaves are so divided into jaggs, as to represent a Staggs horn. 2. Plantago. Coronopus.PLANTAIN. BUCKSHORN. Colour of the leaves; whether that whose leaves are of a dark green above and ash-coloured underneath, bearing a spike of flow∣ers: or that whose leaves are of a paler green, bearing the flow∣ers in a kind of Vmbel. 3. Bistorta. Saponaria.SNAKEWEED, Bistort. SOPEWORT. More narrow; either that whose spike is round and more long: or that whose spike is more short, conteining seeds resembling fleas. 4. Holosicum. Psyllium.SEA-PLANTAIN. FLEAWORT. Number of their leaves; either that which hath only one leaf: or that which hath only two leaves. 5. Monophylion. Bitolium.ONE-BLADE. TWAY-BLADE. Flower; of one leaf, whether Greater; in the fashion of a Bell, the plant having a bitter tast, ‖ ei∣ther the Taller and larger: or the Lower and smaller. 6. Gentiana. Gentianella.GENTIAN, Fellwort. DWARF-GENTIAN. Lesser; having small one leaved flowers, hanging down their heads and bearing berries; ‖ either the Higher or the Lower. 7. Sigillum Salo∣monis. Lilium conval∣lium.SOLOMONS-SEAL. LILLY OF THE VALLEY. Aquatic; growing in the water, bearing spikes of flowers from the joynts of the stalk; ‖ either that of smooth edged leaves: or that whose leaves are either curled or waved about the edges. 8 Potamogeiton. Tribulus a∣quaticus.PONDWEED. WATER-CALTROPE.
VIII. SUCCULENT HERBS may be distributed into such as are Biggest, either that whose leaf is more broad and not indented:VIII. SUC∣CULENT HERBS. or that whose leaf is long, sharp and indented. 1. HOUSELEEK, Sengreen.Sedum majus. Aloe. ALOE. Lesser; Terrestrial; considerable for having Broad and commonly crenated leaves, a round stalk, the flowers growing in the fashion of an Umbell, ‖ either that whose leaves are more blunt pointed: or that whose leaves are more sharp pointed, the root having a sent like that of Roses. 2. ORPINE,Telephum. Rhodia radix. ROSEWORT. Round pointed leaves not indented, ‖ either that which is greater, having reddish stalks, bearing yellowish flowers, being esculent: or that which is less, bearing small white flowers of five leaves. 3. PURSLAIN.Portulaca. Cepaa. GARDEN BROOKLIME. White flowers, speckled with red, the leaves serrate, ‖ either that which hath a more round leaf, and larger flower: or that whose leaf is more oblong and flower less. 4. SPOTTED SANICLE.Sanicula gut∣tata. Sedum serra∣tum. INDENTED SENGREEN. Narrow leaves; growing in dry places: the Greater or the Lesser. 5. STONE CROPP.Sedum minus. Illecebra. WALL PEPPER. Small round leaves; the stalk proceeding from the middle or Center of it, bearing a spike of small flowers. 6. NAVELWORT, Wall-pennywort,Vmbilicus Ve∣neris. Marine; growing in salt places, whose leaf is cylindrical, the ashes of it being used in making of Glass. 7. GLASSWORT.Cali.
IX. HERBS considered according to their SU∣PERFICIES, or MAN∣NER OF GROWING.IX, HERBS considered according to the SUPERFICIES of their Leaves, or their MANNER OF GROWING, may be distinguished in∣to such as are Rough leaved; whether More rough; having Blew flowers; either ‖ that whose leaves are broader, having black streaked seed: or that whose leaves are longer, the Segments of the flower being not so sharp pointed as the other. 1. Borago. Buglossum.BURRAGE. BUGLOSS. Long narrow leaves; either ‖ that which hath a red root commonly used in Dying: or that which bears larger flowers, which before they are explicated, do turn like a Scorpions tail. 2. Anchusa. Echium.ALKANET. VIPERS BUGLOSS. Less rough; distinguishable by their having Spotted leaves; bearing one entire flower of different colours, viz. White and Purple on the same root: or that whose flower is a round tube, hanging downwards, the leaves embracing the stalk. 3. Pulmonaria. Corinthe.SAGE OF JERUSALEM, Ladies-glove. HONYWORT. Broad leaves, sharp pointed, being large plants; either ‖ that whose flower is long, hollow, and of one leaf, divided into five segments: or that which is of an offensive sent, the flower of a dirty red, the flower succeeded by 4 seeds in the shape of little burrs. 4. Symphtum. Cynoglossum.COMFREY. DOGS-TONGUE, Hounds-tongue. Small leaves; either ‖ that whose seed is of an ash colour, hard and shi∣ning, like a polished stone: or that the spike of whose flowers is crooked and supposed to turn towards the Sun. 5. Lithospermum. Heliotropium.GRUMMELL. HELIOTROPE. Stellate; so stiled from the manner of the growth of their leaves, which encompass the stalk at intervals, like the rays of a Starr; distin∣guishable by bearing. Lesser flowers; Erect; having slender long leaves; of Solid stalks; either ‖ the taller bearing red berries, the shoots of wch are used for food: or the lower of an ill sent, bearing yellow flow∣ers, used in some places to coagulate Milk. 6. Asparagus. Gallium.ASPARAGUS. LADIES-BEDSTRAW, Cheeserunning. Hollow stalks; jointed without any leavy flowers, either ‖that whose leaves are like bristles: or that whose leaves are branched like the horns of a Stagg. 7. Equis tum Millefolium cornutum aquaticum.HORSE-TAIL. HORNED WATER-MILFOIL. Ramping; of Broader leaves; either ‖ that which hath a red root used for Dying: or that whose leaf is more hairy, having four leaves opposite to one another at a joint, bearing yellow flowers. 8. Rubia inile∣rum. Cruciata.MADDER. CROSSWORT. Narrower leaves; either ‖that which is like Madder: or that common weed, whose stalks and little burrs are apt to stick to a man's clothes. 9. Mllugo.Apar.BASTARD MADDER. GOOSE-GRASS, Cleavers. Larger flowers; growing on the top of the branches; either ‖ that of broader leaves, growing commonly in woods, having a tuft of white four-leaved flowers of a sweet sent: or that of narrower leaves, the flower consisting of five leaves. 10. WOODROF. Ala Spergula.SPURRY.
Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers. HErbs considered according to their flower,§. IV. having no seed-vessel be∣sides the Cup which covers the flower, may be distinguished into STAMINEOUS; whose flower doth consist of threddy Filaments or Stamina, having no leaves besides the Perianthium: or those herbace∣ous leaves encompassing these stamina, which do not wither or fall away before the seed is ripe. I. Foliaceous; which besides the Stamina have leaves, being either of Compound flowers; consisting of many leaves: or a circle of Leaves, and a Thrumm of short stamina, close set together; whether NOT PAPPOUS. II. PAPPOUS, whose seeds do either ly in down: or have some downy parts. III. Simple flowers; which besides a circle or border of leaves, have only some fewer longer stamina more sparsedly set together, like threds or strings, to be distinguished by the manner of the growing of the Flower; into Vmbelliferous; such as grow in the fashion of an Umbel on seve∣ral little stalks, proceeding from the top of a bigger stalk, which all together represent the figure of an inverted Cone, the flowers being the Basis, which have generally two seeds growing together, and a compound leaf, whether of BROADER LEAVES; under which are comprehended all such whose leaves are about the same bredth, or broader then Parsly. IV. FINER LEAVES; under which are comprehended all such, whose leaves are divided into narrower segments then those of Parsley. V. Verticillate; by which those kinds of Plants are meant, whose flowers grow in rundles or whirles about the stalk, being of the shape of a Hood or Helmet; as likewise those whose flow∣ers are of the like shape, namely Galeated, having the like o∣pen seed-vessel, but their leaves growing by pairs, whether FRUTICOSE; having stalks of a hard woody consistence. VI. NOT FRUTICOSE. VII. SPICATE. VIII. SEED; growing MANY TOGETHER IN A Cluster or BUT∣TON. IX.
I. HERBS OF STAMI∣NEOUS FLOWERS.I. HERBS OF STAMINEOUS FLOWERS, and not of grassy leaves, may be distributed into such whose seeds are Triangular; the plants to which they belong being either Perennial; Bigger; having a great leaf not jagged about the edges; ‖ either that whose leaf is more large, and the root used for purging: or that whose leaf is more oblong. 1. Rhabarba∣rum. Lapathum.RUBARB. DOCK. Lesser; having a grateful acidity in the tast of the leaf; ‖ either that whose leaf is oblong: or roundish. 2. Acetosa. Acetosa Ro∣mana.SORREL. FRENCH SORREL. Annual; having leaves. Triangular; and black seed; ‖ either that which is Erect, whose seed is Esculent: or that which is Climbing. 3. BUCK-WHEAT, Brank. Tragopyrum. Convolvulus niger.BLACK BINDWEED. Not Angular; being short and slender, upon week procumbent stalks, full of joynts. 4. Polygonum.KNOT-GRASS. Round; Distinguishable by Sex; of male and female; because from the same seed some plants are produced, which bear flowers and no seeds, and others which bear seeds and no flowers. The bigger; having a divided leaf; ‖ either that which hath a large hollow stalk, and a compound or fingered leaf, of the rine of which Linnen is made: or that which is a climbing Plant twisting about such things as are next to it, from the right hand towards the left, contrary to the manner of other twining Plants, of a rough roundish leaf, divided into many segments, with a head of scaly tufts growing in a cluster or bunch, commonly used to preserve drink from sowring. 5. HEMP, Tow, Canvas. aunabis. Lupulus.HOPP. The Lesser; whose leaves are Shorter; either that which hath smooth leaves and is annual: or that which hath hoary leaves being perennial. 6. MERCURY. Mercurialis. Phyllon.CHILDING MERCURY. Longer; of serrate edges, the root being perennial. 7. Cynocrambe.DOGS MERCURY. Not distinguishable by Sex; but either by their Leaf; being Triangular; considerable for Being of an unctuous touch, and used for Sallets: ‖ either that which hath a bigger and echinate seed: or that which hath a less and smooth seed. 7. Spinachia. Bonus Nenri∣.SPINAGE. ENGLISH MERCURY.
Having a seed vessel made up of two leaves closing together: or having the leaf sinuate about the edges. 9. ORRAGE·Atriplex. Pes Auserinus. GOOS-FOOT. Broad; with smooth edges of a dull insipid tast, with a large long root, the seed-vessel being round, rugged and hard, contein∣ing two or three seeds. 10. BEET.Beta. Narrow and long, having a spicate head; ‖ either that used by Dy∣ers, having undivided leaves, and longer spikes: or that which hath divided leaves, and shorter spikes. 11. DYERS-WEED.Luteola. Reseda. BASE ROCKET. Winged leaves; with a stiffe stalk, growing to a good stature, and bearing Triangular Cods. 12. MEADOW-RUE.Thalictrum. Sent or smell. Pleasant; either that whose leaves resemble those of an Oak, with red veins: or that whose leaves resemble those of Wormwood, bearing the flowers in a long spike, and having a rough seed-vessel. 13. OAK OF HIERUSALEM.Botrys. Ambrosia. OAK OF CAPPADOCIA. Vnpleasant; having a serrate leaf with stinging prickles. 14. NETTLE.Vrtica urens. Seed-vessel; bearing chaffy tufts, ‖ either that which hath a roundish leaf: or that whose leaf is more oblong and pointed. 14. BLITE.Blitum. Amaranthus. PRINCES FEATHER, Amaranthus. Place of Growth; being usually upon walls, having red stalks; and a rough seed. 16. PELLITORY OF THE WALL.Parietaria. Littleness; being the least of this kind; ‖ either that which hath weak stalks, leaning on the ground, with leaves like those of Time but smaller, bearing the seeds in clusters about the joynts: or that which is of a woody stalk, bearing the flowers and seeds at the top of the branches. 17. RUPTUREWORT.Herniaria. Camphorata. STINKING GROUND-PINE.
II. HERBS OF A COM∣POUND FLOWER NOT PAP∣POUS.II. HERBS having a COMPOUND FLOWER NOT PAPPOUS, may be distinguished into such whose flowers are compounded either of Short hollow stamina thick set together in a thrumm, with a circle of leaves: or without such a circle, commonly called Corimbiferous, being either of Vndivided leaves; having a Radiate flower; whose limb is Yellow; either the Greater; and tallest, ‖ either that which is the biggest of flowers: or that which hath a tuberous esculent root. 1. Flos solis. Flos solis Pyra∣midalis.SUN-FLOWER. HIERUSALEM-HARTICHOKE. Lesser; having a crooked seed. 2. MARIGOLD. Caltha.White; either the greater and taller, having a ramous leavy stalk: or the lesser and lower, having a naked stalk. 3. Bellis major. Bellis minor.GREAT DAISY. DAISY. Naked Flower; considerable for having A strong pleasant smell; either that which is the bigger plant, of a broad leaf: or that which is the lesser plant, of more narrow leaves more deeply indented, whose flowers grow in an Um∣bell. 4. Cosius horto∣rum. Ageratum.ALECOST, Costmary. MAUDLIN TANSY. Long hoary leaves; either that which is Odorate, having a yellowish flower, of a dry strawy consistence, preserving the colour for se∣veral years after its being gathered: or that which bears a white flower, the more common sort of which is not Odorate. 5. Stoechas citri∣na. Guaphalium.GOLDEN STAECHAS. CUDWEED, Cottonweed. Divided leaves; having a Radiate flower; whose limb is Yellow; considerable for the leaves; being More finely divided; either that which grows usually amongst Corn: or that which doth commonly grow in mountainous places, having leaves like those of Fennel. 6. Chrysanthe∣mum segetum. Buphthalmum verum.CORN MARIGOLD. OX-EY. Winged leaves; like those of Tansy. 7. Flos Africanus.AFRICAN MARIGOLD. White; whose leaves are More finely divided; either that of a pleasant: or that of an unpleasant sent. 8. Chamaeme∣lum. Cotula faetida.CAMOMIL. STINKING MAYWEED. ess finely divided; being of a strong sent. 9. Malaria.FEAVERFEW.
Vndivided; being long and narrow; ‖ either that whose leaves are indented about the edges: or that whose leaves are smooth, being of a hot tast. 10. SNEEZEWORT. TARRAGON.Ptarmica. Draco hrba. Naked flower; whose stalks are More woody; either that whose leaves are more green: or that whose leaves are generally hoary and white. 11 SOUTHERNWOOD.Abrotanum. mas. Abrotanum foemina. LAVENDER COTTON. Less woody; either that of a bitter tast, and more pleasant smell: or that whose sent is not so pleasant, whose leaves are green above and hoary underneath. 12. WORMWOOD.Absinthium. Artemisia. MUGWORT. Bearing their flowers in the fashion of an Vmbel, having winged leaves, ‖ either that which is of a strong and not unpleasant sent: or that which is less odorate. 13. TANSY.Tanacetum. Millefolium. MILFOIL. Oblong tubulous leaves; the Greater; bearing many flowers upon a stalk, ‖ either that whose leaves upon breaking have several little hairy strings, the flower made up of tubulous leaves lasciniated at the top: or that of a more globular flower, the root seeming to have a piece bitten off. 14. SCABIOUSScabiosa. Morsus Dia∣boli. DIVELS BIT. Lesser; bearing but one flower upon a stalk, like that of Scabious, ‖ either that of a round blew flower, having a leaf like that of the lesser daisy: or that of grassy leaves and a naked stalk 15 BLEW DAISY.Globularia. Caryophyllus marinus. THRIFT, Sea Gilly-flower. Oblong flat leaves; without any thrumm in the middle, bearing blew flowers, ‖ either that which is smaller and annual: or that which is larger and perennial. 16. ENDIVE.Endivia. Cichoreum. SUCCORY.
III. PAP∣POUS HERBS.III. PAPPOUS HERBS, may be distributed into such whose heads are either Round and Squamous, considerable upon Account of their Leaves; whether Prickly; either that of a lesser: or that of a bigger head used for food. 1. THISTLE. Carduus. Cinara.HARTICHOKE. Hoary; either that whose flower is commonly blew, of tubulous jag∣ged leaves: or that which bears a purple flower of flat leaves. 2. Cyanus. Ptarmica Au∣striaca.BLEWBOTTLE. AUSTRIAN SNEEZEWORT. Serrate; commonly winged, ‖ the Lesser: or the Greater used in Physick. 3. SAW-WORT. Serratula. Centaurium majus.GREAT CENTORY. Stalks; being dry and hard, bearing usually a purple flower; ‖ either that of a more dark: or that of a lighter colour. 4. Iacea. Stabe.KNAPWEED. SILVER KNAPWEED. Seeds; being more large; either that of White: or that of Black seeds 5. Carthamus. Chondrilla crupina.BASTARD SAFFRON. BEARDED CREEPER. Plain or flat; whose flower is either Radiate, or naked. Terrestrial; considerable upon account of their Roots; being more large, bearing yellow flowers; ‖ either that of a lesser leaf, the root of which is counted poysonous to beasts: or that of a larger and longer leaf, the root of which is odorate and bitter, and counted wholsome to men. 6. Doronicum. Helenium.LEOPARDS-BANE. ELECAMPANE. Leaves; being thick, fatty and jagged, bearing yellow flowers; ‖ either that which bears a thrummy flower: or that which bears a radiate flower. 7. Senecio. Iacobaea.GROUNDSIL. RAGWORT. Flowers; as to their Manner of growth; in a kind of Vmbel, or Tuft; ‖ either that whose flowers are naked and purplish: or that whose flowers are radiate and yellow. 8. Eupatorium cannabinum mas. Virga aurea.DUTCH AGRIMONY. GOLDEN ROD. Colour; either that which bears flowers of different colours, the leaves whereof somewhat resemble the rays of a Starr: or that whose flowers are generally yellow, the leaves of the plant being Odorate. 9. STARWORT. Aser. oniza.FLEABANE.
Marine; having long thick leaves; ‖ either that the border of whose flower is Purple and the middle of it Yellow: or that of a Yellow flower and hard stalks, the leaves being narrow and cut in at the ends. 10. SEA-STARWORT.Tripolium. Crithmum chrysanthe∣mum. GOLDEN FLOWER'D SAMPHIRE. Double; the plants having a milky juice, distinguishable by their Heads; being smaller; either that of a more rugged leaf used for Sallads: or that of a smoother leaf, said to sweat out a gumm at the joints. 11. LETTICE.Lactuca. Chondrilla. GUMM SUCCORY. Leaves; whether Iagged; either that of a solid stalk: or that of a hollow smooth stalk, the seed of which being ripe, doth with the down upon it, spread it self into a Sphaerical figure. 12. HAWKWEED.Hieracium. Dens Leonis. DANDELION. Vndivided; ‖ either that whose leaves are long and grassy, the flow∣er of which being closed, doth represent a goats beard, whose root is esculent: or that whose leaves are round pointed, and hairy. 13. GOATS-BEARD.Tragopogon. Pilosella. MOUSE-EAR. Resembling thistles; but not prickly; either that which bears larger: or that which bears lesser flowers. 14. SOWTHISTLE.Sonch. Lampsana. NIPPLEWORT.
IV. UMBEL∣LIFEROUS HERBS OF BROADER LEAVES.IV. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS whose LEAVES are MORE BROAD and less finely cut, may be distinguished into such as are, Odorate; and of a strong sent; whether such as is More pleasant; in such kind of plants as are More properly belonging to this tribe; to be distinguished upon Ac∣count of Leaves; as to their Shapes; whether such are are Of Different shapes in the same plant, the lower leaves towards the bottom of the stalk being rounder and broader, and those upon the stalk more finely cut having Aromatic seeds; ‖ either that of a smaller seed: or that of a more large seed, being round and hollow, the leaves of the plant being of less pleasant sent then the seed 1. Anisum. Coriandrum.ANNIS. CORIANDER. Winged leaves; resembling those of Parsnip; having the like smell and tast. 2. Sison.BASTARD STONE PARSLEY. Fearn; either that which hath a large black furrowed seed: or that whose seed is less, and more slender, resembling an Oat. 3. Mrrhis. Cicutaria vul∣garis.SWEET CICELY. WILD CICELY. Not winged; resembling Parsley, but being much broader; either that which hath a large black streaked seed: or that which is a taller plant, having less leaves and a stronger sent. 4. Hipposelnum. Levisticum.ALEXANDERS LOVAGE. Colour; whether Pale green; having large and broad leaves; ‖ either that which hath a yellow juice, the Vmbel of whose flowers is somewhat spherical, which dies after bearing seed: or that which is of very near affinity to this in shape and sent, but not so large, and more perennial. 5. ANGELICA. Angelica. Imperatoria.MASTERWORT. Dark green; being indented; either that whose seed is broad: or angular. 6. Laserpitium. Libanotis Theophrasti.LASERWORT. HERB FRANKINCENSE OF THEOPHRASTUS. Hairy tuft, encompassing the bottom of the stalk. 7. Silermonta∣num.SERMOUNTAIN. Less properly belonging to this tribe; having winged leaves; ‖ either that whose flowers are tubulous: or that which bears a great tuft of white flowers of a sweet sent. 8. Valeriana. Vlmaria.VALERIAN. MEDOW SWEET.
Less pleasant; Lesser; ‖ either that of a weaker sent, but esculent and of a grateful tast: or that of a stronger sent, growing naturally in moist pla∣ces. 9. PARSLEY.Petroselinum. Apium palu∣sire. SMALLAGE. Larger; of a rough stalk, and winged leaves. 10. HERCULES ALL-HEAL.Panax Hercu∣leum. Not odorate; distinguishable by their Roots; being esculent; ‖ either that of a bigger root growing single: or that of a less root growing in clusters. 11. PARSNIP. SKIRRET.Pastinaca sa∣tiva latifol. Sisarum. Leaves; whether Whole, and somewhat nervous; ‖ either that whose leaves are more round, the stalks growing through them: or that whose leaves are more long. 14. THOROUGH WAX.Persoliata. Bupleurum. HARES EAR. Winged, and indented; ‖ either that whose root is of a hot biting tast: or that whose leaf is divided into three, five, or more segments, being long and narrow. 12. BURNET SAXIFRAGE.Pimpinella saxifraga. Eringium um∣belliferum. UMBELLIFEROUS ERINGO. Of different shapes in the same plant; the lower leaves being divi∣ded like Parsley, the leaves upon the stalk being undivided, and encompassing it. bearing a great, black, round seed. 13. CANDY ALEXANDER.Smyrnium Creticum. Place of growth; being proper to wet grounds; ‖ either that whose leaves are hairy, and of a deep green, bearing a white flower: or that whose leaves are not hairy. 15. COW-PARSNIP.Sphondilium. Sium. WATER-PARSNIP.
V. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS whose LEAVES are more FINE∣LY CUT into narrow segments,V. UMBEL∣LIFEROUS HERBS OF FINER LEAVES. may be distinguished into such as are Odorate; having their leaves divided into More long narrow segments; considerable upon account of their Leaves; being Of a dark green; and small seeds; ‖ either that which is perennial, of slender seeds: or that which is annual, of flat seeds 1. Foeniculum. Anethum.FENNEL. DILL. Commonly divided into three segments at the ends; ‖ either that whose leaves are more thin and dry: or more thick and succu∣lent, used for sallade. 2. HOGS FENNEL. Peuedanum. Crithmum.SAMPHIRE. Seed; being either Large and broad; ‖ either that of a tall stature, the segments of whose leaves are somewhat shorter then those of Fennel: or that whose root smells like Frankincense. 3. Ferula. Libanotis Ga∣leni.GIANT FENNEL. HERB FRANKINCENSE OF GALEN. Long and more slender; whether the Bigger or the Less, of an Armatick sent. 4. Meum. Ammi.SPIGNEL. BISHOPSWEED. Stalk; being crooked, bending several wayes, 5. Sseli Massili∣use.HARTWORT. More short segments; having Rough seeds; ‖ either that whose root is large and esculent: or that of a smaller root, the Umbels when the flower is faded, resem∣bling a Birds nest by closing or bending inwards towards the top. 6. Pastinaca sa∣tiva tenui fol. Daucus.CARRET. WILD CARRET, Birds-nest. Long streaked seeds; ‖ either that which is the taller plant, bearing the lesser seeds: or that which is the lower plant bearing the larger seeds. 7. Carum. Cuminum.CARROWEY. CUMMIN Broad large seeds; or having a leaf hairy on the backside, and reddish. 8. Panax Ascl∣pium. Cherephyllon.ALLHEAL. CHERVIL. Large hollow stalk; ‖ either that of an offensive smell and counted poisonous: or that which resembles this, growing in watery places. 9. Cicuta. Cicutaria a∣quatica.HEMLOCK. WATER HEMLOCK. Not odorate; growing in Dryer places; distinguishable by their Roots; having Tuberous roots; consisting of one single tuber, or of several. 10. Bulbocasta∣non. lipendula ulais.EARTHNUT DROPWORT.
Roots of a hot biting tast; ‖ either that of a round dark coloured seed: or that of a broad flat seed, the root of which hath a yel∣low purgative juice. 11. PELLITORY OF SPAIN. SCORCHING FENNEL.Pyrethrum. Thapsia. Stalks of the Vmbel, being strong and white, used for the picking of Teeth: to which may be adjoined that other plant, if this fail, whose seeds are prickly. 12. SPANISH PICKTOOTH.Gingidium. Caucalis. BASTARD PARSLEY. Watery places; of Fibrous roots; ‖ either that whose leaves have segments like Fennel, but somewhat broader: or that whose segments are like those of Carret, but smooth, and with a milky juice. 13. WATER-MILFOIL.Millefolium aquaticum. Thyscelinum. MILKY-PARSLEY. Tuberous root; 14. WATER DROPWORT.Oenanthe. VI. VERTICILLATE FRUTICOSE HERBS, being all of them odorate,VI. VERTI∣CILLATE FRUTI∣COSE HERBS. may be distinguished into such whose leaves are either Larger; whether Hoary and rough; of a pleasant tast and smell. 1. SAGE.Salvia. Smooth; and of a dark green; ‖ either that whose leaves are cut in like those of an Oak, more long and narrow: or that whose leaves are only indented about the edges, being more short and broad. 2. GERMANDER.Chamaedris. Teucrium. TREE GERMANDER. Lesser; whose leaves are either Short and roundish; the sent being More quick and pungent; either the larger, having a woolly head: or the lesser. 3. MASTICK. GOATS MARJORAM.Marum. Tragoriganum. More wild and gentle; having smaller leaves, which grow thicker on the stalk. 4. THYME.Thymus. Long and narrow; whether Hoary; the Greater; bearing spikes; ‖ either that of longer spikes, being the larger plant: or that of shorter thicker spikes. 5. LAVENDER.Lavendula Staechas. CASSIDONY, French Lavender, Stickadove. Lesser; whose leaves are indented, being of a more dull sent, bear∣ing small flowers. 6. POLIMOUNTAINPolium mon∣tanum. Smooth; ‖ either that whose leaves are softer and larger: or that whose leaves are harder and less. 7. HYSSOP.Hyssopus. Satureia. WINTER-SAVORY.
VII. VERTICILLATE NOT FRUTICOSE HERBS, may be di∣stinguished into such as are Odorate;VII. VER∣TICILLATE NOT FRU∣TICOSE. HERBS. considerable for their sent, whether Pleasant; The greater kind; distinguishable by the Flowers; growing More close and thick together; ‖ either that which is apt to creep and spread under ground by the roots: or that whose leaf hath some resemblance to the leaf of a Nettle. 1. Mentha. Nepeta.MINT. CAT-MINT. More dispersedly; at the setting on of the leaves, having shorter and broader leaves; ‖ the former of a darker green, and stronger sent. 2. Melissa. Calamintha.BALM. CALAMINT. Seeds; growing in a large hollow Cup like an inverted Bell, having leaves like Balm. 3. Molucca.ASSYRIAN BALM. Scaly heads; the former a more grateful smell, and lesser leaves. 4. Majorana. Origanum.MARJORAM. WILD MARJORAM, Organy. Leaves; Not hoary; ‖ either that whose leaves are, like those of Marjoram, indented, the flowers growing in looser spikes: or that whose leaves are like those of Thyme, but of a different sent. 5. Ocymum. Acinos▪BASIL. STONE-BASIL. Hoary; having leaves Broader; ‖ either that which hath several scaly heads, being the lesser plant: or that which is the bigger plant, whose flowers grow in close rundels, of a stronger sent. 6. Dictamnus. Marrubium album.DITTANY. WHITE HOREHOUND. Narrower; a low plant bearing a yellow flower. 7. Chamaepytis.GROUND-PINE. The least; a small creeping plant growing in watery places, being of a pungent sent. 8. Pulegium.PENNYROYAL. Not pleasant; distinguishable by the Sent; being like that of Garlick; ‖ either that whose leaves are like those of Germander, growing in watery places: or that whose leaves are like those of Sage, growing in wooddy places. 9. Scordium. Scoredonia.WATER GERMANDER. WOOD-SAGE. Leaf; whether Rough; Broad leaf; the bigger or the Lesser. 10. CLARY. Sclarea. Hominum.WILD CLARY.
Resembling those of Nettle; the one narrower: the other broader and rounder pointed. 11 DEAD NETTLE, Archangel. BLACK HOREHOUND.Vrtica iners. Marrubium nigrum. Long; ‖ either the taller larger plant: or the lesser plant having not so thick a down upon the leaves. 12. BASE HOREHOUND. IRONWORT.Stachis. Sideritis. Smooth; with a round jagged leaf, of a dark green, having a stiffe stalk. 13. MOTHER WORT. Not odorate;Cardiaca. considerable for having Long narrow leaves; the flowers coming out more dispersedly, growing in watery places; ‖ either that whose leaves are more narrow, and green like those of Hyssop: or that whose leaves are less narrow, the flowers standing commonly two together at the joynts. 14. HEDGE HYSSOP.Gratiola. Lysimachia galericulata. HOODED LOOSE STRIFE. Spicate flowers; The greater; ‖ either that of oblong green notched leaves and short spikes: or that which is the fatter plant, having longer spikes, growing in watery places, bearing sometimes three leaves at a joint. 15 BETONY.Betonica. Lysimachia purpura. PURPLE LOOSE STRIFE. The lesser; bearing generally blew flowers; ‖ either that whose leaves resemble those of wild Marjoram: or that whose leaves are like those of the lesser Daisy, creeping by strings. 16. SELF-HEAL. BUGLE.Prunella. Bugala. No leaves; but only strings or wires, growing upon other plants, from whom (when it is arrived to any bigness) it receives its nourish∣ment, the root in the ground dying. 17. DODDER.Cuscuta.
VIII. SPI∣CATE HERBS.VIII. SPICATE HERBS, may be distinguished into such as are Spinous; having prickly leaves, whether those whose head is Oblong; ‖ either that whose leaves do so encompass the stalks as to hold the rain water: or that of a jagged leaf, whose roots are often Can∣died for sweet-meats. 1. Dipsacus. Eryngium.TEASEL. ERINGO. Round; ‖ either which hath a resemblance to Thistles: or to Teasels. 2. Carduus globo∣sus. Virga Pastoris.GLOBE THISTLE. SHEPHEARDS ROD. Not spinous; distinguishable by their Seeds; being little burrs; ‖ either that of a winged leaf and yellow flower: or that of an undivided leaf, bearing a white flower. 3. Agrimonia. Circaea Lute∣tiana.AGRIMONY. ENCHANTERS NIGHT-SHADE. Winged leaf. 4. Pimpinella sanguisorba.BURNET. Trefoil; ‖ either that which hath a woolly spike: or that whose seed-vessel doth in the top of it expend it self into five rays. 5. Lagopus. Trifolium stellatum.HARES-FOOT. STARR-HEADED TREFOIL. Long leaves; growing in wet places; ‖ either that of a hot biting tast: or that which hath a fairer spike of flowers, being of an acid tast. 6. Perficaria. Potamogiton angustifolium.ARSMART. NARROW-LEAVED PONDWEED.
IX. HERBS bearing MANY SEEDS together IN A cluster or BUTTON,IX. HERBS BEARING MANY SEEDS IN A BUT∣TON. may be distinguished according to the Leaf; into such as have Winged leaves; ‖ either that whose leaf is underneath hoary and of a silver colour: or that whose leaves are broad at the end, having lit∣tle pinnulae towards the bottom of them, bearing a burr. 1. WILD TANSY.Argentina. Cariophyllatae. AVENS. Fingered leaves; growing from the same point of the foot-stalk; ‖ either five, having a flower consisting of five leaves: or seven, the flower consisting of four leaves. 2. CINQUEFOIL.Pentaphyllon. Tormentilla. TORMENTIL. But one leaf upon the foot-stalk of the flower, and but one flower; ‖ either that whose leaves and stalks are generally more Smooth: or more Hairy, the head after the flower is faded, being covered with long woolly locks. 3. ANEMONY, Wind-flower.Anemone. Pulsatilla. PASCH FLOWER. Flowers; whether most commonly Yellow; shining as if varnished, bearing their seed in a rough head; ‖ either that whose flower doth generally consist of five round point∣ed leaves: or that whose flower hath eight or nine leaves blowing early▪ 4. CROW-FOOT.Ranunculus. Obelidonium minus. PILEWORT. Red; having leaves like those of Camomil. 5. ADONIS FLOWER. Seed; in a head of a round flat cheese-like figure;Flos Adonis. ‖ either that which is Of rounder leaves; the Less or the Greater. 6. MALLOW.Malva. Malva hor∣tensis major. HOLYHOK. Of hoary soft leaves; ‖ either the less growing in Marshes: or the great∣er by the Sea. 7. MARSH MALLOWS.Althaea. Malva arbo∣rea. TREE MALLOW. Of jagged leaves; 8. VERVAIN MALLOW.Alca.
Of Herbs considered according to their Seed-vessel. HERBS of Perfect flowers considered according to their Seed-vessels, may be distinguished into such as have A divided Seed-vessel;§. V. into several distinct cases, which may be called CORNICULATE. I. An entre Seed-vessel; whether Siliquous; containing their seeds in long pods, distinguishable accor∣ding to their flowers, into Papillionaceous; the flower having some resemblance to a Butter∣fly, as the blooms of Pease or Beans, &c. whether CLIMBERS; such as are generally furnished with Tendrils or Claspers. II. NOT CLIMBERS; being without such Tendrils. III. Not papillionaceous; such whose FLOWERS do generally CON∣SIST OF FOUR LEAVES. IV. Capsulate; having shorter seed-vessels, distinguishable into Pentapetala; such as bear FLOWERS OF FIVE LEAVES V. Tripetala, and Tetrapetala; such as bear FLOWERS OF THREE or FOUR LEAVES VI. Monopetala; such as bear a flower of one intire leaf, whether Campanulate; such whose flowers have some resemblance to the figure of a Bell VII. Not campanulate; the limbs of whose flowers are divided into several segments, representing so many distinct leaves. VIII. BACCIFEROUS; whose seeds are included in a juicy pulpe. IX. 1. HERBS OF COR∣NICULATE SEED VES∣SELS.I. HERBS OF A CORNICULATE or Horned SEED-VESSEL, may be distinguished into such as are More esteemed for the flower; having Bigger seeds; ‖ either that with a compound broad leaf, bearing the lar∣gest flower of any low herb: or that with a winged leaf like Ash, ha∣ving black shining seeds, and a sent like Hops. 1. Paeonia. Fraxinella.PIONY. FRAXINELLA, Bastard Dittany Lesser seeds; ‖ either that of a divided slender leaf, the flower having a long heel: or that which hath a compound leaf, the flower bending downwards, consisting of tubulous parts. 2. Delpinium. Apud gia.LARKS HEEL. COLUMBINE. Less esteemed for the flower; having Hooded flowers; and roundish jagged leaves; ‖ either that which is counted Poison: or that which is counted an Antidote. Acomtu. Anthora.WOLVES BANE. WHOLSOM WOLVES BANE. Not hooded flower; ‖ either that of a tuberous root, the flower coming cut of the middle of the leaf, blowing in Winter: or that with a Tri∣angular seed of a biting tast. 4. Acomtum hy∣male. Staphis aga.WINTER WOLF-BANE. STAES-ACRE. Seed-vessel; like the long bill of a bird; ‖ either that which bears larger flowers, more sparsedly set: or that which bears lesser flowers in the fashion of an Umbel. 5. Geramum. .RANES-BILL. VENUS COMB, Shepheards needle.
II. PAPILIONACEOUS CLIMBING HERBS,II. PAPI∣LIONACE∣OUS CLIMBERS. may be distributed into such as do climb; either by Twisting; having long flat cods, their leaves being set by threes. 1. KIDNEY BEAN, French bean, Ginny bean. Tendrils; or Claspers,Phaseolus. to befurther distinguished by their Seed; whether Round; and esculent; ‖ either that whose seed is black, the leaves and flowers like those of the common Bean: or that whose seed is not black, the leaves of a lighter green. 2. BEAN OF THE ANTIENTS.Faba vete∣rum. Pisum. PEASE. Flat; and esculent, having hairy winged leaves; ‖ the Greater: or the Less. 3. VETCH. LENTIL.Vicia. Lens. Cods; being knotted, otherwise resembling a Vetch. 4. BITTER VETCH. Stalks; being Angular;Orobus. ‖ either that which bears one pair of smooth leaves upon a foot-stalk: or that whose leaf is undivided, only to∣wards the top, having two or three segments, bearing a white flower. 5. CHICKLING.Lathyrus. Ochrus. WINGED WILD PEASE. Leaves; by pairs encompassing the stalk, being more broad at bottom, and sharp pointed, bearing a yellow flower, having black shining seeds. 6. YELLOW WILD VETCH.Aphaca. Manner of bearing the esculent part under ground; ‖ either that which bears its seed both under ground, and above ground: or that of small tuberous esculent roots, bearing bright purple flowers, many together upon a foot-stalk. 7. UNDERGROUND CHICKLING.Arachidua. Terrae glandes. PEASE EARTH-NUTS.
III PAPI∣LIONACE∣OUS NOT CLIMBING.III. PAPILIONACEOUS HERBS NOT CLIMBING, may be distinguished into such as have; either More leaves then three; Esculent; whether the Larger; of a flat seed; ‖ either that of a great hollow stalk, broad leaves of a dark green, the cod lined with a woolly substance, the blossoms being black and white: or that which hath a fin∣gered leaf, being from one foot-stalk divided into many segments, bearing a spike of flowers. 1. Faba. Lupinus.BEAN. LUPIN. Lesser; of a round seed, having small winged leaves indented, the cods round and turgid.Crn. 2. CHICH PEASE. Not esculent; to be further distinguished by their Flowers; growing in thick spikes or tufts. The Greater; ‖ either that whose leaves grow like those of Vetch, smooth, and of a sweet tast, a short crooked cod furrowed on the out∣side, conteining a double row of seeds: or that whose leaves are hairy.Glaux vulga∣ris. Astragalus. sylvaticus 3. WILD LICCORICE. MILK VETCH. Lesser; ‖ either that whose flowers grow in a tuft, the utmost segment of the leaf being broader then any of the other: or that whose flowers grow in a spike, having a leaf divided like Rue.Anthyllis legu∣minosa. Fumaria. 4. LADIES FINGER. FUMITORY. Seed vessel; whether Rough; having winged leaves; ‖ either that whose flowers grow in thicker spikes, of a shining red colour, with prickly seeds growing at the end of one another: or that whose flow∣ers grow in more slender spikes from the sides of the stalk, ha∣ving a long thick root.Hedysarum clypeatum. Caput galli∣naceum. 5. FRENCH HONNYSUCKLE. COCKS-HEAD, Sanfoin. Smooth; whether such as bear Crooked cods; and yellow flowers, many together: or crooked seeds in the shape of a Horsshooe, the seed vessel being indent∣ed on one side.Securidaca. Ferrum Equi∣num. 6. HATHCET VETCH. HORSSHOOE. Streight; being long and slender, of grassy leaves, and a bright red flower.Catanance. 7. CRIMSON GRASS VETCH. Stalk; being hairy, stiff and erect, with leaves consisting of many pairs of Wings; ‖ the latter of which will contract it self upon the touch,Galega. Herba viva. as if it had sense. 8. GOATS RUE. SENSITIVE PLANT.
Leaves; which are long and winged, being small plants; ‖ either that whose cods grow together like the claws of a bird: or that with a spinous seed-vessel. 9. BIRDS FOOT.Ornithopodi∣um. Tribulus terri∣stris. LAND CALTROPS. Not more then three leaves, distinguishable by their Flowers; growing in spikes. Trefoil; ‖ either that which bears long spikes of yellow flowers, to which succeed round seed-vessels, conteining generally but one seed in each: or that of a shorter spike. 10. MELILOT.Melilotus. Trifolium pra∣tense. TREFOIL HONNYSUCKLE. Not Trefoil; having a grassy leaf. 11. MILKWORT. Seed-vessels;Polygala. Long; Crooked; ‖ either that whose leaves have same resemblance to those of Purslain, growing by threes, of more slender cods: or that which hath long smooth undivided leaves, the seed-vessel being like a Caterpiller. 12. SCORPION GRASS.Telephium Scorpoides. Scorpoides buplurifolio. CATERPILLER. Streight; whether More long and slender; ‖ either that which hath little wings or ears at the bottoms of the leaves: or that which hath long: flat cods. 13. LOTUS. FOEN GREEK.Lotus. Foenum Gra∣cum. Less long and thicker; having prickly stalks, bearing a large flower in proportion to the plant. 14. CAMOCK, Rest-harrow. Round; and Spiral; ‖ either that which is smooth:Resta bovis. or that which is prickly. 15. SNAIL TREFOIL.Medica cochle∣ata. Medica Echi∣nata. HEDGHOG TREFOIL.
IV. SILI∣QUOUS NOT PAPI∣LIONACE∣OUS HERBS.IV. SILIQUOUS HERBS NOT PAPILIONACEOUS, whose flowers consist generally of four leaves, may be distinguished by their Being esteemed for the flower, having Shrubby staks; and being of a pleasant sent, of a round flat seed; ‖ either that of hoary leaves: or that whose leaves are smooth, of a deep green. 1. Leucoium Keiri.STOCK GILLY-FLOWER. WALL FLOWER. Oblong seeds; ‖ either that which hath a more broad jagged leaf: or that which hath a sharp indented leaf, compounded of several toge∣ther upon one foot-stalk. 2. Hesperis. Dentaria.DAMES VIOLET, Double Rocket. TOOTHWORT. Seeds wrapt up in down; ‖ either that whose flower grows out from the top of the cod, which makes it to be called filius ante patrem: or that which hath a broad nervous leaf with a milkie juice, bearing the flowers in a tuft, having a large cod filled with a silkie substance. 3. Lysimachia siliquosa Apocynum re∣ctum Syria∣cum.CODDED WILLOW HERB, Codded loose strife. UPRIGHT DOGS-BANE, Silk-grass. Being used as Esculent; either their Roots; whether such as are commonly eaten Boyled; ‖ either that whose leaves are more rough, the root com∣monly roundish: or that whose leaves are more smooth, the root oblong, and of a more firm substance. 4. TURNIP. Rapum. Napus.NAVEW. Raw; of a biting tast, bearing purplish flowers, and long knotted cods. 5. RADISH. Raphanus.Leaves; having Succulent leaves; of a blewish grey; ‖ either that of a jagged leaf, yellow flower: or that of an undivided-leaf, bearing a white flower. 6. Brassica. Perfoliata sili∣quosa.CABBIDGE, Colewort, Colly-flower. CODDED THOROUGH WAX. Iagged smooth leaves; ‖ either that which bears larger flowers grow∣ing more sparsedly: or that which bears less flowers growing more close together. 7. ROCKET. Eruca-Barbarea.WINTER-CRESS. The smell and tast of Garlick: or a hot biting tast, bearing large cods, which being ripe are of a red colour. 8. Alliaria. Capsicum.SAUCE ALONE, Iack by the Hedge. GINNY PEPPER. Seeds; ‖ either that of short square cods: or that of long round cods. 9. MUSTARD. Sinapi. Rapistrum.CHARLOCK.
Leaf; whether Divided; or jagged. Less finely; being of a whitish blew, and bearing commonly a yel∣low flower; ‖ either that which is a maritim plant, having a lar∣ger flower, and longer cods: or that which hath a yellow juice. 10. HORNED POPPY.Papaver cor∣niculatum. Chelidonim majus. GREAT CELENDINE. More finely; having slender cods. 11. FLIXWEED.Sophia Chi∣rurgorum. Vndivided; whose leaves are Smooth towards the top of the stalk, and rough towards the bot∣tom, bearing white flowers; ‖ either the greater, having many slender long cods growing thick together on the top of the branches: or the less, bearing the cods more dispersedly. 12. TOWER MUSTARD.Turritis. Pilosella sili∣quosa. CODDED MOUSE-EAR. Long; bearing yellow flowers, being tall plants; ‖ either that which hath narrow dark green leaves, not serrate: or that whose leaves are more broad, of a pale green and serrate. 13. TREACLE WORMSEED.Camelina myagrum. Draba lute. YELLOW ARABIAN MUSTARD. Seed wrapt up in down; having five leaves in the flower; ‖ either that which is counted a Poyson: or that which is counted an Antidote. 14. DOGS-BANE. SWALLOW-WORT.Apocynum. Asclepias. Growing in watery places; having winged leaves; ‖ either that which is esculent of a biting tast, a short thick cod: or that which is in some esteem for the flower, bearing more long and slender cods, and whitish flowers. 15. WATER CRESS.Nassurtium aquaticum. Cardamine. CUCKOE FLOWER, Lady-smock.
V. CAPSU∣LATE HERBS of FIVE LEA∣VED FLOW∣ERS.V. CAPSULATE HERBS bearing FLOWERS OF FIVE LEAVES, may be distinguished into such whose leaves are Vndivided; Esteemed for the flower; whether such whose flowers grow Sparsedly; being either of Sweet sent; and elegant structure, their flowers standing in small cups; ‖ either that of a larger leaf and flower: or that whose leaf and flower is smaller. 1. GILLYFLOWER. Caryophillus. Caryophillus minor.PINK. No considerable sent; Growing in a cup; ‖ either the larger, the leaves of whose flow∣ers are more round pointed: or the lesser, having a clammy juice, whereby little Flyes are caught. 2. CAMPION. Lychnis. Muscipula. CATCHFLY. Not growing in a cup; a low plant, bearing shining purple flowers. 3. VENUS LOOKING-GLASS. Speculum Veneris.In an Vmbel or Tuft; Perennial whether that wch bears flowers of various colours on the same tuft: or that whose flowers are commonly of a bright scarlet. 4. LONDON TUFT, Sweet Iohn, Sweet William. Armeria. Lychnis Chalcedonica.BRISTOW NONSUCH. Annual; whose leaves are of a bitter tast. 5. Centaurium minu.LESSER CENTAURY. Not esteemed for the flower; considerable either for their Manner of growth; whether Erect; bearing Red flowers; growing commonly amongst Corn; ‖ either that which bears small flowers, of smooth leaves, round seed, an an∣gular cup: or that which bears larger flowers, of a deep red, hoary leaves, and angular seed. 6. Vaccaria. Pseudo. me∣lanthium.COW-BASIL. COCKLE. Yellow flowers; of a red juice when bruised, whether such whose leaves are Lesser; ‖ either that of a round stalk: or that of an angular stalk. 7. St. JOHNS-WORT. ypericum. Ascirum.St. PETERS-WORT. Larger; having a round seed-vessel, like a berry. 8. Androsaemum. vulgare.TUTSAN, Park-leaves. Procumbent; bearing White flowers; whose leaves are cut in about the middle; ‖ either that which bears a more large flower: or that which bears a little flower having hairy leaves. 9. Gramen Leu∣canthemum. Alsine myosois.STICHWORT. COMMON CHICKWEED. Coloured flowers; the latter being spotted on the backside of the leaves. 10. BASTARD CHICKWEED. Alsine. Anagallis.PIMPERNEL. Milkie juice; bitter and caustick, of a triangular seed-vessel. 11. Tithymallus.SPURGE, Tithymal. Large flowers; ‖ either that wch is used for the making of fine linnen, ha¦ving long narrow leaves, & a round seed vessel, conteining oblong shining seeds: or that with a stiff stalk, having leaves like those of Sallow, sometimes 3 or 4 at one setting on. 12. Linum. Lysimachia lutea.FLAX, Linseed. YELLOW LOOSE STRIFE. Divided leaves; ‖ either that which hath a strong sent, a round seed-vessel, the leaves of a whitish blew colour: or that which bears a large flower of a pale blew, with a circle of leaves under it, having a large seed-vessel, horned at the top. 13. RUE, Herb of grace. Ruta. Nigella.FENNEL FLOWER.
VI. CAPSULATE HERBS, whose flowers consist of three or four leaves, may be distinguished into such as are;VI. CAP∣SULATE of three or four leaved flowers. either of Three leaves; in the flower, being water plants; ‖ either that which hath long leaves like Aloes, with sharp serrate edges: or that whose leaf doth in the figure of it resemble a barbed Arrow. 1. FRESH WATER SOULDIER.Militaris Aizoides. Sagittaria. ARROW-HEAD. Four leaves; in the flower, to be further distinguished by the Seed-vessel; whether Compressed; Larger; and more broad; ‖ either that whose leaf is like the leaf of a Nettle, the seed-vessel shining like Sattin: or that of hoary stalks and leaves, being the lesser.Viola lunaris. Alysson Diosco∣ridis. 2. BULBONACH, Honesty, Sattin. MADWORT OF DIOSCORIDES. Lesser; the former of a biting tast. 3. THLASPI.Thlaspi. Bursa pastoris. SHEPHEARDS PURSE. Round; of Larger heads; and flowers being narcotic; ‖ either that of a bitter white juice of which Opium is made, with a star-like covering on the top of the seed-vessel: or that whose leaf is more finely jagged, having a rough seed-vessel.Papaver. Argemone. 4. POPPY. BASTARD POPPY. Lesser heads; and flowers, being of a hot biting tast; ‖ either that wch bears a white flower & reddish seed: or that which bears long nar∣row leaves upon the stalk, and others that are broader, and jagged towards the bottom of the stalk.Nasturtium. Iberis. 5. GARDEN CRESS. SCIATICA CRESS. Leaf; as to the Biting tast; ‖ either that which is a large plant of a juicy serrate leaf, of a light blewish green: or that which is a low small plant, of jagged leaves, and rough seed-vessel, growing many together, each con∣teining one seed.Lepidium. Coronopus Ruellii. 6. PEPPER-WORT. SWINES CRESS. Shape; being like those of Ivy, the stalks being divided into three, and so subdivided, one side of the lower part of the leaf standing out more then the other.Epimedium. 7. BARRENWORT. Flower; in respect of the Colour; being yellow, large plants; ‖ either that whose leaves are of a blewish green, long and smooth, used in dying: or that whose leaves are more narrow and indented.Glastum, Myagrum. 8. WOAD. GOLD OF PLEASURE. Manner of growth; in spikes. Vpon the top of the stalks; bearing small blew flowers; ‖ either that of lesser leaves indented: or that of a naked stalk, growing by the sea side.Verbena. Limonium. 9. VERVAIN. SEA-LAVENDER. From the sides of the stalks; whether the Larger; having a flat seed-vessel. 10. BROOKLIME.Anagallis aquatica. Lesser; being small plants, having compressed seed-vessels like those of Shepheards-purse: the latter bearing the bigger flower of a bright blew.Veronica. Chamadris spuria. 11. SPEEDWELL. WILD GERMANDER.
VII. CAM∣PANULATEVII. CAMPANULATE HERBS, may be distinguished into such as are Climbing; Pomiferous; bearing Bigger esculent fruit; iher such as have Softer skins or cts; ‖ either that which is the largest, of a waterish tast, having a large seed with a welt about the edges: or that which is of a more rich pleasant tast, with a plain seed not mark∣ed in the limb of it. 1. Pepo. MeloPOMPEON, Quash. MELON, Musk-melon. Shelly coats; growing to such a hardness as renders them fit to make bottles, &c. ‖ either that which bears commonly a white flower: or that of a yellow flower. 2. Cucurbita. Citrullus.GOURD. CITRUL. Lesser; Esculent; of a whitish pulp, and waterish tast. 3. Cucumis.COWCUMBER. Purgative; ‖ either that of a figure like a Pear, of a bitter juice: or that like a Cowcumber, but smaller and rough, the seeds spirting out upon breaking off the stalk. 4. Colocynthis. Cucumis asi∣ninus.COLOQUINTIDA. WILD COWCUMBER. Neither esculent nor purgative; having a leaf like that of a Vine, but less, the fruit oblong but very small. 5. Balsamina¦mas.MALE BALSOM. Capsulate; having a short round seed-vessel, and angular seeds, climb∣ing by twining about other plants; ‖ either that which is not pur∣gative: or that which hath a milky juice in the root. A violent pur∣gative, 6. Convolvlus. Scammonia Syriaca▪BINDWEED. SCAMMONY. Erect; considerable for the flower, being either Greater; ‖ either that whose flower is bigger at the bottom: or that which is less at the bottom. Europaean; 7. Violae Maria∣nae. Trachelium.COVENTRY BELLS. THROATWORT. Exotic; ‖ either that which hath flowers of several colours, leaves like those of Nightshade, growing by pairs, the branches alterna∣tim: or that whose leaves are jagged, having a large thorny seed-vessel. 8. Mirabile Pe∣ruvianum. Strammoni∣um.MERVAIL OF PERU. THORN APPLE. Lesser, ‖ either that which hath An Esculent root; a long leaf, a blew flower, the edge divided into five points: or that whose root is not esculent. 9. Rapunculus. Campanula.RAMPION. BELL-FLOWER. A hollow flower; somewhat like the finger of a Glove: the second being of a purgative quality. 10. Digitalis. Sesamum.FOXGLOVE. OYLY PURGING PULSE A Narcotic quality; ‖ either that which hath large smooth unctu∣ous leaves, but very small seed: or that which hath soft woolly leaves jagged. 11 Nicotina. Hyosciamus.TOBACCO. HENBANE.
VIII. CAPSULATE HERBS NOT CAMPANULATE, having their leaves divided into several segments,VIII. CAP∣SULATE HERBS NOT CAM∣PANULATE may be distinguished into such as have Naked stalks; Of a rough nervous leaf; ‖ either that which bears one flower upon a stalk which is bigger, being divided into five laciniae: or that which bears a less flower, many together at the top of the stalk. 1. PRIMROSE. PAIGLE, Cowslip.Primula veris. Paralysis. Of a thicker smoother leaf; the flowers growing many together, stand∣ing in a shorter cup; ‖ either that which bears the bigger: or the smaller flower, the leaves being hoary underneath. 2. BEARS EAR.Auricula Vrsi. Paralysis mon∣tana. BIRDS EY. Of a round indented leaf; 3. BEARS EAR SANICLE.Cortusa. Leavy stalks; whether Taller plants; considerable for Bearing their flowers in spikes; the limb of the flower being divided into five segments, with very little hose; ‖ either that whose leaves and stalks are hoary: or that which hath less leaves, being green. 4. MULLEIN. MOTH MULLEIN.Verbascum. Blattaria. Having small duskie flowers; ‖ either that of a roundish leaf, and weak stalk, the flower being a kind of Tube, with a lip on one side: or having a stiff stalk, a leaf like a Nettle, a small purplish flower, and a round seed-vessel. 5. BIRTHWORT.Aristolochia. Scrophularia. FIGWORT. Lesser plants; whether such as are Deciduous; to be further distinguished by their different flowers. Resembling a head with a gaping mouth; having long narrow leaves, the second having a heel. 6. SNAPDRAGON. TOAD-FLAX.Antirrhinum. Linaria. Resembling a helmet or hood; Having creased indented leaves; ‖ either that with turgid husks: or that with smaller husks. 7. COCKSCOMB.Crista galli. Euphrasia. EYBRIGHT. Having broad jagged leaves; with a spike of gaping flowers, be∣ing a larger plant: or having long leaves jagged about the set∣ting on, with large seed. 8. BRANK URSIN, Bears-breech. COW WHEAT.Branca Vrsi∣na. Melampyrum. With heels; ‖ either that whose seed when ripe will spirt out of the cod, bearing yellow flowers: or that of a pale downy leaf, weak stalks, trailing on the ground. 9. CODDED ARSMART. FEMALE FLUELLIN, Female Speedwell.Noli me tan∣gere. Elatine. Ever green; having weak stalks creeping on the ground. 10. PERIWINKLE.Vinca pervin∣ca.
IX. BACCI∣FEROUS HERBS.IX. BACCIFEROUS HERBS, may be distinguished according to their Qualities; into such as are Esculent; either in respect of the Fruit; being Most pleasant; a Trefoil propagating by strings or wires. 1. Fragaria.STRAWBERRY. Less pleasant; ‖ either that of a leaf like Agrimony, bearing round fruit of a bright red: or that of a broad hairy rough leaf, bear∣ing a large fruit almost as big as a Cowcumber. 2. Pomum amo∣ris. Malum insa∣um.APPLE OF LOVE. MAD APPLE. Root; bearing winged leaves, and a bell flower. 3. attata.POTATO OF VIRGINIA. Malignant; whether such whose leaves are more Simple and undivided; ‖ either that which hath a broad leaf, bear∣ing black berries: or that which hath a more long, broad, dark co∣loured leaf, a great root, bearing great berries on single stalks. 4. Solanum. Mandragoras.NIGHTSHADE. MANDRAKE. Compound; or made up of many segments; ‖ either that which bears light green berries in a cluster: or that which bears but one leaf divided into four or five parts, and but one black berry. 5. Aconitum ra∣cemosum. Herba Paris.HERB CHRISTOPHER, Berry bearing Wolves-bane. HERB TRUE LOVE, One Berry. Manner of growth; of the Plants themselves; being Climbers, whether such as are considerable for Purgativeness; bearing red berries; ‖ either that of a great white root, having leaves like a Vine, but more rough: or that of a great black root, with leaves like those of Ivy. 6. Bryonia alba. Bryonia nigra.WHITE BRIONY. BLACK BRIONY, Wild Vine, Ladies-seal Being full of crooked prickles; having a long triangular leaf. 7. Smilax aspera·PRICKLY BINDWEED. Berries; whether in a Bladder; ‖ either that which is a low plant, which bears a red berry in a large bladder: or that whose leaves are like Chickweed, ramping upon other plants. 8. Alkakegi. Cacubalum. Plinii.WINTER CHERRY. BERRY BEARING CHICKWEED. Vmbel; having winged leaves, like Elder, both for shape and sent. 9. Eubulus.DANEWORT.
Of Shrubs. SHRUBS may be distributed into such as are Bacciferous;§. VI. Deciduous; SPINOUS, or thorny. I. NOT SPINOUS. II. EVERGREEN. III. SILIQUOUS; such as bear their seeds in PODS. IV. Graniferous; bearing smaller seeds, whether such as are DECIDUOUS. V. EVERGREEN. VI. 1. BACCIFEROUS SPINOUS shrubs of DECIDUOUS leaves, may be distinguished into such as have either Compound leaves; whether such as may be called Fingered; viz. when several proceed from one point, bearing an escu∣lent berry consisting of many little pulpy grains aggregated toge∣ther in one head; ‖ either that whose branches are erect, bearing the more pleasant fruit: or that whose branches are procumbent and trail∣ing 1. RASBERRY, Raspis.Rubus Idaeus. Rubus vulga∣ris. BRAMBLE, Blackberry. Winged; viz. growing by pairs against one another upon a middle rib; ‖ either that which bears the more beautiful and sweet flower: or that whose flower is less beautiful and sweet. 2. ROSE.Rosa. Rosa canina. BRIER. Simple leaves; Divided into several segments; ‖ either that which bears a more juicy esculent berry, being the lesser plant: or that which bears a drier red berry, being the taller plant. 3. GOOSBERRY.Groscularia. Oxyacantha. WHITE THORN, Haw-thorn. Vndivided; whether Roundish; whose fruit is Esculent; ‖ either that which produces a fruit like a small Plum, black, round, of an acid austere tast, the blossoms coming out before the leaves: or that which bears its fruits in clusters, being long slender reddish, of an acid tast. 4. SLOE-TREE, Black-thorn.Prunus sylve∣stris. Berberis. BARBERRY. Not esculent; whether Purgative; having leaves like those of a Plum-tree, bearing black berries used in dying. 5. PURGING THORN.Rhamnus Catharticus. Not purgative; ‖ either that which hath long, stiffe, slender, sharp thorns, bearing a fruit resembling a hat: or that whose berries contein a long streaked seed. 6. CHRISTS THORN.Paliurus. Lycium. BOXTHORN. Long; and somewhat hoary. 7. BUCKS THORN.Rhamnus,
II. BACCIFEROUS Shrubs of DECIDUOUS leaves, NOT SPI∣NOUS,II. BACCI∣FEROUS DECIDU∣OUS NOT SPINOUS. may be distributed into such whose berries are; either Esculent; bearing their fruit In clusters; ‖ either that of a rich juice, spungy wood, trailing branches: or that whose leaves are like those of Goosberry, but larger, and erect branches. 1. Vitis. Ribes.VINE, Grape, Raisin. CURRAN. Singly; being a low plant, of dark green leaves, hollow flowers, small fruit. 2. Vitis Idaea vulgaris.BILBERRY, Whortle-berry. Not esculent; to be further distinguished with respect to the Leaf. Vndivided; Round; considerable for the Manner of bearing their fruit; whether In Vmbels; whose leaves are Hoary; underneath; ‖ either that which bears black berries, containing one flat seed: or that which bears red berries. 3. Viburnum. Aria.WAYFARING TREE. WHITE BEAM TREE, Cumberland Hawthorn. Green; having red twigs, and a black fruit, conteining one ker∣nel. 4. Cornus foemi∣na.DOGBERRY TREE. In clusters; having but one grain in a black berry; ‖ either that whose leaves are larger: or lesser. 5. BIRDS CHERRY. Padus Theo∣phrasti. Mahalab.WILD ROCK CHERRY OF AUSTRIA. Sparsedly; having several grains in a berry; whether such whose leaves are Hoary underneath, and less; ‖ either that of a thicker leaf, bear∣ing a red berry, covered with a kind of down: or that other bearing a black berry. 6. Chamaemespi∣lus. Diospyros.DWARF MEDLER. SWEET WHORT. Green and larger; like those of Alder, but smoother, bearing a black berry, the inward bark being a violent purgative. 7. Alnus nigra baccifera.BERRY BEARING ALDER. Flowers; being tubulous and odorate; ‖ either that which is climb∣ing: or that which is erect. 8. Periclymenum Periclymenum rectum.WOODBINE, Honysuckle. UPRIGHT WOODBINE. Tast of the fruit; being hot, biting, aromatic, growing in clusters, each cluster coming out on the side of the stalk, opposite to a leaf on the other side, being a Climber. 9. Piper.PEPPER. Long; Purgative; bearing red berries; ‖ either that which sends out its blossoms in winter before the leaves, being of a sweet sent: or that whose younger branches and berries are quadrangular. 10. MEZEREON. Mezereon. Enonymus.SPINDLE TREE. Not purgative; having slender flexile twigs; ‖ either that which bears black berries in clusters: or that which bears red berries more sparsedly. 11. Ligustrum. Cassia Pota∣rum.PRIVET. SHRUB CASSIA. Iagged; ‖ either that which bears a great round cluster of white flowers: or that which bears its flowers in an Vmbel. berries. 12. Sambucus Rosea. Sambucus a∣quatica,GELDER ROSE. WATER ELDER. Compound; bearing a flower like Iessamine with round black shining stalks. 13. Polemonium.YELLOW JESSAMINE. Having no leaf; the flowers and berries coming out at the joynts of the 14. agus.SEA-GRAPE.
III. BACCIFEROUS SEMPERVIRENT SHRUBS,III. BACCI∣FEROUS SEMPERVI∣RENT SHRUBS. may be distribu∣ted into such whose leaves are; either Compound; whether Winged; ‖ either that which is of a fragrant smell, bearing yellow seeds in black berries: or that which bears small berries like Mulberries. 1. TRUE BALSOM, Balm.Balsamum Iudaicum. Poterium. THORNY BURNET. Fingered; having several leaves growing from one foot-stalk, bearing the fruit in clusters.Palma humi∣lis. 2. DWARF PALM. Intire; whether of Indented edges; bearing Black berries; ‖ either that whose leaves grow against one another: or that whose leaves grow alternately. 3. PHYLLYRAEA, Mock-privet.Philyrraea. Alaternus. EVERGREEN PRIVET. Red berries; ‖ either that of oblong shining serrate leaves, bearing fruit like Strawberries, but bigger: or that which bears berries of a more pale yellowish red.Arbutus. Pyrocantha. 4. STRAWBERRY TREE. EVERGREEN THORN. Smooth edges; to be further distinguished by the Tast; hot and biting, being violent purgers; whether such whose leaves are Broader; of a tough stalk, the leaves towards the bottom being more long then those of Bays, bearing greenish flowers, and black berries, of a very hot tast.Laureola. 5. SPURGE LAUREL. Narrower; ‖ either that which bears long pale leaves and red ber∣ries: or that which bears dark green leaves, the berries growing by threes.Thymalaea. Chamaelaa tricoccos. 6. SPURGE OLIVE. WIDOW WAIL. Flower; as to the manner of its growth, as likewise of the berries; either In the midst of the leaf; whether having Larger leaves; not spinous: the latter of which hath a small leaf growing out of the middle of another leaf, betwixt which two, the blossoms and berries do grow. 7. LAUREL OF ALEXANDRIA.Laurus Alex∣andrina. Hypoglossum. HORSE-TONGUE. Lesser leaves; spinous, bearing large red berries. 8. BUTCHERS BROOM.Ruscus. In an Vmbel; having a thick, broad, dark coloured leaf, bearing early flowers, and said to blossom twice in one year. 9. WILD BAY. Leaf;Laurus tinus. whether Small, slender, and prickly at the ends, being odorate; ‖ either that whose leaves and wood, are of a more pleasant sent, producing blewish berries: or that whose sent is less pleasant, bearing black berries.Iuniperus. Sabina. 10. JUNIPER. SAVIN. Roundish and broad; ‖ either that which is odorate: or that whose flowers grow in clusters, bearing pentagonal fruit about the big∣ness of a Pease.Myrtus. Rhas myrti∣fol. 11. MYRTLE MYRTLE SYMACH. Manner of growing; upon other plants; ‖ either that which hath weak branches, angular shining leaves, black berries in clusters, growing commonly upon other trees or walls: or that which never grows on the ground, of a paler colour and transparent berries.Hedera. Viscus. 12. IVY. MISSELTO.
IV. SILI∣QUOUS SHRUBS.IV. SILIQUOUS SHRUBS, may be distinguished into such as are Deciduous; whether having Intire leaves; the Greater; being a tall plant, approaching nearer to the magnitude of a Tree, bearing beautiful spikes of blew flowers. 1. Syringa caeru∣lio lore.LILACH, Pipe-tree. Lesser; ‖ either that of a round leaf, being a low plant, the bud of whose flower, when pickled, is an esculent sauce, bearing large white flowers: or that which is taller, bearing yellow flowers. 2. Capparis. Aspalathus.CAPAR. THORNY BROOM. Compound leaves; Trefoils; bearing yellow flowers; the Greater, or the lesser. 3. BEAN TREFOIL. Laburnum. Cytisus.SHRUB TREFOIL. Winged leaves; Europaean; considerable for having A purgative quality; ‖ either that which hath no od leaf at the end: or that which bears its seeds in hollow pods or bladders. 4. Sena. Colutaea.SENA. BASTARD SENA. An esculent root; of a sweet juice. 5. Glycyrrhiza.LICCORICE. Exotic; The Greater; being thorny, bearing yellow flowers; ‖ either that whose leaves are smaller, the flowers growing in a sphae∣rical cluster, being odorate: or that whose leaves are much larger. 6. Acacia. Acacia Ameri∣cana.BINDING BEAN TREE. LOCUST TREE. The Lesser; considerable for the falling down of the branches, and closing of the leaves upon a touch, as if the plant had sense. 7. Planta humi∣lis.HUMBLE PLANT Sempervirent; having Green twigs; bearing yellow flowers; ‖ either that which hath long slender, square, flexile twigs, and long thin cods: or that whose twigs are more short, and stiffe, and prickly, bearing shorter cods more full and thick. 8. BROOM. Genista. Genista spi∣nosa.FURRS. Hoary leaves; ‖ either that which hath long thorns, standing thick, bearing white flowers shaped like those of Broom, having winged leaves: or that which is a Cinquefoil. 9. GOATS THORN. Tragacantha. Dorycnium.DORYCNIUM.
V. GRANIFEROUS DECIDUOUS SHRUBS,V. GRANI∣FEROUS DECIDU∣OUS SHRUBS. may be distinguish∣ed into such as are Erect; to be considered according to their Flowers; whether such as have Smaller flowers; in spikes; bearing Round fruit; like berries; ‖ either that which bears five leaves upon a foot-stalk: or whose seed-vessels are pentagonal, contein∣ing small yellow seed. 1. CHAST TREE.Agnus castus. Spirae Theo∣phrasti. SPIKED WILLOW OF THEOPHRASTUS. Seed wrapt up in Down; having very small leaves like those of Ci∣pres, and an odorate wood. 2. TAMARISK.Tamariscus. Larger flowers; whether Odorate; ‖ either that which hath weak branches, whose flowers are of a more pleasant smell: or that whose flowers are of a strong and less pleasant smell. 3. JESSAMINE. WHITE PIPE TREE.Iasminum. Syringa alba. Not odorate; having leaves like those of Marsh mallow, being soft and hoary. 4. SHRUB MALLOW.Althan. Odorateness of the leaves; ‖ either that which grows in fenny places, bearing long leaves, and small squamous Catkins: or that which is a lower plant, having roundish nervous leaves, upon long foot-stalks, bearing woolly tufts, and seeds like Lentils. 5. GALLS.Elaeaguus cordi. Coccigrea. RED SUMACH. Milkiness of the juice; being a violent purger, having long leaves of a pale green colour. 6. TREE SPURGE. Climbers;Tithymallus arborescens either by Twisting; ‖ either that which is a Trefoil: or that which hath winged leaves, bearing the flowers in a cluster, having feathery tufts. 7. CLEMATIS, Virgins-bower. TRAVELLERS JOY.Clematis. Virna valgi. Laying hold on walls or trees by small tendrils; like clawes or fingers. 8. VIRGINIAN CLIMBERS, Virginian Ivy.Hedera quin∣quefol. Cana∣dsis.
VI. GRANIFEROUS EVERGREEN SHRUBS, may be distinguish∣ed into such as are Europaean;VI. GRANI∣FEROUS EVER∣GREEN SHRUBS. considerable for Bearing large flowers; whether that which hath hoary leaves, the flow∣er consisting of five leaves: or that which bears long stiffe leaves of a dark green. 1. Cius. Nerium.HOLY ROSE. OLEANDER, Rose-bay. Having a purging quality; whether such as have Hoary leaves; ‖ either that which hath small leaves, thick set upon the stalk, being hoary underneath: or that whose leaves are bigger, and hoary all over, bearing small flowers in tufts. 2. Sana munda. Tarton rair.SANA MUNDA. GUTTWORT, Trouble-belly. Smooth hard dry leaves; bearing a blew flower like that of Scabious. 3. Alypum mon∣speliensium.HERB TERRIBLE. Being odorate; whether such as have Hoary leaves; verticillate, having hooded flowers; ‖ either that which hath narrow long leaves hoary underneath: or that which hath broader leaves hoary all over, bearing yellow gaping flowers. 4. Rosmarinus. Salvia fruti∣csa.ROSEMARY. SAGE MULLEIN. Green leaves; whether that which bears small flowers in an Vmbel: or that which bears a large flower like that of Oleander, yellow and spotted. 5. Seseli Aethio∣picum. Ledum Alpi∣num.HARTWORT. SWEET MOUNTAIN ROSE. The place of their growth; whether Near the Sea; being of a pale colour; ‖ either that whose leaves are smooth, bearing mossy flowers, and a small compressed seed: or that of winged hoary shining leaves, bearing yellow flowers in clusters. 6. SEA PURSLAIN. Halimus. Iovis barba.SILVER BUSH. In barren places; being a low plant, having small hollow flowers, and little leaves. 7. HEATH. Erica.Exotic; a low shrub, the branches spreading and growing thick toge∣ther, which after being dried and shrunk up, will upon being put into warm water dilate and expend themselves. 8. Rose Hieri∣cuntina.ROSE OF JERICO. Of Trees. Trees may be distinguished according to their §. VII.Fruit or Seed; being conteined either in a Fleshy pulp; whether POMIFEROUS. I. PRUNIFEROUS. II. BACCIFEROUS. III. Hard shell; NUCIFEROUS. IV. GLANDIFEROUS, or CONIFEROUS. V. SINGLE TEGUMENTS, or Coverings. VI. WOODS OR BARKS. VII. GUMMS OR ROSINS. VIII.
I. POMIFEROUS TREES,I. POMI∣FEROUS TREES. may be distinguished into such as are More properly called Trees; whether Deciduous; having Visible Blossoms; Esculent when ripe; More round; the tree spreading more in breadth, both as to the branches and roots of it, the fruits having an outward cavity at each end, in the place of the blossom and the stalk, and five in∣ward cavities lined with stiffe membranes, each of which doth commonly contein two kernels.Malus. 1. APPLE. Less round; that part of the fruit where the stalk grows, being more prominent; ‖ either that which rises more in height: or that which spreads more in breadth, being a lower and more crooked tree, whose fruit is covered with a Down, being when raw, of an unpleasant tast and sent.Pirus. Malus cydo∣nea. 2. PEAR. QUINCE. Not esculent, till rotten; The greater; ‖ either that smaller tree, having long leaves, dark green above and white beneath, the fruit having a wide aperture in the place of the blossom: or that thorny tree, whose leaf and fruit is like a Hawthorn, but the fruit bigger, and of a pleasant acidity. 3. MEDLAR.Mespilus. Mespilus Aro∣nia. LAZAROLE. The lesser; being tall trees; ‖ either that of winged serrate leaves, bearing a fruit like a small Pear: or that of jagged leaves, bearing a lesser fruit in clusters upon long foot-stalks. 4. TRUE SERVICE.Sorbus. Sorbus tormi∣nalis. COMMON SERVICE. No visible blossoms; unless (as JOHN BAUHINUS observes) within the fruit, being a weak tree, of smooth bark, large leaves, divided commonly into five jags, whose fruit is of an oblong Pear-like fi∣gure, of a more soft consistence, full of little grains. 5. FIGG.Ficus. Sempervirent; or evergreen; whose fruit is either Round; of a Hard, crustaceous, brittle rine; a thorny tree, bearing large beauti∣ful blossoms, the fruit full of grains in a red pulp, with a kind of Coronet on the top of the fruit, at the place of the blossom. 6. POMEGRANATE.Malus Puni∣ca Softer rine; the fruit as to its colour being of a deep yellow; ‖ either that which hath a quick juice of a grateful acidity: or that whose juice is of a more dull and flat tast.Aurantia. Pomum Ada∣mi. 7. ORANGE. ADAMS APPLE. Oblong; and oval; being of a pale yellow; ‖ either the bigger, whose rine is more thick, and whose juice is less acid: or the less, whose rine is more thin, and whose juice is more acid.Malus medi∣ca. Limonia. 8. CITRON. LEMMON. Less properly called Trees; bearing fruits of some resemblance to Figgs; ‖ either that which grows to a great bigness, bearing a pleasant fruit, many in a cluster, being Annual: or that whose leaves grow out of one another, of which those in Northern Countries are commonly so small as to be reckoned amongst Herbs.Musa arbor. Ficus Indica. 9. PLANTAIN TREE. INDIAN FIGG.
II. PRUNI∣FEROUS TREES.II. PRUNIFEROUS TREES, may be distinguished into such as are Not Purgative; Deciduous; whose fruits are Greater; whose stones are Rough; having many deep crooked furrows; ‖ either that whose fruit is covered with a Down: or that whose skin is not downy. 1. Malus Persca. Nucipersica.PEACH. Malacotoon. NECTARINE. Smooth; ‖ either that which is sooner ripe, of a more dry, solid, yellow pulp: or that of a more succulent pulp. 2. Malus Arme∣niaca. Prunus.APRICOCK. PLUMM. Lesser; putting out blossoms before leaves; ‖ either that which bears a more round fruit upon a long foot-stalk: or that which bears a more oblong fruit upon a shorter foot-stalk. 3. Cerasus. Cornus.CHERRY. CORNELION. Sempervirent: having stones with very small kernels: ‖ either that which hath long narrow leaves, hoary underneath, the fruit not escu∣lent till pickled: or that which hath very long leaves, like those of Reed, the fruit growing in clusters, of a pleasant tast. 4. Olea. Palma.OLIVE. DATE. Purgative; being sold in Apothecaries shops. Vsed sometimes for food; ‖ either that whose fruit is bigger: or that which bears a small black turbinate fruit, standing in a little cup, of a black, sweet, viscid pulp, adhering to the stone, which conteins three seeds. 5. Myrobalanus. Sebesten.MIROBALANE. SEBESTEN. Not used for food; ‖ either that whose fruit hath some resemblance to an Olive: or that which bears a red fruit, the leaf short, round, ser∣rate, of a deep green. 6. Zizyphus alba. Zizyphus sati∣va.WHITE JUJUBS COMMON JUJUBS.
III. BACCIFEROUS TREES,III. BACCI∣FEROUS TREES. may be distinguished into such as are either. Europaean; Deciduous; whose fruit is Esculent; having broad, roundish, serrate, rough leaves, bearing a fruit like that of a Rasberry, but bigger. 1. MULBERRY.Morus. Not esculent; having Winged leaves; the wood more Soft and spungy; ‖ either that, the younger branches of which are full of Pith, bearing the berries in an Vmbel, being of an ill sent: or that which bears its berries in a close tuft, the wood being used for giving a black tincture to Leather. 2. ELDER. SUMACH.Sambucus. Rhus Sumach. Hard; ‖ either that which bears its berries in an Vmbel, being of a red colour and an acid tast: or that which bears a small, round, oblong fruit, in long clusters, having many hollow excrescences like Bladders.Fraxinus bu∣bula. Terebinthus. 3. QUICKEN TREE. TURPENTINE TREE. Single leaves; bearing a small black fruit upon a long foot-stalk, like that of a Cherry, the leaves resembling those of Nettle. 4. NETTLE TREE.Lotus. Evergreen; considerable for their Berries; whether such as bear Black berries; ‖ either that whose leaves are more short, odorate, of a deep green, each berry conteining two seeds: or that whose leaves are more pale, long, shining and serrate. 5. BAY.Laurus. Laurus cera∣sus. LAUREL. Red berries; ‖ either that which hath small narrow leaves of a dark green: or that which hath large shining prickly leaves. 6. YEW.Taxus. Agrifolium. HOLLY. Whitish berries; having small round leaves of an ill sent, a hard close wood of a yellowish colour. 7. BOX.Buxus. Gumms; ‖ either that which hath winged leaves, without an od leaf at the end: or that which hath long narrow leaves, like those of Iris, producing a red Gum called Sanguis draconis. 8. MASTIC TREE.Lentiscus. Draco arbor. DRAGON TREE. Exotic; Deciduous; ‖ either that whose fruit is Aromatical, being the bottom of the flower, which when ripe, grows turgid in the middle where the seeds are conteined: or that of winged leaves, serrate, of a deep green, bearing white berries in clusters. 9. LOVE TREE.Caryophyllus aromaticus. Azedarach. BEDE TREE. Evergreen; ‖ either that of an Aromatic wood used in Physick, having leaves like those of a Fig-tree, but less: or that of winged leaves, long, narrow, sharp pointed, bearing berries like those of Asparagus, in clu∣sters. 10. SASSAFRAS. INDIAN MOLLE.Sassafras. Molle arbor.
IV. NUCI∣FEROUS TREES.IV. NUCIFEROUS TREES, may be distinguished into such as are Europaean; conteining in one common husk One Nut; having a covering that is either Thick and pulpy; having oyly kernels; ‖ either that which is the larger tree of winged leaves, odorate, having a rugged kernel, divi∣ded into several lobes: or that which is a lesser tree, having long narrow serrate leaves, and a smooth kernel. 1. Iuglans. Amygdalus.WALNUT. ALMOND. Thin husks; either such as are Wholly encompassed; and covered by their husks; whether that of winged leaves, having a white thin shell, upon which there is ano∣ther rugged covering: or that whose leaf is like that of a Quince, green above and white underneath, the fruit covered with a downy husk, the kernel of a bad tast. 2. Pistacea.PISTACIE, Fistic-nut. STORAX. Styrax.Open at one end; being smaller Trees, of broad indented leaves, bearing Catkins; ‖ either that of a larger kernel and thinner shell, whose husk is longer: or that of a lesser kernel and thicker shell, whose husk is shorter. 3. Avellana. Corilus sylve∣stris.FILBERT. SMALL NUT. Several Nuts; whose outward husk is Echinate and prickly; ‖ either that which hath long, smooth, deeply indented leaves, the husk conteining three or four Nuts: or that which bears a short, roundish, shining leaf, having a smooth bark, and Nuts of a triangular figure. 4. Castanea. Fagus.CHESNUT. BEECH. Smooth; and thin, in the form of a Bladder; being a small tree of winged leaves. 5. Staphylo-den∣dron.BLADDER NUT. Exotic; conteining in one common husk One Nut; ‖ either that which is a large tree, bearing the largest Nut of all that are known, covered with a thick rine upon the shell: or that which hath a hard Aromatic kernel, covered immediately with a yel∣lowish Aromatic husk, called Mace, upon which there is a thin shell, and upon that a pulpy coat. 6. COCO. Nux moscha∣ta.NUTMEG. Several Nuts; having a covering More thin; whose kernels are used for the making of drinks, being but small trees; ‖ either that which grows in shady moist places, having many kernels together in a husk: or that which is less properly called a Nut, bearing a double kernel in a husk, each of them being flat on one side, and gibbous on the other. 7. CHOCOLATE. Cacao. Buna arbor.COFFI. Covered with a woolly substance: or that which besides the outward tegument hath likewise an inward pulp, wherein the fruit lies, of the shape of a Heart, and the bigness of a Bean, used in Physick. 8. Gossipium. Anacardium.COTTON TREE. ANACARDIUM.
V. GLANDIFEROUS, and CONIFEROUS TREES,V. GLAN∣DIFEROUS and CONI∣FEROUS TREES. may be di∣stinguished into such as are Glandiferous. Deciduous; ‖ either that which is a large tree, of a hard lasting wood, a rugged bark, the leaves waved at the edges: or that whose leaves are more deeply divided, bearing a larger fruit, standing in great thick rugged cups, used for tanning. 1. OAK. BITTER OAK.Quercus. Cerrus. Evergreen; ‖ either that whose leaves resemble those of Holly, being of a dark green above, and white underneath: or that which is very like to this, having a very, thick, light, porous, deciduous bark. 2. HOLM OAK. CORK TREE.Ilex. Suber. Coniferous; Deciduous; bearing small Cones; ‖ either that which grows in wate∣ry places, having leaves of a dark green, shaped like those of the Nut-tree: or that whose leaves are very slender, growing in tufts, more thin at distances, of a paler colour. 3. ALDER. LARICH TREE.Alnus. Larix. Evergreen; whose Cones are Bigger; ‖ either that which is a large tall tree, bearing great roundish Cones of smooth scales, standing upwards, the leaves being small, narrow, and thick set together: or that which bears long slender leaves, two growing out together from one socket, the Cones consisting of hard wooddy scales. 4. CEDAR. PINE.Cedrus. Pinus. Lesser; having Long leaves; ‖ either that whose leaves encompass and cover the branches; bearing long Cones hanging downwards: or that whose leaves grow from each side of the stalk, being more flat, like those of Yew, green on the upper side, and whitish underneath, furcated at the end, bearing Cones shorter and thicker, growing erect. 5. MALE FIRR TREE, Pitch-tree. FEMALE FIRR TREE.Abies mas. Abies foemina. Short leaves; ‖ either that which grows in a conical figure, bear∣ing small roundish Cones: or that which hath compressed branches of a strong resinous sent, bearing small Cones encompassed with six scales. 6. CYPRESS.Cupressus. Arbor vitae. TREE OF LIFE.
VI. TREES whose Seeds are in SIN∣GLE-TEGU∣MENTS.VI. TREES bearing their Seeds in SINGLE TEGUMENTS or Co∣verings, may be distinguished into such whose seeds are conteined in Pods; called Siliquous trees; whether such whose Pods are Larger; being Esculent; having winged leaves, and very broad Pods. 1. Siliqua arbor.CAROB, St Iohn's bread. Purgative; ‖ either that which bears a round, black, and very long Pod, whose pulp is used as a benign purgative: or that which bears a thick Pod, having winged leaves, and a purgative pulp. 2. Cassia. Tamarindus.CASSIA. TAMARIND. Lesser; having a round leaf, bearing elegant purple blossoms, and a thin Pod. 3. Arbor Iuda.JUDAS TREE. Membranaceous coverings; whether Foliaceous husks; ‖ either that whose leaves are rough and indented, having a rugged bark:: or that whose leaf is somewhat longer and smoother, having a more even bark. 4. Vlmus. Carpinus.ELM. HORNBEAM. Alate seed-vessels; or Keys; whether such as do generall bear Single Keys; having winged leaves, a smooth bark, and a tough wood. 5. Fraxinus.ASH. Double Keys; ‖ either that which hath smaller leaves, divided into five segments, being a brittle wood: or that which hath broader leaves, more deeply divided, being a soft wood. 6. Acer minus. Acer majus.MAPLE. SYCAMORE. Catkins; called Iuliferous trees; whether such as are of Lesser leaves; ‖ either that which hath slender reddish twigs, smooth and white branches: or that which bears a roundish crenate leaf, up∣on very slender foot-stalks, which makes them apt to shake upon every little breath of wind. 7. BIRCH. Betula. Populus tre∣mula.ASPIN. Larger leaves; ‖ either that whose leaves are of a dark green, like those of Ivy, having a whitish bark, and growing in watery places: or that whose leaves are laciniated, being of a dark green above, and hoary white underneath. 8. BLACK POPLAR. Populus nigra. Populus alba.WHITE POPLAR. Longer leaves; of a soft wood, growing most naturally in moist places; ‖ either that whose leaves are more dense and compact, being the larger tree: or that which is a lesse tree, having a broader leaf, and bearing larger Cat-kins. 9. Salix angusti∣sol. Salix latifol.WILLOW. SALLOW. Round Buttons; ‖ either that which hath broad leaves ending in a point, being smoother above then underneath, bearing a sweet blossom, and a round fruit about the bigness of a Pease, conteining one seed: or that which hath a divided leaf, whose fruit is echinate or prickly, contein∣ing several seeds 10. LIME TREE. Tlia. Platanus.PLANE TREE.
VII. TREES considered according to their WOODS or BARKS,VII. TREES considered according to their WOODS or BARKS. may be distinguished into such as are principally known and taken no∣tice of for their Woods; according to their uses in Physick; whether such as are esteemed Cordial; being a hard, heavy, unctuous, Aromatic wood, the grain like that of Oak. 1. ALOE TREE. Diaphoretic; of a hot biting tast;Lignum Aloes. ‖ either that which is used against the Pox: or that which is commended as an Antidote against the biting of Serpents. 2. GUAIACUM, Pockwood.Lignum vitae. Lignum colu∣brinum. SNAKEWOOD. Cooling and Astringent; whether that of a deep red, being hard, heavy, and of a finer grain, having a dull tast and no sent: or that which is yellowish, of a strait course grain, and fragrant smell like Musk. 3. RED SAUNDERS.Santalum ru∣brum. Santalum ci∣trinum. YELLOW SAUNDERS. Vseful against the Stone and diseases of the Kidneys; ‖ either that which tinges Water so, as to make it in several lights to appear of two co∣lours, blewish and yellow, not considerable for tast or smell: or that which is yellowish in the middle, and white on the outside, having a hottish tast, and a sent like that of a white Rose. 4. LIGNUM NEPHRITICUM.Lignum e∣phriticum. Lignum Rh∣dium. ROSEWOOD. Mechanics; whether for Dying a red colour; the former being a hard heavy wood of a strait grain, with streaks of black. 5. BRASIL WOOD.Brasilium lig∣num. LOG WOOD. Fabrile uses; whether the making of Cabinets; being capable of a shining politure; ‖ either that of a black colour, a close grain, being very heavy: or that which is variegated with red and white. 6. EBONY. PRINCES WOOD.Ebenum. Tubes; for the conveiance of Water, being streight slender trees, growing to a very great height, having a tuft of branches only at the top, the greatest part of them being pith, inclosed in a shell of very hard wood, somewhat resembling a Rush, 7. CABBIDGE TREE, Palmetto Royal. Barks; or Rines; either that which is Esculent; being Aromatic, and of a sweet tast. 8. CINNAMON. Medicinal;Cinnamomum. ‖ either that which is so soveraign a remedy for the cure of Agues, being of a dark colour, no considerable tast: or that which is of an Ash colour, and a hot biting tast, good against the Scurvy. 9. CORTEX FEBRIFUGUS PERUVIANUS, Iesuits powder.Cortex febri∣fugus. Cortex Win∣teranus. CORTEX WINTERANUS.
VIII. TREES considered according to their GUMS or ROSINS.VIII. TREES considered according to their GUMMS or ROSINS, may be distinguished; either according to their Gums; whether Odorate; being of a bitter tast, proceeding from an exotic thorny Tree. 1. Myrrha.MYRRHE. Not odorate; ‖ either that which proceeds from an Egyptian thorny tree: or that which is of a yellowish colour and bitter tast, lea∣ving behind it a kind of sweet rellish, somewhat like Liccorice▪ 2. Gummi Ara∣bicum Sarcocolla.GUMM ARABICK. SARCOCOLLA Rosins; whose consistence is more Solid; and hard Odorate; having a More pleasant sent; used for Suffumigations; being transparent; having Lesser grains; ‖ either that which proceeds from an Arabian tree: or that which is of near resemblance to this, proceed∣ing from an Aethiopian Olive, of a whitish-colour mixed with yellow particles. 3. FRANKINCENSE, Olibanum. Thus. Gummi Ele∣mi.GUM ELEMI. Bigger grains; proceeding from an American tree, the latter of which is more clear and transparent. 4. Gummi Ani∣ma. Copal.GUMMI ANIMAE. COPAL. Perfumes; ‖ either that which is of a more hard consistence, and more tenacious: or that which is more easily dissolved. 5. CARANNA. Caranna. Benzoin.BENJAMIN. Less pleasant sent; either that which is More volatile; white and transparent from several trees. 6. Camphora.CAMPHIRE. Less volatile; ‖ either that which is unctuous and bitterish, easily growing soft, proceeding from an exotic thorny tree: or that which proceeds from a tall tree like Poplar. 7. Bdellium. Taca mahaca.BDELLIUM. TACA MAHACA. Not odorate; of a red tincture, used in painting and varnishing. 8 Lacca.LAKE. Liquid; being of a sweet sent; ‖ either that which is of a more strong smell: or that which is of a reddish colour, used for stopping defluxi∣ons. 9. LIQUIDAMBRA. Liquidambra. Balsamum Peruvianum.BALSAMUM PERUVIANUM.
CHAP. V. I. Concerning Animals, the general distribution of them. II. Of exan∣guious Animals. III. Of Fish. IV. Of Birds. V. Of Beasts. VI. A Digression concerning Noah's Ark. SEnsitive creatures may be distinguished into such as are counted more Imperfect; which have something analogous to blood,§. I. but are destitute of that red juice commonly so called, being therefore stiled EX∣ANGUIOUS, having either no leggs, or more legs then four, Perfect; whether FISHES, which have no legs, but fins answerable to them, being co∣vered with a naked skin, or with scales, whose proper motion is swimming. BIRDS, which have two leggs and two wings, whose bodies are co∣vered with feathers, being oviparous, whose proper motion is fly∣ing. BEASTS, which are for the most part, four-footed, hairy, and vivipa∣rous, excepting only some few which are without feet or hair, and are oviparous. It may be observed to be amongst these (as it is amongst the other ranks of Beings,) that the more perfect kinds are the least numerous. Upon which account, Insects being the most minute and imperfect, and some of them (perhaps) of a spontaneous generation, are of the great∣est variety, tho by reason of their littleness, the several Species of them, have not hitherto been sufficiently enumerated or described, by those Authors who have particularly applyed themselves to this study. There are sundry of these, as likewise of other Animals, which have no Latin names, as being unknown to the Romans, & there are sundry which have no English names, as being strangers to us. And amongst those that have English names, some are here described by their usual Appellations in Latin, because I knew not at present how to render them properly in Eng∣lish: And some there are peculiar to some coasts and rivers, and not commonly known elsewhere, which are hard to be enumerated. As for fictitious Animals, as Syren, or Mermaid, Phoenix, Griffin, Harpy, Ruck, Centaur, Satyr, &c. there is no provision made for them in these tables, because they may be infinite; and besides, being but bare names, and no more, they may be expressed as Individuals are.
Of Exanguious Animals. THose kinds of more imperfect Animals, which are destitute of that red juice,§. II. commonly called blood, are stiled Exanguious; to which may be annexed that general name given to the least kinds of these, viz. Insect, from that incisure or resemblance of cutting what is common to most of them in some part of their bodies. These EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS may be distinguished into Lesser; usually called Insects; whether such whose generation is Analogous to that of other Animals; which breed young like them∣selves, growing from a lesser to a greater magnitude, not being transmutable into any other Insect; whether such as have. NO FEET OR BUT SIX feet, being WITHOUT WINGS. I. SIX FEET and WINGS, or MORE feet THEN SIX. II. Anomalous; whether such as ARE DESIGNED TO A FURTHER TRASMUTATION. III. Have in their production undergone severall mutations; being first Eggs, then Maggots or Caterpillars, then Aureliae, and then flying Insects, which after their first production do not increase in mag∣nitude; whether such as have NAKED WINGS. IV. SHEATHED WINGS. V. Greater; whether Hard; whose bones are on their outside; being either CRUSTACEOUS; namely such as are wholly covered with a tough flexile substance, having generally eight legs, besides a pair of claws, and two or more annulated horns or feelers. VI. TESTACEOUS; of a more hard and brittle substance TURBINATED; consisting of a cone-like cavity, rouled up in a spiral, which beginning at the Aperture or mouth of them, doth generally proceed from the left hand to the right. VII NOT TURBINATED. VIII. SOFT. IX.
I. INSECTS of an Analogous generation, having no feet,I. INSECTS▪ having no feet, or but six, being without wings. or but six feet, being without wings, may be distributed into those that are Apoda; without feet. More oblong and round; Larger; More slender; of a reddish colour, with very little distinction of parts; ‖ either that which breeds in the earth: or that which breeds in the bodies of children. 1. EARTH WORM.Vermis. Lumbricus Intestinorum. BELLY WORM. More thick; ‖ either that which breeds in watery places, being used for the drawing of blood: or that which is covered with a slimy moisture, having four little horns like prominencies, or feelers. 2. LEECH.Hirudo. Limax. SNAIL. Lesser; breeding in Animals; ‖ either the more minute, being small white Worms, breeding in the lower guts of Men: or the bigger, stick∣ing their heads in the inward membranes of Horses stomachs or guts. 3. ASCARIDES. BOTTS. More short and flat; ‖ either that whose shape doth somewhat resemble a Flounder, found both in waters, and in the branches of the Porus bilearis, and the liver of several of the Ruminant kind: or that of a Quadrate body, with a little trunk standing out betwixt two Anten∣nae, and six stringy substances behind, living in the Sea. 4. FLUKE. ASILUS. Hexapoda; having six feet. Terrestrial; Greater; More slender; ‖ either that whose body is somewhat compressed, sending out a light from her tail: or that which is of a whitish co∣lour, more oblong, breeding in Meal. 5. GLOW-WORM.Cicindela. Farinaria. MEAL-WORM, Gentle. Less slender; ‖ either of a Darker colour; being like a Beetle without wings, but seeming to have some little rudiments of wings, noted for being apt upon a touch to send out a yellowish oyly substance from his joynts. 6. PROSCARAB.Proscarabeus. Lighter colour; whether that which resembles a Locust without wings: or that which is of a Chesnut colour, flat, broad, soft, avoiding light places. 7. FIELD CRICKET.Brucus. Blatta non alata. COCK ROCHES. Lesser; troublesome to other Animals; ‖ whether that of a paler co∣lour: or that of a dark red, being salient. 8 LOUSE.Pediculus. Pulex. FLEA. Aquatic; having a compressed body, with an oblique decussation upon the back, and a long tail. 9. WATER SCORPION.Scorpio aqua∣ticus.
II. INSECTS winged, or having above six legs.II. INSECTS of an Analogous generation, having either wings or more legs then six, may be distributed into such as are Winged; whether Terrestrial; whose bodies are More oblong; Living in open fields; and feeding on plants; ‖ either that kind, by the swarms of which whole Countries have been sometimes destroy∣ed, having long hinder legs for leaping, making a noise by rubbing their legs against their wings: or that of a long slender breast, often holding up the two fore-legs, which are longer then the other. 1. Locusta. Mantis.LOCUST, Grashopper. MANTIS. Living in holes of the ground, and houses; ‖ either that which affects to reside near Hearths and Ovens, making a noise like a Locust, by the affriction of the wings, having the wings lying more close to the body: or that whose fore-legs are broad and strong, divided into fin∣gers like those of a Mole, whereby it is inabled in a very short space to dig a hole in the ground. 2. Gryllus. Gryllo-talpa.CRICKET. FEN-CRICKET, Evechurr, Churr-worm. More compressed and broad; ‖ whether that which hath broad angular shoulders, being marked with an oblique decussation on the back, ha∣ving the proboscis reversed under the belly: or that which is of a Chesnut colour, having large stiff wings, avoiding the light. 3. Cimex. Blatta alata.CIMEX SILVESTRIS. WINGED COCKROCH. Aquatic; having a decussation or kind of Lozenge-mark on the back; ‖ either that which runs upon the top of the water, having long legs like those of a Spider: or that which hath two long swimming legs behind, whereby he swims in the water. 4. Tipula. Cicada aqua∣tica.WATER SPIDER. CICADA AQUATICA. Not winged; Terrestrial; having Eight legs; being hurtful to Animals; either the Larger; whether that which by drawing out from the belly a slimy substance, and working it with the feet, doth frame a small Web to catch Flies: or that which hath an oval body, two forcipate claws, a knotty tail, with a crooked sting at the end of it. 5. Aranea. Scorpius.SPIDER. SCORPION. Middle kind; ‖ either that of a round body, the legs fixed to the neck, sticking to Animals by thrusting the head into their skin: or that which is of a dark red colour, a tender skin, causing a very offen∣sive stink, when crushed. 6. TICK, Sheep-tick. Ricinus. Cimex.PUNICE, Wall-louse. Least kind; ‖ either that which breeds in corrupted Cheese, fruit, &c. or that which doth work it self into the skin of children. 7. Syro. AcarisMITE. WHEAL WORM. Clothes; being of a silver colour, mealy, oblong, of swift motion. 8. Tinea.MOTH. Fourteen legs; covered with a scaly armature, having a flat belly, and a gibbous back, being apt to roul it self up when touched. 9. Asllus.SOW, Cheselip, Hog-louse, Wood-louse.
More then fourteen feet; ‖ whether that whose body is of a more com∣pressed: or a more round figure.Scolopendra. Iulus. 10. SCOLOPENDER. JULUS. Aquatick; ‖ whether that which sticks to Fish, not much differing from an Asellus, but only in respect of the tail, which is somewhat broad: or that whose back is more gibbous, being apt to skip.Pediculus ma∣rinus. Pulex mari∣nus. 11. SEA LOUSE, SEA FLEA, Sugg, River Shrimp. III. INSECTS of an ANOMALOUS generation, designed for a fur∣ther transmutation,III. ANO∣MALOUS INSECTS. may be distinguished into such as are Apoda; those that are without feet, considered according to the General name; 1. MAGGOT.Eula. Particular kinds; whether such as are. Sharp at both ends; ‖ either the bigger, producing the favificous kind: or the lesser, breeding in the exorescies of Oaks, and the tufts of Bri∣ars, and sometimes creeping out of the sides of Caterpillars, produ∣cing a smaller sort of shining Fly, many of which are Seticaudes. 2. BEE MAGGOT, Grub. SHINING FLY MAGGOT. Broad and flat at their tails; ‖ either the greater, having two black spots on the tail, the fore-part being more slender, with two little black hooks upon the head, by fixing of which, this Insect doth draw his body forward, from whence Flesh-flies proceed: or the lesser, with a short erect tail, producing Flies of the Wasp kind. 3. GENTILE. WASP-LIKE FLY MAGGOT. Pedata; having legs, whether Hexapoda; such as have six legs. Aquatic; living in the water; ‖ whether that which is naked, producing Dragon-flies: or that which is in a case with little straws or sticks ad∣hering to it, producing May flies. 4. LIBELLA WORM. CADEW, Straw-worm.Phryganeum. Terrestrial; breeding several sorts of Scarabs; ‖ whether that which is of a strait figure: or that whose tail is inverted under the belly. 5. STRAIT BEETLE PRODUCING HEXAPOD. WHIRL WORM.Spondyle. More then six legs; considerable according to the General name; comprehending all such, as besides three pair of slen∣der crooked legs, on the three first annuli next the head, have two or more short thick legs behind, and two appendages at the tail. To which may be adjoyned the most principal of those. 6. CATERPILLAR. SILK WORM.Eruca. Bombix. Particular kinds; whether having Eight feet; that which in its progressive motion doth first gather its body up into a loop, resting it upon his hinder feet and the ap∣pendages of the tail, and then thrusting himself forward, or else skipping forward. 7. GEOMETRA. SKIPPING WORM. Many feet; amongst which the most common and numerous kind have fourteen feet; ‖ whether those that are smooth: or those that are hirsute. 8. SMOOTH CATERPILLAR. PALMER WORM, Bear worm.
IV. NAKED WINGED INSECTS.IV. NAKED WINGED INSECTS, which in their production do under∣go several notations, may be distributed into such, whose wings are either Membranaceous; consisting of a thin transparent film, being bred of Maggots or Worms that are Apoda; without feet Bigger; Favificous; or making of Combs, in which multitudes of them do co-habit and breed, having four wings; whether such as are Beneficial; by their gathering of Hony and Wax from Plants; ‖ ei∣ther that which is of a more oblong figure, the males of which (called Drones) are without stings, being commonly preserved in Gardens: or that which is more short, thick and hairy, living more wildly in lesser swarms. 1. Apis. Bombilius.BEE, Drone, Hive, Comb. HUMBLE-BEE. Hurtful; by their destroying of fruits, Bees, &c. being of an oblong figure, and a yellow colour; ‖ either the less, of a lighter yellow: or the greater, of a deeper yellow. 2. Vespa. Crabro.WASP. HORNET. Not favificous; having Four wings; whether such as in their shapes resemble Bees or Wasps. 3. BEE-LIKE FLY. WASP-LIKE FLY. Two wings; ‖ whether that of a short thick body, of various bignes∣ses and colours, proceeding from an oblong round Aurelia, feeding on flesh: or that of a yellowish colour, and longer legs, feeding on dung. 4. Musca car∣nari. Musca slerco∣raria.FLESH FLY. DUNG FLY. Lesser; living gregarioussy; ‖ either that of an oblong body, with a deep incisure, having four wings, of which there are many that at some∣times are without wings: or that of a more slender body, a tuft on the head, living near watery places, having but two wings. 5. Formica. Culex.ANT, Emmet, Pismire. GNAT. Pedata; having six feet; whether those of Broad wings; ‖ either that which hath a great head, a long strait pro∣boscis lying under the belly, making a loud noise, by the help of two stiffe membranes that are upon his breast: or that which hath a near resemblance to a Butterfly, in respect of the largeness of the wings, but only they are not farinaceous or erect. 6. Cicada. Musca papilio∣nacea.CICADA. PAPILIONACEOUS FLY. Narrow wings; being bred out of the water; ‖ either of a naked hex∣apod Worm: or of one that lives in a case, to which little sticks and straws do adhere. 7. Libella. Seicauda.DRAGON FLY, Bolts-head. MAY FLY. Long legs; having but two wings. 8. CRANE FLY. Shepheards fly. Farinaceous wings; being covered with a mealy substance easily coming off upon a touch, which in the Microscope appears to consist of small downy feathers, as the most ingenuous Mr. Hook hath first discovered; whether such whose wings in the usual posture are Erected; standing upright upon their backs being of great variety for colours and magnitudes, distinguishable into these two common kinds, such as appear by day, or by night. 9. BUTTERFLY. Papilo. Phalaena.MOTH. Compressed; lying more flat on the body, the wings being more short and strong, and the tail more broad. 10. Praedatrix.HAWK BUTTERFLY.
V. SHEATHED WINGED INSECTS,V. SHEATH∣ED WING∣ED IN∣SECTS. commonly called Beetles or Scarabs, may be distributed into such, whose coverings are more Thick, strong and horny; whether those that are accounted Horned; having either One horn; the greater, the biggest of this tribe, the horn turning down∣wards: or the lesser, being one of the smallest of this tribe, having Antennae on each side of his snout or horn, which together represent the Greek letter ψ, breeding amongst and devouring Corn. 1. RHINOCEROTE.Rhinoceros. Scarabaeus nasi-cornis. WEEVILL. Two horns; Stiffe, without joynts; whether branched like those of a Stagg: or not branched like those of a Bull.Cervus volans. Buceros. 2. STAG BEETLE. BULL FLY BEETLE. Limber, and with joints; improperly called horns, being Antennae or feelers; ‖ either that whose Antennae are very long and re∣versed over his back: or that which hath knobbed feelers not so long. 3. GOAT-CHAFER.Capricornus. Scarabaeus Antennis no∣dos. KNOBBED HORN'D BEETLE. Not horned; Terrestrial; having Longer coverings for their wings; The greater; Of a dark blackish colour; whether that which is most common: or that other of near resemblance to this, having serrate legs, using to roul Dung into little balls, by working backwards with his hinder feet.Scarabaeus vulgaris. Scarabaeus Pi∣lularis. 4. COMMON BEETLE. DUNG BEETLE. Of a lighter colour; ‖ either that of a russet colour, living in Trees, having a long sharp tail, extended beyond the wings: or that of a shining green, feeding on Roses.Scarabaeus Arboreus. 5. DORR, Grey Beetle. GREEN CHAFER. The lesser; ‖ either that of a long slender body, frequent about houses, making a noise like the minute of a Watch, by striking the bottom of his breast against his belly: or that of a more short round figure, living in the fields, being either wholly red, or sometimes spotted with black 6. DEATH WATCH.Scarabaeus domeicus. Scarabaeus punctatus. LADY-COW. Shorter coverings; not reaching half the length of their bodies, which are long and slender, having forked tails, which they turn up in their defence; ‖ the greater which is black: or the less which is of a reddish colour 7. STAPHILINUS.Staphilinus. Forficula. EARWIGG. Aquatic; ‖ either the greater, living under water, having the hinder pair of legs longer for swimming, being said to fly out of the water sometimes in the night: or the less of a gibbous round shining back, playing on the top of the water.Scarabaeus aquat. major. Scarabaeus aquat. minor. 8. GREAT WATER SCARAB. LES WATER SCARAB Thin, weak and flexile; of more oblong bodies; ‖ either that which is of a green, gilded, shining colour, used for Causticks: or that which shines in the night.Cicindela. 9. CANTHARIS. GLOW WORM FLY.
VI. The greater sort of EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS being CRU∣STACEOUS,VI. CRU∣STACEOUS EXANGUI∣OUS ANI¦MALS. may be distributed into such whose figure is more Oblong; The greater; having Naked shells; of a dark brown colour; ‖ either that which hath four pair of legs, and two great claws: or that which hath no claws, but five pair of legs, the feelers somewhat compressed, being thorny on the back. 1. Astacus. Lonsta mari∣na.LOBSTER. LONG OISTER. Downy shell; having a broad head, with two short, broad, laminate prominencies from it, five pair of legs, and no claws. 2. Vrsus mari∣nus.SEA BEAR. The lesser; living in Fresh water; resembling a Lobster, but much less, of a hard shell. 3. Asacus fluvi∣atlis.CRAYFISH, Crevice. Salt water; having a thinner shell, being of a pale flesh colour; ‖ either that of a sharper tail, the two fore-legs being hooked and not forcipate: or that which hath a broader longer tail, with two purple spots upon it, being the greater. 4. Squilla. Squilla Man∣tis.SHRIMP, Prawn. SQUILLA MANTIS. Shells of other Sea Fishes; having besides two claws, and two pair of legs hanging out of the shell, two other pair of soft hairy legs with∣in the shell. 5. Cancellus.HERMIT FISH, Souldier Fish. Roundish; comprehending the Crab-kind, whose bodies are somewhat compressed, having generally shorter tails folded to their bellies. The Greater; having Thick, strong, short claws; the latter of which hath serrate promi∣nencies on the side of the claws, somewhat resembling the Comb of a Cock. 6 Cancer vulga∣ris. Cancer Hera∣cleoticus.COMMON CRABB. SEA-COCK Slender claws; ‖ either that of a longer body, having two horns be∣tween his eyes, being rough on the back and red when alive: or that whose upper shell doth extend beyond his body, having a long stiffe tail. 7. Cancer majus. Cancer molu∣censis.CANCER MAJUS. MOLUCCA CRAB. The Lesser; resembling A Common Crab; but being much less. 8. Cancer minor.LITTLE CRABB. A Spider; whether that which is somewhat more oblong in the body, having a long snout: or that whose body is round. 9. Aranea ma∣rina. Aranea cru∣stacea.SEA SPIDER. CRUSTACEOUS SPIDER.
VII. TESTACEOUS TURBINATED exanguious ANIMALS,VII. TESTA∣CEOUS TURBINA∣TED ANI∣MALS. may be distributed into such as are More properly so called; whether such whose spiral convolutions Do appear on the outside; being either Not produced; but equal on both sides; ‖ either the Greater, having several Diaphragms perforated, the Animal within somewhat re∣sembling a Polypus: or the Less, being of a dark red colour, and found in fresh water. 1. NAUTILUS. WATER-SNAIL. Produced; whether More short in the spiral production, considerable for having a Purple juice; heretofore used in Dying, the shells being either knobbed or thorny; ‖ either that whose shell is very large and thick, being the strongest and heaviest of this kind, having a long aperture: or that which hath a roundish aperture, with a neb or beak at one side of it. 2. MUREX. PURPURA. Long aperture; ‖ either that whose turbinated part is almost plain, and the part not turbinated, much produced, somewhat like a Cy∣linder: or that which is of a great bigness, having seven strong furrowed prominencies from one side of the aperture. 3. CYLINDROIDES. APORRHAIS. Roundish aperture; ‖ either that which is more prominent, having more revolutions: or that which is more compressed, having few∣er revolutions, many of them having a knob by the aperture. 4. SEA SNAIL.Cochlea. NERITES. More oblong▪ always ending in a sharp point, having either a more Prominent base; ‖ either the Greater: or the Lesser. 5. PUCCINUM. TURBO. Flat base; broad and round, being nearer to the figure of a Cone; the greater: or the lesser, whose base is less flat. 6. TROCHUS PERIWINKLE, Welke. Do not appear on the outside; but are within the shell, having long aper∣tures; ‖ either that whose aperture is more narrow, being furrowed on either side: or that whose aperture is somewhat wider, not furrowed on the sides of it. 7 VENUS SHELL.Concha Vene∣ris. Concha Per∣sica. PERSIAN SHELL. Less properly so called; being of near affinity to the Vnivalvs, the inside having a pearl-like shining colour, with several holes on one side, being at one end on the outside somewhat turbinated. 8. SEA EAR.Auris marina.
VIII. TE∣STACEOUS ANIMALS NOT TUR∣BINATED.VIII. EXANGUIOUS TESTACEOUS ANIMALS NOT TURBI∣NATED, may be distributed into such as are Vnivalvs; having but one shell; whether being Vnmoved; sticking fast to Rocks or other things; ‖ whether that whose convexity doth somewhat resemble a short obtuse angled cone, having no hole at the top: or that which is of an oblong figure, somewhat Cy∣lindrical, fixed at the bottom to the place where first it was bred, with an aperture at the top. 1. LIMPET. Patella. Balanus.CENTER FISH. Moveable; ‖ either that of a Spherical figure somewhat compressed, full of prickles, having one large round aperture at the bottom, and ano∣ther small aperture opposite to it: or that which is of a more oblong figure, a tender shell, having two apertures on the same side. 2. Echinus. Echinus spa∣tagus.BUTTON-FISH. MERMAIDS HEAD. Bivalvs; having two shells; whether more Roundish; such whose outsides are Smooth; ‖ whether that of a larger thicker shell, of a pearl-like shining, whose inward part towards the joynt, doth end in a narrow sinus or cavity: or that which is whitish on the outside. 3. Concha mar∣garitifera. Galades.MOTHER OF PEARL. GALADES. Rough; ‖ either that whose joynt is more narrow, having no promi∣nences in the inside of it: or that whose joynt is more broad, with two prominencies and two correspondent cavities in each shell. 4. OYSTER. Ostrea. Spondylus.SPONDYL. Furrowed; ‖ either the bigger; having one or two ear-like prominen∣cies on the outside towards the joynt: or the less, having no such pro∣minencies. 5. Pecten. Pectuncalus.SCOLLOP. COCKLE. Oblong; considerable for being Less long; and nearest to the round kind, being smooth, and having thin shells; ‖ either the greater, of a flattish and compressed figure: or the lesser, being somewhat of a triangular figure, having the edges of the shell indented. 6. CHAMA. Chama. Tellina.TELLINA. More long; whether such as are Of a dark blackish colour on the outside; ‖ either the greater, which from a joynt at one end more acute and slender, doth grow out to a great length, becoming broad at the other end, having a silk-like substance within the shell: or the less, of which one kind hath the joynt at the end, and is commonly eaten, the other hath the joynt on the side. 7. Pinna. Musculus.PINNA. MUSCLE. Not closed exactly in all parts of their shells; ‖ either that which lyes in holes in a kind of marle at the bottom of the Sea, having an a∣perture near the joynt, and a little hook in the inside: or that which is open at both ends, being the longest of all the rest, in proportion to its bigness. 8. PHOLAS. Pholas. Solen.SHEATH-FISH, Razor-fish Growing by a neck to other things; whose shell consists of five parts, commonly (though falsly) said to produce a Bird, being of a trian∣gular figure. 9. Bernicla.BARNICLE.
IX. SOFT EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS, may be distributed into such as are More Perfect; having mouthes like the beaks of Birds,IX. SOFT EXANGUI∣OUS ANI∣MALS. with eight strin∣gy substances about them serving instead of legs, their bodies contein∣ing a black liquor like Ink; whether those whose bodies are more Obround; having No Antennae; or feelers, and being without any bone; ‖ either the greatest, growing to a vast magnitude: or the less, whose legs are longer in proportion, being of a sweet sent. 1. POUR CONTREL, Preke, Polypus.Polypus. Bolitaena. SWEET POLYPUS. Antennae; ‖ either the greater, with a great, thick, soft, not pellucid bone in the body: or the lesser, which is without such a bone, having small roundish flapps on either side of the body. 2. CUTTLE FISH. LESSER CUTTLE.Sepia. Sepiola Ron∣deletii. Oblong; ‖ either that of longer Antennae with triangular flaps, having a long pellucid bone resembling a Sword: or that of shorter Antennae, having the triangular flaps nearer the tail, being of a reddish colour. 3. SLEVE. REDDISH SLEVE.Loligo. Loligo rubra. Less perfect; counted Zoophytes, as being betwixt Plants and Animals; whether such as have More distinction of parts; ‖ either that which hath some resemblance to a Hare: or that which hath some resemblance to a naked black Snail, without horns. 4. SEA HARE. HOLOTHURIUS.Lepus. Holothurius. Less distinction of parts; Pellucid; being a kind Of Gelly, roundish at the top, marked with reddish lines in the form of a Starr, or Rose, having several kinds of rays like legs, proceeding from the middle of it. 5. BLUBBER.Pulmo mari∣nus. Not pellucid; usually sticking to other things; ‖ either that which is of various figures, being covered with a hard callous skin, contein∣ing an esculent pulpy substance: or that which is of a fleshy con∣sistence, having no hard skin, being of various shapes and bignes∣ses, some of them stinging the hand upon the touch. 6. TETHYA.Tethya. Vrtica ma∣rina. SEA NETTLE.
Of Fish. §. III.FISH may be distributed into such as are Viviparous; and skinned; whose figure is either OBLONG and roundish. I. FLAT or thick. II. Oviparous; whether such as do generally belong to Salt water; to be further distinguished by their Finns on the back; whether such, the rays of whose finns are Wholly soft and flexile. III. Partly soft, and partly spinous; having TWO FINNS on the back. IV. But ONE FINN. V. Figure; whether OBLONG. VI. FLAT. VII. CRUSTACEOUS COVERING. VIII. Fresh water; being scaly. IX. I. VIVIPA∣ROUS OB∣LONG FISH.I. VIVIPAROUS OBLONG FISH, may be distributed into such as are Cetaceous; breeding their young within them, having lungs and no gills, and but one pair of finns; ‖ either the greatest of all living Creatures, of which there are several species, one without teeth or a tube to cast water, another with teeth and such a tube, and another with a large long horn: or that other Fish of a less magnitude, which is gregarious, often appearing above water. 1. Balana. Dolphinus.WHALE. PORPOIS, Dolphin. Cartilagineous; said to hatch their young ones within their bellies, whose mouths are placed under their noses; whether such as are more Proper to the Sea; having generally a double Penis, wide mouths, and five apertures on each side instead of Gills; to be further distin∣guished by their having Long snouts or prominencies; ‖ either in the fashion of a Saw: or in the figure of a Sword, being without those apertures on the side, common to the rest. 2. SAW-FISH. Pristis. Xiphias.SWORD-FISH. Rows of very sharp teeth; ‖ the Greater: or the Lesser. 3. Canis carcha∣rias. Glaucus.SHARKE. GLAUCUS. Lips rough like a File, but without teeth; ‖ the Greater: or the Lesser. 4. Mustelus levis. Asterias.HOUND-FISH. SPOTTED HOUND-FISH. Thorns on their backs; ‖ either joyning to the former part of the Finns: or obliquely crossing the rays of the finn. 5. Galeus spinax. Centrina.THORNBACK DOG. HOG-FISH.
The aperture of their mouths, nearer to their noses then any of the other sorts of Dog-fish; and being spotted; ‖ either with large black spots: or with smaller spots. 6. GREATER DOG-FISH.Catulus ma∣jor. Catulus mi∣nor. LESSER DOG-FISH. A head like the head of a Crutch, with the eyes at the ends of the transverse, growing to a vast bigness: or having a very long slen∣der tail. 7. ZYGAENA. FOX.Zygaena. Vulpecula. Common to salt and fresh water; having gills, but no teeth, their mouths being placed under their noses; ‖ either that whose body is penta∣gonous, having five rows of bonny lamins, not properly scales, four strings hanging before the mouth: or that which is more round. 8. STURGEON.Acipenser. Huso. HUSO. II. VIVIPAROUS CARTILAGINEOUS FISH,II. VIVIPA∣ROUS FISH NOT LONG AND ROUND. whose bodies are not long and round, may be distributed into such as are Flat and broad; distinguishable by some peculiarity in their parts, as to Length; of the Tail; being either Spinous; having a sharp serrated thorn on the tail counted vene∣mous; ‖ either that whose snout is less or more prominent. 1. PASTINACA.Pastinaca. Aquila. AQUILA. Not spinous; ‖ either that whose back is smooth: or thorny. 2. FLARE.Raia Lavis. Raia clavata. THORNBACK. Snout; being sharp; ‖ either that whose body is shorter in propor∣tion to the breadth: or that whose body is longer. 3. RAIA OXYZYNCHOS, Maid. SQUATINO-RAIA. Breadth of the head; having a thick short tail in the fashion of a Bat∣tledore; ‖ either that which hath five purple spots on the back: or that which hath one round aperture for each gill, a vast mouth, with stringy substances on his head and back. 4. CRAMP-FISH TOAD-FISH, Sea-divel.Torpedo. Rana pisca∣trix. Situation of the mouth; which opens at the end of the snout, and not underneath, as the rest of this tribe, having a more oblong body, and a very rough skin, with finny substances, standing out from each side like wings. 5. SCATE, Angel-fish.Squatina. Thick and short; ‖ either that which hath no tail, but resembles the head of a Fish cut off, with one tooth in each jaw, and one hole for each gill: or that which is of a reddish colour and spinous. 6. MOLE.Mola. Lumpus. LUMP.
III. OVIPA∣ROUS FISH of FLEXILE FINNS.III. OVIPAROUS FISH, whose back FINNS are wholly soft and flexile, may be distinguished into such as have Three such soft finns on their backs; namely the Cod-kind, which use to be preserved for humane food by salting; either the Shorter and thicker; whether Larger; ‖ either that which hath a kind of beard: or that of a black coloured back. 1. Molva. Asellus nger.COD FISH, Keeling. COLE-FISH. Lesser; ‖ either that which hath a black spot on either side: or that which is of a softer body, having very small scales, being the least of this kind. 2. Asinus ami∣quorum. Asellus mollis.HADDOCK. WHITING. Longer and more slender; ‖ either that whose flesh when salted, looks yellow, and is more brittle: or that other of near resemblance to this, whose hinder finn seems to be two, by reason of its rising up higher in the further part, tho it be properly but one. 3. Asellus longus. Merlucius.LING. HAAK, Poor Iohn. Two soft flexile finns; either the Bigger; whether the Tunny kind; having very small scales, scarce discernable, with seve∣ral pinnulae both above and below, besides their finns, being of a shining blew on the back, and a silver colour on the belly and sides; the Larger; ‖ either that which hath no streaks on the sides: or that which hath oblique transverse streaks from head to tail. 4. TUNNY. Thynnus. Pelamis.PELAMIS. Lesser; having oblique transverse streaks more undulated. 5. MACKEREL. Scombrus.Flying fish; having large spotted finns like wings, with two long strong thorns behind the head: to which may be adjoined for its affinity in flying, that other Fish, which hath but one soft finn on the back, with large scales near his tail. 6. Milvus. Hirundo Pli∣nii.KITE-FISH. SWALLOW-FISH. Least kind; distinguishable by their having The lower pair of finns connected; ‖ latter having a shorter head, and more tumid jaws. 7. Gobius mari∣nus.SEA GUDGEON. PAGANELLUS. The rays of the former finn on the back, rising up much higher then the membrane which connects them; ‖ either that whose former pair of finns are connected: or that which hath a hole instead of gills, whose eyes stand more close together. 8. JOTO. DRACUNCULUS. Little black spots in the figure of Lozenges. 9. APHUA GOBITES.
One soft flexile finn; distinguishable by their Being of the Herring kind; namely scaly, without teeth, of a bright silver colour on the belly, and a dark shining colour on the back, pre∣sently dying when taken out of the water, having generally a row of sharp prickles under the belly; whether the Larger; More common; being gregarious, swimming together in great multitudes; ‖ the greater: or the lesser. 10. HERRING, Sprat.Harengus ma∣jor. Harengus mi∣nor. PILCHARD. Less common; being somewhat bigger and flatter then a Herring, with several black spots on the sides, coming up into Rivers. 11. SHAD.Clupea. Lesser; ‖ either that which is more proper to salt water, being long and roundish, having the upper mandible much more produced then the other: or that which lives in Lakes, being of a broader figure then the former. 12. ANCHOVY. CHALCIS Sarda.Encrasicholus. Being of the Horn-fish kind; having a longer slender body and a long snout; ‖ either that which is more known and common in Europe, ha∣ving one finn from the anus to the tail, and another opposite on the back, the vertebra or back-bone being of a green colour: or that which is here less common, belonging to the West-Indies, having no finn upon his tail. 13. NEEDLE FISH. TOBACCO-PIPE-FISH.Acus. Petimbuaba. Having between the eyes two finn-like substances; and but two or three rays in the lower pair of finns, with a row of small teeth, and a fang at each end; ‖ either that which hath upon his back-finn a beautiful spot variegated with rundles; or that whose finn is of an unequal al∣titude. 14. BLENNUS. SCORPIOIDES. Wanting the lower pair of finns; ‖ of a deep figure, somewhat resembling that of a Turbut: or being of a red colour, with large scales, a great flat head, steep from the eyes to the snout. 15. STROMATEUS, Callicthys. NOVACULA. Having some sharp teeth; and several other round broad teeth in the palate, the tops of which are commonly sold for Toad-stones. 16. LUPUS MARINUS SCHONFELDII. Breadth or depth downwards; ‖ either that which hath two long rays extending beyond the tail, one from the back, the other from the belly: or that which hath but one long ray, like a Bodkin, proceed∣ing from the fin on the back. Both exotic Fishes, described by Margravius. 17. PARU. GUAPERUA.
IV. OVIPA∣ROUS FISH having one finn SPI∣NOUS, and the other FLEXILE.IV. OVIPAROUS FISH having two finns on the back, whereof the former is spinous and stiffe, and the other soft and flexile, may be di∣stinguished into the Bigger kind; whose figure is Shorter; distinguishable by their Having small scales; being square towards the tail, which is forked: or else being of a more deep figure, with the rays of the fore-finn very low, the former of them pointing towards the head. 1. AMIA, Leccia Salviani. GAUCUS. Having the finns almost joyned; ‖ either that with a little short beard under the chin▪ being undulated obliquely from the back to the belly with blewish and yellow streaks: or that other of a near re∣semblance to this, only without a beard, and of a more black co∣lour. 2. CORACINUS. UMBRA Longer; having a large mouth, with sharp teeth; ‖ either that which is spotted when young, being very voracious: or that other of some resemblance to the former, having large scales, an obtuse angled mouth, with streaks of black and white from head to tail. 3. LUPUS. Mugil.ENGLISH MULLET. Lesser kind; whether such as are considerable for Having two or three long prominences like fingers before their lower finns; great bonny heads, large broad finns, called the Gournet-kind, to be further distinguished by their Colour; Red, or Grey. 4 Cuculus. Hirundo.RED GOURNET, Rochet. GREY GOURNET. Forked snouts; by reason of two flat prominencies resembling horns; ‖ either that of shorter: or that of longer horns, the latter of which is covered with large bonny scales, with eight rows of thorns, the body octangular, having but two fingers. 5. Lyra prior Rondeletii.-FISH, Piper. LYRA ALTERA RONDELETII. Being of a reddish colour; with two long prominencies from the lower jaw, esteemed delicate food; ‖ either the bigger, whose scales are larger and stick faster to the skin: or the lesser, whose scales are less, and apt to come off upon a touch. 6. TRUE MULLET. Mullus major. Mullus minor.LESSER MULLET. The length of their bodies; whether Having the lower mandible longer then the other, the finns on the back being at a greater distance: or having the second finn on the back very small, with a wide mouth like that of a Serpent. 7. SPHYRAENA. SAURUS.
Being of a flattish figure; with oblique transverse yellowish streaks, from the back to the belly, having the eyes very near the mouth: or being more roundish, somewhat of the colour and figure of Mackerel, only a row of prickles on each side make it to appear quadrangular. 8. WEAVER, Dragon-fish.Draco. TRACHURUS. Wanting the lower pair of finns; or being of a reddish colour, without teeth, having the scales edged with short hairy filaments, which makes it rough to the touch. 9. CAPRISCUS. APER. Having a long slender snout; with a strong movable serrated thorn, belonging to the former finn on the back, inclining towards the tail with bonny substances instead of the lower finns, the finns on the back being nearer to the tail then in other Fish: or having a strong serrated horn standing upright on the head. 10. TRUMPET-FISH.Scolopax. Monoceros Clusii. MONOCEROS CLUSII. Having the mouth and eyes reversed, looking upwards: or having a great head, very wide gills, and but three rayes in the lower pair of finns, the body being spotted. 11. URANOSCOPUS. SCORPAENA. Being of a deep figure, without scales, having on each side a broad black spot, and long bristles rising up above the rays of the finns. 12. DOREE, St. Peters fish.Ear.
V. OVIPA∣ROUS FISH of ONE FINN, part∣ly STIFF, and partly SOFT.V. OVIPAROUS FISH having one finn on the back, the rays of which are partly stiffe and spinous, and partly soft and flexile, may be di∣stinguished into such whose figure is more Broad; or deep; whether Europaean; Bigger; distinguishable by their COLOURS; whether Gold colour between the eyes, having round sharp teeth, and for the most part a purple spot near the gills: or that which is of a like figure to the former, but only without this gold colour, being black about the tail. 1. Aurata. Sparus.GILT-HEAD, Sea-bream. SPARUS. Streaked with yellow from head to tail; ‖ either that whose streaks are more obscure, being of a shorter body: or that whose streaks are more conspicuous, being of a longer body. 2. CANTHARUS. SALPA. Streaked with a dark colour, transverse the back; ‖ either that whose streaks are more obscure, being of a shorter broader fi∣gure, and having broad flat teeth: or that whose streaks are more conspicuous, being of a longer body. 3. SARGUS. MORMYLUS. Reddish; on the back and sides; ‖ either the greater, having a dark spot on each side near the head: or the lesser, being with∣out such a spot. 4. PAGRUS. RUBELLIO. Being somewhat more produced in their bodies then the others of this deep kind; ‖ either that which is black about the tail, having great eyes: or that of a reddish colour, with four re∣markable teeth in either jaw. 5. MELANURUS. DENTEX. Having the finn on the back so low in the middle, that it seems two, with great heads full of prickles, counted venemous; ‖ ei∣ther the greater, of a reddish colour: or the lesser. 6. Scorpius ma∣jor. Scorpius mi∣nor.GREATER SCORPION-FISH. LESSER SCORPION-FISH. Least of these deep fishes, of a dark colour, with large scales, and long streaks from head to tail. 7. CHROMIS. Indian; described by Margravius; ‖ either that of a forked tail, ha∣ving two prickles on the cover of each gill: or that which hath broad spots on either side. 8. JAGURACA. ACARA.
Long; distinguishable by Variety and beauty of colours; ‖ either the Greater, of which there are several kinds, the most beautiful of which, is called Pavo, the more dark, Merula: or the Lesser. 9. SEA-THRUSH.Turdus. JULIS. Dark broad streaks; crossing the back; considerable for ha∣ving Heads variegated with red and blew; ‖ either the Greater: or the Lesser, having a black spot in the middle of the finn on his back. 10. SEA PERCH.Perca marina. SACHETTUS. The lower jaw longer then the upper; ‖ either that which is with∣out prickles: or that which hath two prickles on the cover of the gills. 11. PHYCIS. CHAUNA. A broad black spot on either side; or very great eyes in proportion to the body. 12. MAENAS. BOOPS.
VI. OVIPAROUS FISH OF AN OBLONG FIGURE, being generally without scales,VI. EEL-FIGURED FISH. having slimy skins, apt to bend and twist with their bodies more then other Fish, may be distributed into such as are Europaean; being either Proper to Sea-water; Longer; Round; whether More thick; ‖ either that which hath but one pair of swimming finns, and two little horns: or that which hath no swimming finns, with four little horns, and a sharp snout, the skin varie∣gated with yellow. 1. Congrus.CONGER. MURAENA. More slender; ‖ either that which grows to a very great length, having a wider and longer mouth then an Eel, the finn not reaching the tail, which is round and not flat: or that which hath one continued finn as Eeles, with four stringy promi∣nencies from the lower mandible, less round and long then the former. 2. Serpens mari∣nus.SEA SERPENT. OPHIDION PLINII. Flat; like a Ribbon or Fillet; ‖ either the bigger of a reddish co∣lour, having two pair of finns: or the lesser, whose flesh is tran∣sparent, and the finn on the belly thrice as deep as that on the back, having but one pair of fins. 3. TAENIA MAJOR. TAENIA MINOR. Shorter; ‖ either that with two finns on the back, with a kind of beard, and instead of the lower pair of finns, having two long strin∣gy substances cleft at the ends: or that which is of a smaller mag∣nitude, having one pair of swimming finns, with a forked tail, to which the back finn is extended. 4. TINCA MARINA. SAND-EELS. Common to salt and fresh water; having a round aperture for the mouth, with which they suck their nourishment, and seven holes on each side instead of gills, being Cartilagineous, without swimming finns; ‖ either the Greater: or the Lesser. 5. Lampetra major. Lampetra mi∣nor.LAMPREY. LAMPERN. Proper to fresh water; considerable for having. Two pair of finns; ‖ either that which is the biggest of this tribe, having two very long strings from the upper jaw, and four shorter from the lower jaw, onely one small finn upon the back, and a long one under the belly: or that which is shorter and thicker then an Eel, with a short beard from his lower mandible, having two finns on the back, the hinder finn on the back and that un∣der the belly, not being contiguous to the tail, variegated in the co∣lour. 6. Silurus. Mustela.SHEAT FISH, River whale. EEL POUT.
One pair of finns; 7. EEL.Anguilla. Indian; described by Imperatus; ‖ either that with two long horns reversed over the back: or that which hath a flatness on his head and part of his back, in which there are divers transverse rimulae or chinks. 8. SPADA MARINA. REMORA IMPERATI. VII. PLAIN or flat FISH, being oviparous and bonny,VII. OVI∣PAROUS PLAIN FISH. both whose eyes are on the same side of the flat, and the mouth transverse, swimming broadwise, are either Oblong; and squamous; Greater; having the mouth on the right side of the eyes; ‖ either that which is not spotted: or that which is spotted. 1. COMMON SOLE.Solea. Solea oculata. SPOTTED SOLE. Lesser; having the mouth on the left side of the eyes, having bigger scales. 2. POLE.Cynoglossus. Quadrate; Greater; ‖ either that of a grey marble colour, spinous, having the eyes on the right side: or that which hath the eyes on the left side, being the biggest of this Tribe. 3. TURBUT.Rhombus. HALIBUT. Middle kind; being of a dark grey, and full of small asperities. 4. BRETT. Lesser kind; ‖ either that of a sandy reddish colour, without scales or asperities, having the eyes on the left side: or that which is reddish, squamous, and with black spots. 5. PLAIS.Passer. Passer niger. FLOUNDER, Fluke.
VIII. FISHES OF A HARD CRUSTACEOUS SKIN, may be di∣stributed into such as are for the figure of them,VIII. FISHES OF A HARD CRUSTA∣CEOUS SKIN. either Sphaerical; having two broad teeth like those of men; whether Without thorns; ‖ either that which hath a more prominent mouth, and a bonny breast: or that which is encompassed with very short hairs, close set. 1. ORBIS SCUTATUS, Globe-fish. ORBIS HIRSUTUS. With thorns; or prickles; ‖ either streight: or hooked. 2. ORBIS MURICATUS. ORBIS ECHINATUS. Angular; whether such as are more Perfect; either Triangular; being variegated with angular figures on the body; ‖ ei∣ther that which is without horns: or with horns. 3. Piscis triangu∣laris. Piscis triangu∣laris coruntus.TRIANGULAR FISH. TRIANGULAR FISH HORNED. Pentagonal; or of a five angled figure, encompassed with pentagonal bonny scales. 4. HOLOSTEUS. Imperfect; for which reason they are by some reckoned amongst In∣sects, having tubes, with a kind of valve, instead of mouths; ‖ either that which is more oblong, of an Hexangular figure to the end of the finn on the back, and after quadrangular: or that whose body is of an Heptan∣gular figure in the former part, and quadrangular in the hinder part, be∣ing spinous, the head having some resemblance to that of a Horse. 5. ACUS ARISTOTELIS. HIPPOCAMPUS. RADIATE; in the form of the Rays of a Starr. 6. Stella piscis·STARR-FISH. IX. SQA∣MOUS RI∣VER FISH.IX. SQUAMOUS RIVER FISH, may be distributed into such as are either Bigger; whether Voracious; whose scales are set together either More loose; being generally bigger, such as have on their backs One finn; placed near the tail, with wide mouths, and sharp long teeth, every other of which is moveable. 1. PIKE, Iack, Pickerel. Lucius.Two finns; the hindermost of which is small, fleshy and without rays, having generally teeth, which may be stiled the Trout-kind, com∣prehending such as are Common to fresh and salt water; ‖ either the biggest, of a reddish flesh: or the least, of a white flesh, and violaceous smell. 2. Salmo. Violacea.SALMON. SMELT. Proper to fresh water; whether Spotted; the Greater: or the Lesser, living in Lakes. 3. TROUT. Trutt. Carpio.CHARR. Not spotted; considerable for being More round; ‖ either that which is streaked from head to tail, having the finn on the back bigger and broader then in Trouts: or that having a long snout. 4. Thymallus, Oxyrynchos.GRAYLING. UMBER.
More broad; and compressed, of a small mouth, without teeth; the Greater, somewhat like a Herring: or the Lesser. 5. FARRA. LAVARETTUS. More close; and compact; being generally less scales in proportion then the others, having a wide mouth, without teeth, but asperities analogous to teeth, comprehending the Perch-kind, of which in sundry Countries there are several varieties, distinguishable by their bigness or little∣ness, thickness or slenderness. But the two principal kinds to which the others may be reduced, are ‖ either such as have two finns on the back, the first spinous, and the other soft, with transverse black streaks on the side, being commonly the bigger: or but one finn, which is partly spinous, and partly soft, being of a yellowish colour, and commonly lesser.Perca. Perca aurata▪ 6. PERCH. RUFFE. Not voracious; comprehending the Carp-kind, wch have one finn on the back, no teeth in their mouth, but only in the orifice of their stomacks, o∣ver which teeth there is a kind of stone or bone, for the most part of a triangular figure, by affriction against which, they grind their food; whether the Bigger; comprehending such as delight more in Standing waters; ‖ either that whose scales are larger, and more loose, the first ray of the finn being strong and serrate, having four stringy prominencies from the upper lip: or that whose scales are less and more compact, being very slimy, of a greenish colour, the lower pair of finns in the male being more thick and fleshy. 7. CARPE.Cyprinus. Tinca. TENCH. Running waters; whether such as are more Thick and round; ‖ either that which hath four stringy prominen∣cies resembling a beard: or that which hath a great head. 8. BARBLE.Barbus. Capito. CHUB, Chevin. Broad and deep; ‖ either the most broad: or that which is less broad, having commonly red eyes and finns. 9. BREAM.Abramis. Rubellio. ROCHE. Lesser; floating usually towards the top of the water; ‖ either that which is more thick, of some resemblance to a little Chub: or that which is more compressed and thin,Luciscus. Alburnus. 10. DARE, Dace. BLEAK, Blea. Least kind of River Fishes; whether such as live more towards the Lower parts of the water; near the ground; either such as have on the back One finn; with a kind of beard on the mouth; ‖ the greater: or the lesser. 11. GUDGEON.Gobio. Gobites bar∣batus, LOACH, Groundling. Two finns; with a large broad head. 12. BULL-HEAD, Millers-Thumb, Gull.Gobio Capita∣tus. Vpper parts of the water; or near banks; ‖ either that which hath but one finn on the back, being smooth: or that which hath two finns, be∣ing prickly, having three strong prickles on either side, and a kind of Armature consisting of four or five Laminae 13. MINNOW.Phoximus. Pungitius. BANSTICLE, Stickleback.
Of Birds. BIRDS may be distinguished by their usual place of living, their food, bigness,§ IV. shape, use and other qualities, into Terrestrial; living chiefly on dry land; whether CARNIVOROUS; feeding chiefly on Flesh. I. PHYTIVOROUS; feeding on Vegetables; whether Of short round wings; less fit for flight. II. Of long wings; and swifter flight; having their Bills; either more LONG AND SLENDER; comprehending the Pidgeon and Thrush-kind. III. SHORT AND THICK; comprehending the Bunting and Spar∣row-kind. IV. Insectivorous; feeding chiefly on Insects; (tho several of them do likewise sometimes feed on Seeds) having slender streight bills to thrust into holes, for the pecking out of Insects; whether the GREATER KIND. V. LEAST KIND. VI. Aquatic; living either About and NEAR WATERY PLACES. VII. In waters; whether FISSIPEDES; having the toes of their feet divided. VIII. PALMIPEDES; having the toes of their feet united by a mem∣brane. IX. I. CARNI∣VOROUS BIRDS.I. CARNIVOROUS BIRDS, may be distinguished into such as are either Rapacious; living upon the prey of other Animals, having hooked beaks and talons, amongst which the females are generally more large strong and fierce. Diurnal; preying in the day time. The bigger and stronger kind; noted either for quick Sight, or Sent; the latter of which is by Gesner distinguished from the former, that the beak of it, doth not grow crooked immediately from the root, but only at the end or tip of it. 1. EAGLE. Aquila. Vultur.VULTUR. The middle kind; being either made use of and trained up by Men for the catching of other Birds, of which there are great varieties, distinguishable by their manner of flight, bigness, shape, the Birds they prey upon, &c. or such others as are of near affinity to these, but not commonly used to this purpose. 2. Accipiter. Milvus.HAWK. KITE, Buzzard, Glede,
The least kind; the former having prominent nostrils, being well known by his voice: the other with a processus on the outside of the upper mandible. 3. CUCKOO.Cuculus. Lanius. BUTCHER BIRD. Nocturnal; preying in the night, having broad faces, and great eyes; ‖ of which, some have tufts of feathers standing out like long ears, or horns: others being without such tufts. 4. OWL HORNED.Bubo cornu∣tus. Bubo non cor∣nutus. OWL NOT HORNED. Semirapacious; feeding commonly either on Carrion, or other things, and more seldome on living Animals. The Crow-kind; having a bill somewhat large and strait; ‖ amongst which, those that are most common with us, are of a deep black co∣lour, in their bodies The bigger kind; Greater: or Less. 5. RAVEN.Corvus. Cornia. CROW. The lesser kind; having a mixture of dark brown with black: or be∣ing wholly black on the body, with red bill and legs. 6. DAW. CHOUGH.Monedula. Coracius. The Parret-kind; of hooked bills, having two toes before, and two behind, considerable for the variety of beautiful colours, and the imitation of speech; ‖ the Greater: or the Less. 7. PARRET.Psittacus. Psittacus mi∣nor. PARAQUETO. The Py-kind; of a chattering voice, having many notes; ‖ either pyed with black and white, with a long train: or having some of the smal∣ler feathers on each wing, variegated with blew and black. 8. MAGPY, Py. JAY.Pica candata. Pica glanda∣ria. The Woodpecker-kind; climbing upon trees and walls, in order to which they are furnished with strong feathers in their train, to sup∣port them in climbing and pecking; ‖ of which there are various species, reducible to these two kinds; such as have a very long tongue, with two claws behind and two before: or such as have shorter tongues, and but one toe behind. 9. WOODPECKER OF LONG TONGUES. WOODPECKER OF SHORTER TONGUES.Picus martius.
That kind of Eagle, which is Of a dark yellow colour, having legs feathered down to the foot called. Chrysaetos. Black all over, excepting a white spot between the shoulders on the back. called. Melanaetus. With a ring of white on his tail. called. Pygargus. Osprey.Feeding on Fish. called. Ossifragus. That kind of Vulture noted for Percnopteros.Having his head and part of neck bare of feathers called Bald Vulture. Vultur Boeti∣cus. Ald.Being of a Chesnut colour, and feathered down to the toes. called Chesnut colou∣red Vulture. Vultur aureus.Being of a yellowish colour, very great, having some of the feathers of the wing, three foot long. called Golden Vulture. Hawks are usually distinguished into such are Short winged; having their wings considerably shorter then their trains, of which there are usually reckoned three kinds. Accipiter Pa∣lumbarius. Accipiter frin∣gillarus. Tinnunculus.The biggest of this kind called Fem. Goshawk, Male Tarcell. The lesser of this kind; either ha∣ving Transverse streaks of yellow. Oblong streaks. called F. Sparrowhawk, M. Musket. Kestril. Long winged; having their wings equal to, if not longer then their trains, of which there are usually reckoned these six kinds, noted for Iersalco.A whitish colour, but spotted on the back with black spots. called F. Gerfalcon, M. Ierkin. Falco monta∣nus.Having a fastigiated or rising head, being of an ash colour. called Mountain Falcon. Falco.A thick head and flat, a short neck, and striking with the breast. called F. Falcon, M. Tarcel. Lanarius.Having a blewish bill and legs. called F. Lanner, M. Lanneret. Subbuteo.Having a white spot behind his eyes on each side. called Hobby. Aesalon.Being the least of all Hawks. called F. Merlin, M. Iack-Merlin. Kites may be distinguished into such as are noted for Nilvus.Having a very forked Train. called Common Kite. Buteo Trior∣chis.Being or seeming bald on the head, having a round train, feeding on young Rabbets. called Common Buzzard. Anataria.Feeding on Fish. called Bald Buzzard. Pygargus mi∣nor.Being of a white or ash colour, with a white streak on the Train. called Ring-tail. Lanius or Butcher bird, is of three several kinds, noted either for being Of a reddish colour on the back, the most common somewhat bigger then a Spar∣row. called Lanius vulgaris. Particoloured, of the same bigness with the former. called Ash-coloured, about the bigness of a Black-bird. called Lanius cinereus major. Owls horned are of three kinds, namely such as are noted for being Of the bigness of an Eagle, feathered down to the toes. called Bubo. Of the bigness of a tame Dove. called Otus, Asio. Of the bigness of a Missle bird, with a single feather on each side for a horn. called Scops.
Owls not horned, are of five kinds, namely such as are noted for Having a border of feathers about the face, the legs feathered and toes hairy, about the bigness of a Pidgeon. called Our common white Having a ring of white feathers about each eye, a white bill, hairy legs and feet.Vlula Aldro∣vandi. called Owl, living in Barns.Aluco. Being of a darker colour, living in Ivy-bushes. called Our common field Owl.Strix Aldro∣vandi. Caprimulgus. Being like a Cuckoo, having a short small bill, but a wide mouth. called Goat-sucker. Being the least of all, not bigger then a Black-bird. called Noctua. Crows are usually distinguished into three kinds, namely that which is Carnivorous. called Crow. Frugivorous, of a black colour; gregarious, building their nests together. called Rook.Cornix frugif▪ Frugivorous, party coloured; black and cinereous. called Roiston Crow.Cornix Ciner: To the Py-kind, those other birds may be reduced which are noted for having The wings and head of a bright azure. called Roller Argentoratensis. A dark colour spotted with white. called Caryocatastes. A tuft of feathers on his head. called Garrulus Bohemicus. A bill bigger then his whole body. called Toucan. A large bill, with a kind of horn reversed upon the bill. called Rhinoceros. Two long strings like the small naked stemm of a feather reaching from the back beyond the train, and strong legs and claws. called Bird of Paradise.Manucodiata. These three last exotic Birds are not perhaps so proper to this tribe, but I know not at present how to reduce them better. To the first sort of the Woodpecker-kind, those Birds may be reduced which are noted for Being Greater; of a Greenish colour, and a black spot on the head of the male. called Woodspite.Picus Marti∣us viridis. Black colour, excepting a red spot upon the head of the Cock. called Hickwall.Picus maxi∣mus niger. Being of a lesser magnitude, about the bigness of a Black-bird, variegated with black and white, with a red spot on the head of the Cock. called Witwall, Hiho.Picus varius. Holding the head on one side, somewhat bigger then a Sparrow, of a brownish colour. called Wry-neck.Iynx, Torquil∣la. To the second sort of the Woodpecker-kind, those other Birds may be re∣duced, which are noted for An Ash colour, being about the bigness of a Sparrow. called Nuthatch.Sitta. A long slender bill, being about the bigness of a Sparrow. called Wall-creeper.Picus murari∣us. A long slender bill, being a little bigger then a Wren. called Ox-eye-creeper▪Certhia. Being about the same colour and bigness as a Lark, and noted for climbing upon Reeds. called Reed-Sparrow.Iunco. A greenish colour, and less. called Lesser Reed-Sparrow.Canus varola.
II. PHYTI∣VOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT WINGS.II. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT WINGS, less fit for flight; may be distinguished into such as are Flying; such as can bear up their bodies (tho with some difficulty) by the motion of their wings, for some considerable time and space, ha∣ving generally shorter bills, being pulveratricious, of whitish flesh, most proper for food, having gizzards (i. e.) strong musculous stomacks, lay∣ing many Eggs, called the Poultry-kind. Domestic; 1. The most common; having the train compressed upwards. COCK,Gallus. Hen, Capon, Chicken, Pullet, Poultry. Less common; having an elegant train, which is sometimes turned up and spread, and spurs on the legs; ‖ either that whose colours are more elegant and beautiful, having a tuft on the head: or that which is less beautiful. 2. Pavo. Gallo-pavo.PEACOCK. TURKY. Wild; either the Bigger kind; Living chiefly in woods; the former being distinguishable by ha∣ving a long train wherein the feathers do gradually increase to∣wards the middle: the other, by being feathered on the legs. 3. PHEASANT. Phasianus.ATTAGEN Living in open fields; having no heel or back-claw; ‖ either the greater, being about the bigness of a Turky: or the less, being about the bigness of a Pheasant. 4. Otis.BUSTARD. ANAS CAMPESTRIS BELLONII. Being serrate on each side of the claws, and hairy to the toes; ‖ either the bigger, feeding usually on fine leaves: or the less, feeding on Heath, of a black colour, the feathers of the train reversed sidewayes. 5. Vrogallus. Tetrao.COCK OF THE WOOD. HEATH COCK, Grous, Pout. Middle kind; of a short train, to be further distinguished by their Reddish Breasts; with the figure of a Horshooe: or having a red bill and legs. 6. Perdix. Perdix rutta.PARTRIDGE. RED PARTRIDGE. Hairy legs; ‖ either that which hath a black spot under the bill: or that which is wholly white excepting some black on the train, be∣ing hairy to the very nails or claws, living on the Alps. 7. Gallia Coryl∣lorum.HAZLE HEN. LAGOPUS. Least poultry-kind; ‖ either that which hath a short train, a small back toe: or that which is of a deep body compressed upwards, ha∣ving longer legs, with a bill more like a Water-hen. 8. QUAILE. Coturnix. Rallus.RAILE. Not flying; being the biggest of all Birds; the one having only two, and the other three claws. 9. Struthio-ca∣melus. meu.ESTRICH. CASSAWARE, Emew.
III. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF LONG WINGS,III. PHY∣TIVOROUS BIRDS OF LONG WINGS. and swifter flight, having their bills more long and slender, may be distinguished into the Pidgeon-kind; laying but two Eggs. The Bigger; whether the most common and domestic, of great variety of colours, living in houses: or that which lives in woods, of an ash co∣lour, having a ring of white about the neck 1 PIDGEON, Dove.Columba. Palambus tor∣quatus. RING-DOVE, Queest. Lesser; ‖ either that which hath a reddish breast: or that which is ge∣nerally marked on each side of the neck with azure and black, except some that are wholly white, being the least of this kind. 2. STOCK-DOVE. TURTLE.Oenas, Vinago. Turtur. Thrush-kind; of a lesser magnitude then Pidgeons, and longer trains in pro∣portion to their wings, laying more Eggs then two, being generally bacci∣vorous. Speckled on the breast; Canorous; considerable for having the bill More round; being of a dunnish green on the back, feeding on Missle berries; ‖ the Greater: or the Lesser. 3. MISSLE-BIRD, Shreight. THRUSH, Throstle, Mavis, Song-Thrush.Turdus visci∣vorus. Turdus. More flat; spotted either with whitish, or reddish spots: the latter of which hath likewise a reddish tail 4. STARE, Starling. MERULA SAXATILIS, Ruticilla major.Sturs, Not Canorous; being Birds of passage, coming only in Winter; the Greater: or the Lesser. 5. FELDEFARE.Turdus pila∣ris. Turdus ilia∣cus. REDWING, Swinepipe. Not speckled on the breast; Less beautiful for their colours; Canorous; ‖ either that which is more black, with yellow bills and legs: or less black, having some dark shining blew on the back, being somewhat waved on the breast. 6. BLACKBIRD. PASSER SOLITARIUS.Merula. Not canorous; ‖ either that which hath on the breast an Area of white: or that which is of an ash colour. 7. MERULA TORQUATA. MERULA MONTANA. More beautiful for their colours; The Greater; ‖ either that which hath a reddish bill, the wings and train black, the rest of the body bright yellow: or that which hath a long black bill, a long crest of feathers upon the head, tipped with black, with transverse streaks of black and white upon the wings. 8. GALBULA. HOOP. The Lesser;Vpupa. having the three foremost toes joyned together to the first joynt, without any membrane, the outmost and middle toe, to the second joynt; ‖ either the bigger, having a Bill somewhat crooked:Apiastr, Me∣rops. . the lesser, having a strait strong bill. 9. BEE-EATER. KING-FISHER, Alcyon.
IV. PHYTI∣VOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT THICK BILLS.IV. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT, THICK, strong BILLS, being generally Granivorous, may be distinguished into such as do belong either to the Bunting-kind; having a hard knob in the pallate of the mouth. The bigger; being Canorous. 1. Emberiza alba Gesneri Alanda con∣gener.BUNTING. The Lesser; not esteemed for singing; ‖ either that of a yellowish bo∣dy: or that which is yellow about the throat. 2. Cenchryamus Belloni. Citrinella Hortulanus.YELLOW-HAMMER. HORTULANE. Sparrow-kind; without such a knob in the mouth. Not canorous; The more common and lesser kind; living either about houses: or in mountains, having a reddish head. 3. Passer. Passer mon∣tanus.SPARROW. MOUNTAIN SPARROW. The less common and greater kind; with a bigger stronger bill then the other, to break the stones of fruits for their kernels; ‖ either that without a crest: or that with one. 4. COCOTHRAUSTES. COCOTHRAUSTES CRISTATUS INDICUS. Canorous; Bigger; ‖ either that with a great head and a red breast: or that with a cross bill, the upper and lower part crossing each other towards the middle, said to sing in Winter 5. Rbicilla. Loxia.BULL-FINCH, Alpe, Nope. SHELL-APPLE, Cross-bill. Lesser; considerable for their different colours; being either Greenish; the Bigger: or Lesser. 6. Chloris. Passer Cana∣rius.GREENFINCH. CANARY BIRD. Brownish; The Bigger; ‖ either that whose breast is of a dilutered: or that which is variegated with black on the head. 7. Fringilla, Monte-frin∣gilla.CHAFFINCH. BRAMBLE, Brambling. The Lesser; not red about the bill: or red about the bill. 8. Linaria. Linaria rubra.LINNET. RED LINNET.
V. INSECTIVOROUS the GREATER,V. INSECTI∣VOROUS, GREATER. may be distinguished in∣to such as are of Swifter flight; comprehending the Swallow-kind, of long wings, fork∣ed trains, short legs, being much upon the wing, Birds of passage, coming in Summer. The greater; building in Chymneys, variegated with black and white, having a red spot on the breast: or building in Churches, of a black∣ish colour, very short feet, the biggest of this kind. 1. SWALLOW.Hirundo. Hirundo apes. SWIFT, Martlet, Church-Martin. The lesser; building about houses, of a white rump, and feathered down to the toes: or building in banks, with a broad spot on the breast. 2. MARTIN.Martes. Hirundo ripa∣ria. SAND-MARTIN, Shore-bird. Slower flight; Canorous; considerable for Singing in the night; being of a dark reddish colour. 3. NIGHTINGALE.Luscinia. Having a long heel; the greater: or the less, living in watery places. 4. LARK.Alauda. Alauda pra∣tenys. TIT-LARK. Having a red breast; or a red train. 5. ROBIN REDBREAST, Ruddock.Rubecula. Ruticilla. REDSTART. Not Canorous; considerable for The delicacy and fatness of their flesh; ‖ living either amongst Figs, of which there are several varieties, the most common and best known, being from his black head called Atricapilla: or living in holes of the ground, and having a white rump. 3. BECCAFIGO.Ficedula. Oenaths. WHEAT-EAR. Having a long train, and frequently moving it; ‖ either the more common one, which is black and white: or that which is less com∣mon, of a yellow colour. 7. WAGTAIL.Motacilla. Motacilla fla∣va. YELLOW WAGTAIL. Living; ‖ either upon stony places or open Heaths: or that which creeps in hedges, having the back like that of a common Sparrow, the breast of a Lead colour, with a black bill. 4. STONE SMICH.Muscicapa tertia Aldre∣vandi. Curruca. HEDGE SPARROW.
VI. LEAST INSECTI∣VOROUS BIRDS.VI. The LEAST kind of INSECTIVOROUS BIRDS, may be di∣stributed into such as are Canorous; whether of a Greenish colour in the body; to be further distinguished by the colour of the Head; ‖ either that of a black: or that of a yellow head. 1 LIGURINUS. SERINUS. Neck; being of an ash colour. 2. CITRINELLA. Brownish colour; and spotted, the train more erect. 3. Passer Troglo∣d.WREN. Not Canorous; being either Greenish; considerable for Having a tuft of yellow, or red feathers upon the head: or being in other respects of the same shape with this, but only wanting such a tuft. 4. REGULUS CRISTATUS. REGULUS NON CRISTATUS. Making a humming noise; of which there are several varieties not yet sufficiently described. 5. HUMMING BIRD. Tonnius.Variegated with black and white; The bigger; with a broad black spot down the breast; 6. Tringillago.GREAT TITMOUSE. The lesser; considerable for having A blewish head: or a black head. 7. Parus Cru∣lus. Parus ater.TITMOUSE. COLEMOUSE. A long train: or a Tuft on the head. 8. Parus cauda∣tus. Parus Crista∣tus.LONG TAILED TIT. CRESTED TIT.
VII. AQUATIC BIRDS living about and NEAR WET PLACES,VII. AQUA∣TIC BIRDS living NEAR WET PLA∣CES. having longer legs, and long slender bills for their more convenient going and fetching up their food in such places, may be distinguished into The Plover-kind; whose bills are about one inch and a quarter long. The bigger; having A tuft on the head; being in the body and wings of a dark and white colour. 1. LAPWING, Puet. No tuft; ‖ either that of a greenish colour, wanting a back claw:Vanellus. or that of a grey colour with a very small back claw. 2. GREEN PLOVER.Pluvialis viri∣dis. Pluvialis ci∣nereus. GREY PLOVER. The lesser; being without any back claw: ‖ either that of a greyish colour, caught by imitation: or that which hath a black fillet about the eyes, and a forked train. 3. DOTTEREL. SEA LARK.Morinllus. Charadrios. The Redshank-kind; whose bills are about two inches long. The bigger; considerable for Having a red bill and legs: or for having a kind of ruffe about the neck of the males, of great variety of colours, being pugnacious. 4. REDSHANK.Hamatopus. Avis pugnax. RUFFE. Being mixed of black and white; ‖ whether the greater, having transverse streaks of black and white on the train: or the lesser, ha∣ving only the exterior feathers of the train white. 5. TRINGA MAJOR. TRINGA MINOR. The lesser; having white bellies; ‖ either that whose back is grey: or that of a dark brown colour. 6. KNOT. STINT. The Woodcock-kind; whose bills are about three inches long; whether having Strait bills; Frequenting fresh waters; of a fulvous colour spotted; ‖ the greater: or the less; the male of which latter is much less, and of a shorter bill then the female. 7. WOODCOCK. SNIPE.Scolopax. Gallinago mi∣nor. Frequenting salt waters; ‖ either that of a black and white colour, with red bill and legs, wanting a Postica: or that of a grey colour, having a Postica. 8. SEA PY▪ GODWIT.Haemantopus▪ Belloni. Fedoa. Crooked bills; ‖ either that of a grey colour: or that whose feathers are of an elegant scarlet, excepting the wings, which are black. 9. CURLEW. GUARA BRASILEANA.Arquata.
VIII. AQUA∣TIC FISSI∣PEDES.VIII. AQUATIC BIRDS, living much in the water, being FISSI∣PEDES, ‖ may be distinguished into such as are, Not swimming; but wading; comprehending the Crane-kind, having long necks and legs, long and strong bills; whether Sharp pointed bills; either such whose necks are Longer; considerable for Building in Fenny places; being hairy on the head, having the wind-pipe reversed in the form of the Letter S, and being Herbivo∣rous: or building on Houses and Chymneys, of a black and white colour, with red legs and bill, making a noise by the collision of the beak▪ being Piscivorous. 1. Grus.CRANE. Ciconia.STORK. Having a thicker bill; somewhat crooked and shorter then the o∣thers of this tribe, with scarlet coloured wings; or having a tuft of bristles on the head. 2. PHAENICOPTER. GRUS BALEARICA. Being of an ash colour, having a tuft of feathers standing out behind the head, building on trees; being Piscivorous, with one blind gut; ‖ either the greater: or the lesser. 3. HEARN. Ardea.ARDEA CINEREA MINOR. Being of a white colour; in other respects like the former; the greater: or the lesser. 4. Ardea alba major. Ardea alba minor.GREATER WHITE HEARN. LESSER WHITE HEARN. Shorter neck; ‖ either that which is fulvous and spotted, being Pisci∣vorous, having one blind gut: or that which is white with a red bill. 5. Ardea stellaris. Ardea Brasi∣lica.BITTOUR. BRASILEAN BITTOUR. Broad and round pointed bill; like a Spoon, Piscivorous, of a white colour. 6. Platea.SHOVELAR, Spoon-bill. Swimming; either The Diving-kind; being much under water, and finn-footed, viz. with a membrane standing off on each side of the toes, having downy feathers, and wanting a train; ‖ either the greater, having a longer bill: or the lesser, having a shorter bill. 7. Colymbus ma∣jor. Colymbus mi∣nor.GREAT DIDAPPER, Dabehick. LITTLE DIDAPPER. The More-hen-kind; whose bodies are somewhat compressed side∣wayes; whether Finn-footed; having a membrane of Scollopt edges on each side of the toes, a bald head, being of a black colour. 8. Fulica.COOT. Not finn-footed; ‖ either the greater, which hath a little red baldness: or the lesser, having a long red bill. 9. MOOR-HEN, Water-hen. Gallinula.GALLINULA SERICA,
IX. AQUATIC PALMIPEDE Birds,IX. AQU∣TIC PAL∣MIPEDES. whose toes are joyned together with a membrane, may be distinguished into such whose bills are either Flat and blunt; being Herbivorous. The greater; ‖ either the biggest of a white colour, having black legs: or the lesser, the males of which are commonly white. 1. SWAN, Cygnet. GOOSE, Gander, Gosling.Cygnus. Anser. The middle kind; ‖ either the bigger, of a beautiful colour, the head of a dark green, the body white, with large spots of orange colour: or the lesser, having reddish legs. 2. SHELDRAKE. DRAKE, Duck The least kind; ‖ either the bigger,Ana. having the bill and legs of a lead colour: or the lesser, being from the eyes to the hinder part of the head of a greenish colour. 3. WIDGIN. TEALE.Penelope. Querquedula. Sharp; being generally Piscivorous. The Solan-goose kind; having the four toes joyned together; ‖ whether White; ‖ either that which hath a long bill, hooked at the end, laying but one Egg: or having a great bag under the bill. 4. SOLAN-GOOSE. PELLICAN.Onocrotalos▪ Black; the greater, used for catching of Fish: or the lesser. 5. CORMORANT.Corvus mari∣nus. Graculus pal∣mipes. SHAGG. The Puffin-kind; frequenting desart Islands, wanting a postica, going upright, laying but one Egg; whether such as build their nests Within the ground; in holes; ‖ either that which is more common in Europe, having the top of the head, the back, wings and train of a black colour, the rest white, the bill somewhat compressed upwards, short, of a triangular figure, and red at the point: to which may be adjoyned that American Bird, of a like shape to this, but bigger. 6. PUFFIN. PENGUIN.Anas arctica Clusii. Penguin. On the ground; chiefly rocky places, making their nests together; ‖ either that with a compressed black bill, hooked at the end, having a white line on either side: or that of a longer bill, less sharp, not hooked. 7. RAZOR-BILL. GUILLAM.Alca Wormii. Iomavia. The Diving-kind; being much under water, having round serrate bills, hooked at the end; ‖ either that which is variegated with black and white: or that which is of a cinereous colour on the back, with a red head, and a tuft upon it. 8. DIVER.Mergus. Mergus irra∣tus. DUNN DIVER. The Gull kind, being much upon the wing as Swallows, commonly of an ash colour; ‖ either the bigger: or the lesser, having red bill and legs, with a forked train. 9. GULL, Sea-mew.Larus. Hirundo ma∣rina, SEA SWALLOW, Sray.
Besides the common sort of Swans, there is a wild kind, called Hooper, having the wind-pipe going down to the bottom of the breast-bone, and then reversed upwards in the figure of the Letter S. Besides the common Goose, there are several sorts of wild ones, whereof one is black from the breast to the middle of the belly, called Brant Goose, Bernicla, or Brenta. To the Widgeon-kind may be reduced that other fowl, about the same bigness, the two middle feathers of whose train do extend to a great length, called Sea-Pheasant, Anas cauda acuta. To the Teal-kind should be reduced that other fowl, of the like shape and bigness, but being white where the other is green, called Gargane. To the Gull-kind, doth belong that other Bird, of a long slender bill bending upwards, called Avogetta recurvi-rostra. Of Beasts. BEASTS, may be distinguished by their several shapes, properties, uses, food,§. V. their tameness or wildness, &c. into such as are either Viviparous; producing living young. WHOLE FOOTED, the soles of whose feet are undivided, being used chiefly for Carriage. I. CLOVEN FOOTED. II. Clawed, or multifidous; the end of whose feet is branched out into toes; whether NOT RAPACIOUS. III. RAPACIOUS; living upon the prey of other Animals; having generally six short pointed incisores, or cutting teeth, and two long fangs to hold their prey; whether the CAT-KIND; having a roundish head. IV. DOG-KIND; whose heads are more oblong. V. OVIPAROUS; breeding Eggs. VI. I. WHOLE FOOTED BEASTS,I. WHOLE FOOTED BEASTS. may be distinguished into such as are either of Solid hard hoofs; considerable for Swiftness and comeliness; being used for riding. 1. HORSE, Mare, Gelding, Nag, Palfrey, Steed, Courser, Gennet, Stallion,Equus. Colt, Fole, Filly, Neigh, Groom, Ostler. Slowness and strength in bearing burdens; having long ears; ‖ either the more simple kind: or that mungrel generation begotten on a Mare. 2. Asinus. Mulus.ASSE, Bray. MULE. Softer feet; having some resemblance to the Lev. 11.4.26.Cloven footed-kind; by reason of the upper part of the hoof being divided, being ruminant, having a long slender neck, with one or two bunches on the back. 3. Camelus.CAMEL, Dromedary. Multifidous kind; having little prominencies at the end of the feet, representing toes, being of the greatest magnitude amongst all other beasts, used for the carriage and draught of great weights, and more particularly esteemed for the tusks. 4. Eliphas.ELEPHANT, Ivory.
II. CLOVEN FOOTED BEASTS,II. CLOVEN FOOTED BEASTS. may be distributed into such as are Horned and Ruminant; having two horns. Hollow; not branched nor deciduons, being common both to the males and females, useful to men both living and dead; whether the Bigger; being useful both by their labour and flesh; 1. KINE, Bull, Cow, Ox, Calf, Heifer, Bullock, Steer, Beef, Veal,Bos. Runt, bellow, low, Heard, Cowheard. Lesser; being useful either in respect of the Fleece and Flesh: or Hair and Flesh. 2. SHEEP, Ram, Ewe, Lamb, Weather, Mutton, Bleat, Fold, Flock,Ovis. Caper. Shepheard. GOAT, Kid. Solid; branched, deciduous, being proper only to the males; whe∣ther the Bigger kind; ‖ either that of the highest stature, having horns with∣out brow-antlers, of a short stemm, and then spreading out into breadth, branched at the edges: or that of a lower stature, ha∣ving round, long, branched horns. 3. ELKE. STAGG, Hart, Hind, Red Deer, Venison.Alcis. Cervus. Middle kind; whose horns become broad towards the ends; ‖ ei∣ther that of lesser horns, not used for labour: or that which hath the largest horns in proportion to that body, of any other Deer, with a double branched brow-antler, being in the Northern Countries used for the drawing of Sleds. 4. BUCK, Doe, Fawn, Pricket, Sorel, Sore, Fallow Deer, Venison.Dama. Rangifer. REIN-DEER, Tarandu. Least kind; having a short, round, branched horn. 5. ROE-BUCK, Roe.Capreolus. Horned but not ruminant; having but one horn, placed on the nose, be∣ing a beast of great bigness, covered with a kind of Armature, and counted untamable. 6. RHINOCEROT.Rhinoceros. Ruminant but not horned; being useful to men only, when living, for carriage of burdens, having the longest neck of any other Animal (if there be really any such Beast.) 7. CAMELOPARD, Giraffa.Camelopardus. Neither horned nor ruminant; useful only when dead, for its flesh. 8. HOG, Swine, Bore, Sow, Pig, Porket, Barrow, Shoot, Pork,Porcus. Ba∣con, Brawn. Grunt. Amongst those that belong to the Bovinum genus, there are several sorts described by Authors distinguished by their having either A Beard; stiled Vrus. A Bunch on the back; stiled Bisons. Horns reflected about the ears. stiled Bonasus. Broad, flat, rugged horns; stiled Buffalus. Besides the more common kinds of Sheep, there are others mentioned by Authors, and described to have Streight wreathed horns. called Ovis Stepsiceros. Great thick tails. called Broad tailed Sheep.
Amongst those that belong to the Goat-kind, besides the more vulgar sort, there are others whose horns are either Ibex.Angular and knobbed. called Stone Buck. Gimpse Rupi∣capra. Gazel.Small and round; being hooked at the end. called Shamois. Streight and wreathed. called Antilope. III. CLAW∣ED NOT RAPACI∣OUS.III. CLAWED Beasts NOT RAPACIOUS, may be distinguished into such as are either Man-like; having faces and ears somewhat resembling those of Men, with only four broad incisores, or cutting teeth, and two short eye-teeth, not longer then the other, their fore-feet being generally like hands, with thumbs, going upon their heels; whether the Bigger kind; ‖ either that which hath a short tail: or that which hath no tail. 1. BABOON, Drill. Papio. Simia.APE, Iackanapes. Lesser kind; having a long tail, and being very nimble: to which may be adjoined, for its affinity to this kind in respect of the face, that beast which is the slowest of all others, having but three toes on each foot, feeding on leaves, having a blind gut joyned to the upper orifice of his stomack, being probably ruminant. 2. MONKEY, Marmosit. Crcopithecus. Ignavus.SLOTH, Haut, Ay. Hare-kind; having two long teeth in the lower jaw before, and two o∣thers opposite to those (tho not quite so long) in the upper jaw, most of which are counted ruminant, because when they have by the help of their incisores filled their mouths with meat, they after chew it over again with their Molares or grinders,Levit. 11. but they are not properly rumi∣nant, because they have but one stomack, out of which they do not fetch up their food being once swallowed. These may be distinguished into the Bigger kind; whether such as are covered with Hair; living either Above ground; being of all others the most fearful. 3. HARE, Leveret. Lepus.Vnder ground; ‖ either that with long ears and a short tail: or that with short ears and a long tail, being said to sleep all the Winter. 4. CONNY, Rabbet. Cuniculus. Mus Alpinus.MARMOTTO. Quills; ‖ either the bigger: or the lesser kind. 5. PORCUPINE. Histrix. Echinus.HEDGHOG. Middle kind; ‖ either that which lives in Trees, with a spreading bushy tail: or that which lives on the ground, with a short tail, and course hair, having only three toes on a foot. 6. SQUIRREL. Sciurus,GINNY PIG. Least kind; living commonly, either In houses; being mischievous to Corn; ‖ the greater: or lesser kind 7. Sorex. Mus domesi∣cus.RAT. MOUSE. Abroad, under ground; having small eyes, and broad feet like hands, be∣ing not so properly belonging to this tribe, but of near affinity to it. 8. Talpa.MOLE.
Besides the common Rat there are others having Flat tails, their hinder feet being palmipedes. called Water-rat, Musk-rat. Short tails, and spotted skins. called Leming.Mus Norva∣gicus. Besides the more common sort of Mice there are others Of long snouts, counted venemous. called Field-mouse, Sheew-mouse.Mus Araneus. Of a sandy colour, a spreading tail, sleeping much. called Dormouse.Mus Avella∣narum. Having wings, upon which there are four claws instead of feet, the only flying beast. called Batt, Flittermouse.Vespertilio. IV. RAPACIOUS Beasts of the CAT-KIND,IV. RAPA∣CIOUS CAT-KIND. may be distributed into such, whose bodies are in proportion to their legs, either Less long; having generally two Claviculae or canel-bones, by which they are inabled to strike or cuff with their fore-feet, and to climb, being able to sheath their claws; whether the Bigger; considerable for Boldness and courage; being the chief of all wild beasts: or for slow∣ness and slugginess, going upon the heels. 1. LION-ess, Whelp, roar.Leo. Vrsus, BEARE, Cub. Spottedness; ‖ either with Rundles: or with Streaks. 2. TYGER.Tigris. Pardus. PARD, Panther, Leopard. Quick sightedness; 3. OUNCE, Lynx.Lynx. Lesser; ‖ either that Domestic Animal, the Enemy to Mice: or that wild fierce creature, of some resemblance to this, producing Civet. 4. CAT, Kitling, Kitten, Mew. CIVET-CAT.Catus. Zibetta. More long; namely such as by the length of their bodies, and shortness of their legs, are fitted to creep and wind themselves into holes, for the catching of their prey. The Verminous-kind; whether such as are Terrestrial; of a Courser furr; being noxious to Rabbets; ‖ either that which is fre∣quently trained up by Men for the catching of Connies: or that which is of a stinking savour. 5. FERRET. POLECAT, Fitchew.Viverra. Putorius. Finer furr; whether the Bigger; being commonly white under the throat. 6. MARTIN, Sable, Gennet.Martes. Lesser; ‖ either that which is wholly white, excepting a black spot on the tail: or that whose belly is white, the tip of the tail black, the back of a light dun. 7. STOAT, Ermine. WEESLE.Mustela. Amphibious; ‖ either that of a finer furr, having a broad, thick, scaly tail: or that of a courser furr. 8. CASTOR, Beaver. OTTER.Castor. Lutra.
As for that mongrel generation, which many Authors describe, as being begotten betwixt a Pard and a Lioness, being therefore called Leopard, as likewise that other Beast, commonly described by the name of Gulo or Ierf, and that other named Hyaena. There is reason to doubt, whether there be any such species of Animals, distinct from those here enumerated. Tho the belief of these (as of several other fictitious things) hath been propagated by Orators, upon account of their fitness to be made use of in the way of similitude. V. RAPA∣CIOUS DOG-KIND.V. RAPACIOUS Beasts of the DOG-Kind, may be distinguished into such as are either Europaean; Terrestrial; whether Bigger; ‖ either that which is noted for tameness and docility: or for wildness and enmity to Sheep▪ 1. Canis. Lupus.DOG, Bitch, Puppy, Whelp▪ Bark, bay, yelp. WOLF, Howle. Lesser; living usually in holes within the ground; ‖ either that which is noted for subtilty, having a bushy tail: or that which is noted for tenacity in biting, being esteemed commonly (tho falsly) to have the legs on the left side shorter then the other. 2. Vulpes. Taxus.FOX. BADGER, Grey, Brock. Amphibious; whether the Bigger, Being less hairy, having great tusks: or the lesser, being more hairy. 3. MORSE, Sea-horse. Phocas.SEAL, Sea-calf. Exotic; being noted for Gregariousness; going in great troops, and being said to assist the Lion in hunting. 4. Lupus aureus.JACKALL. Long snout, and feeding on Ants, and sometimes on roots; ‖ either that of a hairy: or that of a crustaceous covering. 5. Tamandua. Tau.ANT-BEARE. ARMADILLO. A bag under the belly; wherein the young ones are received, being apt to hang by the tail, having a mixed resemblance both to an Ape and a Fox. 6. Sivulpes.CARAGUYA. Amongst the several species of Animals, there is not any of greater variety in respect of accidental differences, then that of Dogs, which be∣ing the most familiar and domestick Beast, hath therefore several names assigned to it according to these differences, which are derived either from the Countries in which they are originally bred, and from which they are brought to other places, as England, Ireland, Iceland, Ginny, &c. or their bigness or littleness, or from their shape, colour, hairiness, &c. But they are chiefly distinguishable from those uses which men imploy them about, either in respect of
Delight; LAP-DOGS. Companying; when they serve only to follow us up and down. CURRS. Custody of places or things; MASTIFS. Hunting; either by Sight; GASE-HOUNDS. Smell; whether for Birds; SPANIELS Terrestrial; LAND SPANIELS. Aquatic; WATER SPANIELS. Beasts; of a Greater kind; HOUNDS. Lesser kind; BEAGLES. Swiftness; and running after Greater Beasts; GREYHOUNDS. Lesser Beasts; LURCHERS. Play; TUMBLERS. VI. OVIPAROUS BEASTS;VI. OVIPA∣ROUS BEASTS. may be distinguished by their diffe∣rent ways of progressive motion; whether Gradient; having four feet, the figure of their bodies being either more Broad; whose outward covering is Crustaceous; ‖ belonging either to the Land: or to the Water. 1. TORTOISE, Land-tortoise.Testudo. Testudo mari∣na. TURTLE, Sea-tortoise. Skinny; ‖ either that which is not poisonous: or that which is counted poisonous. 2. FROG, Tadpole, croke.Rana. Bufo. TOAD, Tadpole. Oblong; whose bodies and tails are more produced; whether the Greatest kind; being skinned and scaly; ‖ either the larger: or the lesser, the latter of which is described to have a dew-lap under the throat. 3. CROCODILE, Allegator, Cayman, Leviathan.Crocodilus. SENEMBI, Iguana. Middle kind; ‖ either that which is most common in other Countries, and of greatest varieties: or that which hath two toes behind in each foot, with prominencies upon the head like ears, being said (tho falsly) to feed only upon air. 4. LIZARD.Lacerta. Chamal. CHAMELION. Least kind; ‖ either that of a brownish colour with yellow spots: or that of a more dark colour, having a broad tail for swimming. 5. LAND SALAMANDER, Land Eft, Newt.Salamandra terrestris. Salamandra aquatica. WATER SALAMANDER, Eft, Newt. Creeping; being without feet, and of round oblong bodies; whether the Bigger kind; 6. SERPENT, Hiss.Serpn. Middle kind; ‖ either that which is not poisonous: or that which is counted poisonous, having two long, hollow, moveable teeth, hatch∣ing the Eggs within its body. 7. SNAKE, Hiss.Katrin t∣quata. Vipera. VIPER, Adder, Aspe. Least kind; commonly esteemed blind and poisonous. 8. SLOW WORM.Cailla.
That kind of Animal which is commonly called a Dragon, and descri∣bed to be a kind of Serpent with wings and feet (if there ever were any such thing) might possibly be some monstrous production, but there is reason to believe that there is no such standing species in nature. Besides the common kind of Frogs, there is another distinct sort, called the Green frog, feeding on leaves, having blunt broad toes. Besides the more usual sorts of Lizards, there are others described, as having some distinct peculiarity in respect of Bigger magnitude, and greenness of colour. called The green Lizard. Blunt broad toes. called The Facetane Li∣zard. Thicker body, having a tail annulated with scales. called Cordylus. Slender body and small feet, resembling a Slow worm. called Chalcidica, Lizard. Small head, and lesser scales. called Scinke. §. VI.HAving now dispatched the enumeration and description of the se∣veral species of Animals, I shall here take leave for a short digressi∣on, wherein I would recommend this, as a thing worthy to be observed, namely, that great difference which there is betwixt those opinions and apprehensions which are occasioned by a more general and confused view of things, and those which proceed from a more distinct considera∣tion of them as they are reduced into order. He that looks upon the Starrs, as they are confusedly scattered up and down in the Firmament, will think them to be (as they are sometimes stiled) innumerable, of so vast a multitude, as not to be determined to any set number: but when all these Starrs are distinctly reduced into particular constellations, and described by their several places, magni∣tudes and names, it appears, that of those that are visible to the naked eye, there are but few more then a thousand in the whole Firmament, and but a little more then half so many to be seen at once in any Hemi∣sphere, taking in the minuter kinds of them, even to six degrees of mag∣nitude. It is so likewise in other things: He that should put the Questi∣on, how many sorts of beasts, or birds, &c. there are in the world, would be answered, even by such as are otherwise knowing and learned men, that there are so many hundreds of them, as could not be enumerated; whereas upon a distinct inquiry into all such as are yet known, and have been described by credible Authors, it will appear that they are much fewer then is commonly imagined, not a hundred sorts of Beasts, nor two hundred of Birds. From this prejudice it is, that some hereticks of old, and some Atheisti∣cal scoffers in these later times, having taken the advantage of raising ob∣jections, (such as they think unanswerable) against the truth and au∣thority of Scripture, particularly as to the description which is given by Moses, concerning Noah's Ark, Gen. 6.15. where the dimensions of it are set down to be three hundred cubits in length, fifty in breadth, and thirty in height, which being compared with the things it was to contein, it seemed to them upon a general view, (and they confidently affirmed accordingly) that it was utterly impossible for this Ark to hold so vast a multitude of Animals, with a whole years provision of food for each of them.
This objection seemed so considerable, both to some of the ancient Fathers, and of our later Divines, who were otherwise learned and ju∣dicious men, but less versed in Philosophy and Mathematicks, that they have been put to miserable shifts for the solving of it. Origen, and Saint Austin, and several other considerable Authors, do for the avoiding of this difficulty affirm, that Moses being skilled in all the learning of the Aegyptians, doth by the measure of cubits, here applyed to the Ark, un∣derstand the Aegyptian Geometrical cubit, each of which (say they) did contein six of the vulgar cubits, namely, nine foot. But this doth upon several accounts seem very unreasonable, because it doth not appear, that there was any such measure amongst the Aegyptians or Iews, styled the Geometrical cubit: And if there were, yet there is no particular reason, why this sense should be applyed to the word cubit here, rather then in other places. It is said of Goliah,1 Sam. 17.4. that his height was six cubits and a span, which being understood of the Geometrical cubit, will make him fifty four foot high, and consequently his head must be about nine foot in the height or diameter of it, which must needs be too heavy for Da∣vid to carry. Others not satisfied with this solution, think they have found a better answer, by asserting that the stature of mankind being considerably larger in the first ages of the world, therefore the measure of the cubit must be larger likewise, and perhaps double to now what it is, which will much inlarge the capacity of the Ark. But neither will this afford any reasonable satisfaction. For if they will suppose men to be of a much bigger stature then, 'tis but reasonable that the like should be supposed of other animals also; in which case this answer amounts to nothing. Others will have the sacred cubit to be here intended, which is said to be a hands breadth longer then the civil cubit, Ezeck. 43.13. But there is not any reason or necessity for this. And 'tis generally believed, that the sacred cubit was used only in the measure of sacred Structures, as the Tabernacle and Temple. This seeming difficulty is much better solved by Ioh. Buteo in the Tract de Arca Noe, wherein supposing the cubit to be the same with what we now call a foot and a half, he proves Mathematically that there was a sufficient capacity in the Ark, for the coneining all those things it was designed for. But because there are some things liable to exception in the Philosophical part of that discourse, particularly in his enumeration of the species of Animals, several of which are fabulous, some not distinct species, others that are true species being left out; therefore I conceive it may not be improper in this place to offer another account of those things. It is plain in the description which Moses gives of the Ark, that it was divided into three stories, each of them of ten cubits or fifteen foot high, besides one cubit allowed for the declivity of the roof in the upper sto∣ry. And 'tis agreed upon as most probable, that the lower story was assigned to contein all the species of beasts, the middle story for their food, and the upper story, in one part of it, for the birds and their food, and the other part for Noah, his family and utensils. Now it may clearly be made out, that each of these stories was of a sufficient capacity for the conteining all those things to which they are assigned.
For the more distinct clearing up of this, I shall first lay down several tables of the divers species of beasts that were to be received into the Ark, according to the different kinds of food, wherewith they are usual∣ly nourished, conteining both the number appointed for each of them, namely, the clean by sevens, and the unclean by pairs, together with a conjecture (for the greater facility of the calculation) what proportion each of them may bear, either to a Beef, or a Sheep, or a Wolf; and then what kind of room may be allotted to the making of sufficient Stalls for their reception. Beasts feeding on Hay. Beasts feeding on Fruits, Roots and In∣sects. Carnivorous Beasts Number. Name. Proportion to Beeves. Breadth of Stalls Number. Name Proportion to Sheep. Breadth of the Stalls. Number. Name Proportion to Wolves. Breadth of their Stalls.       feet       feet       feet 2 Horse 3 20 2 Hog 4 20 2 Lion 4 10 2 Asse 2 12 2 Baboon 2 2 Beare 4 10 2 Camel 4 20 2 Ape 2 2 Tigre 3 8 2 Elephant 8 36 2 Monky 7 2 Pard 3 8 7 Bull 7 40 2 Sloth 2 Ounce 2 6 7 Urus 7 40 2 Porcupine 2 Cat 2 6 7 Bisons 7 40 2 Hedghog 2 Civet-cat 7 Bonasus 7 40 2 Squirril 2 Ferret 3 6 7 Buffalo 7 40 2 Ginny pig 2 Polecat 7 Sheep 1 30 2 Ant-bear 2 2 Martin 7 Stepciseros 1 2 Armadilla 2 2 Stoat 7 Broad-tail 1 2 Tortoise 2 2 Weesle 7 Goat 1 30         2 Castor 7 Stone-buck 1     21 20 2 Otter 7 Shamois 1         2 Dog 2 6 7 Antilope 1         2 Wolf 2 6 7 Elke 7 30         2 Fox 2 6 7 Hart 4 30         2 Badger 7 Buck 3 20         2 Jackall 7 Rein-deer 3 20         2 Caraguya 7 Roe 2 36                 2 Rhinocerot 8                 2 Camelopard 6 30                 2 Hare 2 Sheep.                 2 Rabbet                 2 Marmotto                       92 514             27 72 In this enumeration I do not mention the Mule, because 'tis a mungrel production, and not to be rekoned as a distinct species. And tho it be most probable, that the several varieties of Beeves, namely that which is stiled Vrus, Bisons, Bonasus and Buffalo▪ and those other varieties reckon∣ed
under Sheep and Goats, be not distinct species from Bull, Sheep, and and Goat; There being much less difference betwixt these, then there is betwixt several Dogs: And it being known by experience, what vari∣ous changes are frequently occasioned in the same species by several countries, diets, and other accidents: Yet I have ex abundanti to pre∣vent all cavilling, allowed them to be distinct species, and each of them to be clean Beasts, and consequently such as were to be received in by sevens. As for the Morse, Seale, Turtle, or Sea-Tortoise, Crocodile, Senembi, These are usually described to be such kind of Animals as can abide in the water, and therefore I have not taken them into the Ark, tho if that were necessary, there would be room enough for them, as will shortly appear. The Serpentine-kind, Snake, Viper, Slow-worm, Lizard, Frog, Toad, might have sufficient space for their reception, and for their nou∣rishment, in the Drein or Sink of the Ark, which was probably three or four foot under the floor for the standings of the Beasts. As for those lesser Beasts, Rat Mouse, Mole, as likewise for the several species of Insects, there can be no reason to question, but that these may find sufficient room in several parts of the Ark, without having any particular Stalls appoint∣ed for them. Tho it seem most probable, that before the Flood, both Men, Beasts and Birds did feed only upon Vegetables, as may appear from that place, Gen. 1.29, 30. And God said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yelding seed, to you it shall be for meat. And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat, com∣pared with chap. 9.3. Where after the Flood, when the productions of the Earth were become of less efficacy and vigor, and consequently less fit for nourishment, God saith to Noah, Every moving thing that liveth, shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all things. Yet because this proof is not so very cogent to convince a captious Adversa∣ry, but that he may still be apt to question, whether the Rapacious kinds of Beasts and Birds, who in the natural frame of their parts are peculiar∣ly fitted for the catching and devouring of their prey, did ever feed up∣on herbs and fruits; Therefore to prevent such Cavils, I shall be content to suppose that those Animals which are now Praedatory were so from the begining: upon which, it will be necessary to enquire, what kind of food might be proper and sufficient for them, during their abode in the Ark. Now 'tis commonly known, that the ruminant kind are most usually the prey for the rapacious kind of beasts. It appeares by the foregoing tables, that the beasts of the rapacious car∣nivorous kinds, to be brought into the Ark by pairs, were but forty in all, or twenty pairs, which upon a fair calculation are supposed equivalent, as to the bulk of their bodies and their food, unto twenty seven Wolves; but for greater certainty, let them be supposed equall to thirty Wolves: and let it be further supposed, that six Wolves will every day devour a whole Sheep, which all Men will readily grant to be more then sufficient for their necessary sustenance: According to this computation, five Sheep must be allotted to be devoured for food each day of the year, which amounts in the whole to 1825. Upon these suppositions there must be convenient room in the lower
story of the Ark to contein the forementioned sorts of beasts which were to be preserved for the propagating of their kinds, besides 1825. Sheep, which were to be taken in as food for the rapacious Beasts. And tho there might seem no just ground of exception, if these beasts should be stow'd close together, as is now usual in Ships, when they are to be transported for any long voyage; yet I shall not take any such advan∣tage, but afford them such fair Stalls or Cabins as may be abundantly suf∣ficient for them in any kind of posture, either standing, or lying, or turn∣ing themselves, as likewise to receive all the dung that should proceed from them for a whole year. And that the Ark was of a sufficient capacity for these purposes, will appear from the following Diagram. In which there is a partition at each end of the Ark, marked AA, of fifteen foot wide, and the breadth of the Ark being seventy five foot; these partitions must contein in them five Areas of fifteen foot square, and an Area of five foot square, being sufficient to contein four Sheep, therefore one of fifteen foot square must be capable of thirty six Sheep; Allowing one of these Areas at each end for stairs, there will eight of them remain, (viz. four at each end) to be reckoned upon for the conteining of Sheep; which eight will be capable of receiving 288 Sheep. Besides these partitions, at the end there are five several passages marked BB, of seven foot wide for the more convenient access to the se∣veral Stalls; the four Areas on the side marked CC, designed for Stalls, are each of them eighteen foot wide, and about two hundred foot long. And the two middle Areas marked DD, are each of them twenty five foot wide, and about two hundred foot long. Supposing the two middle Areas to be designed for Sheep; an Area of twenty five foot square must be capable of a hundred, and there being sixteen of these, they must be capable of 1600 Sheep, which being added to the former number of 288 will make 1888. somewhat more then 1825 the number assigned for those that were to be taken in for food. The four side Areas marked CC, being each of them eighteen foot wide, and two hundred foot long, will be more then sufficient to contein the several beasts which were to be preserved for the propagating of their kind; for which in the foregoing Tables their is allotted to the length of their Stalls only six hundred and six foot, besides the largeness of the Stalls allotted to each of them. So that there will be near upon two hundred foot overplus, for the reception of any other beasts, not yet enumerated or discovered. As for that fashion of the Keel of Ships now in use, whereby they are fitted for passage through the Waters, and to endure the motion of the Waves: This would not have been convenient for the business here de∣signed; The Ark being intended only for a kind of Float to swim above water, the flatness of its bottom, did render it much more capacious for the reception of those many living Creatures, which were to be contein∣ed in it. And tho towards the end of the Flood when it began to abate, God is said to Make a wind to pass over the Earth, whereby the waters were asswaged, Gen. 8.1. Yet 'tis not likely that in the time of the deluge, when the whole Earth was overflowed, that there should be any such rough and boisterous winds as might endanger a Vesel of this Figure; such winds usually proceeding from dry Land.
From hence it may be evident, that there was sufficient room in the lower story for the convenient reception of all the sorts of beasts that are yet known, and probably for those other kinds that are yet un∣known to these parts of the World, The next thing to be cleared up, is the capacity of the second story for conteining a years provision of food. In order to which 'tis to be ob∣served, that the several beasts feeding on hay, were before upon a fair cal∣culation supposed equal to ninety two Beeves: but to prevent all kind of Cavils which may be made at the proportioning of them, let them be as a hundred, besides the 1825. Sheep taken in for food. But now because these are to be devoured by five per diem, therefore the years provision to be made for them, is to be reckoned but as for half that number, viz. 912. These being divided by seven to bring them unto a proportion with the Beeves, will amount to 180, which added to the former hundred make 280, suppose three hundred. So then according to this supposition, there must be sufficient provision of hay in the second story to sustein three hundred Beeves for a whole year. Now 'tis observed (saith Buteo) by Columella, who was very well ver∣sed in the experiments of Husbandry, that thirty or forty pound of hay is ordinarily sufficient for an Ox for one day, reckoning twelve ounces in the pound. But we will suppose forty of our pounds. And 'tis asserted by Buteo upon his own tryal and experience, that a solid cubit of dryed hay, compressed, as it uses to be, when it hath lain any considerable time in Mows or Reeks, doth weigh about forty pound; so that for three hundred Beeves for a whole year there must be 109500. such cubits of hay, (i. e.) 365. multiplied by 300. Now the second story being ten cubits high, three hundred long, and fifty broad, must contein 150000. solid cubits, which is more by 40500. then what is necessary for so much compressed hay; and will allow space enough both for any kind of beams and pillars necessary for the fabric, as likewise for other reposito∣ries, for such fruits, roots, grain or seed, as may be proper for the nourish∣ment of any of the other Animals. And likewise for such convenient passages and apertures in the floor as might be necessary for the putting down of the hay to the Stalls in the lower story. From which it is mani∣fest that the second story was sufficiently capacious of all those things de∣signed for it· And then as for the third story; there can be no colour of doubt, but that one half of it will be abundantly sufficient for all the species of birds, tho they should be twice as many as are enumerated in the foregoing tables, together with food sufficient for their sustenance, because they are generally but of small bulk, and may easily be kept in several partiti∣ons or Cages over one another. Nor is there any reason to question, but that the other half would afford space enough both for Noah's family and utensils. Upon the whole matter, it doth of the two, appear more difficult to as∣sign a sufficient number and bulk of necessary things, to answer the capa∣city of the Ark, rather then to find sufficient room for those several species of Animals already known. But because it may be reasonably presumed, that there are several other species of beasts and birds, especially in the undiscovered parts of the world, besides those here enumerated, therefore 'tis but reasonable to suppose the Ark to be of a bigger capacity, then
what may be sufficient for the things already known, and upon this ac∣count it may be asserted, that if such persons who are most expert in Phi∣losophy or Mathematicks, were now to assign the proportions of a Vessel that might be sutable to the ends here proposed, they could not (all things considered) find out any more accommodate to these purposes, then those here mentioned. From what hath been said it may appear, that the measure and capa∣city of the Ark, which some Atheistical irreligious men make use of, as an argument against the Scripture, ought rather to be esteemed a most rational confirmation of the truth and divine authority of it. Especially if it be well considered, that in those first and ruder ages of the World, when men were less versed in Arts and Philosophy, and therefore pro∣bably more obnoxious to vulgar prejudices then now they are, yet the capacity and proportions of the Ark are so well adjusted to the things it was to contein; whereas if it had been a meer humane invention, 'tis most probable, that it would have been contrived according to those wild apprehensions, which (as I said before) do naturally arise from a more confused and general view of things, as much too big, as now such men are apt to think it too little, for those ends and purposes to which it was designed. CHAP. VI. The Parts of Animate Bodies; whether I. More Peculiar, or II. Mor General. §. I.UNder this Head of PECULIAR PARTS of Animate Bodies are comprehended all the Parts that belong to the whole kind of Plants:PECULIAR PARTS of Animate Bo∣dies. But as to Animals, it contains onely such as are peculiar to some of them, not common to all. And these are comprehended with the others under the same Head, because I could not otherwise place them conveniently to my purpose. They are distinguishable by their rela∣tion to Plants; as being LASTING PARTS. I. ANNUAL PARTS. II. KINDS OF FRUIT. III. Animals; belonging chiefly unto SWIMMING Animals. IV. FLYING Animals. V. GOING Animals. VI.
I. By LASTING PARTS of Plants are meant such as do usually con∣tinue during the life of the Plant, and are not renewed every year.I. LASTING PARTS of Plants. And because the chief of these is styled WOOD, therefore may that be here adjoyned by way of affinity. These are distinguishable by their Fabric and Consistence, together with their Position and Shape; being either more Hard and Solid; considered according to the Position; as to the Earth, wherein Plants do grow; being either Within it; to which may be adjoyned those parts in the body of the Plant which have some analogy to Roots. 1. ROOT, Radical, radicate, eradicate. KNOT, Knurle, Knag. Without it; the upright part above ground; ‖ either the greater, upon, and from which the branches do grow: or the lesser, growing up from the same root. 2. STOCK, Stem, Trunk, Body, Stalk, Stub, Stump. SUCKER, Shoot. Plant it self, shooting from the Stem of it; ‖ whether greater and spread: or less, and pointed, being common likewise to Fishes, &c. 3. BRANCH, Sprig, Sion, young Shoot, Graft, Bough, Arm of a Tree, Slip, Lop. THORN, Prickle, spinous. Shape and Figure; ‖ more cylindrical and stiff: or more taper and flexile. 4. STICK, Staff, Stake, Cudgel, Scepter, Mace, Croser, Virg, Leading-staff, Truncheon, Battoon, Rest, Scatch, Crutch, Helve, Perch, Tally. WAND, Twig, Rod, Switch, Pole. Soft. Not dissolvable; ‖ outward: or inward. 5. RINDE, Bark, Pill. PITH. Dissolvable, by Water, or by Fire; being ‖ either of an aqueous: or an unctuous nature. 6. GUM. RESIN. Liquid; of a ‖ more watery: or more unctuous consistence. 7. JUICE, Sap, succulent. BALSAM.
II. ANNU∣AL patts of Plants.II. By ANNUAL Parts are meant such as are renewed every year; which are either More principal; those parts whereby Plants do propagate their kinds. Antecedent to the Seed; either that most tender part of a Plant, con∣siderable for its beauty and colour, adhering to the first rudiments of the Seed: or that which is answerable to this in Willows and Nut-trees, &c. 1. FLOWER, Blossom, Bloom, blown, Nosegay, Posey. CATKIN, Palm. The Seed it self; in respect of the Parts belonging to it, and encompassing it; ‖ either the most Soft and succulent; betwixt the outward Skin and the inward Seed vessel: or the most hard crustaceous part containing the Seed. 2. PULP. STONE, Shell. Thin part, for Covering: or Oblong, for Defence. 3. HUSK, Hull, Shell, Skin, Chaff, Boled. BEARD. Aggregate of Fruit or Seed; of a Figure ‖ more gross and confused: or more narrow, oblong, and taper. 4. CLUSTER, Bunch, Pannicle. EAR, Spike, Spire, Bent. Less principal; to be further distinguished by the Figure, in respect of Thickness or Thinness; either such as are more thick, namely the first little swellings in the growth of a Plant, or of the parts of it: or such as are more thin, namely those laminated parts, belonging either to Plants themselves, or to their flowers. 5. SPROUT, Bud, shoot, burgeon, pullutate, repullutate, germinate, put forth, spring forth. LEAF, Foliags, Blade. Length; whether such as are Proper to the Flower; the greater, standing up singly in the middle of the flower: or the lesser, being small threddy filaments with∣in the flower, whereof there are usually many together. 6. STILE. STAMEN, tuft. Common to other parts of the plant; ‖ either those small stemms, up∣on which flowers and leaves do grow: or those kinds of threddy shoots, by which climbing Plants do take hold of and twist about the things that stand next to them 7. STALK, Footstalk, shank. TENDREL, Clasper. Hollowness; conteining within it, either ‖ the leaves of the flower: or the fruit. 8. CUP, Perianthium. PERICARPIUM.
III. By FRUITS are meant those more Succulent parts of Plants, which are either the Receptacles of Seed, or else the Seeds themselves;III. Kinds of FRUITS. to which may be adjoyned▪ by way of affinity, the general name denoting the EXCRESCENCES of Plants, as Galls are of Oken leaves, &c. Fruits may be distinguished into such as are Receptacles of Seed. Eaten commonly by men; whose eatable part is covered with a Soft Skin. Without Stones; being generally a larger fruit. 1. APPLE, Pomiferous. With Stones; ‖ either the greater kind, conteining one single stone encompassed with an esculent pulp: or the less, growing either in Clusters, or dispersedly on Trees, Shrubs and Herbs, conteining generally several small seeds or stones in the pulp or husk of it. 2. PLUM, Pruin, Pruniferous. BERRY, Bacciferous. Hard Shell; namely that kind of fruit, whose only esculent part is inclosed in a hard covering. 3. NUT, Nuciferous. Not eaten commonly by men, but by beasts. Consisting of one only Seed, in a Seed-vessel; ‖ roundish: or flat-fi∣gured. 4. MAST, Acorn, Pannage. KEY. Conteining several Seeds; being ‖ more solid: or hollow. 5. CONE, Apple. COD, Husk, Pod, Shell, shale, siliquous. Seed; ‖ being the most minute kind of Fruit, whereby Plants propa∣gate their Kinds; or the Inmost parts of Seeds. 6. GRAIN, Corn, Kern. KERNEL. The Peculiar parts of Animals here enumerated are said to be such as belong chiefly, not only, to the several kinds of Swimming, Flying, Going Animals; because there are some under each Head that belong also to other Animals. So Spawn and Crust belong to Insects, and some Beasts, as well as to Fish. So Trunk or Proboscis, and Egg do belong to some Going Animals, as well as to Flying. So doth Embroyo to a Bat and all Viviparous Fish, as well as to Going Animals. But these Parts are more commonly and generally found amongst those Kinds under which they are listed.
IV. Parts pe∣culiar To SWIMMING ANIMALS.IV. Those Parts peculiar chiefly to SWIMMING ANIMALS, to which Custom hath ascribed distinct names, do serve either for their Outward Covering; with respect to different Magnitudes. Lesser; being a Thin lamin. 1. SCALE. Greater; ‖ opening usually upon a Ioint, as in Oisters, &c. or an entire Armature, without such opening, as in Lobsters, &c. 2. SHELL, Testaceous. CRUST-aceous, Shell. Respiration; those Opening parts on the sides of the Head, which are thought to supply the place of Lungs. 3. GILL. Progressive motion; serving either to Direct this motion; by feeling such objects as lye in the way, being long prominencies, standing off from the head, common to several Insects. 4. FEELERS, Horns, Antennae. Assist in this motion; whether of Swimming; as in most kinds of skinned and scaly fish. Internal; a thin membrane filled with air, by the help of which Fishes poise themselves in the water. 5. SWIMMING BLADDER. External; ‖ either those thin broad substances, standing off from the body of the Fish: or those long slender parts belonging to these 6. FINN. RAY, Radius, Pinnula. Going; as in crustaceous exanguious Animals. 7. CLAW.. Procreation; belonging either to the ‖ Males: or Females. 8. MILT, Soft row. SPAWN, Hard row.
V. Te Parts peculiar TO FLYING ANIMALS are eitherV. Parts pe∣culiar TO FLYING ANIMALS. Not fleshy; such as serve for Outward covering, which is done by small oblong bodies, with hair-like branches growing from both sides of them, the bottom of which is a kind of a hollow Cylinder like a reed. 1. FEATHER, Plume, callow, fledge, pluck. QUILL. Progressive motion; which in such kind of Creatures is twofold. Flying; which is done by those parts fastned on the shoulders, by the motion of which they strike the Air: These are generally an aggre∣gate of Feathers; but in Bats and Flies of a Skinny consistence. To which may be adjoyned that aggregate of hindermost Fea∣thers, whereby they steer themselves in their Flight. 2. WING. TRAIN, Tail. Going; by a Foot with several Toes ‖ divided: or united by some film for their better help in Swimming. 3. TALON, Pounce, Claw, Clutch. FLAT FOOT, Palmipede. Feeding and Fighting; ‖ the mouth of a Bird: or a kind of hollow tube through which some things suck their nourishment. 4. BEAK, Bill. TRUNK, Proboscis, Snout. Fighting onely; of a sharp figure; ‖ either on the side of the Leg: or in the Tail, counted poisonous. 5. SPUR. STING, Prickle. Procreation; ‖ a roundish body covered with a Shell: or a yellowish case. containing a Maggot, which is transmuted into a Moth or Butterfly. 6. EGG, Nit, Flyblow. CHRYSALITE, Aurelia. Fleshy; belonging to the Fore-part; and placed either ‖ on the top of the head: or under the Iaw. 7. COMB, Crest. GILL, Wattle. Hinder-part; ‖ either that Protuberance about the end of the Back-bone: or that Cavity or Glandule in it containing an unctuous substance for the suppling of the Feathers. 8. RUMP. OIL-BOX.
VI. Parts pe∣culiar TO GOING ANIMALS.VI. The Parts peculiar belonging TO GOING ANIMAL are such as serve for Outward covering; considerable according to the More general name; denoting a small oblong flexile body, growing Plant-like out of the skin: or Aggregates of these, growing thick to∣gether and curled. 1. HAIR. WOOL. Particular kinds; ‖ either a more big and stiff kind of hair: or the more small and softer kinds of hairy substances, sometimes ascribed to Feathers. 2. BRISTLE· DOWN, Lint. Aggregates; more proper to Hair: or to Wool. 3. FURR, Ermin, Minivor, &c. Timber. FLEECE, Flu. Hairy parts; ‖ on the Chin or Face: or on the Neck. 4. BEARD, Mustach, Whisker. MANE, Crest. Progressive motion; whether ‖ in whole or cloven-footed Animals: or in multifidous or clawed Animals. 5. HOOF. NAIL, Claw. Fighting; the foremost part serving for offence against greater Animals: or the hindermost part serving for defence against Insects. 6. HORN, Head, goring. TAIL, Scut, Dock, Crupper, Single of Deer. Procreation; the young in the Womb before its birth: or the bag wherein it is contained. 7. EMBRYO, Child in the Womb. SECUNDINE, After-birth. Of GENERAL PARTS. §. II.BY GENERAL PARTS of Animals are meant such as are more com∣mon to the whole kind, or at least the more perfect kinds, as Beasts and Men; there being several parts enumerated under this head, as Milk, Marrow, Bone, Gristle, Tooth, Dug, Rib, Navel, all under the fifth Dif∣ference, and some under the sixth, which are not common to all sorts of In∣sects, Fishes, and Birds. These are distinguishable into Homogeneous. CONTAINED. I. CONTAINING. II. Heterogeneus. External. HEAD. III. TRUNK. IV. LIMM. V. INTERNAL. VI.
I. CONTAINED HOMOGENEOUS PARTS are such kind of fluid Bodies as are distinguishable by their various Consistences and Uses,I. CON∣TAINED HOMOGE∣NEOUS PARTS. and not by any difference of Shape or Figure; because, being liquid, they have no Shape of their own, but must be contained termino alieno. They are either more Thin and Aerial. 1. SPIRIT-uous. Liquid and Fluid; being either More limpid; and of an aqueous transparency, ‖ for diluting and at∣tenuating the Humors: or a prepared Juice for nourishing the se∣veral parts. 2. SERUM, Whey. SUCCUS NUTRITIUS. More opacous and thick. Not generally diffused; being useful either for Nutrition; ‖ a whitish humor in the Mesentery extracted from the food before Sanguification: or receiving a farther digestion in the breasts for the nourishment of the Foetus. 3. CHYLE. MILK, Cream, Beestings, milch, Dairy. Generation; ‖ common to both Sexes: to which may be adjoyned that excrementitious moisture proper to some Females. 4. SPERM, Seed, seminal. MENSTRUA, Courses. Diffused through the whole, and mixed together in one Mass; con∣sidered either according to the General name; denoting that red juice in the bodies of the more perfect Animals 5. BLOUD, Crimson. Particular kinds; of which this whole mass is said to consist, com∣monly stiled the four Humors, and according to the old Theo∣ry, esteemed to be either Hot; and ‖ moist: or dry. 6. BLOUD, Sanguin. CHOLER, Gall. Cold; and ‖ moist: or dry. 7. PHLEGM, pituitous. MELANCHOLY, Choler adust. More consistent; ‖ in the Head, the organ of the inward Senses: or in the Cavity of the Bones, for the moistning of them. 8. BRAIN. MARROW, medullary.
II. CONTAINING HOMOGENEOUS PARTS are distinguishable by their Qualities of Hardness and Softness,II. CON∣TAINING HOMOGE∣NEOUS PARTS. or by their Figures and Uses; being either of a More hard Consistence; For strengthning of the Fabric; ‖ either the most hard and dry: or less hard; both devoid of Sense 1. BONE, Skull. GRISTLE, Cartilage. For uniting of the Bones and Muscles; ‖ either oblong: or the extremity of the Muscle affixed to the part which is to be moved. 2. LIGAMENT. TENDON. More soft Consistence; being either Thin and broad; for covering of ‖ the outward parts: or the inward parts. 3. SKIN, Cuticle, Fell, Hide, Pelt, Slough, flay, excoriate, gall. MEMBRANE, Film, Pannicle, Tunicle, Skin, Pericardium, Pe∣ricranium, Peritonaeum. Oblong and narrow; Hollow; for conveyance of the Bloud ‖ to the Heart: or from the Heart. 4 VEIN, Venal. ARTERY-all. Solid; for conveyance of the Spirits, serving for Sense: or those small hair-like-bodies of which the Muscles consist. 5. NERVE, Sinew. FIBRE, Grain, Filament. Crass; of no determinate Figure; useful for Motion; according to the name, ‖ more general: or particular. 6. FLESH, Parenchyma, carnal, Carnosity, incarnate. MUSCLE, Brawn. Preserving from Heat and Cold: or the Percolation of some humors. 7. FAT, Suet, Tallow. GLANDULE, Kernel, Emunctory, Almond, Bur, Sweet-bread, Nut.
III. Amongst External containing Heterogeneous parts, that which is the chief, being the Seat and Residence of the Soul, is the HEAD:III. Of the HEAD. To which may be opposed the other part styled BODY, Carcass. The parts of the Head are either More general; ‖ either the fore-part less hairy: or the hinder-part more hairy. 1. FACE, Visage, Aspect, Countenance, Favour, Look, Minc, Physi∣ognomy, Feature, Vizzard, Mask. PATE, Scalp, Noddle, Sconce, Scull, Brain-pan. More particular parts of the Head and Face are either More properly Organical; for Sense; whether such parts as are External; used for Seeing, or Hearing. 2. EY, Ocular, optic, see, view, look, kenn, behold, gaze, pore. EAR, Lug, hear, hearken, uricular. Tasting, or Smelling: ‖ either that Scissure of the Face through which we breath and receive our nourishment: or that hol∣low prominence, through which we breath and smell. 3. MOUTH▪ Chaps, muzzle, oral, devour. NOSE, Snowt, Nostril, smell. Internal; used for Tasting, Speaking, or Eating; Convex; ‖ either that of a soft Fleshy substance, whereof there is but one: or that of a most hard and dry consistence, whereof there are many. 4. TONGUE, lick. TOOTH, Fang, Tusk, bite, gnaw, nibble, Holders, Grinders. Concave; either the upper inward part of the Mouth: or the open passage through the Neck into the middle region of the Body. 5. PALATE, Roof. THROAT, guttural, jugular. Less properly Organical; but contributing to the making up the Fabric of the Face; distinguishable by their various Positions into Vpper and fore-right; ‖ Extremity of the Face: or Protuberance over the Eye. 6. FOREHEAD, Brow, Front. EY-BROW. Lateral; ‖ towards the middle: or towards the upper parts. 7. CHEEK, Iole. TEMPLES. Lower; Fore-right; ‖ either the upper and lower Extremity of that Scis∣sure which makes the Mouth: or the Extremity of the Face. 8. LIP. CHIN. Lateral; 9. JAW, Chap, Mandible, Iole. PLACE OF TONSILLAE.
IV. Of the TRUNK.IV. By TRUNK is meant the middle part of the Body, considered abstractly from Head and Limms. The Parts of the Trunk are distinguish∣able by their various Positions, being either Vpper; towards the top of the Trunk. Not determined to fore or hinder part, but common to both; ‖ the Stem-like of the Head: or the upper Convexity of Breast and Back. 1. NECK, Nape, Dulap. SHOULDER, Scapulary. Determined to the Fore-part; ‖ more general: or more specially the glandulous part designed for milk in females. 2. BREAST, Pectoral, Bosom. DUG, Vdder, Teat, Nipple, Pap, Breast. Hinder part; more general: or more specially the Bones of it. 3. BACK. VERTEBRA, Spondyl, spinal, Chine. Middle. Hinder-part; ‖ the direct Muscles: or transverse Bones. 4. LOIN, Chine. RIB. Side-part; ‖ more general: or more specially the lower part of it. 5. SIDE, Lateral, collateral. FLANK, Rand. Fore-part; more general: or more specially the concave middle part of it. 6. BELLY, Paunch, Pannel, Peritenaeum. NAVEL, Vmbilical. Lower; Fore-part; the concave part ‖ between the belly and thighs: or seat of the Privities between the thighs. 7. GROIN. SHARE, Twist. Hinder-part; ‖ more general: or specially the Cavity. 8. BUTTOCK, Breech, Haunch, Ham. FUNDAMENT, Dock.
V. By LIMM or Member is meant any special part designed for Action,V. Of the LIMMS. moveable upon, and distinguishable by its Ioints: for which reason the word JOINT may be annexed to it by way of affinity, one being the thing moved, and the other the thing upon which the motion is made. They are either Vpper Limm. Innermost: or next to the Trunk, with its Ioint. 1. ARM. SHOULDER. Middlemost. 2. CUBIT. ELBOW, Pinion. Outermost. 3. HAND-le, wield, Manual, manage, Palm, Fist, Clutch, Grasp, Haft, Hilt, Glove. WRIST. Lower Limm. Innermost: or next to the Trunk. 4. THIGH, Hip, Ham, Haunch, Pestle. HUCKLE. Middlemost. 5. SHANK, Leg, Shin, Calf. KNEE. Outermost. 6. FOOT, Hock, Trotter, tread, trample, stamp, Instep. HEEL, Calcitrate, kick, Pastern. Common both to upper and lower Limm; the Joints of which may be distinguished by the order of first, second, or third: or innermost, middlemost, or outermost. 7. FINGER, Toe, Thumb. KNUCKLE.
VI. Of the INWARDS.VI. Containing Heterogeneous Internal parts, called INWARDS, En∣trals, Bowels, Foy, Pluck, Purtenance, Vmbels, Hastlet, Garbage, Giblets, reckoning from the uppermost, may be distinguished by their Order, Shape and Uses, into Vpper; towards the Summity of the Body. Hollow and oblong; for the conveyance of the ‖ Nourishment: or of the Breath. 1. GULLET. WIND-PIPE, Rough Artery, Weasand. Massie and more solid; within the Breast; for ‖ Bloud-making: or Breathing. 2. HEART, Cordial, Core, Pericardium. LUNGS, Lights. Thin and broad; for partition ‖ transverse, betwixt the upper and low∣er Belly: or direct, betwixt the Lobes of the Lungs. 3. DIAHRAGM, Midriff. MDIASTINE. Lower; distinguishable Both by their Shapes and Uses. Hollow; ‖ wide, but not long, for containing▪ and digesting of Food: long, but not wide, for conveying of the Food and Excrement. 4. STOMACH, Maw, Paunch, Ventricle, Craw, Crop, Gorge, Pouch, Gizzard, Tripe. GUT, Entrails, Bowels, Garbage, Chitterling, Colon. Massie and solid; for separating of ‖ Choler: or of Melancholy. 5. LIVER, Hepatic. SPLEEN, Milt. Thin and broad; by which the Guts are ‖ connected: or covered. 6. MESENTERY. CAUL, Kell. By their Uses alone, as being for Separating the Vrine: or containing the Vrine or the Gall. 7. KIDNEY, Reins. BLADDER, Vesicle. Generation; denoting ‖ the parts for Generation: or the Glandules for preparing the Sperm. 8. PRIVITIES, Genitals, Pizzle, Yard, Fore-skin, Prepuce. TESTICLE, Stone, geld, spay, Eunuch. Conception in Females, namely, the part containing the Faetus. 9. WOMB, Mother, Matrix, hysterical, uterine.
CHAP. VII. Concerning the Predicament of Quantity, viz. I. Magnitude. II. Space; and III. Measure. THe chief notions belonging to the Predica∣ment of Quantity are reducible to these general Heads; MAGNITUDE. SPACE. MEASURE. Of MAGNITUDE. The word MAGNITUDE is intended to signifie all the notions of continued Quantity:§. I▪ to which may be adjoyned by way of affinity the word EXTENSION, by which is meant that kind of Quantity whereby a thing is said to have partem extra partem, one part out of another, being the same thing with the former under another Consideration. Magnitudes are distinguishable according to their DIMENSIONS. I. MUTUAL RELATIONS to one another. II. AFFECTIONS, in respect of Figure; whether SIMPLE. III. Compound; either LINEARY. IV. PLANARY. V. SOLIDARY. VI. As for Oration, which is enumerated in the usual Systems as one of the Species of Quantity; that is now by common consent acknowledged to be very improperly stiled Quantity; and therefore it is left out here, and referred to another place. I. That kind of Quantity whereby the Magnitude of Bodies is to be mea∣sured, is called DIMENSION.I. DIMEN∣SION. To which may be adjoined upon account of Affinity, That notion of Quantity, whereby a thing is capable of being se∣parated into several parts, DIVISION, distribute, part. Dimensions are of a four-fold difference. The least of Magnitudes, so styled by those who write de Indivisibilibus, as being in their account infinitely little. 1. POINT, Prick, Tittle, Punctilio, Ace, Iot, Whit. The second kind, described by the flux of a point, or composed of infi∣nite such points, is styled. 2. LINE, delineate, rule. The third, described by the draught of a line, or composed of infinite such lines. 3. SUPERFICIES, Plain, Surface. To which may be annexed, that more particular notion of Superficies, called AREA, Plot; Bed, Page. The fourth, described by the lifting up a Superficies, or composed of infi∣nite Superficies. 4. SOLID, Body, Bulk. By these may be express'd those Algebraical notions of Absolute, Line∣ary, Quadratic, Cubic; and so, continuing this Table, Quadrato-Quadratic, Quadrato-Cubic, Cubo-Cubic, Quadrato-Cubo-Cubic, &c. as far as one pleases.
II. The MUTUAL RELATIONS of one Dimension to another are either ofII. MUTU∣AL RELA∣TIONS. Point to line; as being either in ‖ the midst: or extremities of it. 1. CENTER. POLE, Zenith, Nadyr. Point to Lines, or Line to Plains; which do mutually ‖ either meet: or intersect. 2. VERTEX. INTERSECTION, Cut. Line to Plain; or Plain to Solid. Angular; being ‖ either in the midst: or the extremities of it. 3. DIAGONAL. SIDE. Round; being either Extern; ‖ touching: or cutting it. 4. TANGENT. SECANT. Intern; Central; ‖ either more general, passing from side to side: or particularly that which passes from Pole to Pole. 5. DIAMETER, Ray. AXIS. Not central; ‖ either from Periphery to Diameter: or from Pe∣riphery to Periphery. 6. SINE. CHORD. Line to Line, Plain to Plain, or Solid to Solid; having Bare respect to one another in regard of Distance; ‖ either being aequidistant: or else removing farther: or approaching nearer. 7. PARALLEL. DIVERGING, Reclining. CONVERGING, inclining. Position; making an Angle, oblique: or right: or parallel. 8. OBLIQUE, a-skue, a-slope, awry, Declivity, shelving, slaunt, splay, skue, slope, wry, steep, incline, lean, glance, swagg, a∣squint, leer. DIRECT, Erect, upright, perpendicular, advance, precipitate, headlong, down-right, up an end, set up, prick up. TRANSVERSE, Cross, overthwart, thwart, traverse, point-blank. Mutual Contact; ‖ either returning from the other: or cutting through the other.. 9. REFLECTED, Bound, rebound, recoil, repercussion, rever∣berate▪ rebuff. REFRACTED.
III. To the Affections of Magnitudes,III. SIMPLE FIGURE. in respect of more SIMPLE FIGURE, may be adjoyned the general notion of FIGURE, Shape, Fea∣ture, Fashion, Form, Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the Make, well set, or pro∣portioned, transform, transfigure, deface, disfigure. These Affections may be distinguished ino such as belong Onely to Lines drawn from point to point; ‖ the nearest way: or not the nearest way 1. STRAIGHTNESS, Right, direct, point-blank. CROOKEDNESS, Curve, a-wry, hooked, bow, bend, wry, embow, winding, indirect, fetch a compass. To lines and Plains; whether considered Absolutely; in General; contained within ‖ one line, whose every part is equally distant from the same Center: or three or more lines, whose extre∣mities touch one another. 2. CIRCLE, Periphery, Circumference, environ, encircle, surround, Ring, Runde, Epicycle. ANGLE, Corner, Coyn, Nook, Elbow, Polygon. Special; of the Angular, ‖ whether of ninety degrees: or more: or less. 3. RIGHT ANGLE. OBTUSE, blunt, dull, ACUTE, sharp, keen, whet. Respectively; in Bodies whose superficies is composed ‖ either all of straight lines: or of lines bending in the midst, outward: or inward. 4. PLAIN, level, flat, even. CONVEX, prominent, gibbous, protuberant, turgid, embowed. CONCAVE, Hollow, Cavity, Pit, Hole. To Plains or Solids, of Simple Figure; whose superficies is ‖ Circular: or Angular of equal sides. 5. SPHERE, Orb, Globe, Ball, Bullet, Round, Bullet, Pomander, Pom∣mel, Bede CUBE, Dy. Mixed Figures; described either by the Lifting up ‖ of a Circle: or of an Angular plain. 6. CYLINDER, Bar, Column, Cann, Cannon, Role. PRISM, Bar, Wedge. Laying on, in progression from a Point, infinite Plains ‖ circular: or angular. 7. CONE, Taper, Spire, Steeple, Shaft, Pinnacle. PYRAMID, Spire, Steeple, Shaft, Pinnacle, Obelisk. To Lines, or Plains, or Solids; denoting either The diferent Sections of a Cone, being cut ‖ either parallel to the sides of it: or besides the Parallel either way. 8. PARABOLA-icall. HYPERBOLE. ELLIPSIS, oval. The revolution of a Line about ‖ a Cone: or Cylinder. 9. SPIRAL, Serpentine, turbinated, wreath, coyling, worn. HELIX, Winding.
IV. Com∣pound Fi∣gures LI∣NEARY.IV. COMPOUND FIGURES of Magnitude LINEARY by unclo∣sed Lines, are either More Simple; by One Line; whether ‖ solid: or hollow. 1. PIN, Gad. Nail, Peg, Tag, Tack, Tenter. Needle, Probe. HOLE, Hollow, Pore, Vent, Meash, Orifice, Meuse, punch, perfo∣rate, run thorough. Two lines; The end of one meeting with the end of the other; ‖ either con∣vex: or concave. Sharp; 2. TOOTH, Cusp, Point, Neb, Scrag, Tine, Tenon, Cog, ingrail, indented. NOTCH, Nick, Nock, crenated, Gap, hatcht, inveck, indented. Blunt. 3. PROTUBERANCE, Prominence, Process, Stud, Boss, Excrescence, Gibbous, rump, Bunch, Knob, Rub, jutting, rising, tuberous, standing out, stick out, goggle, copped, turgid, Brow, Hillock, Knob, Knot, Node, Cragg, Scrag, Lobe, gorbellied, heave, swell, strut. DENT, Dimple, Sinking, Dock, Crease, indent, Hole, Pit. The end of one with the midst of the other meeting: or the midst of one with the midst of the other cutting. 4. FIGURE of the letter T, Crutch. CROSS, Decussation, athwart, Turn-stile. Three Lines; at Several points making Angles; either ‖ on the same side: or on di∣verse sides. 5. STAPLE. WINDLE. The same point ‖ meeting, or cutting; which is applicable likewise to more lines then three. 6. TUFT▪ Lock, Tassel, Tresses, Thrum, Hassock, Nap, Rug, Fringe. ASTERISC. More Compounded; Distinctly; Pin ‖ with versatil Pin: or with versatil Lamin. 7. WHIP, Flail, Scourge. FLAG, Fane, Banroll, Penon. Pin ‖ with Tooth or Protuberance, &c. or with Notch or Dent. 8. HOOK, Crook, Clasp, Hasp, Tatches, Flook, Tenter, Cramp-iron. FORK, Prong, horned. Mixedly, with some kind of Alternation; ‖ either with Protuberance and Dent: or with Staple and its reverse. 9. UNDULATED, waved, winding. CRENATED, Battlement.
V. Compound Figures of Magnitude PLANARY,V. Com∣pound Fi∣gures PLA∣NARY. expressible by clo∣sed Lines, may be distinguished into such as do either Comprehend Superficies. Straight; either of three: or of four Angles. 1. TRIANGLE. SQUARE, Quadrangle, Quadrate, Diamond figure, Rhomb-oid, Lozenge, Parallellogram. Curve; either ‖ Round: or Oblong. 2. RING, Ferule, Hoop, Annulet, Collet, Rundle, Rowel. LOOP, Button hole, Eye, Link, Noose, Halter. Mixed; being either ‖ part of a Ring with one straight: or a whole Ring with several Diameters. 3. BOW. WHEEL. Consist in being Superficies; as the precedent Figures fluxed into breadth. So the Flux of a Pin: or a Hole, do make 4. LAMIN, Flake, Leaf, Board, Plank, Lath, Plate, Schedule, Scrole, Sheet, Wafer, Cake, Leant, Flap, Label, Coit. CHINK, Crevise, Fissure, Cleft, Crack, Cranny, Chap, Flaw, Rift, Split, Slit, Loop-hole, cleave, spring a leak. The FIGURE T or Cross and Asterisc, do make 5. TRESSEL, Table. PINION, Nut. Cusp: or Notch, do make. 6. EDG, Sharp. GVTTER, Chamfer. Protuberance: and Dent. 7. RIDGE, Bank, Dam, Bridg, Edg, Ledg. FVRROW, Ditch, Dike, Kennel, Channel, Foss, Trench, Dock, Drein, Cut, Dimple, Rivel, Shrivel, Wrinkle, rumple, pucker, Pleit. Staple and Windle 8. FORM. STEP, Grees. Square and Ring. 9. TUBE SQUARE. TUBE ROUND, or Pipe, Spout, Trunck, Tunnel.
VI. Compound Figures of Magnitude Solidary,VI Com∣pound Fi∣gures SOLI∣DARY. may be distinguished in∣to such as are either Intern; denoting the inner parts of a Magnitude to be ‖ either full of small Cavities: or to be one great Cavity: or to have no Cavity. 1. POROUSNESS, Spunginess, fungous, sinking, hollow. HOLLOWNESS, Cavity, concave, Grot, Cave, Den. MASSINESS, solid, Bulk. Extern; compounded either of Sphere or Cube, with ‖ Cylinder: or with Cone. 2. BOTTLE, Button, Bolt-head. PIN, headed. Cylinder or Prism, with Diverse Figures; whether ‖ Cube and Pyramid: or Cone and Pyramid. 3. PEDESTAL. TURRET or Tent, Tower, Pinnacle. Another of the same kind; either ‖ perpendicular: or transverse. 4. GUDGEON. MALLET. Cone with Cone; having ‖ Base to Base: or Vertex to Vertex. 5. BUOY FIGURE. HOUR-GLASS FIGURE. Elliptic; representing the figure of a Sphere crushed, ‖ either about the midst by a Hoop: or at the ends by two opposite Plains. 6. OVAL, Elliptical. BOWL. Spirals: or Helixes. 7. BOTTOM, Clue, glomerate, wind about. SKEIN, Hanke, Reel. Of SPACE. THe word SPACE, Scope, Room, Compass, Interim, Interval, (accor∣ding to the common use of it) is a name importing the more ge∣neral notion of that wherein any thing is contained or done;§. II. Comprehending both Time. Place. Situation. I. TIME.I. By TIME, Tract, Tide, Process, Opportunity, Season, Continuance, is meant continued successive Quantity, having for its common term, IN∣STANT, Moment, Trice, Nick. This is distinguishable according to the Simple differences of it. 1. PRESENT, at this time, now, immediately, instantly▪ current, ready. PAST, expired, former, fore-going, ago, already, even now, hereto∣fore, gone, over, out, a-late, erewhile, long since. FVTVRE, time to come, after-time, hereafter, presently, anon, by and by, shortly, straitway, ere long, henceforth, process of time, after a long while.
Mixed relations of it. Comparative; betwixt The Existings of several things; whether ‖ both together in the same time: or whether in diverse times, so that one is before or after the other. 2. SIMULTANEOUS, of the same time, Synchronism▪ contemporary, compatible, consist, together, concomitant. DISTANT, PRECEDING, antecedent, former, foregoing, previ∣ous, Priority, before, take place, get the start, Predeces∣sor, premise. SVCCEEDING, latter, Posteriority, succedaneous, hinder, follow, go after, Successor. The Considerations of the same thing at several times; whether Past; ‖ little: or much. 3. NEWNESS, Renovation, innovate, renew, anew, Neoteric, Neo∣phyte, novel, Novice, Puny, modern, fresh, upstart, green, late, last, a little while ago. OLDNESS, ancient, Antiquity, pristin, senior, stale, inveterate, of long standing, yore, obsolete, out of date, a long while ago. Future; ‖ little: or much 4. SOONNESS, sudden, early, rath, betimes, forthwith, shortly, pre∣sently, eftsoon, quickly, in a trice, out of hand, imminent, immedi∣ate, incontinent, instant, ready, anticipate, accelerate, put on, rid way, in the turning of a hand, twinckling of an eye, timely, spee∣dily, in hast, after a little time. LATENESS, tardy, last, adjourn, defer, delay, put off, out of date, di∣latory, procrastinate, prolong, prorogue, protract, respite, retard, after a long while, far in the day. Absolute; Particular; Determinate; expressing ‖ at what time a thing was: or from whence it is to be reckoned. 5. DATE. EPOCHA, Hegira. Indeterminate; expressing only the Continuing of it; ‖ a great: or little time. 6. PERMANENCY, lasting, abiding, continuing, durable, stay, remain, persevere, enduring, incessant, indelible, perennial, tedious, hold out, of standing. TRANSITORINESS, fading, flitting, frail, glance, transient, temporary, short, for a spirt, for a little while, quickly gone. Recurring of it; ‖ many: or few times. 7. FREQUENCY, often, ever and anon, thick, rife, common, recourse, resort. SELDOMNESS, rare, scarce, strange, unusual, thin, desuetude. Vniversal; Collective; when a thing continues ‖ throughout the whole time: or only some intermediate parts of it. 8. PERPETUITY, continual, incessant, still, at all times, alwayes. AT TIMES, temporary, by snatches, by fits, bout, ever and anon, now and then, respit, sometimes. Distributive; when a thing exists ‖ in every part of time: or not in any part of it. 9. EVERNESS, Eternity, endless, for ever and ever, always. NEVERNESS.
II. PLACE.II. The Space wherein any thing is contained, is called PLACE, Room, local, standing, station, precinct, set, put, position, lay, dispose, pitch, plant Guns, dislocate, Prospect. It is distinguishable, as the former, according to the more Simple differences of it; denoting that place; ‖ wherein we are: or out of which we are. 1. PRESENCE, face to face, at hand, here, hand to hand, confront, rea∣dy, residence. ABSENCE, Mich, away, non-residence. Mixed relations of it. Comparative; betwixt the Existence of several things; ‖ whether both together in the same place: or in divers places. 2. CONTIGUITY, touch, contact, hit, joyn, close, grazing. DISTANCE, off, keep off, bear off, stave off, way off, set farther, stand away. Consideration of Distance or Place interposed, according to the diffe∣rences of ‖ Little: or Much. 3. NEARNESS, Vicinity, Propinquity, Proximity, nigh, next close, ad∣jacent, adjoyn, neighbour, imminent, impendent, immediate, ready at hand, accost, draw on, approach, at, by, hard-by, besides, hithermost. REMOTENESS, far, farther, aloof, wide of, distant, outmost, ulti∣mate, great way off. Absolute; Particular. Determinate; expressing what is the particular place ‖ to which a thing belongs: or whence it began. 4. HOME, Scene. RISE, Source, Country, Original, Spring, Root. Indeterminate; xpressing only The taking up of ‖ a great: or little place. 5. AMPLENESS, spacious, large, burly, wide, vast. NARROWNESS, close, scantness, strictness, restrained. The occurring in ‖ many: or few places. 6. OBVIOUSNESS, common, rise, thick. RARENESS, seldom, scarce, thin. Vniversal. Collective; when a thing is continued ‖ throughout the whole place: or is only in some parts of it. 7. CONTINUANCE, produce, subsist, along, close. DISCONTINUANCE, by coasts, sparsim, cease, pause, respit, break off, intermit, interrupt. Distributive; when a thing is in ‖ every place: or none. 8. UBIQUITY, Omnipresence. NVLLIBIETY.
III. The mixed Notion made up of Position and Place,III. SITUA∣TION. or the Applica∣tion of the parts of a Body to the parts of Place, respectively, is styled SITUATION, Seat, set, site, lying, standing, pitch, plant, Position, placing; to which may be annexed, by way of affinity, that respect of the imagi∣nary face of a thing towards some other thing or place, called VER∣GENCY, tending, leaning, inclining, hanker, toward, upon that hand, Rhombe. These are either more General; respecting ‖ the Vniverse: or the four chief terms of it. 1. EAST Orient. WEST, Occidental. 2. NORTH, Septentrional, Arctic. SOVTH, Meridional, Antarctic. Special; with relation to the several parts of any thing, consider'd as a Line; the interjacent part: or those which are most remote from each other. 3. MIDDLE, Intermediate, Mean, Core, Heart, Wast, main body, Noon, between both, Interim, Interval. EXTREME, Term, last, end, utter, utmost. END, final, last, extremity, ultimate, surcease, terminate, expire, in fine. BEGINNING, First. Superficies; the outmost parts of which, being considered either with relation to the thing it self: or some other thing to which it is ad∣joyned, is commonly styled 4. SIDE, Flank, Wing, Cheek, lateral, collateral, Limb, Rim, Brim, Brink, Edge-wise, Hem, Ridg, Skirt, Lift, Selvage, Welt, Gard, Eaves, Battlement. MARGIN, Limit, Marchess, Border, Verge, Meer, Bound, Term, Front-ier, Land-mark, adjacent, abutt, confine, Purliew. Body; In general; either as to such parts as are Higher: or Lower. 5 UPPER-SIDE, Ridge, above, vertical. VNDER-SIDE, lower, neather, bottom. Within: or Without. 6. IN-SIDE, internal, intrinsecal, inward, inner, inmost, intestine, OVT-SIDE, external, extrinsecal, outward, outmost, utter, ut∣most, Surface, superficial, exterior, ambient. Living Bodies; specially men, with relation either to The Head: or Foot. 7. TOP, Tip, Head, Crown, Vpper end, Knap, Apex, Vertical, Chapiter. BOTTOM, Base, Lower end, Pedestal, Foot, Sole. The Face: or Back. 8. FORE-PART, Front, Frontispiece, Prow, Van-tguard, Van∣ward, foreward. HINDER-PART, Back, Rere, rereward, endorse, last, Poop, Posterior, The right hand: or left hand. 9 RIGHT SIDE, Dexter, Starrbord. LEFT SIDE, Sinister, Larrbord.
Of MEASURE. §. III.THose several relations of Quantity, whereby men use to judge of the Multitude or Greatness of things,MEASURE. are styled by the name of MEA∣SURE, Dimension, mete, survey, Rule; to which the relative term of PROPORTION, Portion, Rate, Tax, Size, Scantling, Pittance, Share, Dose, Mess, Symetry, Analogy, commensurate, dispense, allot, adapt, is of some Affinity, signifying an equality or similitude of the respects that several things or quantities have to one another. They are distinguishable into such as respect either MULTITUDE. I. MAGNITUDE. II. GRAVITY. III. VALOR. IV. Duration. More GENERALLY CONSIDERED. V. As RESTRAINED TO LIVING CREATURES. VI. I. MULTI∣TUDE.I To the Measure whereby we judge of the MULTITUDE of things may be annexed NUMBER, enumerate, reckon, compute, muster, count, re-count, Tale, tell, Arithmetic, Cyphering. If the way of Numeration were now to be stated, it would seem more convenient to determine the first Period or Stand at the number Eight, and not at Ten; because the way of Dichotomy or Bipartition being the most natural and easie kind of Di∣vision, that Number is capable of this down to an Unite, and according to this should be the several denominations of all other kinds of Measures, whether of Capacity, Gravity, Valor, Duration. So eight Farthings would make a Peny, eight Pence a Shilling, eight Shillings an Angel, eight Angels a Pound. So eight Grains should make a Scruple, eight Scruples a Dram, eight Drams an Ounce, eight Ounces a Pound, &c. But because general custom hath already agreed upon the decimal way, therefore I shall not insist upon the change of it. The different degrees of Number generally received, are these. 1 ONE, Ace, Vnite, Once, First, Imprimis, Single. 2 TWO, a Couple, a Brace, a Pair, a Yoke, Second-ly, Twice, Double, Twofold, Bipartite. 3 THREE, a Leash, Ternary, Trey, Third-ly, Tertian, Thrice, Treble, Threefold, Tripartite, Trine-ity. 4 FOUR, Fourth-ly, Quartan, Quaternion, Fourfold, Quadruple, Qua∣drupartite. Quartile. 5 FIVE, Fifth-ly, Quintuple, Fivefold. 6 SIX, Sixth-ly, Sixfold, Sextuple, Sextile, Senary. 7 SEVEN, Seventh-ly, Septuple, Sevenfold. 8 EIGHT, Eighth-ly, Octuple, Eightfold. 9 NINE, Ninth-ly, Ninefold. How other numbers besides these here enumerated may be expressed both in writing and speech, see hereafter, Chap.
II. Measures of Magnitude do comprehend both those of Length,II. MAGNI∣TUDE. and of Superficies or Area, together with those of Solidity; both compre∣hended in that which is adjoyned, viz. the word CAPACITY, hold, contain. The several Nations of the World do not more differ in their Languages, then in the various kinds and proportions of these Mea∣sures. And it is not without great difficulty, that the Measures observed by all those different Nations who traffick together, are reduced to that which is commonly known and received by any one of them; which la∣bour would be much abbreviated, if they were all of them fixed to any one certain Standard. To which purpose, it were most desirable to find out some natural Standard, or universal Measure, which hath been esteem∣ed by Learned men as one of the desiderata in Philosophy. If this could be done in Longitude, the other Measures might be easily fixed from thence. This was heretofore aimed at and endeavoured after in all those va∣rious Measures, derived from natural things, though none of them do sufficiently answer this end. As for that of a Barly corn, which is made the common ground and original of the rest, the magnitude and weight of it may be so various in several times and places, as will render it inca∣pable of serving for this purpose; which is true likewise of those other Measures, an Inch, Palm, Span, Cubit, Fathom, a Foot, Pace; &c. none of which can be determined to any sufficient certainty. Some have conceived that this might be better done by subdividing a Degree upon the Earth: But there would be so much difficulty and uncer∣tainty in this way as would render it unpracticable. Others have thought, it might be derived from the Quick-silver experiment: But the unequal gravity and thickness of the Atmosphere, together with the various tem∣pers of Air in several places and seasons, would expose that also to much uncertainty. The most probable way for the effecting of this, is that which was first suggested by Doctor Christopher Wren, namely, by Vibration of a Pendu∣lum: Time it self being a natural Measure, depending upon a revolution of the Heaven or the Earth, which is supposed to be every-where equal and uniform. If any way could be found out to make Longitude com∣mensurable to Time, this might be the foundation of a natural Standard. In order to which, Let there be a solid Ball exactly round, of some of the heaviest metals: Let there be a String to hang it upon, the smallest, limberest, and least sub∣ject to retch: Let this Ball be suspended by this String, being extended to such a length, that the space of every Vibration may be equal to a second Minute of time, the String being, by frequent trials, either lengthned or shortned, till it attain to this equality: These Vibrations should be the smallest, that can last a sufficient space of time, to afford a considerable number of them, either 6, or 500 at least; for which end, its passing an arch of five or six degrees at the first, may be sufficient. The Pendulum being so ordered as to have every one of its Vibrations equal to a second minute of time, which is to be adjusted with much care and exactness; then measure the length of this String, from its place of suspension to the Centre of the Ball; which Measure must be taken as it hangs free in its perpendicular posture, and not otherwise, because of stretching: which being done, there are given these two Lengths, viz. of the String, and of the Radius of the Ball, to which a third Proportional must be found out;
which must be, as the length of the String from the point of Suspension to the Centre of the Ball is to the Radius of the Ball, so must the said Radius be to this third: which being so found, let two fifths of this third Pro∣portional be set off from the Centre downwards, and that will give the Measure desired. And this (according to the discovery and observation of those two excellent persons, the Lord Viscount Brouncker, President of the Royal Society, and Mon. Huygens, a worthy Member of it) will prove to be 38 Rhinland Inches, or (which is all one) 39 Inches and a quarter, according to our London Standard. Let this Length therefore be called the Standard; let one Tenth of it be called a Foot; one Tenth of a Foot, an Inch; one Tenth of an Inch, a Line. And so upward, Ten Standards should be a Pearch; Ten Pearches, a Furlong; Ten Furlongs, a Mile; Ten Miles, a League, &c. And so for Measures of Capacity: The cubical content of this Standard may be called the Bushel: the Tenth part of the Bushel, the Peck; the Tenth part of a Peck, a Quart; and the Tenth of that, a Pint, &c. And so for as many other Measures upwards as shall be thought expedient for use. As for Measures of Weight; Let this cubical content of distilled Rain∣water be the Hundred; the Tenth part of that, a Stone; the Tenth part of a Stone, a Pound; the Tenth of a Pound, an Ounce; the Tenth of an Ounce, a Dram; the Tenth of a Dram, a Scruple; the Tenth of a Scruple, a Grain, &c. And so upwards; Ten of these cubical Measures may be called a Thousand, and Ten of these Thousand may be called a Tun, &c. As for the Measures of Mony, 'tis requisite that they should be determi∣ned by the different Quantities of those two natural Metals which are the most usual materials of it, viz. Gold and Silver, considered in their Purity without any allay. A Cube of this Standard of either of these Metals may be styled a Thousand or a Talent of each; the Tenth part of this weight, a Hundred; the Tenth of a Hundred, a Pound; the Tenth of a Pound, an Angel; the Tenth of an Angel, a Shilling; the Tenth of a Shilling, a Peny; the Tenth of a Peny, a Farthing. I mention these particulars, not out of any hope or expectation that the World will ever make use of them▪ but only to shew the possibility of reducing all Measures to one determined certainty. These measures of MAGNITUDE (to which may be annexed the No∣tion of CONTENT) may be reduced to these Heads. 1 Line. 2 INCH. 3 FOOT. 4 STANDARD. 5 PEARCH. 6 FURLONG. 7 MILE. 8 LEAGUE. 9 DEGREE. Each of which is applicable either to Longitude, Area, or Bulk: the last of which comprehends the Measures of Capacity. III. GRAVI∣TY.III. Measures of GRAVITY (to which may be annexed for affinity the thing by which Gravity is measured, styled WEIGHT, Poize, counter∣poise, Plummet,) may be distributed into these kinds. 1 GRAIN. 2 SCRUPLE. 3 DRAM. 4 OUNCE. 5 POUND. 6 STONE 7 HUNDRED. 8 THOUSAND. 9 TUN.
IV. The Gradual differences of that common Measure of the VA∣LUATION or worth of all vendible things (to which may be adjoyned that which is used as this common Measure, styled MONY, Cash, Coin,IV. VALOR▪ Bank, Treasure, pecuniary, Mint, Stamp, Medal, Counter, Purse,) may be di∣stinguished into 1 FARTHING, Dodkin. 2 PENY. 3 SHILLING. 4 ANGEL. 5 POUND. 6 HUNDRED. 7 THOUSAND. V. Unto the Measure of TIME may be adjoyned for its affinity the word which signifies the Permanency of any thing in its existence,V. TIME: from its beginning to its end, DURATION, abide, continue, persist, endure, hold out, last long, persevere, everlasting, survive. Time is usually distributed by the Revolution of the heavenly Bodies, or rather of the Earth and Moon, into such Spaces as are required to a revolution of the Earth in its Orb; according to the Whole 1. YEAR, Twelvemonth, Anniversary, Annual, Biennial, &c. Parts; considerable as being the proper seasons for the Growth and ripening of Vegetables. 2. SPRING, Vernal. SUMMER. Decaying of Vegetables, according to ‖ a lesser: or greater degree. 3. AUTUMN, Fall of the Leaf, Harvest. WINTER, Hybernal, hyemal. Moon in its own proper course about the Earth: to which may be ad∣joyned the usual name given to the fourth part of this. 4. MONTH, Menstrual. WEEK, Sennight, Fortnight. Earth about its Axis; according to the Whole 5. DAY NATURAL, Quotidian. Parts; Greater; Time while the Sun continues ‖ above: or below the Horizon. 6. DAY ARTIFICIAL, Diurnal. NIGHT, Nocturnal, Pernoctation, lodge. Part of the day artificial, ‖ former: or later. 7. MORNING, Mattins, early, dawning, betimes. AFTERNOON, Evening. Lesser parts of time; being each of them ‖ the 24th part of a natu∣ral day, called an Hour: or the 60th part of an hour. 8. HOUR, Horary. MINUTE.
VI. Life-time, or the AGE of LIVING Creatures, (as particularly applied to Men,VI. AGE. to which there is something answerable in other Ani∣mals; to which may be adjoyned the word SECULUM, Age, Estate, Generation,) is, according to common use, distinguished by such Terms as do denote the gradual differences of it. The first and most imperfect State, when ‖ destitute of the use of reason: or having but little use of it▪ comprehending the two first ten years. 1. INFANCY, Babe, Child, Cub. CHILDHOOD, Boy, Girl, Wench, green years· The less imperfect Age, subject to the sway of Passions; ‖ either more, or less, containing the third and fourth ten years. 2. ADOLESCENCY, adult, Lad, Springal, Stripling, Youth, Lass, Da∣mosel, Wench. YOUTH, Iuvenile, Younker. The perfect Age as to the Body: or the declining Age of the Body, but most perfect for the Mind, styled vergens aetas, or the Age of Wisdom; the former comprehending the space betwixt the 40th and the 50th, and the latter containing the space betwixt the 50th and the 60th year. 3. MANHOOD, virile, middle age. DECLINING AGE, elderly. The last and most imperfect Age, by reason of the decay of Vigor, which commonly happens both in Body and Mind, ‖ either according to the first and better part of it: or the last and worst part of this State, reaching from the 60th to the 70th, and from thence for the time after. 4. OLD AGE. DECREPIDNESS, Crone. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Predicament of Quality; the several Genus's belonging to it, namely, I. Natural Power. II. Habit. III. Manners. IV. Sensible quality. V. Disease; with the various Differences and Species under each of these. WHether many of those things now called Quality, be not reducible to Motion and Figure, and the Situation of the parts of Bodies, is a question which I shall not at present consider. 'Tis sufficient that the par∣ticulars here specified are most commonly known and apprehended un∣der that notion as they are here represented, and are still like to be called by the same names, whatever new Theory may be found out of the causes of them. The several Genus's under this Predicament are such kinds of Quali∣ties as are either Internal; whether Innate; NATURAL POWER. Superinduced; considered more Generally; styled by the common name of HABIT. Specially; with respect to the customary Actions of men considered as voluntary MANNERS. External; denoting either Those more general affections of bodies which are the objects of sense. SENSIBLE QUALITY. Those special impotencies of living bodies, whereby they are disabled for their natural functions. SICKNESS.
As for Figure, which by the common Theory is reduced under this Pre∣dicament, that, being a Qualification or Modification of Quantity, may more properly be referred thither. Of NATURAL POWER. THose kinds of Natural innate Qualities,§. I. whereby things are rendred able or unable to act or resist, according to their peculiar natures, are styled NATURAL POWERS, Faculty, Capacity, Endowment, Talent, Gift, Abi∣lity, Strength, Energy, Force, Virtue, may, can. IMPOTENCIES, Disability, Incapacity, invalid, unable, weak, infirm, lame, dead. These Natural Powers may be distributed into such as are More particular; viz. the Faculties that are RATIONAL. I. Sensitive. INWARD. II. OUTWARD. III. More general; being either SPIRITUAL. IV. Corporeal; relating to the good of the INDIVIDUUM. V. SPECIES. VI. I. Those Faculties whereby we are inabled to apprehend and compare the general natures of things as to Truth and Falshood, Good and Evil,I. RATIO∣NAL FA∣CULTIES. and to demean our selves accordingly towards them, are styled RATIONAL, Reasonable, Ratiocination. IRRATIONAL, Vnreasonable, brutish. These may be distinguished into Apprehensive; whereby we are rendred able or unable to Know and apprehend knowable things, Generals as well as Particu∣lars, respecting in them Truth and Falshood. 1. UNDERSTANDING, Intellect, Mind, mental, apprehend, compre∣hend, perceive, conceive, reach, resent, Sentiment. IDIOTICALNESS, being as a natural Fool, Changeling, Innocent Compound and compare Notions together, so as to make a right esti∣mate of things and consequences. 2. JUDGMENT, Iudicious. INIUDICIOVSNESS, Simple, Silly. Apply general Principles to particular cases, being a kind of practical Judgment or Memory relating to matters of Duty. 3. CONSCIENCE. VNCONSCIONABLENESS, Searedness, Profligateness, moral, Insen∣sibility. Motive; whereby we do rationally follow any thing as good, or fly it as evil: or being without any such motion. 4. WILL, Desire, List, Option, Vote, Wish, Mind, Pleasure, covet, volun∣tary. LISTLESNESS, no mind to.
II. INTERNAL SENSES are so styled, because they belong to the interiour parts,II. INTER∣NAL SEN∣SES. and are conversant about internal and absent as well as pre∣sent things. Whether there be any such real Faculties in the Soul as are mentioned under this and the preceding Head, is not here to be debated. 'Tis sufficient that common experience doth acquaint us with such various operations of the Mind, and that general custom hath agreed upon such names for the expressing of them. These are likewise distinguishable into Apprehensive; whereby we are rendred able or unable for the Receiving of impressions from the outward Senses. 1. COMMON SENSE, perceive, discern, apprehend, Sentient, resent, conceive, discover, find. STVOR, Numness, amaze, astonish, narcotic, amuze, asleep, set on edge. Compounding and comparing what is communicated from the outward Senses. 2. PHANSIE, Imagination, Conceit, fantastical, capricious, Phantasm. DOTAGE, Delirium, Dizzard, Sot, besot. Retaining such impressions. 3. MEMORY, recollect, re-call, commemorate, remember, call or come to mind, put in mind▪ suggest, record, recount, con over, getting by heart, by rote, without book, at ones fingers end, memorable, memorial, Memorandum, mindful. FORGETFVLNESS, Oblivion, Vnmindfulness, overslip. Motive; whereby, in order to our own Conservation, we follow or fly what is by the judgment of the Senses represented as good or evil. 4. APPETITE, Desire, Inclination, Concupiscence, Stomach, Longing, Lust, having a mind to. LOATHING, fulsome, nauseate, glut, cloy, go against, queasie, squea∣mish, wambling, qualm, detest. III. EXTER∣NAL SEN∣SES.III. EXTERNAL SENSES are so styled, because they reside in the exteriour parts of the body, and do apprehend only external present things; which common opinion hath determined to the number of Five: amongst which some are said to be Commodious For Discipline; whereby we discern Light and Colour. 1. SIGHT, Vision, View, ken, Optic, descry, discern, espie, spie, peep, prie, see, perceive, look upon, behold, Glimpse, Spectacle, Spectator, Inspe∣ction, Revise, Prospect, first blush, visible, conspicuous. BLINDNESS, Dimness, dark, poreblind, put out ones eyes. Sounds. 2. HEARING, attend, hearken, listen, give ear, audible. DEAFNESS, surd. For the trial of our Food at a distance. 3. SMELL, Odor, Savour, Sent, Pomander, Perfume. Necessary for the Immediate trial of our Food. 4. TAST, Gust, Savour, Relish, Smack, Smatch, Tang, toothsom. Perception of tangible things. 5. TOUCH, feel, contact, tactile, palpable, grope. NVMNESS, Stupor, dead, torpid, asleep. Though common Language have not affixed particular names to the impotencies of some of these, yet they ought to be provided for as well as the rest.
IV. Those natural Habitudes of the Soul or Spirit which render it fit or unfit for its proper functions,IV. TEM∣PERS OF SPIRIT. are styled by that general name of TEM∣PER -ature, -ament, Disposition, Spirit, Genius, Fancy, Humor, Vein, Qua∣lity, Condition, Constitution, Nature. These may be distinguished into such as are more General; chiefly of moral disposition, denoting ‖ the goodness: or badness of it. 1. INGENUITY, Good nature, Candor, candid, free, liberal, clear. DISINGENVITY, Ill nature, Perverseness, thwart, cross, froward, unto∣ward, wayward, awkward, refractory, untractable, wilful, stubborn, sul∣len, dogged, sturdy, stiff, restif. Particular; as to Action; denoting Ability, or disability; aptitude, or ineptitude for it. 2. SPRIGHTLINESS, Wit, Vivacity, ingenious, brisk, lively, quick, acute, sharp, debonair, Mercurial, pregnant, presentness of mind. DVLNESS, Stupidity, gross witted, hard-headed, torpid, soft, thick, heavy, dazle, dolt, Block-head, Logger-head, Dunce, Sot, indocil, dreaming. Attention: or levity of mind in it. 3. SERIOUSNESS, earnest, grave, sober, staid, sad, substantial, so∣lemn. WANTONNESS, lightness, aiery, playward, gamesom, dallying sportful, trifling, lascivious, giddy, petulant, skittish, toying, Ramp, Gigg, Rigg, Gambol Aptitude or Ineptitude to moderate the Irascible appetite. 4. GENTLENESS, Tameness, Mildness, Meekness, Lenity, break, reclaim, tame, come to hand. FIERCENESS, Wildness, Haggard, Savage, barbarous, curstness, surly, eager, furious, dire, fell, grim, rough, source, keen, un∣tamed. Concupiscible appetite. 5 OPPOSITE TO RAPACITY, not rapacious. RAPACITY, ravenous, voracious, greedy, Harpy, devour, preying. Ability or disability to attempt or resist difficulties. 6. STOUTNESS, Boldness, manful, redoubted, daring, sturdy, stre∣nuous. LAZINESS, sluggish, lither, lurden, Drone, dull, soft. Action and Passion, denoting an ability or disability to endure and hold out both in acting and suffering. 7. HARDINESS, Tolerance, strenuous, robust, stout, sturdy, indu∣strious, painful. NICENESS, Softness, Tenderness, Delicateness, Curiosity, fine, squeamish, effeminate, finical, dainty.
V. TEM∣PERS OF BODY FOR THE INDI∣VIDUUM.V. Those CORPOREAL HABITUDES, whereby things are ren∣dred able or unable to act or resist for the good of the INDIVIDUUM, are usually styled by those general names of Temper, Complexion, Frame, State, Constitution, Disposition, Nature. These are distinguishable into such as concern, The just number of the parts; ‖ having all: or wanting some. 1. WHOLENESS, Intireness, perfect, safe and sound, tite, consolidate, of one piece. MVTILOVSNESS, maimed, mangle, lame, lopped, crippled. The nature of the whole or parts; being either Negative or Positive of Corruption. 2. SOUNDNESS, Sanity, Healthiness, hail, heal, whole, clearness. ROTTENNESS, Putridness, Corruption, purulent, tainted, unsound, moulder, festered, addle, Matter, rankle, suppurate▪ putrefie, Carrion Trouble to the sense of Feeling. 3. INDOLENCE, Ease, lenitive, relaxation, clearness, lighten. PAIN, Ach, smart, ail, anguish, grief, ill at ease, sore, pang, thro, tor∣ment, torture, ake, excruciate, twing, twitch, fret, gripe, gird, racking. Positive or Negative; General; relating to the state of the body, ‖ good: or ill. 4. VIGOR, Vivacity, thriving, vegetous, flourishing, lusty, lively, sprightly, florid, quick, fresh, in heart, in good plight, in proof, pert, smart, crank, sturdy, revive. DECAYING, consume, wear, wast, drooping, fading, out of heart, flagging, languish, break, fail, going down, fall away, bring down or low, decline, impair, quail, abate, molder, pine, wither, perish, spend, corrupt. Special; respecting the Plight of the fleshy parts, ‖ full: or sparing. 5. FATNESS, plump▪ pampered, burly, corpulent, gross, foggy, pursie, battle. LEANNESS, macilent, meagre, Starveling, flue, poor, bare, spare, thin, lank, gaunt, Rascal, scraggy, ghastly, pine, emaciate, fall away, Carrion, skin and bone. Figure and colour of the external parts, ‖ right: or wrong. 6. BEAUTY -fulness, Handsomness, Pulchritude, Comeliness, Ele∣gance, Decency, fair, goodly, well-favoured, seemly, polite, quaint, pretty, graceful, lovely, personable. DEFORMITY, unhandsome, ill-favoured, ugly, uncomely, misbe∣coming, Indecorum, absurd, unseemly, mishapen, foul, squalid, Hagg, deface, disfigure. Ability, or disability for Action or Passion. 7. STRENGTH, Force, Might, Validity, Puissance, robust, strenuous, stout, sturdy, in heart, main, corroborate, fortifie, recruit. WEAKNESS, Feebleness, Debility, Imbecillity, Infirmity, disa∣bled, faint, languid, dead, frail, out of heart, heartless, flag∣ging, invalid, small, bring down or low, enervate, decline, en∣feeble.
Aptitude or ineptitude for Motion, In a place. 8. AGILITY, Nimbleness, Activity, Lightness, Volubility, quick, dexterous, Mercurial, restive, handy, man of his hands. LVMPISHNESS, Vnweildiness, dulness, gross, heavy, pursie▪ Lob, Lubber, Slugg, Lozel. To a place. 9. SWIFTNESS, Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, fast, apace, sodain, quick, rapid, hurry, accelerate, hasten, cursory, hy, expedite, run, send, whisk, post. SLOWNESS, Heaviness, slackness, dull, Slug, tardy, leisurely, softly, dilatory, retard, foreslow, delay, Lob, Lubber, lumpish, Lurdan, torpid, unwieldy, gingerly. VI. Such corporeal Habitudes as do concern the Propagation of the Species,VI. TEM∣PERS FOR PROPAGA∣TION OF THE SPE∣CIES. do refer either to the Kinds of things apt for Propagation, according to the General name. 1. SEX, Kind, Gender, Epicene, Hermaphrodite. Particular distribution into ‖ more, or less noble. 2. MALE, masculine, Buck, Bore, Dog, Gib, Cock, Milter, He. FEMALE, feminine, Doe, Sow, Bitch, Hen, Spawner, She. Disposition of things ‖ for, or against Propagation. 3. FRUITFULNESS, fertile-ity, foecund, prolifi fructifie, rank, produce fruit. BARRENNESS, Sterility, Vnfruitfulness, infertile, blasting, blite. State of things generated, when they ‖ have attained the perfection they ought to have: or else are in a state of imperfection, by reason of ex∣cess, or defect. 4. RIPENESS, Maturity, mellow, Precocity, stale, hatch. OVER-RIPENESS, fading, decaying, withering. VNRIPENESS, immature, green.
Of HABIT. §. II.SUch superinduced Qualities, whether infused or acquired, whereby the natural Faculties are perfected, and rendred more ready and vigorous in the exercise of their several Acts, according to the more or less perfect Degrees of them, are styled by the name of HABIT, Endowment, enure, qualifie, Gift, Talent. DISPOSITION, Propensity, Proclivity, Promptitude, Proneness, Inclination, readiness, given to, addiction, fitness, aptitude. To the more general consideration of Habit may appertain Those States or Conditions of life which either reward or enable men for vertuous Actions; comprehending the ENDS OR REWARD OF VERTUE. I. INSTRUMENTS OF VERTUE. II. Those Qualifications, which, though they are not properly Vertues, yet do prepare for, and dispose unto, and, in other respects, circumstan∣tiate Vertue it self, both in the Habit and Operations of it, and are therefore styled AFFECTIONS OF VERTUE, either INTELLECTUAL. III. MORAL. IV. The Kinds of vertuous Habits, whether INFUSED▪ th Intellectual and Moral. V. ACQUIR INTELLECTUAL. VI. I. RE∣WARDS OF VER∣TUE.I. Those things which are due to the merit of ‖ Vertue or Vice, are styled REWARD, Guerdon, Meed, Prize, Recompence. PVNISHMENT, Penalty, Penance, Iudgment, Plague, Vengeance, inflict, suffer, impunity, scotfree. These may be distinguished into such as are either more General; viz. that state wherein a thing injoys as much perfection as it is capable of. 1. HAPPINESS, Felicity, Bliss, Blessedness, Beatitude, good, weal, welfare. MISERY, Vnhappiness, Infelicity, Extremity, Calamity, Woe, Distress, Disaster, Affliction, Tribulation, Trouble, Plague, Iudgment, Caitiff, Wretch, poor, pitiful, deplorable. Particular; relating to the reward of Moral Vertue; in the enjoyment of those things that conduce to our bene esse. External; 3. PROSPERITY, flourishing, thriving, auspicious, fortunate, hap∣py, good luck, success, speed. ADVERSITY, Affliction, distress, tribulation, cross, disaster, infe∣licity, suffering, persecution, duress, fall, pressure, mischance, mishap, misadventure, misfortune, unfortunate, unluckie, un∣prosperous, inauspicious, sinister, dismal, ill luck or success.
Internal; ‖ quiet, or disquiet of the Affections. 3. CONTENTATION, Tranquillity, Contentment, Serenity, Hearts-ease, Equanimity, Sedateness, Rest, be satisfied, acquiesce. ANXIETY, Discontent,  taking, dump, trouble, anguish, dis∣quiet, vexation, perplexity, streight, pinch. Christian Vertues and Graces; consisting in an everlasting Vision and Fruition of God. 4. SALVATION, Beatifical Vision, Heaven, Glory. DAMNATION, Condemnation Hell, perdition. II. The INSTRUMENTS OF VERTUE, commonly styled the Goods of Fortune,II. INSTRU∣MENTS OF VERTUE. requisite to the due exercise of the Acts of many Ver∣tues, and one kind of Reward belonging to it, do concern either Our Persons, and the being at our own disposal. 1. LIBERTY, Freedom, at large, deliver, release, inlare, set free, rid, dis∣patch, ransom, redeem, manumise, emancipate, give one his head, scope, arbitrary, undetermin'd, unconfined, may, may chuse. RESTRAINT, confine, streighten, repress. Our Possessions; being either ‖ sufficient, or insufficient, for our occasi∣ons and conveniencies, according to that rank and station wherein we are placed. 2. RICHES, Wealth, Opulence, Pelf, Means, Fortunes, Estate, thrive, Treasure, make, enrich, worth, well to pass. POVERTY, Necessity, Penury, Indigence, Need, Want, poor, empoverish, ruine. The sutableness of the things which we have or do, and that satisfacti∣on which we receive by them. 3. PLEASURE, Delight, Delectation, Enjoyment. VNPLEASANTNESS, Grief, Trouble, displeasing. Our Names, and the esteem we have amongst good men. 4. REPUTATION, Credit, Countenance, Applause, Name, Honour▪ Vogue, report, Fame, redoubted, of Note, Glory, Renown, well-sounding. INFAMY, Disgrace, discredit, dishonour, disparage, defame, discounte∣nance, shame, ignominy, Stein, Blot, Blemish, Slur, inglorious, illiberal, ignoble, notorious, ill reflexion, or sound, or name. Our Degrees, and the quality of our Conditions in relation to others; being either considerably above them, or below them. 5. DIGNITY, Promotion, Preferment, Advancement, Honour, Worship, Greatness, State, Port, Title, preeminence, upper-hand, High place, raise, exalt, illustrious. MEANNESS, Lowness, Obscurity, Baseness, Vileness, ignoble, plain, abase, debase, degrade, Abjectness. Our Ability to protect our selves and others from injury, which is the usu∣al result or consequent of the rest. 6. POWER-full, Potent-ate, Greatness, Interest, Strength, Might, Puis∣sance, Mastery, Prevalence, Predominance, over-sway, rule-the rost, bear a stroke. IMPOTENCE, weak, inconsiderable.
III. AFFE∣CTIONS OF INTELLE∣CTUAL VERTUE.III. AFFECTIONS of INTELLECTUAL VERTUE, may be di∣stinguished by their reference to those two Faculties in the Rational Soul, imployed for the gaining of Knowledge, viz. Invention; which is ‖ rightly, or ongly disposed by 1. SAGACITY, Perspicacity, Shapness, Subtilty, Dexterity Wit, clear, quick, acute, searching, piercing, docil, towardly, apt, prompt. DVLNESS, Stupidity, Heaviness, gross-witted, indocil, dreaming, Dolt, Dunce, Blockhead. Iudgment; which is ‖ well disposed, by such a temper of mind as doth incline a man to assent unto things upon such evidence as is in it self sufficient, or ill disposed, by such a temper as inclines a man either to assent unto things upon such evidence as is insufficient, or not to assent upon such s is sufficient. 2. FAITH, Docility, Teachableness, Towardliness, Aptness. CREDVLITY, Easiness, light or rash of belief, facil. INCREDVLITY, Vnteachableness, Vntowardliness, Sceptical∣ness, Scrupulousness, Vnbelief. Sensitive Soul, which are apt to hinder us from Knowledge. Phancy; which is ‖ well, or ill disposed by 3. SOBRIETY, discreet, grave, serious, staid, steddy, settled, sage. CONCEITEDNESS, Affectation, Singularity, fantastical, vagary, wild, light, aiery, giddy, freakish, whimsical, hair-brain'd, brain-sick, Humorist, Opiniaster. Apptite; which is fitly regulated by our being concerned for any Truth according to a due measure; and not either more or less then the evidence and importance of it, doth require. 4. MODERATION, Temper, Measure, Gentle-ness, qualifie, reduce to reason. SLIGHTNESS, Slackness, negligence, remissness, Neutrality, frigid, cold, indifferent, unconcerned, slatering, superficial, cur∣sory, overly, perfunctory, faint. FIERCENESS, Fanaticalness, vehemence, violence, eagerness, earnest, furious, heady, immoderate, dogmatical, Opiniaster, boisterous, rough, sour, keen. IV. The Affections of MORAL and HOMILETICAL Vertues,IV. AFFE∣CTIONS OF MORAL AND HO∣MILETICAL VERTUE. do concern either The Temper and Frame of our Minds, as to their due Attention; For any kind of Advantage, or Expedient. 1. CONSIDERATION, Advisedness, deliberate, ruminate, fore∣cast, of or on purpose. CVNCTATION, Loitering, Delay, slack, trifling, linger, lag, while off, drive off, put off. RASHNESS, Hastiness, Temerity, heady, hair-brain'd, fool-hardy, cursory, headlong, precipitate, unadvised, incogitancy, inconsi∣derateness, presumption.
Against any kind of Evil, Danger or Impediment. 2. HEEDFULNESS, Wariness, Care, Cantelousness, Watchfulness, At∣tention, Intention, Caution, minding, circumspection, chary, vigi∣lant, cautious▪ shie, advised, aware, beware, intend, look to or about, see to, take heed, be thoughtful, take thought, take warning, narrow∣ly. CARKING, Solicitude, Anxiety, over-thoughtful. CARELESNESS, Heedlesness, incogitancie, negligence▪ slatering, slightness, lightness, supineness, inconsiderate, oscitation, overly, perfunctory, superficial, secure, unwary, retchless, cursory, idle, slothful, sluggardly, slubbering, dissolute, uncircumspect, hand over head, not regard, overslip. Freedom and Readiness of our Faculties about any thing. 3. ALACRITY, Chearfulness, readiness, forwardness, with all ones heart, with a good will, free, glad, promptness, propensity, rather. GRVDGING, maunder, murmure, mutter, repine, regret, querulous, go against, with an ill will. Reality of our Intentions, sutable to our outward Pretences. 4. SINCERITY, Vprightness, reality, cordialness, heartiness, downright, honest, plain, simple, unfeigned, sound, clear, uncorrupt. HYPOCRISIE, Dissimulation, double tongue or heart, hollow-hearted, feigning, false, counterfeit, sophistical, pretend. The Vigorousness of our Endeavours in the prosecution of fitting means. 5. DILIGENCE, Assiduity, Sedulity, Industry, Attention, Care, Labour, Study, instant, elaborate, ply, bestir, stickle, lay about him, earnest, in∣defatigable, take pains. DOVBLE-DILIGENCE, overdoing, busie▪ pragmatical, fain, medling. SLOTH, Idleness, laziness, carelessness, lither, loose, retchless, dreaming, Drone, Sluggard, Truant, loiter. The Vniversality required to vertuous Actions, in respect of the Object. 6. INTEGRITY, Honesty, intire, equal, impartial, incorrupt, upright. PARTIALITY, unequal, making a difference, accepting of persons. Time of continuance▪ 7. CONSTANCY, erseverance, Stability, Steadiness, stedfast, firm, fixed, sure, certain, resolute, inflexible, unchangeable, abide, persist, hold out, stand out, stay by, stick to, unwearied, indefatigable. PERTINACY, Obstinacy, Contumacy, pervicacious, peremptory, stiff, wilful, inexorable, inflexible. LIGHTNESS, Inconstancy, fickleness, levity, instability, mutabi∣lity, uncertain, unsteddy, unstable, unstedfast, unsettled, unstaid, wavering, divers, dodging, shittle, shuttle, slippery, variable, mu∣table, changeable, trifling, giddy, freakish, paltring, fast and loose.
V. INFUSED HABITS.V. Those are styled INFUSED HABITS, to which the Divine favour and assistance is required after a more especial manner; which are there∣fore styled by the general name of GRACE, Gift. To which may be opposed UNGRACIOUSNESS, Impiety, graceless, ungodly, carnal, wicked, sinful. These are either General; consisting in A change of mind from evil to good. 1. REPENTANCE, Penitence, compunction, relent, remorse, contri∣tion, rue, return, reclaim, renew, regeneration, penance. IMPENITENCE, Obdurateness, Hard-heartedness. An habitual frame of mind, whereby we are fitted for vertuous acti∣ons, and more especially for the Duties of Religion. 2. HOLINESS, Sanctity, Godliness, Piety, Devotion, Righteousness, Sanctification, sacred, Pureness. VNHOLINESS, Wickedness, Iniquity, Impiety, Vngodliness, Pro∣phaneness, Corruption, Sin, Miscreant, graceless, Caitiffe. An inlargement of Soul, to desire and endeavour public general good, and taking it off from being immersed in narrow selfish designs. 3. SELF-DENIAL, Christian Magnanimity, Generosity, Public-spi∣ritedness, Greatness of mind, Resignation. SELFISHNESS, Narrowness, Pedanticalness, Littleness of mind, Worldling. Particular; styled Theological Vertues; respecting Truth and Falshood; a readiness to yield an effectual assent unto re∣vealed Truths upon such grounds as their natures are capable of, and such as are sufficient to prevail with any such prudent teacha∣ble man as is free from any affected Captiousness. 4. FAITH, Belief, Believer, Creed. INFIDELITY, Vnbelief, Miscreant. Good and Evil. Future; being an acquiescence of the mind in the expectation of such Promises as are revealed. 5. HOPE, Trust, Affiance, Reliance, Rembency. DESPAIR, Despondency, out of heart, forlorn, hopeless, past hope, deadness of heart. General; wishing well, and endeavouring to be helpful and ser∣viceable unto all, according to the due proportion we are obli∣ged to by natural or revealed Light. 6. CHARITY, Love. VNCHARITABLENESS, Maliciousness.
VI. Those are styled ACQUIRED INTELLECTUAL HABITS which may be gotten by Industry,VI. ACQUI∣RED IN∣TELLE∣CTUAL HABITS. and tend to the perfecting of the Mind or Understanding. They are distinguishable by their Objects; being either Speculative; furnishing the mind with due Notions and conceptions concerning the Nature of things, their Causes, Differences, Rela∣tions and Dependencies. 1. SCIENCE, Knowledge, Skill, Theory, Learning, Insight. CVRIOSITY. IGNORANCE, rude, untaught. Active; denoting Skill in men and business, whereby we are inabled to judge what is fit and convenient, according to various cases and circumstances. 2. WISDOM, Prudence, Discretion, Sapience, wise, sage, politic. CRAFT, Cunning, Subtilty, Shiness, Policy, Device, Quirk, Sleight, Fetch, Wile, Trick, sly, shrewd, Knave, Shark, Shift, come over one, over reach. FOLLY, Fool-ishness, Simplicity, Silly-ness, Imprudence, Indiscretion, witless, unwise, absurd, shallow, Noddy, Ninny, Sot, infatuate, Foppery. Effective; implying Skill in those several Operations and Works which concern Humane life. 3. ART, Skill, Dexterity, Craft, Cunning, Insight, Knack, expert, well-seen in, good at, artificial, Workman, Artist. VNSKILFVLNESS, bungling, blundering, botching, fumbling, cob∣ling, slubber, smatter, ignorant, silly, rude, gross, jejune, inexpert, inartificial, awkward, Freshman, Novice. The manner of acquiring them; whether by Our own Observation, and repeated Trials. 4. EXPERIENCE, Practice, Exercise, Knowledge, conversant, versed, expert, Experiment, Empyric. INEXPERIENCE, inexpert, raw, to seek, Puny, Novice, Freshman, unverst. The Teaching of others, either ‖ vivâ voce, or ex scriptis. 5. LEARNING, Literature, Scholarship, scholastic, Liberal Science, Skill, indoctinate▪ VNLEARNEDNESS, illiterate, unlettered, rude, simple.
Of MANNERS. §. III.THe Customary and habitual Actions of men considered as voluntary, and as they are capable of Good or Evil, Reward or Punishment, are styled by the name of MANNERS, Ethic, Moral-ity. To which may be adjoyned the general name of such customary Acti∣ons as are mutual betwixt man and man, styled CONVERSATION, Carriage, Demeanour, Comportment, homiletical, Communication, lead, life, living, sociable, behave. The Vertues belonging to these do comprehend all those Habits which concern the regulating both of our Wills and Affections, and of our Con∣versations. They are distinguishable by the Faculties which they mode∣rate, and the Objects they are conversant about, into such as do more im∣mediately concern the regulating of our Wills and Affections, and that Rectitude of mind which we are obliged unto with reference to our selves, considered more separately, accord∣ing to those principal parts of which we consist, viz. Soul and Body, Reason and sense, together with the things we possess, being either More GENERAL. I. More Particular, relating to Our BODIES. II. Our ESTATES or DIGNITIES. III. Conversations, or the right Demeanour of our selves considered as Mem∣bers of Society, in our converse with others; the due managing of the common Affairs and Businesses of life, according to the relations wherein we stand towards those whom we are to deal with. These are commonly called Homiletical Vertues, being either More GENERAL and Common. IV. More Particular, towards SUPERIORS. V. INFERIORS. VI. I. VERTUE.I. Those kind of Moral habits which serve for the regulating of our Wills and Affections more General, are commonly styled by the name of VER∣TUE, Honesty, Probity, Righteousness, brave; denoting such Habits whereby we are inclined and inabled to observe a due Mediocrity in our Actions. To this is properly opposed the notion of VICE, Sin, Crime, Dishonesty, Trespass, Transgression, Fault, Failing, Infirmity, Oversight, wicked, Improbity, Turpitude, unrighteous, unjust, bad, naught, vile, base, loose, evil, ill, corrupt, venial, heinous, debauched, lewd, lawless, licencious, foul, flagitious, enormous, profligate, Miscreant, Ruffian, Caitiff, Villain, Rakehell, Libertine, defile, pollute. These may be distinguished into such as relate to the Inclination of our Minds, either In Debitis; in such things as are due from us By Law; 1. JUSTICE, Righteous-ness, right, square dealing, upright dealing. INIVSTICE, Vnrighteousness, Wrong. RIGOVR, rigid, extreme, severity, overstrict. REMISSION, Over-sparing.
Right Reason. More general; respecting our Actions towards others, in such cases as the Law-giver (could he have foreseen) would have provided for; whereby a man is willing to recede from his own strict right, & the utmost extremities of things, and to take the most amicable way in the accommodating of Differences, supplying that by right Rea∣son which is not provided for in the words of the written Law. 2. EQUITY, Moderation, reasonable, conscionable, Chancery, fair dealing, in reason. SVMMVM IVS, Rigidness, sourness, unreasonableness, iniquity, unequal. More particular; in our Thoughts concerning other mens words or a∣ctions, being ready to interpret every thing in the best sense, when there is no evident reason to the contrary. 3. CANDOR, fair, ingenuous, candid, fair dealing. CENSORIOVSNESS, Sinister suspicion, captiousness, controling, carping▪ find fault. In Gratuitis; respecting chiefly the Benefactor; being either More general; denoting ‖ a propension of mind to do good to other, together with external actions sutable thereto. 4. GOODNESS, Benignity, benevolence, benificence, kindness, good turn, beholding gratifie. MISCHIEVOVSNESS, Maleficence, ill turn. More particular; respecting such as are in a state of misery. 5. MERCY, tender-hearted, pitiful, propitious, soft. CRVELTY, Immanity, inhumane, hard-hearted, pittiless, savage, dire, trculent, barbarous. Beneficiary; namely, a propension of mind to put a just esteem upon the Favours we receive, and to take all occasions of acknowledging and requiting them. 6. GRATITUDE, Thank-fulness, give or render thanks. INGRATITVDE, Vnthankfulness, ingrateful. In arduis; whether things Hard to be done; whereby we are made duly resolute against all such difficulties either of Fear or Discouragement as may hinder us in our duty. 7. FORTITUDE, Valour, Courage, Manhood, Prowess, Puissance, stout, redoubted, undaunted, bold, daring, valiant, resolute, in heart, of spirit, manly, manful, sturdy. RASHNESS, Temerity, fool-hardiness, audacity, desperate, heady, hair-brain'd, boisterous, precipitate. COWARDISE, timorous; faint-hearted, fearful, soft, Craven, Da∣stard, Poltron, Recreant, out of heart, to flinch, to cow. Hard to be suffered; in respect of Pain. 8. PATIENCE, Long-suffering, forbearance, abide, bear, brook, en∣dure, sustein, tolerate, weather it out. OBSTINACY, stubborn, sturdy, peremptory. SOFTNESS, Tenderness; Impatience, relent, mollifie. Provocation to Anger and Revenge, in which we are to observe a due Mediocrity. 9. MEEKNESS, Mildness, long-suffering, gentleness, clemency, lenity, calm, put up. LENTITVDE, Stupor, Insensibility. RASH ANGER, curst, hasty, pettish, peevish, snappish, testy.
II. Vertues relating to our BODIES.II. The more special Vertues for the regulating of our Wills and Af∣fections in things relating to our BODIES, whose Object is Iucundum or Vtile, are either. Of a more large extent; denoting an Ability to withstand all such tem∣ptations of allurement whereby we may be hindred in our Duty. 1. TEMPERANCE. SENSVALITY, Voluptuousness, Intemperance, debauched, dissolute, effeminate, Epicure. Of a lesser extent; concerning the Moderating of our natural Appetites towards things which concern the Preservation of the Individuum; either More necessary; as in Meats. 2. ABSTINENCE, abstemious, fasting. MACERATION. GLVTTONY, Surfeit, voracity, gormandizing, pampering, raven∣ous, sated, Gully-gut. Drinks. 3. SOBRIETY, Abstemiousness. DRVNKENNESS, Sot, besot, inebriate, heady, intoxicate, fox, carouse, overtaken, whittled, fuddled, tipsie, Tipler, Soaker, Pot-com∣panion, Toss-pot. Sleep. 4. VIGILANCE, Watchfulness. SLVGGARDLINESS, Sloth, Drowziness, Sleepiness. Less necessary; which concern Refreshments from Labour. 5. MODERATENESS IN RECREATION. IMMODERATENESS IN RECREATION. External Decorum and Ornament. 6. CLEANLINESS, Neatness, smugg, terse. NICENESS, Finicalness, Delicateness, Daintiness, Curiosity, dapper. SLOVENLINESS, Vncleanness, Nastiness, sordid, filthy, squa∣lid, foul, Sloven, Slut, slubber. Species; as Venery. 7. CHASTITY, Continence, Honesty. VNCHASTITY, Incontinence, Wantonness, lascivious, unclean, obscene, ribaldry, bawdy, lewd, light, dishonest, corrupt, defile, deflowr, incest, rape, ravish, viciate.
III. Vertues relating to the due moderating of our Affections towards the things which concern our ESTATES and DIGNITIES,III. Ver∣tues rela∣ting to our E∣SATES and DIG∣NITIES. whose Object is Pro∣fit or Esteem, may be distinguished into such as do more particularly concern our Estates and Possessions; being either More general; denoting a Mediocrity about getting, or keeping, or spending. 1. LIBERALITY, Bounty, Munificence, open-handed, free, generous, frank, large. PRODIGALITY, Profseness, wastful, lavish, riotous, embezil, lash out Ha∣vock, run out. COVETOVSNESS, Avarice, Worldliness. More special; in Getting. 2. PROVIDENCE. SCRAPING, Rapacity, greedy, craving, griping, ravenous. SLATERING, Improvidence. Keeping. 3. FRUGALITY, Parcimony, thriftiness, good-husbandry, saving, spa∣ring, near. PENVRIOVSNESS, crib, hard, close-fisted, hide-bound▪ over-thrifty, tenacity, pinching, pinchpeny, Churle, Niggard, Miser, close, near. SQVANDRING, flying-out, ill-husbandry▪ unthriftiness, spend-thrift, wast, embezzil, misspend. Spending; distinguished by its Objects; either The Public. 4. GENEROSITY, Magnificence, Bounty, Grandeur, stately, pompous, sumptuous, brave, noble, heroic. RIOTOVSNESS, Profuseness, Luxuriousness, blade-it, debauch, Roi∣ster. SORDIDNESS, Baseness, unworthy, penurious. The Poor; relieving the wants of others. 5. ALMSGIVING, Charity, Dole, Alms, relieve, Pensioner, Bedes-man, Eleemosynary, Hospital. CHVRLISHNESS, uncharitable, rough, Niggard. Strangers. 6. HOSPITALITY, harbour, entertain, treat, open-house. INHOSPITABLENESS. Dignities and Esteem; in respect of the Avoiding or suffering of Disgrace. 7. MODESTY, Bashfulness. SHEEPISHNESS, Shamefacedness, over-bashful, sneaking, softness. IMPVDENCE, Shamelesness, Audacity, saucy, immodest. Seeking or bearing of Honour; as putting a just value upon things, (having but a little esteem for little things,) as likewise upon himself, and his own merits; and not either Less then he ought. 8. MAGNANIMITY, brave, noble, heroic, generous, greatness of mind. INSOLENCE, arrogance, haughtines, presumption, vaunting, vaporing. PVSILLANIMITY, Baseness, sordid, pedantical. More then he ought. 9. MODESTY. ABIECTNESS, Sneaking, narrowness and littleness of mind, base, AMBITION, Presumption, High-mindedness, Vain-glory, Arrogance, aspire, overweening, Rodomontade, affectation of Empire.
IV. HOMI∣LETICAL COMMON ertues.IV. HOMILETICAL Vertues more COMMON, are such vertuous habits as are required in men of all degrees and conditions for the regu∣lating of their mutual Conversations. Not that the other Vertues before specified, are not likewise necessary to this end: but that they do not so di∣rectly and immediately tend to it as these others do which are styled HO∣MILETICAL. To which may be opposed INSOCIABLENESS, Barbarism. These are distinguishable into such as render our Conversation; either Profitable to each other: which may be considered according to the Matter; such as tend to the preservation of Truth; either in our Declarations or Assertions. 1. VERACITY, Truth. LYING, Leasing, forge, fib, flam, false, perjury. OVER-SAYING, Hyperbole, Boasting, Ostenta∣tion, vapor, crack, brag, vaunt, swagger, o∣domontade. VNDER-SAYING, Detraction, Diminution, disparage, traduce, depreciate. Obligations or Promises. 2. FIDELITY, trusty, true, loyal. VNFAITH∣FVLNESS. OFFICIOVSNESS, Fawning. TREACHERY, perfidious, false, faithless, unfaithful, untrusty, disloyal, Recreant, Traitor, Ambodexer, betray, falter, undermine, prevaricate. Peace. 3. PEACEABLENESS, Quietness, Concord Accord▪ Agreement, Vni∣on, appease, atone, pacifie, reconcile, compose, take up, compromize, still, calm, set at peace, part a fray. VNPEACEA∣BLENESS. TAMENESS. CONTENTIOVSNESS, Strife, Dissension, Discord, Variance, Controversie, Difference, Broils, Contest, Combustion, Debate, Division, Bickering, litigious, quarrel, wrangle, clash, jarr, brabble, jangle, Gar∣boil, Odds, Brangling, Conflict, Squabble, Brawling, Cavilling, captious, Incendiary, Barreter, Bonte∣few, Shrew, Scold. Manner; such as regulate our Carriage with a due respect of Things; in Saying what is fit to be said. 4. FRANKNESS, Freeness, plain, open-hearted. TOO MVCH OPENNESS, Tell-tale, Blab, RESERVEDNESS, shy, nice, coy, demure, staunch, wary, close. Concealing what is fit to be concealed. 5. TACITURNITY, staunch, close, still, counsel-keeping, secrecy, silence. LOQVACITY, Babbling, Garrulity, talkative, babble, blab, chat∣ter, gabbling, tattle, prate-ttle. Persons; in observing a just Decorum. 6. GRAVITY, Seriousness, sober, demure, sage▪ stayed, earnest, settled, solid. VANITY, FORMALNESS, Coxcomb, fond, foppish. LIGHTNESS, flashy, Freak, Levity, Petulance.
Pleasant to each other; serving to regulate Our Outward carriage towards others, both Actions and Speeches, as to a Facility for Converse, together with our desires and endea∣vours by all honest wayes to please others, and care, not to offend them. 7. COURTESY, Comity, mannerliness, civility, affability, kindness, hu∣manity, gentle, fair, humane, benign, tractable, smooth. FAWNING, Assentation, Adulation, obsequious, smooth, glavering, gloze, cogg, cajole, curry favour, collogue, wheedle, crouch, creep∣ing, scraping, flatter, sooth, clawing, Blandishment, Parasite, Sy∣cophant, Claw-back. MOROSENESS, curst, crabbed, cynical, froward, churlish, uncivil, boisterous, rude, sullen, surly, unmannerly, hard to please, humor∣some, rough, harsh, sour, testy, snappish, dogged, currish, waspish, tetchy, wayward, peevish, pettish. Our Words and Speeches; either in More serious debates; making due allowances to others, affording them just liberty. 8. COMPLACENCY, Civility, smooth, soft, popular, ASSENTATION, Flattery, glozing, soothing, fawning, mealy-mouth'd, trencher-friend. MAGISTERIALNESS, Arrogance, Imperiousness, Lordliness, masterly, pedantical, rough, over-bear, Roister. Less serious matters; by such honest mirth whereby Conversation is to be sweetned. 9. URBANITY, Facetiousness, Raillery, Drollery, jocular, jocund, merry, Conceit, Iest, Squib, Clinch, Quibble, Wagg. SCVRRILITY, Buffoonry, Abusiveness, Pasquil, Zany, Vice. RVSTICITY, Clownishness, boisterous, blunt, barbarous, rough, rude, Kerne, home-bred, Slouch, uncivil, unmannerly, dirty.
V. HOMIL. VERT. to∣wards SU∣PERIOURS.V. HOMILETICAL VERTUES whereby we are to regulate our Demeanour towards our SUPERIOURS, may be distinguished into such as are More general; denoting the Habit of behaving our selves as we ought towards all in a superiour relation. 1. DUTIFULNESS, submissive. VNDVTIFVLNESS, Sturdiness, stiff, untoward, untractable. More special; ex parte Subjecti; as Inferiours, and at a distance from them. 2. HUMILITY, Lowliness, abase, humble, gentle, submission, demisness. PRIDE, Haughtiness, Loftiness, high-minded, Lordly, elate, stately, perk, self-conceit, arrogance, magisterialness, presumption, overween, puff up, look big. Objecti; as to Superiours in Place. 3. REVERENCE, Honour, regard, respect, veneration, awe, dread, Worship. IRREVERENCE, Petulance, Sauciness, malapert, perk, presumptuous. Gifts. 4. RESPECT, Grace, Honour, deference, civility, esteem, observe, veil to. DISREPECT, Dishonour, neglect, slighting, undervaluing, dis∣regard, vilifie. Authority; General. 5. SUBJECTION, Homage, Loyalty, Allegiance, at ones command, serve under. REBELLION. Special; as Governing. 6. LOYALTY, Allegiance, Fealty, Homage. TREACHERY, betray, Traitor, disloyal. Commanding. 7. OBEDIENCE, obsequious, observant, pliable, submissive, tra∣ctable, towardly, Conformity, follow, serve, be subject to. DISOBEDIENCE, Contumacy, Obstinacy, refractory, self-willed, unruly, untoward, transgress, trespass, break, violate, take head, stiff-necked, wilful, masterless, restive. Punishing; submitting to Justice, and suing for Mercy, or contr. 8. SUBMISSION, give place to, give way, yield, resign, surren∣der, at discretion of. CONTVMACY, Obstinacy, Self-will, stubborn, sullen, stiff, un∣tractable, wayward, stout, stiff-necked, refractory.
VI. HOMILETICAL VERTUES whereby we are to regulate our Demeanour towards our INFERIORS,VI. HOMIL. VERT. to∣ward IN∣FERIOURS. may be distinguished into such as are More general. 1. GRACIOUSNESS, Favour, Indulgence, gentle, kind, mild, serene, soft, benign, propitious. HARSHNESS, Ruggedness, sourness, roughness. More particular; ex parte Subjecti; in respect of our Superiority, from which we are ready upon occasion to yield and stoop down. 2. CONDESCENSION, deign, vouchsafe, bear with, suffer. INSOLENCE, Magisterialness, imperiousness, roughness, strictness, stately, domineer, insult, swagger, Roister, Ruffian. Objecti; as to Inferiors, in Place or Gifts. 3. AFFABILITY, Courtesie, gentleness, facil, fair, demeanour. SVPERCILIOVSNESS, roughness, stern, sour, scornful, stately, surly, arrogant. Authority; in General; ‖ preserving such in their just rights, or invading of them. 4. PROTECTION, Shelter, defence, guard, patronage, refuge. TYRANNY. Special; as Governing. 5. GOOD GOVERNANCE, Discipline, Regiment. MALE-ADMINISTRATION, misgoverning, ill governance. Commanding. 6. REASONABLENESS. VNREASONABLENESS. Punishing when one ought. 7. SEVERITY, strict. FONDNESS, Indulgence, cocker, doe, make much of, tender, chary. Remitting, when there is just occasion. 8. CLEMENCY, Gentleness, favourableness, lenity, mildness. AVSTERITY, stern, strict, inflexible, asperity, rigor, stiff, ri∣gid, harsh, sharp, tart, rough, crabbed. Though several of the Vertues and Vices enumerated under this and the former Head, may be ascribed sometimes to persons in other capacities; yet they do primarily and originally appertain to the Relations of Supe∣riours and Inferiours.
Of SENSIBLE QUALITY. §. IV.BY SENSIBLE QUALITY is meant such kind of Quality as falls un∣der our outward Senses, or the Affections of Bodies considered as they are the Objects of Sense: To which may be opposed the Notion of OCCULT QUALITY. These do relate either to the Eye and things visible. Primary, LIGHT. I. Secondary, COLOUR. II. Ear, SOUND. III. TAST and SMELL. IV. Touch; viz. such Qualities as are more ACTIVE. V. PASSIVE. VI. In this distribution of Sensible Qualities, those that are Visible and Tan∣gible are, both because of their Number and Variety, each of them redu∣ced under double Differences. Whereas those that belong to the Senses of Tast and Smell are, for the contrary reason, contracted under one. The gradual Differences belonging to every one of these are so very nu∣merous, that no Language doth, or indeed can, provide for them; but we are fain to denominate each of them from that subject in which it is most commonly found and known. And, for the farther help of the common defect of Languages as to such things, I have in the following Tables (where it could conveniently be done) reduced things to double Op∣posites, which, with the addition of the transcendental points of Augmen∣tative and Diminutive, will much facilitate the expression of the several degrees of these things. I. LIGHT.I. That is styled PRIMARY VISIBLE, by the help of which we are inabled to see other things; being inherent chiefly either in The Air; according to the more General Nature of it; denoting the intermediate or extremes, the lat∣ter of which is properly a total Privation. 1. TWILIGHT, Dawning. LIGHT, Lux, lightsome, illuminate, enlighten, glimmer, glimpse, flash. DARKNESS, gloomy, close, dim, duskie, Eclipse, obscure, sad, swart, brown. Particular Kind or Degree; the Opposite to which doth suppose some secondary Light. 2. LIGHT, Lumen, lucid, Luminary, irradiate, Sunshine. SHADOW, Shade, Vmbrage, adumbrate, Screen, Canopy, Curtain. The Superficies of solid Bodies; from which a strong or weak reflexion is styled. 3. BRIGHTNESS, Lustre, splendor, refulgence, glister, glitter, dazling, shine, coruscation, clear, fair, orient, polite, gloss, resplndent, illu∣strious, furbish, polish, burnish, irradiate. DIMNESS, gloomy, cloudy, blink.
The Bulk and Solidity of Bodies; according to their ‖ capacity, or inca∣pacity of conveying Light. 4. TRANSPARENCY, Perspicuity, pellucid, diaphanous, clear, thin: OPACIIY, Thick. Both the Superficies and Bulk of Bodies; signifying ‖ a freedom from: or liableness unto, any single or interspersed impediment. 5. CLEARNESS, fair, immaculate, unspotted, clarifie. SPOTTEDNESS, Blemish, Blot, Blur, Mote, Mole, Freckle, Speck, Stain, Soil. II. Secondary Visible Qualities,II. CO∣LOUR. are by a general name styled CO∣LOURS, Tincture, Hue, Complexion, Stain, Tinge; by which are meant those various Appearances in the Superficies of Bodies which do more im∣mediately affect the Eye. They are distinguishable into those that are more Simple; and counted either Primary; whether ‖ the intermediate, or the two extremes. 1. GRAYNESS, Freez, grisly, hoary, russet. WHITENESS, blank, blanch, bleach. BLACKNESS, sable, sad, swart, brown, Negro. Secondary; most considerable according to their order in the Rain∣bow: the usual Colour of Bloud: or of Gold. 2. REDNESS, Crimson, Vermilion, Scarlet, Stammel, ruddy, Mr∣rey, Gules. YELLOWNESS, Sallow, Tawny. Vegetables: or the appearing Colour of the Heavens. 3. GREENNESS, Verdure. BLEWNESS, Azure, Watchet. Iuice of the Fish Murex. 4. PURPLE. Mixed; according to the more General names. 5. VARIEGATEDNESS, motly, pyed, particoloured, divers colours, embroider, inlay. CHANGEABLENESS. Particular kinds; being made either by Points: or Lines▪ 6. SPECKLEDNESS, Freckled. STRIATEDNESS, brindled, streaked, striped. Roundles, or Squares, 7. DAPPLEDNESS. CHECQUEREDNESS.
III. SOUND.III. Sensible Quality perceptible by the Ear, together with the Priva∣tion of it, is styled by the name of SOUND, Noise, resound, Report, Coil, Rout, Racket, blow, loud, dinn, quetch, Echo, Euphony. To which may be adjoyned those natural words (fictitia à sono) bounce, buz, chatter, chink, clack▪ clap, clash, clatter, click, clink, crash, crush, ferk, hum, hiss, jar, jingle, jerk▪ knock, rattle, ruffle, rumble, russle, clutter, lash, pipe, ring, scream, shriek, snap, squeak, squall, roar, thump, toot, twang, thwack, tinkle, wheez, whimper, whip, whine, whistle, yell. SILENCE, Stilness, hush, hold ones peace, muni, tacit, quash, quiet, whist, 'st. The several Notions belonging to this Head, to which different names are assigned, do concern either the Causes of it; considered Formally; according to which several Sounds are made; either by an intermediate, or a stronger and quicker: or weaker and slower per∣cussion of the Air. 1. MEAN, Tenor, Counter tenor. ACVTE, shrill, Treble, Canto. GRAVE, low, Base, deep Materially; when it is made by things Metalline, or other solid brittle bodies; either ‖ clear:  interrupt∣ed by some discontinuity of the parts. 2. RINGING, jingle, tinkle, Bell, tole, chime, Peal, Knell. JARRING, Clattering. Animal; being either. More general to the more perfect Animals: or to Man. 3. VOICE, vocal, call, cry, invocate, Tone. ARTICULATE▪ Voice, speak, eloquution, pronounce, More special, and peculiar to some brute Creatures; which may likewise be imitated with artificial Instruments, by the forcible compression of Air through a rimule: or through an equable concavity. 4. HISSING, Whizzing. WHISTLING. Relations; as a Single perfect Sound: or near half more or less then such a Sound. 5. NOTE, Tone, Key. SHARP. FLAT. Perfect Series of Notes: or aggregate of such Series. 6. TUNE, Lesson, Chime, Ayre, Strain. CONSORT. Affections; either of Single Notes; being either ‖ full and perfect: or impedite and imperfect. 7. CLEARNESS, shrill. HOARSNESS, Harshness. Notes together; in respect of their ‖ agreement: or disagreement. 8. CONCORD, Symphony. DISCORD, Dissonance, untunable Tunes together; in respect of their ‖ agreement: or disagreement. 9. HARMONY, Melody, Music. IANGLING, Tintamar.
IV. The Sensible Qualities belonging to the TAST and SMELL,IV. TAST and SMELL. are of so near affinity, that several Languages do assign to them the same names. They are distinguishable into the More general and extreme, as to the ‖ agreeableness: or disagreeableness of them to the Palate or Nose. 1. SWEETNESS, Pleasant, luscious, toothsom, fragrant, odoriferous, Perfume. VNSAVOVRINESS, Stink, Stench, foetid, noisom, fulsom, rank. More special and middle; from Thin and warm matter, like that of Oil or Butter: or that of Pep∣per. 2. FATTINESS, Oily, unctuous, gross, greasie. ACRIMONIOUSNESS, biting, keen, cutting. Cooling and constringing matter, like that in Green fruit: or in Galls. 3. AUSTERENESS, Harshness, sowr, tart. ACERBITY, Astringency, styptic. Penetrating vellicating matter, like that of Vinegar and Limons: or that of Aloes and Wormwood. 4. ACIDITY, Sharpness, eager, hard. BITTERNESS. Matter of a moderate consistency: apt to corrode by its siccity. 5. SALTISHNESS, saline, brackish, briny, seasoned. FRESHNESS, unsalted, flashy. The vividness: or decay of the Spirits in any thing. 6. FRESHNESS, Smartness, brisk, quick, lively, spirituous. DEADNESS, vapid, decayed, insipid, wearish, flashy. The beginning: or farther degree of Putrefaction. 7. MUSTINESS, Moldiness, vinewed, fusty. ROTTENNESS, addle, putrid.
V. ACTIVE TACTILE QUALI∣TIES.V. Tactile Qualities more ACTIVE are commonly distinguished by their being Primary, from whence the others proceed; being either ‖ the interme∣diate: or the extremes of that Quality, whereby Homogeneous or Heterogeneous things are congregated, or separated. 1. TEMPERATENESS, Warmness, Tepidness, lukewarm. HEAT, hot, soultry, ardent, torrid, fervent, swelter, inflame, scald, Parch, Scorch. COLDNSSS, bleak, piercing, biting, chill, cool, frigid, refrigerate. A Body is easily ‖ bounded by it self: or conformed to any other Bo∣dy, wherein it may be contained. 2 MOISTNESS, dank, damp. WETNESS, Humidity, liquid, mash, slabber, daggle. DRINESS, Siccity, exsicate, arid, sear, parch. Secondary, such as are derived from the first; referring either to The Texture of parts, as to ‖ nearer: or farther distance. 3. CLOSENESS, shrink, Constipation, consolidate, compact. DENSITY, Crassitude, Thickness, Condense-ation, thronged, pressed. RARITY, Thinness, attenuate, rare-ifie. Inclination to Motion ‖ downwards: or upwards. 4. WEIGHTINESS, massie. GRAVITY, Ponderousness, Heaviness, lumpish, weighing, pressing down. LEVITY, Lightness. Aptitude or Ineptitude to Motion. Common to Liquids and Solids. 5. CONSISTENCY, congeal, stand. HARDNESS, indurate, callous, brawny. FLVIDITY, liquid, flow, dissolve. Proper to Solids. 6. FLEXIBLENESS, Pliableness, pliant, bend, bow, stoop. LIMBERNESS, supple, lank, lith, ling, gentle, pliant, plia∣ble, slack, flagging. STIFNESS, stark, tite, rigid, harsh, inflexible. VI. Tactile Qualities more PASSIVE, are distinguishable by their de∣noting either the Giving way to: or resisting of the Touch. 1. YIELDINGNESS, give place. SOFTNESS, Tenderness, mollifie, relent, give. HARDNESS, obdurate, indurate, callous. Fabric of Bodies, as to their Superficies; being ‖ more: or less plain. 2. EVENNESS, plain, level. SMOOTHNESS, Sleekness, glibbery, slippery, terse, polite, polish, burnish, Calender. ROVGHNESS, Asperity, Ruggedness, uneven, harsh, ruffle, rumple, puckered, cragged.
Bulk, being in its self, or in its parts, of ‖ an indifferent: or of a great∣er or smaller magnitude. 3. ORDINARINESS, of the most usual and common size: COVRSNESS, gross, thick. FINENESS, Tenuity, Subtilty, thin, attenuate. Adhesion of parts, in Fluids. 4. SLIMINESS, mucilaginous, roping. CLAMMINESS, viscous, adhering, stick to, cling, cleaving, glu∣tinous, Bird-lime. VNCTVOVSNESS, Slipperiness, Lubricity, glib. Solids. 5. FIRMNESS, Fastness. TOVGHNESS, ductile, malleable. BRITTLENESS, Friableness, crisp, short, frail, fragil. Ineptitude or aptitude to Local motion, chiefly in Solids. 6. STEDDINESS, establish, Stability, FASTNESS, Fixedness, Firmness, stedfast, wistly, set, settle, clenching, Rivet, stick in. LOOSENESS, sleasie, Slackness, unfastned, unfixed, unsteddy, unstedfast, unsettled, Luxation. Of SICKNESS. THose kind of Impotencies of the Body, as to its natural Functions, which are usually accompanied with Pain,§. V. are styled by the com∣mon name of SICKNESS, Disease, ill, Malady, Relapse, unhealthy, unwhol∣som, crazy, Distemper, Indisposition, ail, Fit, mortality, taken with, Spittle. To which is opposed HEALTH, Sanity, Soundness, heal, incurable, wholsom, recover, safe and sound, well, clear, how do you. The principal Notions referring to this Head may be distinguished in∣to such as signifie either The more general CAUSES OF DISEASE. I. The Diseases themselves; whether Common to the whole Body, and the various parts of it, in respect of DISTEMPERS. II. TUMORS. III. Peculiar to some parts; either the HEAD, or ARISING THENCE. IV. MIDDLE REGION, the Breast, or its parts. V. LOWER BELLY or Bowels. VI. Besides the Diseases enumerated in the following Tables, there are di∣vers others not here provided for, because they may be otherwise suffici∣ently expressed: As for instance, those that belong to the Appetite, may be exprest by the notes of Excess, Defect, Depravation.
And thus likewise may it be with those other Functions of Concoction, Sanguification, Nutrition, Augmentation, &c. Those that belong to the Organical parts, in respect of any Imperfe∣ction as to their just Number, Magnitude, Conformation, Site, Connexion, &c. may also be otherwise sufficiently expressed. I. GENE∣RAL CAU∣SES OF DISEASE.I. The GENERAL CAUSES OF DISEASE, may be distinguished into such as are either Extrinsecal, and without the body; whether from Other bodies of a malignant dangerous quality, ‖ either spreading their efficacy by insensible Effluvia: or such as being taken in a small quantity, prove destructive to life. 1. CONTAGION, Infection, taint, catching, run, spread, diffuse. POISON, Venom, envenom, virulent. Violent motion; causing either ‖ a dissolution of continuity: or too great a pressure upon the parts, when the skin is not cut. 2. WOUND, Hurt▪ Sore, vulnerary, cut, break ones head, Scarr. BRUISE, Contusion, crush, batter, shatter. Intrinsecal; with relation to the Humors; whether ‖ as to the error of Excess: or bad disposition. 3. PLETHORA, Fulness. CACOCHYMIA, Ill humors. Qualities; ‖ according to the general name, denoting Excess or Defect: or that particular Indisposition which is most frequent, name∣ly, too much Heat. 4. DISTEMPER. INFLAMMATION. Parts and Vessels; with respect to the Stopping, or blowing of them up. 5. OBSTRUCTION, Oppilation. INFLATION, puffed up, flatulent, windy. Putrefying, of them; considered according to the usual Antecedent, or Cause; ‖ a Collection of putrid matter. 6. ABSCESSUS, Aposteme. Consequent, or Effect; in relation to the Aperture or Cavity made by the Corrosion of this putrid mat∣ter; being either ‖ roundish, or oblong. 7. ULCER, Sore, Botch, Canker. FISTULA. Defect of animal spirits, whereby Sense and Motion is to be com∣municated, so as a part becomes cadaverous and mortified, ac∣cording to a ‖ lesser: or greater degree. 8 GANGRENE. SPHACELUS.
II. Diseases belonging to the whole Body, or the various parts of it,II. DISTEM∣PERS of Body. in respect of DISTEMPER, are distinguishable into such as do arise either From some putrid matter, causing a preternatural heat; being either Not infectious; seated in the Humors; whether ‖ continuing: or intermitting, according to cer∣tain seasons. 1. FEVER, Calenture. AGUE, quotidian, tertian, quartan. Habit of the Body, which is usually accompanied by a wasting away of the parts. 2. HECTIC. CONSUMPTION, tabid. Infectious; by Effluvia; being usually accompanied with Spots in the skin, ‖ according to a lesser: or greater degree of dan∣ger. 3. MALIGNANT FEVER, Spotted fever, Purples. PLAGUE, Pestilence, Pest, pestiferous, pestilential, the Sickness, Murrain. Breakings out in the skin. More dangerous; according to degrees greater: or lesser. 4. POX. MEASLES. Less dangerous; accompanied with pain of itching and burning, from bilious matter; ‖ either that which doth usually over∣spread the whole body: or that which is commonly only in some parts, being apt to diffuse it self gradually, being accompani∣ed with redness and scurfiness. 5. ITCH, Mange. TETTER, Ring-worm, Shingles. Roughness in the skin. 6. LEPROSIE, Lazer, Leper. SCURF, Morphew, Scald. Contact in Venery. 7. LUES VENEREA, French-pox. From some humor not in it self corrupted, but by its superfluity distending the inward membranes of the Bones, the Muscles or Nerves: or dis∣colouring by Redness, and heating the outward skin; being a thin light matter that may be easily discussed. 8. GOUT, Arthritis. ERYSIPELAS, St. Anthony's fire.
III. TU∣MORS.III. Those Diseases by which the parts are swelled and distended be∣yond their due proportion, are styled TUMORS, Rising, swell, turgid, node. These may be distinguished into such Tumors as are either in the Cuticle, or upper skin, with little or no pain; being ‖ small collections of watery matter hindered from transpiring: to which may be ad∣joyned that which is subsequent upon the drying of this and such other putrid matter, causing a roughness upon the skin with little exulce∣ration. 1. PUSTULE, Wheal, Whelk, Pimple, Push, Sty. SCAB. Skin it self and Flesh. With purulent matter. Not poisonous: either ‖ of a bigger magnitude, and apt to pass from one part to another, of more difficult cure: or of a lesser magni∣tude, more frequent, and less dangerous. 2. KING'S EVIL, Scrophula, Struma. BOIL, Blain, Sore, Whitlow, Ancome. Poisonous and corroding; being either ‖ hard and unequal, disco∣louring the skin by paleness or blackness, with Veins about it re∣sembling the Leg of a Crab, and exceeding difficult in the Cure: or else a collection of thick putrid bloud violently hot, with fret∣ting and malignity. 3. CANCER, Wolf. CARBUNCLE, Sore, Plaegue-sore. Without purulent matter. Not discolouring the skin; whether of a Bigger magnitude; either ‖soft: or hard. 4. WEN. SCIRRHUS. Lesser magnitude; being kinds of Plants rooted ‖ in the skin: or below it. 5. WART CORN. Discolouring the skin with redness, and occasioned by Cold. 6. CHILDBLANE. Kibe. Veins or Arteries immoderately distended. 7. VARIX. ANEURISMA. Tendons. 8. GANGLION, Spavin.
IV. The DISEASES belonging to the HEAD, or NERVES,IV. DISEA∣SES of the HEAD and NERVES. or a∣rising thence, may be distinguished into such as relate more Immediately to the Brain it self, the seat and organ of the principal Fa∣culties; either in regard of its Substance; when it is indisposed for the More principal and noble Faculties; either by ‖ some hot Vapour or Humour diffused: or from some particular Hurt or Inflammati∣on, causing a depravation of the Intellectuals, Fancy and Memo∣ry; either ‖ with a Fever, or without. 1. FRENSY, Delirium, frantic, light-headed, phrenetic. MADNESS, out of ones wits, raving, distraction, besides ones self, wood, brain-sick, crack-brained, crazed, lunatic. Less principal Faculties; by the Superfluity of cold pituitous matter, causing ‖ excessive drowsiness: or by crass crude vapours rising from the stomach, working a kind of Suffocation in sleeping by a sense of weight upon the Breast. 2. VETERNUS, Sopor. EPHIALTES, Night-mare, Incubus. Corruption of some crass phlegmatic humor, either ‖ in the Brain, causing much drowsiness and deliration: or in the Arteries which should convey the spirits to the Brain, causing first a giddiness, and then an abolition of Sense and Motion. 3. LETHARGY. APOPLEXY. Defluxion of Humours (which are sometimes salt or sharp) ei∣ther ‖ on the Lungs: or other parts of the Body, Limms, or Ioynts. 4. CATARRH, Distillation, Rheum, Defluxion. RHEUMATISM. Ventricles; ‖ when any hot Vapour doth agitate and disturb the motion of the spirits, so as objects seem to turn round: or when any cold phlegmatic humour doth obstruct their motion, causing a privation of Sense, with convulsive motions in several parts. 5. VERTIGO, Giddiness, Swimming in the head, Dizziness, Scotomy. EPILEPSY, Falling-sickness. Mediately to the Nerves; which may be either Obstructed; whether ‖ the greater-Nerves, and for a longer continu∣ance: or the lesser Branches, for a shorter space, whereby Sense and Motion is hindered. 6. PALSIE, paralytic. NUMNESS, Stupor, asleep. Contracted more generally: or distended in some particular part. 7. CONVULSION. CRAMP, Stitch. Oppressed with superfluous moisture, causing an unequal growth of the parts, specially the Head and Joints. 8. RICKETS, Rachitis. Throat; by such an inward Swelling and Inflammation as doth hinder Swallowing and Respiration. 9. SQUINANCY, Quinsie.
V. DISEA∣SE of the MIDDLE REGION.V. The Diseases belonging to the MIDDLE REGION and its parts, may refer either to the Lungs; in their being Obstructed by some crass phlegmatic matter adhering to the sides of the Pipes, from whence follows Too frequent Respiration. 1. SHORTNESS OF BREATH, Anhelatio, Panting, Pursiness. Difficulty of Breathing, according to ‖ a lesser, or greater degree: by the latter of which men cannot fetch their breath, unless in an upright posture. 2. ASTHMA, Tissick, broken-winded, wheeze. ORTHOPNOEA. Vlcerated, and by degrees putrefying; from whence sometimes doth proceed much purulent matter to fill up the cavity of the Thorax. 3. CONSUMPTION, Phthisis. EMPYEMA. Heart; by some noxious vapours or humours, which do either Provoke to too frequent and vehement motion for the freeing it self from them. 4. PALPITATION. Hinder the motion of it; according to ‖ a lesser: or greater degree. 5. FAINTING, Failing, languish, Qualm. SWOUNING, Swound, Leipothymia. Side; from some Inflammation within the Membranes covering the in∣side of the Ribs, causing difficulty of breathing, and provocation to coughing, upon which great pain follows, accompanied with a Fever. 6. PLEURISIE. VI. DISEA∣SES of the BOWELS.VI. Diseases belonging to the LOWER BELLY or Bowels, may be distinguished into such as do concern the Stomach; by sharp humors corroding the mouth of it, causing sometimes Fainting and cold Sweats. 1. CARDIALGIA, Heart-burning. Liver and Gall; being caused by some impotence in them for the doing of their Functions, in not digesting & distributing the humors belong∣ing to them; causing either ‖ Paleness of colour, Faintness, Indisposition to stir: or Yellowness and Swarthiness of colour, accompanied with faintness and nauseousness. 2. GREEN-SICKNESS, Cachexie. JAUNDISE, Yellow-jaundise, Black-jaundise. Stomach and Liver, and other Bowels jointly; which, being defective in the works of Concoction and Distribution, do occasion a superfluity of serous matter distending the skin of the belly and other parts of the body, accompanied with some wind: and sometimes a windy vapour, accompanied with some watery humors, stretching the belly. 3. DROPSY, hydropical. TYMPANY. Spleen; by its dispersing sour and feculent humors: or noxious vapors, into other parts of the body; the former of which is usually accompanied with faintness, weariness, loosness of teeth, spots on the body, and spe∣cially on the legs. 4. SCURVY, Scorbute. HYPOCHONDRIACAL VAPOURS, Spleneti.
Guts; ‖ from some sharp humor that corrodes, or vapor that distends the Co∣lon: or from some hardned excrement, or some other like matter, stopping the Ilia or smaller Guts. 5. COLIC, Belly-ach. ILIAC PASSION. Faculties of excretion; whether by Stool; either as to the excess of this: or the voiding of bloud. 6. DIARRHAEA, Lax, Looseness, Flux. DISENTERY, Bloody-flix. Vrine; either by some stony concretion in the Kidneys or Bladder: or a continual involuntary urining by drops. 7. STONE. STRANGURY. Lower part of the belly or Scrotum; ‖ by a breach of the internal Mem∣branes, or too much distention of it, or by superfluity of waterish or windy matter: or in the Veins about the Fundament. 8. RUPTURE, Hernia, Burst, Broken-belly. HAEMORROIDS, Piles. Mother or Womb; by ‖ causing convulsive motions: or stopping of the Breath. 9. HYSTERICAL PASSION, Mother. SUFFOCATION. CHAP. IX. Concerning the Predicament of Action; the several kinds of it. I. Spiritual. II. Corporeal. III. Motion. IV. Operation. NExt to the Predicament of Quality may succeed that of Action; the several kinds of which may be distributed into such as have for their Agent a Spirit, or spiritual faculty, called SPIRITUAL ACTION. Body, or material substance, respecting chiefly either the Actions of Animate bodies, called here CORPOREAL ACTION. Passage of bodies from one place to another, styled MOTION. Sundry kinds of works, about which men of several callings use to imploy themselves, styled OPERATION. SPIRITUAL ACTION. THe Genus of SPIRITUAL ACTIONS,§. I. may be distributed into such as do belong either to GOD. I. The Soul, with reference to the Vnderstanding. SPECULATIVE. II. PRACTICAL. III. WILL. IV. Fancy or Appetite; the Actions of which are styled Affections or Passions, and may be distinguished into such as are either more SIMPLE. V. MIXED. VI.
I. ACTIONS OF GOD.I. By ACTIONS OF GOD in this place, are meant only his transi∣ent Actions, which are terminated in the Creatures. As for his immanent Actions, because we can frame no other conceptions of these but such as are sutable to the acts of our own minds, therefore may they be sufficient∣ly expressed by those that follow in the next Differences. These transient Acts here enumerated, do primarily belong to the Divine Nature; though some of them may in a secondary manner, and by way of allusion and participa∣tion, be sometimes ascribed to other things: To which may be annexed upon the account of Affinity the general name of those Actions which do exceed all Natural power, MIRACLE, Wonder, supernatural. These are distinguishable into such as do concern either the Putting of things into their first being: or reducing them to nothing. 1. CREATION, Making, Creator, Creature, ANNIHILATION, Annul, disannul, abolish, extinguish, bring to nought, call-in, cancel, put out. Government or disposal of things; More general; whereby he doth most freely and wisely take care of, and provide for all things: To which may be opposed by some Ana∣logy such a necessary Concatenation and unalterable order amongst things as doth not admit of any liberty: or such a blind contingency of things as excludes all wisdom, expressed usually by the word, 2. PROVIDENCE, Fore-sight, Fore-cast. FATE, Destiny. FORTVNE, Chance, Accident, Venture, Adventure, casual, ap, Luck, Hazard, fortuitous, a Hit, peradventure, perhaps. More special; belonging either to Animate Creatures; by Contributing to their ‖ well: or ill being. 3. BLESSING, Beatitude, Benediction. CVRSING, accurse, ban; Malediction, Execration. Continuing them in their particular kinds of Being: or depriving them of it. 4. PRESERVATION, Conservation, Protection, Keeping, main∣tain, save, Saviour, shelter, guard, keep, cherish. DESTRVCTION, Perdition, Confusion, Bane, Devastation, Loss, pernicious, subvert, undoe, ruine, confound, extirpate, abolish, bring to naught, stroy, destroy, cast away, perish, cut off, wast, con∣sume, dissolve, exterminate, extinguish, fall, gone. Keeping or taking them from any evil felt or feared: or leaving them to it. 5. DELIVERANCE, Rescue, Save-iour, Salvation, free, quit, rid, clear, exempt. DERELICTION, destitute, forlorn, deserting, give vp, relinquish, cast off, deliver up, forsake, leave, forgo. Rational Creatures; as to their Minds; by discovering to them, or impressing upon them, in an extraordinary way, such Truths or Inclinations as humane in∣dustry could not of it self attain to. 6. REVELATION, open, disclose, discover, Vision, Enthusiasm, Fa∣natic, Oracle. INSPIRATION, infuse. States by delivering them from a condition of servitude & misery. 7. REDEMPTION, deliver, save, ransom, rescue.
II. ACTIONS of the UNDERSTANDING and Judgment SPECULA∣TIVE, Contemplation, Theory,II. SPE∣CULA∣TIVE A∣CTIONS of the Under∣standing. are such as do concern the various exercise of our Vnderstandings about the Truth and Falshood of things, with respect either to the Vnderstanding; being either Preparative; in the first Objectization of a thing: or the reflexive Thought about it, together with what else one knows of that kind. 1. THINKING, Cogitation, bethink, deem, imagin, esteem, Conceit, Notion, Thought-ful, pensive, mind it, suggest, put in ones head, MEDITATING, Study, considering, cast about in ones mind, muse, con∣template, Elucubration, think, fore think, premeditate, ponder, extempore. Operative; in ‖ the comparing of things to find out what is Truth: or the Thought resulting from such comparison. 2. INQUISITION, Examination, Search, Scrutiny▪ exploration, investigate, Disquisition, seek, discuss, hunt, canvase, cast water, Quest, Inquest. DISCOVERY, detect, find, perceive, lift out▪ pick out, Invention, excogi∣tate, Author, Inventor, tell, inkling, 'tis out. Iudgment; Primary; in judging such discovery ‖ agreeable to Truth: or disagreeable. More general. 3. ASSENT, Consent, accord, agree, concurr, allow, acknowledge, yield, suf∣frage, Voice, Vote, of the same mind, think good. DISSENT, differ, disagree, of another mind, Discord. More special; according to its arguments; as Proceeding from Causes Extrinsecal; Testimony ‖ sufficient: or insufficient. 4. BELIEVING, Credit, credible, Faith, Trust. DISBELIEVING, Discredit, incredible, Distrust. Intrinsecal in the thing it self; that it is ‖ conclusive: or not so conclu∣sive but that it may be otherwise. 5. KNOWING, Cognition, conscious, wist, witting, aware, privy, Intel∣ligence, learn, inform, acquaint, cognizance, notice, inkling pre∣science, omniscient. DOVBTING, misdoubt, mistrust, distrust, suspence, hanging stagger∣ing, hesitate, pendulous, dubious, ambiguous, at a stand, stick at, Quandary, Scruple, Sceptic, uncertain, Apocryphal, 'tis a question. Productive of these Effects in ‖ higher, or lower degrees. 6 CERTAINTY, Assurance, sure, evince, convince, demonstrate, evi∣dence, undoubted, out of doubt, without doubt, doubtless, infallible. OPINION, Conceit, Iudgment, Sentiment, Mind, Tenet, think, suppose, surmise, ween, overween, unanimous, likely, probable, prejudice, appre∣hend, fancy, repute, deem, Verdict, Sentence, shoot ones bolt. Secondary; judging of Truth found, as to the Consequence of it, in respect of other things to be concluded from it, or to follow upon it; in Thesi: or in Hypothesi 7. REASONING, Discussing, Arguing, Ratiocination, Logic. CONJECTURING, Guessing, surmise, divine, mind gives, conceit, Pre∣sumption, probable. Importance: or frivolousness of it. 8. ESTEEMING, accounting, prizing, valuing, rating, regard, respect, re∣pute, count of, care for, think well of, set by, stand upon, credit, prefer. CONTEMNING, despising, slighting, undervaluing, disregarding, set at nought, scorn, disdain, abjectness, despicable, vilifie, disesteem, neglect, set light by, make nothing of, I pass not for it, Nickname, pish.
III. ACTIONS of the UNDERSTANDING and Judgment PRACTI∣CAL,III. PRA∣CTICAL ACTIONS of the Un∣derstand∣ng. do concern the enquiry after and taking notice of the Nature of things, with reference to their Goodness or Fitness to any purpose. They are distinguish∣able, as the former, by their respect to the Vnderstanding; being either Preparative, in the first Objectization of a business: or the reflexive Thought about it, together with what else one knows of that kind. 1. DELIBERATING, ponder, weigh, forecast. OBSERVING, advert, animadvert, give ear, attend to, heed, regard, give ones mind to, look to, mark, note, mind, pry, peep, watch, take no∣tice, notable, remarkable, oversee, overlook. Operative, in ‖ the comparing of means to find which is expedient: or the Thought resulting from such comparison. 2. CONSIDERATION, revolve, scan, advise, forecast, recognize, premedi∣tate ponder, peruse, study, recount, reflect, review, revise, weigh, bethink, consult, cast in ones mind, retrospection, ruminate. INVENTION, devising, excogitate, find out, make, Author. Iudgment; Primary; in judging the thing found to be ‖ agreeable to its end: or disagree∣able. More general. 3. APPROVING, liking, allowing, think good, take well, fancy him, find a Bill, currant. DISAPPROVING, disliking, disallowing, disavow, mislike, condemn, explode, reprobate. More special; according to its motives; as Proceeding from Causes Extrinsecal; Warranty ‖ sufficient: or insufficient. 4. TRUST, Confidence, betrust, entrust, rely, repose, enfeoff, recom∣mend, credit, charge, rest upon. DISTRVST, Mistrust, Diffidence, Suspicion, Surmize, Iealousie, Vmbrage, call in question, misgive. Intrinsecal in the means it self; ‖ conclusive that it is so: or not so con∣clusive but that it may be otherwise. 5. SATISFACTION, Content, acquiesce, resolve. SCRVPLE, Doubt, dissatisfie. Productive of these Effects; in ‖ higher: or lower degrees. 6. ASSURANCE, Confidence, sure, certain, resolved, secure, confirm. PERSWASION, think, believe. Secondary; in judging of expedients found, ‖ as to the use of them, how they are to be ordered and managed: or what is like to be the event of them. 7. CONTRIVING, projecting frame, machinate, plot, forecast, cast about, or in ones mind, find a way, devise, Conveyance. EXPECTING, look for, wait, gaping after, mind gives me, make account, stay for, watch for. IV. ACTI∣ONS OF THE WIL.IV. ACTIONS OF THE WILL. Under this Head are to be considered the Kinds of such Actions; belonging either to the End as future; comprehending Acts more Simple; Imperfect and diminute; ‖ for: or against one thing rather then another. 1. INCLINATION, Propensity, Proclivity, Proneness, Forwardness, hankering, having a mind to, Prejudice for, bent, addicted. AVERSION, Prejudice against, unwillingness, coyness, stand off.
Impedite and conditional; ‖ for: or against a thing, if left to it self. 2. VELLEITY, Woulding, Wishing, Desire, List, Vote, Will, Mind, Option, rather. NOLLEITY, Backwardness, go against, grudge, loth, Regret, Relu∣ctancy, think much, rather not, unwilling, with an ill will. Perfect; denoting ‖ the determining of it self to do, or not to do: or the taking of farther time to consider. 3. PURPOSING, Intention, Decree, destine, determine, appoint, de∣sign, resolve, ordain, mean, nonce, bent, minded, set himself, set ones mind, predestinate, preordain. DEMURRING, hesitating, hanging, suspence, stick at, Quandary. Complicate; towards an object considered as difficult, signifying ‖ the purpose of doing it notwithstanding such Difficulties: or doubt∣ing because of such Difficulties. 4. RESOLUTION, Fixedness, determined. WAVERING, fluctuate, hanging, suspence, irresolute, staggering. Means; Antecedently; determining what to ‖ take: or leave. 5. ELECTION, chusing, select, Choice, cull, picking, prefer, set aside, Option, Pre-election, predestinate, rather. REIECTION, refuse, Preterition, pass by, cast off, cast aside, cast away, reprobate, repudiate, renounce, explode, out-cast: Consequently; ‖ continuing in the purpose of using such means: or ceasing such purpose. 6. PROSECUTING, persevere, persist, hold on. DESISTING, giving off, leaving, cease, surcease, end, terminate, de∣termin, stay, rest, pause, forbear, withdraw, falter, supersede, break off, go out, give over, lay aside, or down. End obtained; as to the ‖ resting: or not resting of the Will in it as good. DELECTATION, Fruition, Rejoycing, Ioy, Gladness, Delight, Com∣fort, Complacence, Pleasure, Solace, Satisfaction, Content, placid, please, affect, acceptable, delicious, sweet, welcome. DISPLACENCE, Sorrow, Grief, Discomfort, unpleasant, irksom, grie∣vous, Offence-ive, Disgust, Dislike, Distast, stomach, unacceptable gra∣ting, malecontent. Affections; either of the Will it self in its actings; consisting in ‖ its having a power of applying it self to the doing or not doing this or that: or not having such power. 8 LIBERTY, arbitrary, free, may, may chuse. DETERMINATION TO ONE, must, cannot chuse but, limit, Ne∣cessity. Actions of the Will; denoting ‖ the doing of things according to the free inclinations of our own minds: or the being necessitated by some external impediments to do any thing against such inclinations. 9. SPONTANEITY, of ones own accord, freely, willing, voluntary, with a good will, unbidden, gratis, ready. CO ACTION, Compusion, Constraint, Force, enforce, Violence, unwil∣lingness, maugre, perforce, extort, wrench, wrest, in spight, will or nill, driving, pressing, bear down, over-awe.
V. SIMPLE PASSIONS.V. Acts of the Sensitive part, namely of the Fancy, and chiefly of the Appetite, whereby the mind is moved and disturbed with the apprehen∣sions of things, are styled PASSIONS, Affection, Perturbation, pathetic. Those amongst these are called more SIMPLE which consist onely of one single Act. They are distinguishable into such as concern things under the notion of New unexpected surprizing: or else things over-common and too much repeated; without respect to the good or evil of them, being chiefly a disturbance of the Fancy; styled 1. ADMIRATION, marvel, wonder, amaze, astonish. TAEDIVM, glut, loathing, cloy, dawl, nauseate. Good or Evil which we Wish to happen to them. 2. FAVOUR, Benevolence, Benignity, Grace, Good will, kind propiti∣ous, ingratiate, Favorite, Dilling, Well-wisher, make much of. MALIGNITY, Malice, Spite, Pique, Grudge, Prejudice, Despite, Discourtesie, Disfavour, sinister, virulent, malevolent, ill will, ill minded. Apprehend to be in them; whether Absolute; flowing from ‖ our general apprehensions of the Worth of things, and our need of them: or the Evil, and our being hurt by them. 3. LOVE, Affection, inamour, dote on smitten, amiable, besotted, amorous, dear, endear, Darling, Minion, Paramour, well-belo∣ved, Likings, Fancy, Philtre. HATRED, Malice, Rancour, Spite, Virulence, odious, abhor, abo∣minate, detest, cannot endure, Grudge, Pique, Heart-burning, can∣kered, exulcerate. Relative to different notions concerning Both Good and Evil; considered as Present. 4. MIRTH, Glee, Solace, Chearfulness, Sport, blithe, blissom, buxom, frolick, jolly, jocund, jovial, merry, exhilarate, glad, crank, debonair, comical, pleasant, sanguin, Iubile. GRIEF, Sadness, Sorrow, Melancholy, Heaviness, doleful, de∣plorable, disconsolate, bitter, pensive, dejected, tragical, ruful, amort, moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, Dump, cast down, vex, trouble, cut, take on, whimper, pule, woe, agony, anguish, mourn, Plaint, Cry, take heavily. Absent and possible. 5. DESIRE, Affection, covet, crave, fain, long for, lust, greedy, Inclination to, hankering, wish, Concupiscence, eager, earn∣est, importunate, thirst after, have a mind to. AVERSATION, Antipathy, Regret, Reluctancy, Distast, irksom, eschew▪ shun, avoid, abhor, loath, execrate, cannot endure, or abide,
Absent and probable; as to The nature of the Act. 6. HOPE, Trust, Recumbency, Affiance, Rely. FEAR, Awe, Dread, Terrour, Horrour, Consternation, hide∣ous, dismal, afraid, agast, formidable, horrible, terrible, fright, fray, terrifie, scare, startle, daunt, deterr, dismay, a∣mate, appale, dare not, terrible, Bugbear, Hobgoblin. The greater: or lesser degree of this Probability. 7. CONFIDENCE, Affiance, Trust, build upon, rest upon, rely, repose, secure, pert, in heart, dare, presume, take to. DIFFIDENCE, Suspicion, Iealousie, Mistrust, Distrust, out of heart, faint-hearted, cast down, heartless, misdoubt, mis∣give. The issue and event; which as it is represented to have Diffi∣culties in it ‖ either superable: or insuperable; so it excites. 8. BOLDNESS, Courage, Audacity, daring, sturdy, hardy, stout, venturous, pert, malapert, embolden, presume. DESPAIR, Despondency, forlorn, hopeless, dash, cast down, deadness of heart, heartless, past hope. Evil alone, or opposition from others, wherein there is contempt: to which may be annexed by way of affinity (though it be not properly a simple Passion) that particular desire of making such actions whereby others have been injurious to us, to be∣come hurtful to themselves, so as they may be sensible of it. 9. ANGER, Ire, Passion-ate, Wrath, Sharpness, Rage, Out∣rage, Pett, Choler, Gall, fume, storm, fret, pelt, chafe, vex, take on, inflame, kindle, irritate, inrage, exasperate, in∣cense, provoke, move, sullen, hasty, furious, outragious, mad, look big, placable, appease, stomack, Animosity, heart-burning, irascible, rough, hot, curst, snappish, snarle, snuffle. REVENGE, avenge, Vengeance, vindictive, wreak.
VI. MIXED PASSIONS, are such as do not consist of any single Act, but are made up of more then one,VI. MI∣XED PASSI∣ONS. to be distinguished by the Object they are conversant about, and by the Simple Passions of which they consist, into such as are Determined either to Good or Evil; with respect to The particular interest of Repute; being conversant about Good, which we apprehend to be in it self honourable and worthy, im∣plying ‖ Confidence and Love in the promoting of it: or Confidence and Ioy in the owning of it. 1. ZEAL, ardent, Devotion, earnest, fervent, hot, warm▪ intent, eager, Zelt. GLORYING, Triumph, Exultation, boast brag, Eravado, Rodomonta∣do, Thrasonical, crack, crow, vapor, vaunt, Ostentation swagger, vain∣glory, flourishing, take a pride. Evil, which we apprehend to be in it self dishonourable and unworthy; implying ‖ a mixture of Hatred and Aversation against the commit∣ting of it: or Sorrow and Diffidence for the committing of it. 2. SCORN, set light by, slight, despise, contemn. SHAME-faced-full-less, abash, bashful, ashamed, out of countenance▪ con∣found, quash, dash, Impudence, Turpitude, put to shame. The more general interests belonging to Our selves; respecting either Good that is dear to us, implying a ‖ mixture of Love, Anger, and Hope, that we may excel others in it: or a mixture of Love, Anger, and Fear, lest we should by others be deprived of it. 3. EMULATION, vy, strive, struggle. JEALOUSIE, Suspicion, surmize. Evil; whether as done By our selves; being either ‖ a mixture of Sorrow and Fear upon dis∣satisfaction in having committed it: or Sorrow and Desire, as wish∣ing it had not been committed. 4. REMORSE, Compunction, Contrition, relent, beshrew, trouble of mind. REPENTANCE, Penitence, rue. By others; ‖ either a vile thing by any person, or any evil by a vile person; implying a mixture of Anger and Hatred: or of Anger and Aversa∣tion. 5. INDIGNATION, Scorn, dudgeon, fume, murmure. DISDAIN, Scorn. Others; in respect of the Good befalling them, (as we think) ‖ worthily, or unworthily; imply∣ing a mixture of Love and Ioy: or Hate and Grief. 6. JOY FOR THE GOOD OF OTHERS, Gratulation, congra∣tulate, Sympathy. ENVY, Spite-full, invidious, grudge, repine, malign. Evil befalling them, (as we think) ‖ worthily, or unworthily; imply∣ing a mixture of Hate and Ioy: or of Love and Grief. 7. Ioy for the evil of others. PITTY, Compassion, commiserate, condole, relent, ruthful, tender, woful, yearn, Bowels▪ bemoan, bewail, lament, deplore, Sympathy, fellow-feeling. Indetermined either as to Good or Evil, but concerning both consisting in a distraction of the Mind by a conflict of any two contrary Passions: to which may be opposed (though not so proper to this place) the transport of the Mind, being wholly possess'd with one Passion: styled 8. AGONY. EXTASIE, Transport, Amazement, Consternation, Maze, Traunce, Ru∣pture, ravish, astonish, extatical.
CORPOREAL ACTION. BY CORPOREAL ACTIONS are meant such Actions whose Agent is a Body or Material substance.§. II. They are distinguishable into such as are More peculiar to Living creatures; either more Absolute; belonging to VEGETATIVES. I. SENSITIVES. II. RATIONALS. III. Relative to the Outward SIGNS OF PASSION. IV. GENERAL Notions belonging to DEMEANOUR. V. Common with them to other things, to which by Analogy they are ascribed, the different kinds of GESTURE. VI. I. Corporeal ACTIONS belonging chiefly to VEGETATIVE Bodies,I. AC∣TIONS VEGE∣TA∣TIVE. may be distinguished into such as are either. Primary and more general; denoting the making: or unmaking of a thing; the motion towards a new form: or from the precedent form; styled 1. GENERATION, get, beget, procreate, propagate, breeding, engender, Gene∣sis. CORRVPTION, Dissolution, consumetion. Secondary and more particular; relating unto the Conveying, or receiving in that first matter which is to be formed into an a∣nimate Body. 2. IMPREGNATION, beget, pregnant, breeding, teeming, conceived, get with child, big, great with child, or egg. CONCEPTION, with child, Superfetation. Bringing forth what hath been thus conceived; either in due time: or too soon. 3. PARTURITION, Bearing, Birth, Nativity, bringing forth, travail, groning, in labour, lying in, Child-birth, eaing, farrowing, kindling, foling, whelping, deliver, Midwife, brought to bed, cry out, lay egg. ABORTION, miscarry, Mischance, cast young, Castling, untimely birth, Slink, still-born. Improvement of what is thus brought forth; either Peculiar to the Young; implying that more then ordinary tenderness to be used towards things in that state, ‖ whether more general: or that which is proper to viviparous Animals. 4. FOTION, cherishing, foster, foment, brood, Incubation, hatching. LACTATION, giving suck, suckle, Common to Young and Old; Antecedent; ‖ the taking in of sutable and sufficient aliment: or the fit∣ting of this aliment by fermentation. 5. FEEDING, living upon, Aliment, Food. DIGESTING, Concoction, put over. Consequent from the Vnion of the Aliment to the body: and its improving thereby. 6. NOURISHING, Nutrition, maintain, Nutriment. GROWING, come up, increase, improve, thrive, Spring, Proficient Vnion: or disunion, of the Body and Soul. 7. LIVING, Life, quick, alive, enliven, vivifie, revive, survive. vital, Resurrection. DYING, Death, dead-ly, mortal, fatal, dy, decease, depart, expire, give up the ghost, defunct, kill, slay, mortifie, dispatch, Slaughter, Mortality, capital.
II. AC∣TIONS SENSI∣TIVE.II. Corporeal ACTIONS belonging to SENSITIVE Bodies, may be di∣stinguished into such as are either More principal and natural; denoting the kinds of natural Appetite, toge∣ther with such Actions as tend to the satisfying of them; relating to the Preservation of the Individuum, as to the desire of Nourishment, for the supply of Decays; and that either by Food: or Meat. 1. HUNGER, Appetite, Stomach, eager, greedy, ravenous, Famine, sharp-set. EATING, devour, gorging, fall to, Meal, Repast, Refection, Food, Meat, Aliment, edible, Viands, Victuals, fall to ones Meat. Liquor. 2. THIRST, dry. DRINKING, Potion, potulent, potable, quaff, soop, soaking, lap, swill, carouse, sip, tipple, bibble, guzzle, Draught, Drench, Water, Butler, Buttery, Cellar. Rest and refreshment after labour and weariness; comprehending the Appetite or inclination after this: or the Satisfaction of such Appetite, consisting in a cessation from all Actions of the outward Senses, by a relaxation of the Nerves. 3. DROWSINESS, Heaviness. SLEEPING, asleep, dormant, a Nap, lull, Slumber, narcotic, roost. State supposed, belonging to this Appetite, or the Satisfaction of it, de∣noting the general Action of the Senses: or the working of the Fancy in sleep. 4. WAKING, awake, watch, Reveiles, raise from sleep. DREAMING. Propagation of the Species. 5. LUST, Salacity, Lechery, Venery, Concupiscence, libidinous, carnal, fleshly, blissom, clicket, proud. COITION, coupling, gendring, lie with, know carnally, Copulation, rutting, tread, venery Less principal and preternatural; referring to several affections of the Touch, and different kinds of Pain; being either Proper to the Skin and outward parts; caused by an agitation of some thin Vapours stopped in their expiration, which is remedied by such a kind of affriction with an edge as doth open the Pores, that the Vapors may transpire. 6. ITCHING. SCRATCHING, Scraping, clawing, Scalping-iron. Common to other parts; and caused by Distention or compression of the parts: or sharpness of humours. 7. AKING, Ach. PRICKING, Crick, pungent, sharp, Stitch. Disspation of the Spirits in the softer parts by a light touch: or corro∣sion of the membranous parts. 8. TICKLING, Titillation. SMARTING, piercing. Obstruction either in the Nerves or Muscles; causing ‖ some vellications in the Nerves: or a hot pungent pain in the Muscles. 9. TWITCHING, Vellication, Pinching. TINGLING.
III. The Corporeal ACTIONS peculiar to Men,III. ACTI∣ONS PECU∣LIAR TO MEN. or the several wayes of expressing their mental Conceptions, are either by Articulate sounds; considered according to The general name, together with the privation of it. 1. SPEAKING, talk, utter-ance, mentioning, Elocution, pronounce, express, deliver, Prolation, Spokes-man, effable, voluble, fluent, say, tell, mutter, mumble, jabber, jargon, vein, Grammar, Rhetoric, Ora∣tory, Eloquence, Prolocutor, nuncupative, by word of mouth. MVTENESS, dumb, speechless, silent, blank, tongue-tied. The defects of speaking, as to ‖ the continuity of speech: or the prolati∣on of some particular letters. 2. STUTTERING, Stammering, falter, hammer. LISPING. The degrees of loudness in speaking; either ‖ without any vocal sound: or with much noise. 3. WHISPERING, mutter, round in the ear. EXCLAMATION, Acclamation, hollow, hoot, hoop, shout, baul, cla∣mor, cry, Lure, Out-cry, roar, screech, scream, squeak, squeal, loud, lift up ones voice, set out ones throat. The particular kinds of speaking; referring To such words as we see before us; either ‖ more perfect: or imperfect. 4. READING, Lecture, Lesson, legible, peruse. SPELLING. To the manner of ordering our voice according to musical Tunes; ei∣ther ‖ the more perfect: or the more imperfect attempt. 5. SINGING, Song, Ditty, Ballad, Carol, Canticle, Lay, Ode, Madrigal, Eclogue, canorous, Modulation, chant, Chorister, Quire: CHIRPING, questing, quittle. The several relations of speaking; when we say that to another which we expect should be ‖ repeated: or written by him. 6. DICTATING, prompting, suggest. ENDITING. Figures representing either words or things, and made either ‖ immedi∣ately by mens hands: or by the impression of Types. 7. WRITING, penning, drawing, engrossing, Hand, Manuscript, subscribe, superscribe, inscribe, transcribe, Postscript, interline, indorse, scrawle, scrible, rude draught, Pen-man, Scribe, Writer, Scrivener, Secretary, Clerk, Note, Ticket, Docket, Short-hand, Tachygraphy, Brachygraphy, Cryptography, set ones hand, set down, take or put in writing, en∣ter into book, write out fair. PRINTING, Imprint, Impression, typographical, Type, Press, put in Print.
IV. SIGNS OF PASI∣ONS.IV. The OUTWARD SIGNS OF our inward PASSIONS, are ei∣ther More peculiar to some single Passions; as to Admiration: or Sating; Straining the ‖ eyes: or the brows. 1. STARING. MOVING THE BROWS. Love: or Hate; expansion: or contraction of the Muscles of the Face. 2. SMILING, smrking, snearing, simper: LOWRING, powting, scowling, frowning, grinning, look sowre. Mirth: or Sorrow. 3. LAUGHING, deride, ridiculous, giggle, chuckle, tihi, flicker. WEEPING, mourn, cry, Tears, wailing, Plaint, bemoan, bewail, la∣ment, blubber, shed tears, whining. Desire: or Aversation; scruing the body: or wagging the head. 4. WRIGLING. MOVING THE HEAD, Nodd. Hope: or Fear; expressed either by the Body or parts of it; being ‖ moved once and quick: or oft and con∣tinuedly: or deprived of motion. 5. STARTING, flinching. TREMBLING, quaking, shaking, shudering, Trepidation, qui∣vering, shiver, quaver, chatter. RIGOR, Horrour, Stifness. Breath; ‖ emitted short and quick: or emitted slow and long: or sucked up suddenly. 6. HUFFING, snuff, puff. SIGHING, Sobbing. SVCKING up the breath, sniff. Confidence and Diffidence: or Boldness and Despair; setting the hands against the sides: or heaving up the shoulders. 7. KEMBOING. SPANISH SHRUG. Anger: or Revenge; by emission of the breath; either ‖ vocal, but not articulate: or articulate, but not distinctly intelligible. 8. GRONING. GRUMBLING. More common to several Passions; by discolouring the countenance ‖ with a greater degree of Redness then doth belong to the natural hue; appertaining either to Joy, Love, Desire, but chiefly to Shame: or else with Whiteness; belonging to those more violent perturbations of Grief, Anger, &c. but chiefly to Fear. 9. BLUSHING, flush. PALENESS, wan, ghastly, pallid, appale.
V. The general notions belonging to DEMEANOUR, Carriage,V. DEMEA∣NOUR. Comportment, Deportment, Garb, behave, or the manner of our conversing towards one another in respect of such Corporeal Actions as either custom or common opinion hath put a decency and fitness upon, are con∣siderable; either according to the More general kinds; denoting The endeavour to express our respect to others, by ‖ going to them: or staying by them or for them. 1. VISITING, go to see. WAITING, Attend-ance, serve, Retinue, Train, Valet, Page, Lac∣quey, stay for, tarry for, tend. The congress or meeting of others, in respect of ‖ our applying our selves to them: or their receiving or using of us. 2. ADDRESSING, accost. ENTERTAINING, treat, entreat, usage, reception, welcome. The kinds of gesture, or words, signifying respect. 3. SALUTATION, caressing, accost, greet, hail, commendations. More special kinds; consisting in Gestures. At a distance; by bowing of the ‖ Body: or Knees. 4. CONGEEING, cringe, duck, make a leg, crouch. CURCHEEING, Genuflexion. Near; either more▪ Rustic. 5. CLAPPING. SHAKING HANDS. Gentile; by joyning of the ‖ Body: or Face. 6. EMBRACING, clasping, clip, coll, grasp, hug, twine. KISSING, Smack. Words; whereby we express Our ‖ esteem of others: or our business with them. 7. COMPLEMENTING, Courtliness, Caressing. CONFERRING, commune, parley, talk, treat, speak with, Dia∣logue. Our good wishes to others; either at our ‖ first meeting: or parting. 8. SALVEDICTION, accost, greet, hail. VALEDICTION, adieu, farwell, take leave.
VI. GE∣STURE.VI. GESTURE, Action, Behaviour, Gesticulation, Mimic, doth denote such an Animal action or motion as alters the situation of the whole or parts of the body: To which the word POSTURE, Position, may be annexed by way of affinity; signifying the situation in which such moti∣on is determined. The several kinds of these Gestures and Postures (which are applicable likewise to inanimate things) do refer either to the weights being incumbent upon something. Below it: And these are distinguished according to the imaginary pro∣gress of that body or the parts of it, Vpward; either more Direct. 1. RISING, arise, raise, rouse, ly up, sit up, stand up, rear, elevate, lift up, erect, exalt, Resurrection STANDING, Station-ary, Footing, Perch, Rampant, Oblique. Keeping the height, and Inlarging the terms. 2. STRETCHING, retching, extending, Distention, Expansion, produce, sprein, strein, draw out. SPREAD, square. Narrowing the terms. 3. SHRINKING, contracting, Coartation, couch, gather up. CRUMPLE, snudge. Altering the height, by motion of the Trunk. 4. STOOPING, crouch, bow, bend, couring. LEANING, lolling, Recumbency, stay or rest upon▪ Lower Limms. Hipps. 5. SITTING, set, sedentary, seat SATE, squat. Knees. 6. KNEELING, Genuflexion, fall on knees. ON KNEES. Downward; either more Direct. 7. FALLING, fell, cast down, sink. LYING, Prostration, groveling, lay, along, all along, flat, level, couch. Oblique. 8. TURNING. REVERSE, inverted. Above it; whether ‖ partly: or wholly; each of which is either motion or rest. 9. CLINGING. HANGING, pendent, suspended, dangling.
MOTION. THat Action whereby things do pass from one place to another is styled MOTION, move, remove, stir,, wag, shake, quetch, shog, jog, start, jerk,§. III. budge, dislodge, flitting, shuffle, shuttle, rummage, agitation, going, passing, transferr, place, make a stirr. REST, Quiet, still, unmoved, repose, sedate, settle, stand, stay, stand or ly still, Requiem, ease, Pause, acquiesce, settle, sit, lodge, lull, Sabbath, dead of the night, take rest. By the word Motion here is meant Local Motion, which doth alwayes ac∣company Corporeal Action, upon which account many of the Species under this Head might, if there were convenient room for them, be reckoned under the former; but their places here may serve sufficiently to express and distin∣guish them. This Local Motion of bodies may be distinguished into Natural. Of the whole; more General, respecting the Kinds of Animal PROGRESSIVE MOTION. I. Particular, referring to the VARIOUS NOTIONS OF GOING. II. Of the parts; considered More largely; as belonging to ANIMAL ACTION IN COMMON. III As restrained to the Acts of PURGATION. IV. EXERCISE. V. VIOLENT MOTION according to the several kinds of it. VI. I. Kinds of ANIMAL PROGRESSION,I. ANI∣MAL PRO∣GRES∣SION. may refer either to Beasts; more ‖ perfect: or imperfect. 1. GOING, gressive, a Step, Pace, Gate. HALTING, Cripple, lame, limp, hobble, foundred. Birds; in the Air; by the motion of the wings: to which may be annexed that other kind of Motion of the wings whereby Birds use to keep themselves up in the same place with little or no Progression. 2. FLYING, fluttering, soar, volatile, toure. HOVERING. Water; either ‖ upon it: or into and under it. 3. FLOTING. DIVING, duck, plunge. Fish; either ‖ more generally within the water: or more specially down∣wards into it. 4. SWIMMING, launch. SINKING. Insects; as Grashoppers and Fleas, &c. the more ‖ perfect: or imperfect. 5. LEAPING, skipping, jump, frisk, spring, caper, curvet, bound. HOPPING. Ants▪ or Worms, &c. 6. CREEPING, crawl, sprawl, reptile. WRIGLING, insinuate, scrue or wind himself in. Though each of these Motions do principally belong to such kinds of li∣ving Creatures, yet are they not so to be restrained to them but that they may be truly ascribed to others.
II. MODES OF GO∣ING.II. The several MODES OF GOING; may be distinguished into The Self-motion or Ition of Animals; On an ordinary Plain or declivity; according to the Lesser: or greater degrees of Velocity. 1. WALKING, Ambulation, Procession, Perambulation, go, wade, Ford, waddle, Lacquey, Path, foot it, trip along. RUNNING, galloping, Career, Course, Race, start, Goal, outstrip, Foot∣man. Different Motion of the four legs; ‖ when either those of one side move together: or when they move cross and diagonally. 2. AMBLING, pacing, thorough-paced. TROTTING, prancing. Different Extensions ‖ of the body according to height: or of the legs ac∣cording to wideness. 3. STALKING, jetting▪ strutt, portly going. STRADLING, stride, a-stride, divricate. Different Modes, whether more ‖ regular: or irregular. 4. STEDDY. STAGGERING, reeling, Vacillation, Tottering. On a very smooth Plain. 5. SLIDING, glide, slipping. STUMBLING, Titubation, blunder, falter, lapse, slip, trip. On a difficult Declivity, ‖ upwards: or downwards. 6. CLIMBING, clambering, foaling. TUMBLING. The being carried by something else; on ‖ the Land: or Water. 7. RIDING, being horsed or mounted, taking horse, Post-ilion. SAILING, Navigation, Voiage, launch, take water or ship, embark, wast III. Animal MOTIONS belonging to the various parts,III. MO∣TIONS OF THE PARTS. are either More principal; Of the Heart originally, and from thence of the Bloud in the Arteries: to which may be adjoyned the Motion of the Guts. 1. PULSE, throb, beat. PERISTALTIC. Of the Lungs, ‖ more general, or the Sound made by some impediment of breathing through the Nose. 2. RESPIRATION, breathing, fetch wind, draw breath, take breath. SNORTING, snoring. Less principal; of the Mouth and Thorax; by the forcible ‖ emission, or attraction of Breath. 3. BLOWING, puffing, blast. SVCTION, supping▪ sip, soop, drawing, emulgent, snuff up. Diaphragm or Stomach; agitated by a convulsive Motion ‖ upwards, or downwards. 4. SOBBING. HICCOUGH, Yex. Iaws; by a Repeated Motion in the ‖ first, or second preparation of Food. 5. MASTICATION, chewing, champ, gnawing, browzing, mumble. RUMINATION, chewing the cud. Single Motion; to which may be annexed that Motion of the musculous parts of the body, caused by some flatulent vapours. 6▪ YAWNING, gape, Oscitation, gasp. PANDICULATION, retching, stretching.
Tongue, or Throat. 7. LICKING, lap, slap. SWALLOWING, gulp, ingurgitate, devour, pouch, gobble. IV. Those kinds of Actions whereby several Animals do cast off such excrementitious parts as are offensive to nature are styled PURGATION, voiding, evacuating, Excrement, fluxing:IV. PUR∣GATION. to which may be opposed the Notion of BINDING, costive, styptic, restringent, astringent. These Motions may be distinguished by the kinds of parts so amoved; either the more Vaporous and windy; from the Head. 1. SNEEZING, neeze, Sternutation. Stomach upwards, or Guts downwards. 2. BELCHING, parbreak, breaking wind upwards. FARTING, breaking wind downwards, Scape. Serous and watry; from the Whole habit of the body. 3. SWEATING, Exudation, diaphoretic, sudorific, all in a water. TRANSPIRATION, breathing, Evaporation, Effluvium, Perspiration. Head. 4. SPITTING, Salivateion, Spittle, bespit, spawl, bespawl, slaver, drivel, Flux. BLOWING THE NOSE, mucous, Snivel, Snot. Lungs and Chest. 5. COUGHING. EXCREATION, haking, hemming. Greater or lesser Veins. 6. BLEEDING, opening a Vein, Phlebotomy, let bloud, draw blood, Lancet. SCARIFYING, lance. Skin. 7. BLISTERING, Vesication, caustic. CUPPING. Bladder. 8. URINING, piss, make water, hold ones water, stale, diuretic, Diabetes, Dysury. Consistent and gross parts; from the ‖ Stomach upwards, or the Guts downwards. VOMITING, spewing, casting, disgorging, puke, regurgitate, retching. DUNGING, purging by siege, going to stool, scour, Draught, Lask, laxative, Loosness, muting, soluble, solutive, Muck, Ordure, Siege, Stool, Sir-reverence, excrement, easment, ease the belly, Iakes, Privy, House of office.. V. By RECREATION, Diversion, Pastime, Sport, Exercise,V. RE∣CREATI∣ON. are meant those several kinds of Actions which are used for divertisement or Exercise: to which may be annexed the word GAME, Play, Prize, signifying such kind of Exercises, wherein there is an en∣deavour for Mastery. These are either of the Mind; depending upon Chance onely; according to ‖ the more general name: or that particular kind which is most frequent by marked Cubes. 1. LOT, Sortition, Cuts, Ballot, cast or draw Lots. DICE, a Dy, cock-all, rifle. Chance and Skill. 2. CHARTS. TABLES. Skill onely. 3. CHESS. DRAUGHTS. Body; in respect of The whole; requiring Strength and Skill. 4. BOWLING. BALLING, Tennis, Foot ball, Stool-ball, Sto-Ball. Pel-mel. Agility and Skill. 5. DANCING, Masking, Revels, a Ball, Morice, Mumming. VAULTING. Strength Agility and Skill. 6. WRESTLING, grapling, strugling, striving, handy gripes, strike up ones heels. FENCING, Gladiator, Tilting, Tournament, justling, play at weapon or foils. The Eye, or the Ear. 7. SIGHTS, Shews, Theatre, Amphitheatre, Pageants, Spectacle. MUSIC, Serenade, strein, aer, tune, prelude, Waits, Crowd, Fiddle-er, Minstrel, play on an Instrument.
VI. The general kinds of VIOLENT MOTION, may be distributed according to the effects upon the thing moved,VI. VIOLENT MOTION. into such as denote Translation into a new place; comprehending Motion together; when the Mover sustains the thing moved: to which may be annexed by way of affinity that other Action, by which one thing sustains, or hinders the falling of another. 1. CARRYING, bring, convey, bear, serve, import, waft, weare about one, portable, portage, porter, baggage, vehicle, fare, beer, packhorse. BEARING, supporting, sustain, hold up, prop, shore up, stay up, up∣hold, carry, stand under, shoulder up, bolster up. Amotion, when the Mover and Moved do at the beginning cease to be contiguous: or Admotion, when the thing moved doth end in a contiguity of something else. 2. CASTING, throwing, fling, hurl, project, inject, eject, ding, pelt, toss, coit, sling. CATCHING, apprehend, lay hold, snatch, lay hands on, grapple, graspe, scamble. Often returns into the same place; according to ‖ greater or less degrees. 3. SWINGING, Vibration, waving, brandish, agitate, exagitate, to and fro, flourish, rock, sway, dangling, pendulous, wield. SHAKING, Quassation, Concussion, jogging, agitate, dandle, wag, swag, sway, jolt, totter, flutter, shatter, waving. Some impression from the Mover; according to the more General name: or that which is from an obtuse hard body. 4. STRIKING, Percussion, smite, bang, beat, bast, buffet, cuff, dash, hit, swinge, thump, thwack, Blow, Stripe, slap, flap, rap, tap, kick, wince, spurn, bob, box, fillip, whirret, yerke, pummel, punch, rebuff, repercus∣sion, collision, gnash, skittish, interfere, let fly at, KNOCKING, beating, Blow, butt, Mallet, battering, jobbing, Ramm. Particular kind; by the end of a thing, more ‖ obtuse, or acute. 5 POUNDING, braying, Contusion, stamp. PECKING, Mattock, Pick-ax. Dissolution of Vnion in the same body; according to The Stiffness, or Limberness of the body wherein it is made. 6. BREAKING, Fracture, Rupture, burst, Crack, Crash, Squash, Dash, Flaw, Shatter, shiver, crumble. TEARING▪ torn, dilacerate, rend, rent, ragged, tattered, flittered, jagged, pull in pieces. The Figure of the body by which it is made; either ‖ an edge, or a point. 7. CUTTING, Incision gash, slash, hack, hew, chop, rip, chip, snip, slice, section, segment, carve, dissect, whittle, barb, pare, top, lop, curtail, dock, sharpe, keen, Hatchet, Pole-ax. PRICKING, stabbing, Goad, pungent, runn in thrust in, goar.
OPERATION. THe sundry kinds of works about which men of several Callings use to imploy themselves,§. IV. are usually styled by the name of OPERATION, Labor-ious, Pains, Travail, Toil, moil, Turmoile, drudg, droil, work, handy-work, Ply, cooperate, take pains, lay about him. PLAY, Sport, lusory, dally. These are either More Common and general; relating to MECHANICAL FACULTIES. I. MIXED MECHANICAL Operations. II. More Particular; belonging to the providing of Food, AGRICULTURE. III. Houses, or Utensils, FABRILE Arts IV. Clothing, SARTORIAN Trades V. Physic, CHYMICAL, Pharmaceutical Operations. VI. I. OPERATIONS belonging to the MECHANICAL Faculties,I. MECHA∣NICAL O∣PERATI∣ONS. are ei∣ther such as do refer to the Lever; for the forcible motion of a thing ‖ upwards, or downwards. 1. LIFTING, heave, hoise, advance, elevate, exalt, Lever, Crow, Crane. DEPRESSING, strein, stress, weigh down. Balance; for ‖ trial of the weight of things, or the preponderating of one side. 2. LIBRATING, balancing. BIASSING, preponderate. Wedge; for the dividing of hard tough bodies; to which may be op∣posed the thrusting of them close together. 3. CLEAVING, rive, slit, spit, Clet, Chink, Chap, Crevise. COMPRESSING, crib, gripe, pinching, press, squeezing, straining, wring, nip, twing throng, crowd, crush, Constipation, bulge. Pully; when the mover and moved continue their Contiguity in ‖ ad∣motion, or amotion. 4. PULLING, pluck, tow, tug, lugg, twing, twitch, draw, drag, Draught, hale, Revulsion, vellication, distract. THRVSTING, push, shove, drive, rush, justle, repell, extrude, intrude, press, throng, crowd, cramm. farce, wedge in, vennue, run at, foin at. Wheel; by ‖ continued turning about, or rolling backward or forward. 5. VERTIGINATING, turning round, Revolution, wheeling, Rotation, twirl, whirl, spinn, role round. VOLUTATION, tumbling, rolling, wallow, welter, rock, trundle, waddle. Screw; to which may be adjoyned for some affinity the action of that concave Instrument used for the projection of water. 6. SCREWING, Winch. SYRINGING, squirting, spirt, spouting. Spring; wherein there is a motion of restitution: to which may be annexed for its affinity the forcible putting a thing out of its natural tension and posture. 7. SPRINGING, elastical, fillip. BENDING, bow, warp, crooke.
II. Those are styled MIXED MECHANICAL OPERATIONS, which are not appropriate to any one kind of Art,II. MIXED MECHANI∣CAL OPE∣RATIONS. but are general and common to many. These do concern the. Vniting or seperating of several bodies; considered more Simply. 1. BINDING, gird, Band, Bond, Bundle, Packet, Fardle, sheafe, faggot, tack, lace, swaddle, swahing, trussing, girt, surcingle. LOOSENING, unbind, undoe, solve, lax, slack▪ relaxation. Relatively to the affections of binding; viz. fastning of the bond ‖ by a knot, or confused kinds of knots. 2. TYING, Knot, Node, bracing, buckling, coupling fastning, knit, furling. TANGLING, entangle, hamper, ravel, perplex, snarled, felter, in∣tricate, involved, Intrigues, extricate, complicate, insnare, Laby∣rinth. Concealing, or manifesting; either more Common. 3. COVERING, heal, Veil, shroud, hide, whelm, stop, Canopy, Hood, Lid, palliate, cloake, overlay, overrun, overshadow. VNCOVERING, open, expose, discover, shew, reveal, naked, unmask, unveil. Special; relating to Containing bodies. 4. SHUTTING, stop, close, inclosing, immure, exclude, seclude, recluse, obstruct, Wink, fold up, pinn vp, sowe up, seal up, corke up, lute up, lock up, put to the door. OPENING, breaking up, disclose, display, Expansion, gap, Slade, Aper∣ture, unstop, expose, lay or set open. Putting of things ‖ nearer together, or farther asunder; either More general. 5. GATHERING, Collect-ion, assemble, convene, compile, levy, raise men or money, Receiver, rake or scrape together, rally, glean, pick up. SCATTERING, discuss, disperse, dissipate, sprinkle, strew, inspersion. More particular; with reference to the Capacity of Consistent bodies, and such as are not supposed to be contained. 6. HEAPING, accumulate, amass, lay up, stow, pile, Stack, Mow, Cock, Rick, Shock, Drift, Dunghill, mixen. SPREADING, diffuse, Expansion, display, Suffusion, strew, run, plash, lay cloth. Fluid Bodies, and such as are supposed to be contained in some∣thing. 7. FILLING, replenish, Repletion, full, plenary, sated, stow, cram, stuff, farse, recruit. EMPTYING, evacuate, vacant, Vacuity, rid, void, exhaust, Chasm, clear, lanke, lave, draw dry. Motion of bodies, chiefly fluids; according to ‖ the more general name: or that which is involuntary, and besides intention. 8. POURING, Effusion, Infusion, gush, guggling, yewer, Tunnel. SPILLING, shedding, run out, seth over.
III. OPERATIONS belonging to AGRICULTURE,III. AGRI∣CULTURE. do concern either The Ground, or Land; in respect of Loosning it; either ‖ by single persons: or by the help of drawing Beasts. 1. DIGGING, delve, break up, spit, spade. PLOWING, tilling, breaking up, coulter, share. Breaking the clods, and smoothing the surface. 2. HARROWING. ROLLING. Helping or directing the Fertility of the ground, by ‖ adding some new matter▪ or removing the impediments of noxious Plants. 3. MANURING, cultivate, dunging, marling, soiling, Tilth, culture. WEEDING. The Grane or Seed, chiefly of Herbs; in respect of Putting it into the ground, or taking it off from the ground upon its ma∣turity. 4. SOWING, seminate. REAPING, mowing, Crop, Harvest, Sithe, Sickle, stubble, swarth. Separating of it from ‖ the straw, or lesser husks. 5. THRESHING, Flail. WINNOWING, Fan, Ventilation. The Propagation of Trees or Shrubs chiefly, by Putting the Root of the Plant in the ground; to which may be adjoyned the putting of Grain segregately into the ground, which is sometimes u∣sed for Pulse. 6. PLANTING, implant. SETTING. Ioyning a part of one Plant to another; either ‖ to the top of the body, or some branch being cut, or to the sides of the body. 7. GRAFTING, ingraft, Imp. INOCOLATING. Cutting off superfluous Branches; to which may be adjoyned the cutting down of the whole. 8. PRUNING, dressing, cutting, coping. FELLING, grubb, wood-fall.
IV. By FABRILE OPERATIONS, (Smith, Carpenter, Mason, &c.) are meant all such kind of works as do primarily concern our Houses or Utensils,IV. FA∣BRILE OPE∣RATIONS. whether for necessity, or ornament: to which may be adjoyn∣ed those Operations which concern the making of Earthen ware, styled FIGULATORY, Potter. These are distinguishable into such as denote Dissolution of Continuity; either by Seperating of some thin parts from the surface of a body by rubbing with an edge: or breaking the body it self into minute parts by percus∣sion with some obtuse body. 1. SHAVING, scraping, raze, razour. CONTUSION, bruising, pounding, stamping, braying, morter, pestle, Dividing from a body some small parts; either ‖ by affriction upon a stone, or with an iron instrument. 2. GRINDING, attrition, Grist, Querne, Mill. FILING, Raspe. Dividing the parts of a body, by cutting it, either ‖ in roundish cavities, or in oblong scissures. 3. BORING, perforate, foraminate, pierce, Bodkin, Dril, Awle, Gimlet, Wimble, Trepann, Awgre. SAWING, Saw, whipsaw, &c. Vniting either of metalline or other bodies by some third body adhering. 4. SODERING, Cement, luting. GLUING, cementing, glutinous, conglutinate. Shaping of bodies into particular figures; either by Hammering, or melting. 5. FORGING. CASTING, melt, founding, fusile, molde. Cutting, either ‖ a solid and bulky, or a flat figure. 6. CARVING, Sculpture. GRAVING, ingrave, etching. Compressing of a soft body; or circumagitating either a soft: or hard body. 7. KNEADING, moulding, plastic. TURNING, Lath. Adorning the surface of the body; either by ‖ variety of colours: or ad∣ding an external lustre to it. 8. PAINTING, limn, draw, enamel, fucus, pensil. VARNISHING, size.
V. SARTORIAN OPERATIONS do concern either theV. SARTO∣RIAN OPE∣RATIONS. Preparation of stuffs; by Making several vegetable or animal substances into Thred. 1. TWISTING, tortion, wreath, writhing, twine, winding. SPINNING, Spinster, Rock, Distaff. Ioyning such Threds together into Cloth. 2. WEAVING, Texture, Contexture, Loom, Web, braid, woven, Hur∣dle, Shuttle, Wicker, Matt. KNITTING. Thickning and colouring such Cloth. 3. FULLING, milling, Fuller. DYING, stain, Tincture, tinge, in grain. Making of Stuffs into Vests; either by Vniting necessary, and cutting off unnecessary parts. 4. SOWING, Stitch, Seam-ster, Suture, Welt, Needle, dearn, quilt, draw cloth, rip. CLIPPING, Scissors, shear, shorn, cut. Placing together the parts in ‖ greater, or lesser plicatures. 5. FOLDING, wrap, lap, pleit, clinching, clutching, doubling, invelop. CURLING, crisping, frizling, furling. Preserving of such Stuffs or Vests clean; common likewise to other things. By the help of Water or liquor; either when Things are put into, and agitated in the water; to which may be op∣posed the putting upon them other bodies of a more gross consistence; styled 6. WASHING, scouring, Lotion, rince, Laver, Laundress, gargling. SMEARING, daubing, anoint, ointment, Vnction, greaze, chrism; and many with [be] as bespaul, spit, spue, sprinkle. Water is imbibed and communicated to the thing; to which may be adjoyned, for its affinity, the putting of things into liquor, in order to the communicating of some new quality to such liquor. 7. SOAKING, steeping, embrewing, macerating, watering Land, &c. bathing, imbibe, sinke, sop, brewis, embrew. INFUSION, watering Fish, &c. macerate, Decoction, impregnate. By external Motion of or upon them, ‖ more, or less violent. 8. RUBBING, scrape, Friction, Frication, scrub, chafe, Attrition, fret, gall, scowr, taw, grate. WIPING, stroke, terse, handkerchief, towel, napkin. By Instruments to seperate those minuter bodies which adhere to the superficies. 9. BRUSHING, sweeping, Beesom, Whisk, Brush, Broom, Maukin. COMBING, carding, currying.
VI. By CHYMICAL OPERATIONS are meant such kind of works as tend to the changing of bodies,VI. CHYMI∣CAL OPE∣RATIONS. with respect to the Position and Figure of their minuter parts. By this, amongst other ends, Medicaments are u∣sually prepared; for which reason, those kind of Operations styled PHARMACEUTICAL, belonging to the Apothecary, may be hereunto annexed. The Operations belonging to this Head, do concern the changing and preparing of Bodies; either by Instruments, for the reduction of them into minute parts; ‖ by compres∣sion and affriction betwixt two hard bodies: or by separating the parts so reduced, through a porous Plain. 1. GRINDING. SIFTING, bolting, Sieve, siercing, ranging. Liquors; either Changing the Consistence of bodies; by reducing them into ‖ a more liquid: or a more dry consistence. 2. DISSOLUTION, melt, liquefie dissolve, thaw, fusil, flux, run about. COAGVLATION, congealing, Clod, Curd, Gelly, Clot-tered, Gore, Concretion, grumous. Dividing hard bodies into minute parts; ‖ by an acid liquor, through which such parts are dispersed: or the sinking down of such parts to the bottom, by the mixture of some other liquor. 3. CORROSION, eating, fretting, gnawing, caustic. PRECIPITATION, settling. Separating of these parts from the liquor; by passing them through a po∣rous body; either ‖ downward: or both upward and downward. 4. STRAINING, Percolation, squeeze, Colender. FILTRATION, filtre. Heat; applicable chiefly either to Liquid bodies; which being kept for some considerable time in a gen∣tle heat, upon this usually follows; either the Loosning the inward parts of such bodies, so as by agitation they work one upon another; styled 5. DIGESTION. FERMENTATION, work, fret, Leven, Yeast, Barm, Rennet. Separating of the finer parts▪ by raising them up in the form of a Liquor: or the farther separating of the more spirituous from the watery parts of this liquor. 6. DISTILLATION, Still, Limbeck, cohobation. RECTIFYING. Hard and solid bodies; either by Driving away the more watery and volatil parts, and leaving the more solid: or raising the volatil parts in the form of a Salt. 7. CHARRING, chark, Tinder. SUBLIMING, Sublimation. Burning away the combustible parts of a body: or turning the parts re∣maining after such burning into a liquor. 8. CALCINATION. LIXIVIATION, deliquiate, Lye, Buck.
CHAP. X. Concerning Relation more private, namely, I. Oeconomical or Family Relation, together with the several kinds of things relating to those in that capacity, either as, II. Possessions; or, III. Provisions. THE Species of Relation are the most numerous amongst the Tables of Accidents, by reason of their mixed natures, comprehending both Substances, Qualities and Actions, as they are circumstantiated by some pe∣culiar respects, according to which they are here considered. More private Relation may be distinguished into such as denote; either Those Personal respects or Actions, which belong to the first kind of Asso∣ciation of Men into Families; called OECONOMICAL RELATION. Those things which are necessary to the well being of Families, either as POSSESSIONS. PROVISIONS. OECONOMICAL RELATION. THat respect wherein one man may stand to another, according to the first and most natural kind of association of men into Families,§. I. is styled OECONOMICAL RELATION, Family, Houshold, domestic, menial, House, Home. The Notions belonging to this Head, may be distinguished into such as sig∣nifie; either Personal Relations, of CONSANGUINITY. I. AFFINITY. II. SUPERIORITY, or Inferiority. III. EQUALITY. IV. Oeconomical Duties referring to Education; consisting either in WORDS. V. DEEDS. VI. I. Those who partake of the same Bloud,I. CON∣SANGUI∣NITY. are styled Relations of CON∣SANGUINITY, Kin, kindred, Bloud, House, Stem, Stock. These are distinguishable into such as are; either more General; denoting such as have ‖ preceded, or succeeded. 1. PROGENITOR, Ancestor, Forefather, Extraction, Parentage, Elders, Pedegree, Genealogy. DESCENDANT, Lineage, Off-spring, Race, Issue, Progeny, Generation, Po∣sterity, Stock, Breed, Kind, Extraction, Stem, spring from. Special; whether Direct; ‖ ascending, or Descending. 2. PARENT, Sire, Father, Mother, Dam, paternal, maternal, Grandsire, &c. Orphan. CHILD, Issue, Son, Daughter, Brood, Litter, filial, adopt, Posthume. Lateral; either ‖ Ascending, or descending. 3. UNCLE, Aunt. NEPHEW, Niece. Equal. Immediate; whether ‖ by both Parents, or by one 4. BROTHER, Sister-hood. HALF BROTHER. Mediate; either ‖ Brothers Children, or their Descendants. 5. FIRST COSIN, -German. COSIN.
II. Those respects which do either refer unto or arise from a state of Marriage,II. AFFINI∣TY. whereby persons are mutually ingaged to Fidelity and Con∣stancy, are styled Relations of AFFINITY, Alliance, Kindred. These are distinguishable into such as do concern either That state preceding whereby persons are rendred capable of it as to their ‖ not being married: or not having coupled with any other person. 1. COELEBS, Single life, Bachelour, Damosel, Maid. VIRGIN, Maid. The endeavour after Marriage; wherein, if several persons stand in com∣petition, there doth thence arise this double Relation. 2. SUTER, Paramor, Sweet-heart, Mistress, Servant, woo, canvase court, make love▪ RIVAL, Corrival, Competitor. The first beginning of this Affiance, by a mutual Promise in order to the consummating of it. 3. BETROTHED, contracted, Spouse, espouse, Affiance, sure. The full completing of it by all its Solemnities. 4. MARRIED, Matrimony, Wed-ding, Match, Mate, nuptial, conjugal, Husband, Wife, Yoke-fellow, Spouse, Bride-groom, Bains, Dower, Bygamy, Polygamy, Hymen, Epithalamium. The state resulting from a dissolution of it by Death. 5. WIDOWER, Dowager, Relict, Iointer. III. SUPERI∣ORITY.III. Relations of SUPERIORITY, Betters, and INFERIORITY, Vnderlings, do originally belong to Families, in which was the first kind of Government, and from thence are derived all the secondary Relati∣ons which follow; respecting either Minors; as to their Souls and Religion. 1. GODFATHER, Godmother, Gossip, stand for. GODCHILD. Bodies; in respect of ‖ nourishing: or being nourished. 2. FOSTERER, Nurse, educate. NVRSLING. Minds; ‖ instructing: or being instructed in any Science or Art. 3. TEACHER, Master, Tutor, institute, instruct, inform, indoctrinate, Doctrine, Document, docil, Lecture, Lesson, train, discipline, enter, read to, Rabbi. LEARNER, Apprentice, Disciple, Pupil, Scholar, Puny, Neophyte, young beginner, Student. Estates. 4. GUARDIAN, Tutor, Tuition. PUPIL, Minority, Ward-ship, under-age, non-age. Majors or Minors; in respect of Habitation; as supreme: or subordinate; whether in a relation More fixed. 5. MASTER OF THE FAMILY, House-wife, Good man of the house. DOMESTIC, of the houshold, menial. More occasional. 6. HOST, Landlord, boord, tabling, sojourn, entertain, Inn, Hospi∣tality, Inholder. GVEST, Boorder, Sojourner, quarter, lodge, lie, tabling, at livery.
Power to command: or Duty to obey. 7. MASTER, Lord, Sir, Mistress, Dame, Madam, Lady▪ SERVANT, Servitor, Minister, Man, Maid, Handmaid, servile, ad∣minister, Hind, Iourneyman, Prentice, Waiter, Lacquey, Footman, Page, Livery. Benefits ‖ conferred: or received. 8. BENEFACTOR, Courtesie, Kindness, Favour, Service, Good turn, Pleasure, gratifie, oblige, ingage, good office, Patron. BENEFICIARY, beholding, bound, obliged, ingaged humble Servant. General obligation of ‖ protecting others: or being under such Protection. 9 PATRON-age, support, dedicate. DEPENDANT, Retainer, Cadet, Client, Follower, Retinue, wait. IV. Relations of EQUALITY or Fellowship (as was said concerning those of the former Difference) do originally belong to persons in an Oeconomical capacity;IV. EQUALI∣TY. though they are not in the strictest sense to be so confined, but they are likewise applicable to persons upon other con∣siderations. These are founded; either upon Mutual Love: or Hatred, which should be chiefly upon the account of Vertue: or Vice. 1. FRIEND-ship, Confident, Privado, intimate, all one, being in with, Amity, amicable, befriend, great with, strike in with, kind▪ attone. ENEMY, Adversary, Foe, Antagonist, Opposite, Opponent, Feud, Hostility, Odds, Spite, Enmity, being out with, fall out with, adverse party. Conversation with others, chiefly upon the account of Pleasure; or Se∣gregation from others. 2. COMPANION, Compeer, Associate, Fellow, Match, Mate, Consort, So∣ciety, Sociable-ness, Comrade, Collegue, Complice, Concomitant, Gossip, associate, accompany, Crew, Gang, keep company with. SOLITARY, lonesom, alone, onely, recluse, sole, single, Solitude, by it self, retired, desolate, several, aside. Near: or remote Habitation. 3. NEIGHBOUR, adjacent, vicinity. FOREINER, Alien, exotic, extraneous, peregrine, outlandish. Particular Knowledge: or Ignorance of others. 4. ACQUAINTANCE, Familiar-ity, conversant. STRANGER, strange, alienate, unacquainted, uncouth, alien. Dealings with others. Iointly; as one party. 5. PARTNER, Copartner, Partizan, Sharer, impart, joyn, commu∣nicate, Communion, halves, joynt-stock, partake. Mutually; as party and party. 6. CUSTOMER.
V. The chief Oeconomical Duties (which are likewise applicable to other Relations) are those which concern the due Government of per∣sons in this capacity,V. EDUCA∣TION speci∣ally relating to WORDS. chiefly of the inferiour and younger sort, styled by the general name of EDUCATION, institute, train, breed, bring up, semi∣nary. Education Duties consisting in WORDS do respect either A thing to be done, or forborn; expressing to others our Desires, or their Duties. Simply; to persons Inferior; ‖ for it: or against it. 1. COMMAND, require, bid, impose, charge, injoyn, exact, appoint, prescribe, Mandate, Precept, Injunction, Commandment, Impe∣rative, Warrant, will. FORBID, Prohibit-ion, interdict, inhibit, barr, contraband, coun∣termand. Equal; ‖ for it: or against it. 2. PERSUADE, exhort, suasory, move, press, win, cajole, Motive, Inducement, ductile, exorable, pliable, flexible, draw in, Elo∣quence. DISSVADE, dehort. Superior; ‖ for it: or against it. 3. INTREAT, beseech, pray, desire, crave, ask, petition, supplicate, Postulation, invite, implore, Obtestation, Obsecration, request, sue, supplicate, solicit, press, urge, instant, Importunity, conjure, exorable, inexorable. DEPRECATE. Argumentatively; (i.) with reasons representing it chiefly as Honest: or dishonest. 4. ADVISE, counsel, consult, wish one. WARN, admonish, Monition, advertise, Caution, Item, Precaution, premonish, notifie, Proviso, Caveat, forewarn. Pleasant: or unpleasant. 5. ALLURE, tempt, tice, entice, till, drill, inveigle, move, draw, lull, lure, lead, tole, train, egg on, win, trepan, bait, stale. DETERR, dishearten, fright. Profitable: or hurtful. 6. PROMISE. THREATEN, Commination, menace, denounce▪ A thing already done; expressing our ‖ liking: or dislike of it; whether To themselves, in their presence. 7. COMMEND, applaud, extoll, magnifie, hem, recommend. REPREHEND, reprove, rebuke, chide, blame, check, snib, quip, rate, rattle, controll, take up, shent, find fault, shrive, Redarguti∣on, culpable, Satyr, scold. To others, in their absence. 8. PRAISE, Fame, Glory, Renown, Encomium, extol, exalt, laudable, plausible, applaud, commend, Doxology, Panegyric. DISPRAISE, discommend.
VI. Oeconomical Duties of EDUCATION consisting chiefly in DEEDS,VI. EDUCA∣TION DEEDS. may be distinguished into such as are either Precedent; signifying the ‖ assisting: or hindring another in the Way of doing 1. DIRECT, steer, guide, lead, govern. SEDVCE, tempt, err-or, astray, mislead, deceive, delude, pervert, be∣guile, debauch, inveigle, Mistake, Oversight, Fallacy, Sophistry, draw in, lead aside, Fools Paradice. Will of doing. 2. INCOURAGE, animate, hearten, comfort, solace, abett, back, cheer, cherish, countenance, set on, stand by, patronize, quicken, excite. DISCOVRAGE, dishearten, disanimate, weaken, discomfort, baulk, daunt, droop, quail, out of heart, crest-faln, exanimate. Concomitant; supporting against Evil. Past: or present. 3. COMFORT, Consolation, solace. DISCOMFORT, disconsolate, uncomfortable. Present, or future; whether of Want; either ‖ in whole: or in part. 4. MAINTAIN, sustain, support, find, keep, provide for, Subsistence, Livelihood. STIPENDATE, Allowance, Exhibition, Pension, Annuity, Scho∣larship. Danger. 5. DEFENDING, standing to or by one, guard, ward, preserve, shelter, protect, save, fence, keep, tutelary. DESERTING, leave, destitute, forsake, quit, flinch, relinquish. Consequent; relating to the Persons; ‖ endeavouring to better them by punishments while there is hope: or ceasing to punish them as being past hope. 6. CORRECTING, chastising, discipline, inflict. GIVING OVER, leave. Event of such dealings; by making them ‖ better: or worse. 7. REFORM, reclaiming, mend, convert, correct. HARDEN, incorrigible, indurate, obdurate, seared.
OECONOMICAL POSSESSIONS. §. II.BY OECONOMICAL POSSESSIONS. Estate, Goods, Substance, Stock, Ability, Chattels, hold, injoy, seized of, occupy, indow, in hand enter upon, are intended such kinds of things as are necessary upon several accounts for the use, preservation, and well-being of a Family. And though divers of these things, as Land, Buildings, &c. be common as well to Political and Ecclesiastical Bodies, yet do they (as was said before) originally belong to Families, to which all other Associations were subsequent, and in which they were founded. To this may be adjoyned that other Notion signify∣ing the benefit accruing to us by our Possessions, styled REVENUE, In∣come, Intrado, Patrimony, Rent, Profit, Endowment, Steward, Fee, Vails, Perqui∣sites, the proceed. These Possessions do refer either to things Natural, as LAND. I. Artificial; whether Buildings, considered according to their KINDS. II. Parts. GREATER. III. LESSER. IV. Things serviceable for CARRIAGE. V. FURNITURE, Vtensils. VI. I. Possessions of LANDS.I. That part of the Earth wherein any man hath a propriety, is styled LAND, Earth. And if he commonly resides upon it, 'tis called his DWEL∣LING, Habitation, Mansion, Home, inhabit, reside, Inmate, Desert, Wilderness, Solitude, abide, settle, stay. The several Notions belonging to this, may be distinguished into such as signifie Both Land and Habitation, ‖ sufficient for one Family: or a small aggre∣gate of such. 1. FARM, Grange, Mesuage, Tenement, Tenant, Copyhold. MANOR, Lordship, Village, Thorp, Homage, Tithing, Liberty. Land alone; according to the General name: or the name denoting a larger extent of it. 2. FIELD, Grounds, Croft. FORREST, Chase, Verderer, Purliew. Particular kinds; distinguishable according to their Vses; either for ‖ Herbs: or Fruit-Trees. 3. GARDEN. ORCHARD, Nursery. Corn: or Hay. 4. ARABLE, tilled Land, ear Land, Fallow▪ Lay Land. MEDOW, Mead. Tame Beasts: or wild Beasts. 5. PASTURE, Down, Lawn, Herbage, Hayward, Lease, Panage. PARK, Warren, Paddock, Keeper. Fish: or Fowl. 6 POND▪ Stew. DECOY.
Fewel; ‖ greater: or less. 7. WOODS, Sylvan, Thicket, Cops, Grove. HEATH. Qualities; being either of Equal wetness; ‖ from fresh: or from salt Water. 8. FEN. MARSH. Vnequal wetness; whereof the excess is either ‖ on the surface: or under the surface, within the Land. 9. MOOR, plashy, slabb. BOGG, Quagmire, Slough, Fastness. II. Those kinds of Helps or Contrivances whereby men preserve the Pla∣ces of their abode from the Injuries of Weather,II. BUILD∣INGS. and other Inconvenien∣cies, are styled by the common name of BUILDINGS, Edifice, Structure, Fabric, erect, Architecture, Superstructure, Substruction. To which may be opposed the Notion of buildings decayed, called RUINS, dilapidate, demolish, raze, Dissolution, Wrack, Rubble, Rubbish, fall, break, subvert, throw down, lay wast. These may be distinguished, according to their Uses, into such as are for Ordinary habitation; whether ‖ immoveable: or moveable. 1. HOUSE, Mansion, Mesuage, Cote, Cottage, Hut, Shed, Hovel, Lodge, Place, domestic, Ining. TENT, Tabernacle, Pavilion, Booth, Bowre. Grandeur: or Strength. 2. PALACE, Seraglio. CASTLE, Cittadel. Height and beauty; either with ‖ a flat: or sharp top. 3. TOWER, Turret. STEEPLE, Pinnacle, Shaft, Spire. Religious worship; for Invocation or Preaching: or for Sacrifice. 4. TEMPLE, Church, Chappel, Sanctuary, Synagogue, Mosque, Cathe∣dral, Chancel, Quire. ALTAR. Warmth, Cleanliness or Health; whether by ‖ warm Air: or Water. 5. STOVE, Hot house. BATH, Stew, Bain, drencht. Passage; either Above ground; ‖ over the Water: or over dry Land. 6. BRIDGE, Pontage. SCAFFOLD, Stage. Vpon the ground; denoting ‖ a paved passage betwixt Buildings: to which may be annexed the more general term of the passage place. 7. STREET, Piazza, Lane, Ally. WAY, Rode, Causway, Course, Avenue, convey, egress, Ally, Path, Pass∣age. Vnder ground. For Persons. 8. VAULT, Grott. For Water; ‖ useful: or superfluous. 9. AQUAEDUCT, Conduit, Water-course. SINK, Sewer, Kennel.
III. Greater parts of BUILD∣INGS.III. To the GREATER PARTS OF which BUILDINGS do con∣sist, and into which they may be distributed, may be adjoyned that usu∣al kind of division styled BAY. These are either More general; concerning the Main design of the Timber-work: or the dividing part. 1. FRAME, Compages, Skeleton. PARTITION, Wall. Principal places; whether ‖ segregate: or aggregate. 2. ROOM, Chamber, Cabbin, Cell, Hall, Parlour, &c. Kennel, Sty, Stable, &c. Lobby, Loft, &c. APARTMENT. Vacancies or Passages; ‖ without: or within. 3. COURT, Yard, Back-side. ENTRY, Passage, enter. More particular; distinguished according to their Uses and Situations; being either for Support. Intern. Lower; whether ‖ erect: or transverse. 4. FOUNDATION, Ground-work, Substruction, Base, Bottom, fundamental, underpinning, ground-pinning. FLOOR, Ground, Deck, Contignation. Higher; ‖ erect: or transverse. Oblong and narrow. 5. PILLAR, Column, Post, Iambe, Pile, Pillester. BEAM, Sparr, Rafter, Mantle, Transom, Summer. Flat: or Curve. 6. WALL, Sepiment, immure, countermure, mural ARCH, Vault, embowed. Extern; ‖ put to: or built to the part which it supports. 7. PROP, till, support, uphold, stay up, shore up, shoulder up, under-prop, under-set. BUTTRESS. Covering; whether ‖ highest: or subordinate. 8. ROOF, Covering, Tilt, Penthouse, Leads, Thatch, Tiling, Slate, Shingles. SIELING. Warmth▪ either ‖ Simple: or with a Tube to it for passage of the Smoke. 9. HEARTH. CHIMNEY, Tunnel, Mantle. IV. Lesser parts of BUILD∣INGS.IV. LESSER PARTS OF BUILDINGS are distinguishable into such as are serviceable; either for Passage upwards and downwards; being either ‖ immoveable: or moveable. 1. STAIRS. LADDER, Scale. Passage in and out; either of ‖ Persons: or fresh Air; considered according to the Whole. 2. DOOR▪ Gate, Port-er, Wicket, Postern, Hatch, Porch, Portal. WINDOW, Casement, Balcony. Parts relating to a Door chiefly, or Window. Without it; ‖ above: or below. 3. THRESHOLD, Sill, Groundsill. LINTEL.
Vpon it; for the Opening and shutting of it. More artificial; ‖ the fixed: or loose part. 4. LOCK, Padlock. KEY. More simple; to open ‖ from within onely: or both wayes. 5. BOLT, Barr, Sparr. LATCH. Motion of it; ‖ concave: or convex. 6. HINGE. STAPLE, Hook. V. By CARRIAGE is meant the Conveyance of things from one place to another:V. Things for CARRIAGE. to which may be annexed by way of affinity the Notion of the Heavy thing to be carried, BURTHEN, (Load, lade, ouerate, Far, Fraight, charge, surcharge, Luggage, Lumber, disburthen, exonerate, overcharge, The provisions of this kind do relate to things considered as (overload.) Whole; being used for the Carriage either of Persons or Goods, and moving either With Wheels; Four Wheels; either ‖ the more elegant: or the more plain. 1. COACH, Chariot. WAIN, Waggon. Two Wheels; either ‖ the more elegant: or the more plain. 2. CHARIOT. CART; Carr, Dray, Tumbrel. Without Wheels; being either to be Carried between the Movers; either ‖ the more elegant: or the more plain. 3. SEDAN, Litter. BARROW. Drawn along after them. 4. SLED. WELSH CART. Parts of the thing upon which the weight is drawn or carried; serving either for Fastning to the Animals which draw or carry; used either ‖ double: or single. 5. SHAFT, Thills. POLE. Motion; being for figure and situation ‖ Round and erect: or oblong and transverse. 6. WHEEL, Truckle, Trundle. AXIS, Spindle. The central: or semidiametral parts of the Wheel. 7. NAVE. SPOKE, Fellow. Furniture of the Animals which draw or carry; either for Supporting of ‖ the Trunc: or the Feet of the burthen. 8. SADDLE, Pack-saddle, Pad, Pannel, Pillion. STIRRUP. Directing the Motion; by the ‖ Head: or Sides. 9. BRIDLE, Rein, Headstall, Curb, Snaffle, Bit. TRACE.
VI. By FURNI∣TURE (Vtensils, Implements, Houshold-stuff, Moveables, Goods,VI. FURNI∣TURE. furnish, fit▪ provide, procure, ready,) is meant those moveable things of various kinds requisite to the several uses of a Family. These are either More simple, intended chiefly for Action, according to The general name. 1. INSTRUMENT, Implement, Tool. Some special kinds of Instruments; ‖ for cutting: or for knocking. 2. KNIFE, Razor. HAMMER, Sledge, Mallet, malleable, ductile, Beetle, Poleax. Less simple, being made up of several parts joyned together; according to The general name: or that kind used for the drawing vp of water. 3. JUGAMENT, Frame. PUMP. Some special kinds; being used for Putting things upon; being either ‖ moveable: or fixed. 4. TABLE, Stall, Dresser, Bord, Cupbord. SHELF. Sitting upon onely; to which may be annexed by way of affinity, that other Utensil intended for the ease and softness of sitting or lying. 5. STOOL, Seat, Fourm, Bench. CUSHION, Pillow, Boulster, Pillion. Sitting and leaning: or sitting and lying upon. 6. CHAIR, Throne, Settle. COUCH. Lying and sleeping upon; to which that may be annexed of the same affinity as in the Fifth. 7. BEDSTED, Settle, Cradle, Testor. BED, Pallet, Hammock, Mattress, Nest, Kennel, Litter, Vpholster. More complicate, by reason of the mixture with Wheels or Screws, &c. according to The general name: or that particular kind used for the taking of Animals. 8. MACHIN, Engine, Frame, Gin. TRAP, Gin, Springe, Pitfal, Toyle, Weare, Weele, Buck, Net, In∣sare. Some special kinds; for ‖ grinding of Corn, &c. or distinguishing of Hours. 9. MILL, Querne. CLOCK, Watch. PROVISIONS. §. III.UNder this Head of PROVISIONS (Accommodations, Equipage, fur∣nish, provide, procure, purvey,) are comprehended some of the same kinds of things as under the former, with this peculiar Difference, That several of the particulars under this are more occasional and transient,
and not of such continual usefulness as those under the other. These are distinguishable into such as Have particular references, either to Food, as to The kinds of it. ORDINARY. I. EXTRAORDINARY. II. The manner of PREPARING it. III. CLOTHING. IV. VESSELS. V. Are of a COMMON MIXED Nature. VI. I. By SUSTENTATION ORDINARY (Commons, Fare, Cheer, Diet, Meat, Viands, sustenance, Victuals, Manciple, Caterer, Pantry,I SUSTEN∣TATION ORDINARY.) is intended such kind of Food as is usual for ordinary persons, and ordinary times; either according to the General name; whether ‖ greater, more stated, constant and usual: or less, and more occasional. 1. MEAL, Dinner, Supper, Refectory. REFECTION, Bait, Bever, Break-fast, Collation, Repast, Nunchion. Particular kinds; distinguishable according to the matter; whether Solid and consistent; being made either of Grain or some Vegetable, ‖ baked in a drier substance without any consi∣derable mixture, of all other the most common and necessary: or else being made up and mixed with some other eatable substance. 2. BREAD, Loaf, Manchet, Cake, Dough, Bisket, Past, Batch, Pantry, Pantler. PUDDING, Haggis, Sausage, Dumpling, Link. Milk ‖ condensed in the finer part: or of Milk coagulated and pressed. 3. BUTTER. CHEESE. Animal musculary substance; either ‖ alone: or put into some bready substance, which is likewise capable of some other ingredients. 4. FLESH. PIE, Pasty, Tart, Custard, Flawn, Past, Pastry, Pastler. Liquid; either for Eating; consisting of Water boiled with some other ingredients, ‖ for the strengthening of it for Food: or for the coagulating of it. 5. BROTH, Pottage, Porridge, Caudle, Cullice, Grout, Gruel, Pana∣do, Posset, Ptisane, Frumenty, Hogwash, Potherbe. GELLY, congeal. Fatty juice of several Vegetables, and sometimes of Animals, eaten with other things, and useful for Medicine; to which may be adjoyned the watery juice of dressed Flesh. 6. OIL. GRAVY, Iuice. Drinking; the infusion of Burly or some other Grain first macerated; either ‖ without Hopps: or with Hopps. 7. ALE, Whort, Brew. BEER, Drink, Whort, Brew.
II. SUSTENTATION EXTRAORDINARY (Cates, Delicates, Dain∣ties,II. SUSTEN∣TATION EXTRAOR∣DINARY. Liccorous,) may be considered according to the General name; signifying abundance, variety and delicacy; either of ‖ more substantial Meats: or of Sweet-meats. 1. FEAST, Gaudy. BANQUET, Iuncket, Sweet-meat, Desert. Particular kinds; used for Eating; comprehending Common requisites, for the better relishing of other Food; to which may be adjoyned the various mixtures of things, to render them grateful to the Palate. 2. SAUCE, Sallet. CONFECTION, Conserve, Comfit, Sucket. Vsual ingredients of Sauce; being either for the Tast Sweet; viz. the juice of the sweet Cane, ‖ concreted: or deliquiated or dissolved into a liquor of a thick consistence. 3. SUGAR. SYRUP. Of hot and savory Gust and Smell. 4. SPICE, Aromatic, Grocery. Sour; ‖ the juice of Grapes, or infusion of Barly being eager: or the juice of Crabs. 5. VINEGAR. VERJUICE. Drinking; whether more Natural; being either ‖ more simple: or the juice of Fruits, chiefly Grapes: or other drinks made by mixture. 6. WINE, Sider, Perry, Stum, Must, Vintage, Vintner, Sack, Claret, &c. BEVERAGE, Syllabub, Mede, Wassal. Artificial, by distillation with fire; according to ‖ the more general name: or that particular kind most in use. 7. SPIRITS. BRANDY. III. Actions relating to the PREPARATION OF FOOD (dressing, crude,III. PREPA∣RATION OF FOOD. raw,) are either General and antecedaneous; signifying either ‖ the killing and dividing of Beasts for Food: or the more common notion of fitting both Flesh and other proper Materials, in order to their being eaten. 1. BUTCHERING, Shambles, Slaughterhouse. COOKING, dressing, Kitchin, Scullion, dress Meat. Special and subsequent; denoting the several kinds of Cookery; either More principal; the preparing and dressing things. Wet; in a ‖ wider, or closer vessel; in a greater, or lesser quantity. 2. BOILING, Decoction, Seething, sod, Ebullition, parboil, poach. STEWING. Dry; ‖ by holding it to, or turning it about near the Fire: or by laying it on a hot Hearth, or in some close heated Cavity. 3. ROASTING, Tosting, Spit, Broach, Iack. BAKING, Baker, Oven, Pastry, Batch. Mixed, part being wet and part dry; either ‖ in an open broad vessel: or by laying it on the Fire. 4. FRYING▪ Fricace, Fritter, Steak. BROILING, Carbonadoing, Grilliade, Gridiron, Rasher. Less principal; relating to the Preparing of it; by Cutting, Into; punctim or caesim, pointwise or edgewise. 5. PINKING, Pouncing, Pricking. SLASHING, gashing, hashing, carbonado, jagg.
Through; either in ‖ laminated: or more minute particles. 6. SLICING, Collop, Hash. MINCING, shred, chop, cut small. Application of other things; either ‖ wet: or dry. 7. BASTING, Dripping, sprinkle, Inspersion. FLOWRING, powdering, corning, spicing. Mixed, (i.) both cutting and application. 8. STRATIFY, Lair, interlacing, interlard, lay in. LARD, prick in, stick in, interlarding. Preserving; either ‖ in wet: or in dry. 9. PICKLING, soucing. CONDITING, preserving, embalming, candying, seasoning, Mummy. IV. Such things as are requisite for the covering of our nakedness,IV. CLOTH∣ING. and the preserving of us from the injuries of weather, are styled by the name of CLOTHING, Vest, Apparel, attire, Array, Garment, Raiment, Habit, Garb, Stole, Robe, Weed, accoutred, clad, dight, dressing, make ready, wear, invest, Livery, put on or off, naked, stript, bare, Taylour, Wardrope. To which may be adjoyned, for its affinity, the usual name of those other things of the like use amongst men upon particular occasions, and more generally required for labouring beasts; ARMAMENT, Harness, Tackle, Array, Habiliment, Trappings, accoutred, Furniture, Traces. The several particulars under this Head may refer; either to The matter of which Vests are made; which is either Some Animal substance; either of Beasts. The hairy parts. 1. WOLLEN, Cloth. HAIRY, Stuff, Sackcloth. The Skins of Beasts prepared. 2. LEATHER, Buff, Cheverel, &c. Tann, Curry. Insects, viz. the Silk-worm. 3. SILK, Mercer, Sattin, Velvet, Plush, Taffety, &c. Some Vegetable substance; either ‖ the Rind of Plants, as Hemp, Flax, Nettle, &c. or growing upon Trees. 4. LINEN, Canvase, Lawn, Damask, Diaper, &c. COTTON, Bombast, Fustian. The use and fashion; either for Ornament onely; being elegantly distinguished with Apertures and Intercisions. 5. LACE, garded, galloon, &c. PURLE. Ornament and binding; being a Long Lamin; ‖ narrower: or broader. 6. RIBBAND, Fillet, Tape, Favor, Knot, Hairlace. SCARF, Garter. Long Pin; ‖ slenderer: or thicker. 7. THRED, Line, Wire, Yarn, Packthred. CORD, String, Halter, Rope, Slip, Line, Rein, Lamin; specially of Leather: or Loop and Pin. 8. THONG, Latchet, Strap. BUCKLE. Ornament and covering of ‖ the outside: or the inside. 9. FACING. LINING.
V. VES∣SELS.V. Such kind of Vtensils as serve to contain other things, are usually cal∣led VESSELS, Cask, Receptacle, Pan, Plate, &c. These are distinguishable by their Matter, Shapes and Uses, into such as serve for the Keeping and carriage of things; being either Pliable to the things they contain; whether ‖ more loose: or more close. 1. BAG, Sack, Budget, Pocket, Pouch, Purse, Sachel, Scrip, Wallet, Poke, Male, Knapsack, Portmantue, Cloak-bag. CASE, Sheath, Scabbard, Shrine, Covering, Quiver, Tike, Pillowbear. Stiff; for Arid; being made either of ‖ bords: or twigs. 2. BOX, Chest, Trunk, Ark, Coffer, Cabinet, Casket, Bin, Clapper, Cupbord, Hutch, Locker, Safe, Spence, Press, Pyx, Coffin, Sumpter, Desk, Flash, Till, Drawer, Cap-case. BASKET, Flasket, Maund, Frail, Hamper, Pannier, Scuttle, Weel, Dorser. Liquids; in Greater quantities; either ‖ closed at both ends: or open at one. 3. BARREL, Cask, Fat, Firkin, Keg, Hogshead, Kilderkin, Pipe, Tun, Butt, Rundlet, Cooper. TUB, Bucket, Coul, Vate, Cistern, Pale, Piggin. Less quantities; whether Shallow; being made either of ‖ Metal: or other materials, Wood, Earth, &c. 4. DISH, Platter, Pan, Charger, Voider, Bason, Laver, Patin, Plate, Por∣ringer, Saucer. TRAY, Pan, Boul, Trough. Deep; of ‖ a bigger: or lesser aperture. 5. POT, Flagon, Tankard, Iack, Iar, Pitcher, Iugg, Mugg, Noggin, Postnet, Vrne. BOTTLE, Crewet, Iugg, Cruse. Dressing or boiling of Meat; either ‖ without: or with feet. 6. KETTLE, Caldron, Copper, Furnace. SKILLET, Pipkin. Spending; either by Taking out, the Tube of effusion: to which may be adjoyned the instrument for stopping it. 7. FAUCET, Spout. TAP, Spiggot, Stopple. Receiving in; whether ‖ of a roundish: or oblong Cavity. 8. SPOON, Ladle, Scummer. SCOOP, Shovel, laving. Laying on of Meat: or pouring out of Drink. 9. TRENCHER, Plate. CUP, Boul, Goblet, Beaker, Cann, Chalice, Mazer, Glass. VI. The last Head of COMMON MIXED Materials, must be acknow∣ledged to be a very Heterogeneous heap.VI. COM∣MON, MIXED MATERI∣ALS. But the several particulars under it being very necessary in their kinds, and not reducible to any of the other Heads, I am forced to put them together here, not knowing at present how to reduce them more properly. They are distinguishable by their Ends or Uses; being such Provisions as concern Food for Cattel; either ‖ of dried Grass: or dried stems of Grain. 1. HAY, Fodder. STRAW, Fodder, Halm, Litter, Thatch. Warmth, and preparing of Food for men. 2. FEWEL, Firing, Logg, Collier, Woodmonger. Giving of Light; being made either ‖ of the dried Fat of Animals: or of Oil. 3. CANDLE, Link, Taper, Torch, Light, Lanthorn. LAMP.
Curing of Wounds or Sores by outward application, being a Confection of Medicaments, which is sometimes spread upon some Vest matter. 4. SALVE, Vnguent, Ointment. PLASTER, Cataplasm, Serecloth, Poultis. Cleansing or stiffening of Clothes. 5. SOPE. STARCH. Communication by Writing; denoting either the Instrument: or Liquor to write with. 6. PEN. INK. Matter to write on; considered either ‖ simply in its nature: or as it is com∣pacted in Aggregates. 7. PAPER, Parchment, Vellum, Schedule, Bill-et, Ticket, Stationer. BOOK, Volume, Tome, Treatise, Manuel, compile, compose, Library, Tract, Pamphlet, Manuscript, Stationer. Ornament; by representation of the likeness of things ‖ in plain: or in solid. 8. PICTURE, Pourtraiture, Effigies, Draught, Map, Chart, Landscap, Em∣blem, Image, Projection, Scheme, Diagram, Analem, Arras, Enammel. IMAGE, Statue, Puppet, Idol, Coloss, Crucifix. CHAP. XI. Concerning Relation more public, whether I. Civil. II. Judiciary. III. Military. IV. Naval. V. Ecclesiastical. MOre publick relation may be distributed into such as do concern those several respects, Actions and Things; belonging either to Several Families associated under Government, CIVIL RELATION. Courts of Judicature, and matters of Law, JUDICIAL RELATION. A state of Warr, MILITARY RELATION. Mens Affairs and Traffique on the Water, NAVAL RELATION. Matters of Religion and Worship, ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION. CIVIL RELATION. THat Relation arising from the associating of Families under Government for mutual benefit and defence, is styled Political or CIVIL, Republic,§. I. Commonwealth, State, political, secular. To which may be opposed ANARCHY, Confusion. The Notions belonging to this do refer either to Persons in a political capacity, considered according to their DEGREES. I. PROFESSIONS or Vocations. II. CONVENTIONS. III. Things or businesses, relating to RIGHTS. IV. CONTRACTS for the Alienation of our Rights. V. OBLIGATIONS for the Confirmation of Contracts. VI.
I. Those differences whereby men under a Political Relation, are di∣stinguished from one another,I. DEGREES OF MEN. according to their several ranks, are styled, DEGREES, Place, Quality, Rank, Order, Scutcheon, Coat of Arms, Herald. To which may be opposed the word PARITY, Levelling. These are either More general; according to the first common Difference of ‖ govern∣ing, namely such to whom doth belong the power and care of direct∣ing others in their duty, and rewarding or punishing them accord∣ingly: or governed, namely such as are under this Power. 1. MAGISTRATE, Rector, Governour, Regent, Rule-er, Dominion, Sway, Consul, President, Provost, Warden, Head, Territory, Seigniory, Ma∣jor, Baylif, Syndic, States, Iurisdiction. SUBJECT-ion, Vassal, submit, Homage, Liegeman, Private person, truckle, Vnderling. More particular; relating to Kinds of principal Magistrates; which have great variety of Titles in several Countries, not necessary to be distinctly provided for here, excepting onely such as are either; ‖ Sovereign: or Homagers to some other. 2. KING, Sovereign, Emperor, Imperial, Monarch, Queen, regal, royal, Majesty, reign, Kingdom, Lord, Dynasty, Sultan, Cham, Liege Lord, Regent, Realm, Diadem, Crown, Coronation, Scepter, Throne, en∣throne, Viceroy. PRINCE, Potentate. Orders of Subjects. Higher. More general; comprehending the ‖ greater: or lesser Nobility. 3. LORD, Peer, Nobleman, honourable, Patrician, Duke, Mar∣quess, Earl, Count, Viscount, Baron. GENTLEMAN, Gentry, Knight, Esquire, Sir, Madam, Wor∣ship-ful, Gentil-ity, Wellborn. More special; with relation to the Degrees in liberal Professions; either ‖ perfect: or inchoate. 4. GRADUATE, commence, Degree, Doctor, Master, Rabbi. CANDIDATE, Batchelor, Inceptor, canvas, sue, stand for. Middle; considered Aggregately. 5. PEOPLE, Folk, Commonalty, Community, mean, obscure, igno∣ble, Plebeian, Populacie, popular, populous. Segregately; as they are Inhabitants either in ‖ Cities: or the Countrey 6. CITIZEN, Free-man, enfranchise, Denizon, Townsman. YEOMAN. Lower sort; considered Aggregately. 7. RABBLE, Vulgus, Tag-rag, base. Segregately; according to their want of ‖ Dignity: or Wealth. 8. VILLAIN, Varlet, Rascal, Peasant, Boor, servile, Sirrah, Vassal, base. BEGGAR, Rogue, Mendicant, Shake-ragg. Conditions of men; as having ‖ a right to dispose of themselves: or not. 9. FREE-MAN, liberal, enfranchise, Burgess, SLAVE, emancipate, manumit, servile, illiberal, Bondman, Bon∣dage, Thraldom, enthrall, enslave, serve, Droyl, Drudge.
II. That course of life about which one is usually employed,II. PRO∣FESSIONS. and to which he applies himself for the getting of a Subsistence, is styled his PROFESSION, Vocation, Calling, Trade, Function, Occupation, Course of life, Craft, Mystery. To which may be adjoyned the word denoting the actual Use of such Callings, PRACTICE, Exercise, Vse, follow, put in ure. These may be distinguished, into such as are either More necessary and beneficial to humane life; whether Liberal Professions, such as become free and generous men; relating ei∣ther to Things. Sacred; as ‖ discovered by revelation: or as the knowledge of them is▪ attainable by nature. 1. DIVINE, Theology, Clerk, Schoolman. PHILOSOPHER. Civil and political; namely, ‖ the more generally received Laws and Constitutions: or those belonging to a particular Nation. 2. CIVIL LAWYER. COMMON LAWYER, Pettifogger. Natural; with particular reference to the diseases of mens bodies and their cure; either ‖ by direction: or by manual operation. 3. PHYSICIAN, Medicine, Patient, Empiric, Mountebank, Quack salver, Farrier, Leach, Receipt. CHIRURGION, dress a wound. Words or Language: or the ornaments of discourse. 4. PHILOLOGER, Critic. POET-ry, Poem, Bard, Muse. Illiberal; belonging more peculiarly To a Town; consisting of Trades of ‖ exchange: or manufacture. 5. MERCHANT, Market, Pedler, Huckster, Bodger, Hawker, Regra∣ter, Shopkeeper, Traffic, Dealing, Merchandize, Fair, Mart. MECHANIC, Handicraft, Artificer, Manufacture; Artizan, Work house. To the Country; relating to the most ancient Professions of Tilling the ground: or feeding of Cattel. 6. HUSBANDMAN, georgic, Hinde, Agriculture, Tillage, Bayliffe. HERDSMAN, Shepherd, Pastor, Cow-herd, Hog-herd. Catching of wild Animals. 7. HUNTSMAN, Hunt-er, Fowler, Fisher, chase, trace, course, Ve∣nison, Game, Pocher. Both to Town and Country; for the carriage of things by ‖ Water: or Land. 8. MARINER. CARRIER, Ripier, Cargo. Not necessary; comprehending those several Professions which tend to the diversion of others; ‖ by acting or personating some particular Story or Fiction: or by amusing of men by the Agility of body or hand. 9. PLAYER, Actor, Comedian, Tragedian, Play, Stage, Theatre, Enterlude, Personate. PRESTIGIATOR, Shewer of tricks, juggle, Legerdemain, Hocas pocas, Tumbler, Dancer on the ropes, &c. Mountebank.
III. The several Aggregates of men under Political Government, are usually styled either by that more general:III. CON∣VENTION▪ or special name. CONVENTION, Assembly, Meeting, Congregation, Convocation, Company, Rendezvouz, Concourse, Confluence, Quire, Chapter, Committee, Club, Hall, convene, Conventicle, Sessions, Assize, flock or gather together. SOCIETY, Gyld, Gang, Tribe, Clan, Fraternity, Club, Knot, Crew, Fellow∣ship, Company· These are either such as have the same General inducements; in respect of Language and supreme Government; whether ‖ primitively: or de∣rivatively. 1. NATION-al, epidemical, naturalize, People, Country, vernacu∣lar, Patriot. COLONY, Plantation. Place of Habitation; considered according to the General name; denoting such as inhabit ‖ more dispersedly in the open fields: or more close together, usually within fenced places. 2. COUNTRY, rural, rustic, Peasant, Boor, Hinde, Kern, Swain, Clown, Tike. TOWN, Burrough. Special kinds; signifying all that part of a Nation under the same Subordinate Government; ‖ dwelling more at large: or such as dwell close together, with peculiar Liberties and Priviledges in common amongst them. 3. PROVINCE, Circuit. CITY, Suburbs, Metropolis, See, Borough, municipal. Lowest Government; whether ‖ with: or without Iurisdiction. 4. SHIRE, County, Tribe, District, Riding. PARISH, parochial, Parson, Vicar, Thorpe, Village. Special inducements; for ‖ Attendance on Governours: or advice in the Government. 5. COURT-ier, aulical. COUNCIL, Senate, Parliament, Diet, Conclave, Consistory, San∣hedrim, Synod, Committee. Education in Learning; either ‖ of the Adult, with a power to license them for the Liberal professions: or onely of Children or young be∣ginners. 6. UNIVERSITY, Academy, School. SCHOOL. Regulating the affairs of some ‖ Trade: or Profession; especially if they cohabit for those ends in a kind of Political family. 7. CORPORATION, Gyld, Brotherhood, Fraternity, Company, So∣ciety, community, municipal, incorporate. COLLEGE-iate, Fellow. Driving on of some design; ‖ in general: or with particular reference to the opposing of what is legally established. 8. LEAGUE, Confederacy, Combination, Alliance, Complice, Parti∣san, Party, side with, joyn, hold together, Pack, compact. FACTION, Sect, Iuncto, Gang, conspire, side with, combine, Par∣ty-zan, Oligarchy.
IV. The things which in Iustice or Equity▪ do belong to persons,IV. RIGHTS. are called RIGHTS, Title, Interest, Estate, Tenure▪ Holding, Freehold, Gift, Col∣lation, Reversion, Landlord, Paramount, endow, enfeoff. To which may be adjoyned the word LIBERTIES, denoting whatsoever is permitted, or not forbidden to them. These are considerable according to their Original; being either Primary and unwritten. Not voluntary; but according to ‖ the condition of its first being: or common practice and continuance. 1. NATURE. CUSTOM, accustom, Vse, Wont, Guise, Fashion, Rite, Vsage, usual, currant, common, ordinary, ure, enure, Habit, Practice, Haunt, pre∣scribe, unusual, obsolete, familiar, received, conversant, Habit, manner, course, Hank, Exercise, Prescription, Desuetude. Voluntary; according to the ‖ choice of the Will: or a determined order. 2. ELECTION, Choice. SUCCESSION, devolve, follow, Place. Secondary and written. General; whether ‖ perpetual: or temporal. 3. LAW, Act, Statute, Decree, Sanction, Constitution, Canon, Rule, legal, legitimate, enact, ordain, order, abrogate, repeal, prescribe, Legislator. EDICT, Ordinance, Proclamation, Order, Breve, Bull, Act, Rule, Sanction, Rescript. Special; conferring ‖ Right to have: or Right to do. 4. PATENT, Charter, Brief, Letters Patents, Placard. COMMISSION, Brief. parts; consisting in▪ Power over that which is One's own; either ‖ totally: or as to the use of it. 5. PROPRIETY, Concern, Owner, Proprietary. USUS-FRUCTUS. Another's; either as to ‖ his person: or his affairs. 6. AUTHORITY, Power, Dominion, Prefect, President, Head, Pro∣vost, Master, Plenipotentiary, authentic, classic, govern, ratifie, Rule, sway, inspection, dispose, Precinct, Territory. OFFICE, Place, Cure, overlook, officiate, superintend, surveigh, oversight, charge, conduct, Commissary, Prefect, Collegue, Groom. Liberty; with respect to Advantages by special Law; either ‖ of the supreme Magistrate: or of some particular rank of Subjects. 7. PREROGATIVE, Royalty. PRIVILEGE, Franchise, enfranchise, freedom, Grace, preeminence. Remission or exemption from the rigour of a general Law, in its ‖ Commanding: or prohibiting. 8. DISPENSATION. LICENCE, Permission, Sufferance, Leave, allowance, Faculty, Connivence, Placard, Prattick, let, may, suffer, admit, dispence, Pass-port, Safe conduct, Letters of Mart. Punishing: or imposing burthens. 9. TOLERATION, Connivence, suffer, let alone, Quarter. IMMUNITY, free, Discharge, Exemption, Quarter, scot-free.
V. The mutual negotiating betwixt men in their ordinary converse with one another is styled CONTRACT,V. CON∣TRACT. Commerce, Entercourse, Traffic, Trade, Negotiation: to which may be annexed for affinity the most general occasion for such Intercourse, namely, the parting with one thing for the getting of ano∣ther, called EXCHANGE, barter, chaffer, cope, swap, truck, chop, Commutation, Scoursing, Bargain, Match. The principal matters belonging to this Head do either refer to Actions; General; whether Absolute; transferring a thing from one to another; whether ‖ for his use to whom it is transferred: or for his use that transfers. 1. ASSIGNING, consigning, conveying, resigning, deliver, put over. DEPOSITING, Trustee, Feoffee, enfeoff, charge, commend, recommend, entrust, commit, Fiduciary, Sequestration. Conditional▪ ‖ giving: or having right to an Estate after the death of him who disposeth of it. 2. BEQUEATHING, devising, Legacy, Testament, Will, Executor, Intestate. INHERITING, Heir, hereditary, Heritage, Patrimony, Fee-simple, En∣tail, disherit, Hereditament, Portion, Primogeniture. Special; either by Parting with: or procuring propriety in any thing, upon the consideration for something else to be taken or given in exchange. 3. SELLING, vent, utter, Ware, Commodity, Sale-able, venal, vendible, sta∣ple, put off, retail, afford, handsel, monopoly, make mony of, serve one with. BUYING, purchase, Cater, Chapman, Customer, engrossing, ransom, re∣deem, regrate, forestal, interlope, preemption, the refusing. Parting with: or procuring the temporary use of something belonging to another; according to The more general name. 4. LENDING, Loan, Creditor, prostitute, trust. BORROWING, take up. The particular kind▪ relating to some temporary reward to be ‖ taken, and given. 5. DEMISING, let, let out, let to farm, lease, Lessor, Landlord, Broker, Rent, Principal, Interest, put to use. HIRING, farming, backney, mercenary, prostitute, Tenant, Lessee, Lease, Rent, Interest, Vse, at livery, Gratis. Bestowing skill or labour about any business: or compensating of it. 6. EARNING, Merit, Desert, Meed, Demerit, supererogate. WAGES, Fee, Salary, Pension, Stipend, Vails, fare, freight, gratis. Things; whether more Private; to be exhibited by the Buyer; either ‖ the whole value: or a part of it, for assurance of the rest. 7. PRICE, Rate, Value, Worth, Ransom, stand in, cost, cheap, dear, preci∣ous, sumptuous, rich, inhaunce, depreciate. EARNEST, Gage, Pledge. Seller; either ‖ the thing bought: or some part, for security of the whole. 8. BARGAIN, Ware, Commodity. SEISIN, Livery, install, admit, Entry, inthrone, inaugurate, invest. Public; towards defraying the charge of Government; whether ‖ ordinary: or occasional. 9. TRIBUTE, Custom; Annates, Gabel, Excise, Toll, Impost, Publicane. TAX, Rate, Contribution, Collection, assess, Publicane, Subsidy, Tun∣nage, pontage, pannage, Pole, Collector, Scot, Sesment.
VI. Those several kinds of Assurances which men offer concerning what they intend to give or do, are styled, OBLIGATIONS, plight,VI. OBLIGA∣TIONS. en∣gage, Deed, bind, Bond, Bill, evidence, &c. undertake for. And when such Obligations are reciprocal, they are then called PA∣CTIONS, Agreement, Compact, Covenant, Bargain, Condition, indent, Match, Stipulation, Sponsion, Warranty, Article, strike up a bargain. These are either Imperfect; or degrees towards Contracts more Remote; in the first overtures of a Contract; whether ‖ as begun by one: or mutual betwixt both. 1. BESPEAKING, Retain. TREATING, driving a Bargain, capitulate, chaffer, parley, cheapen, huck, haggle. Near; in proposal of those terms according to which one obliges himself to ‖ buy: or sell. 2. BID, offer, huck, haggle. DEMAND, cheapen, ask, exact. Perfect; either in Words; Spoken. Common; ‖ ingaging our Veracity, sometimes with the addition of such solemn expressions as may testifie our reality. 3. PROMISE, Word, Parol, plight, Covenant, League, undertake for, pass ones word. PROTESTATION, Asseveration, averr, vouch, stand in, Atte∣station. Sacred; ingaging our Religion, and appealing to God as ‖ a Witness, and as a Iudge, to punish us upon our falshood. 4. SWEARING, Oath, deposing, abjure, Perjury, adjure, purge upon Oath. IMPRECATION, Execration, Malediction, Cursing. Written; attested with ‖ our peculiar name, or Mark: or Impressing some figure in Wax, or some like matter 5. SIGNING, Obligation, Deed, Evidence, Bill, Indenture, Instru∣ment, Writing, Muniment, Conveyance, Policy, subscribe, under ones hand, set ones hand. SEALING, Seal, Signet, Sigil, Bond, specialty. Security; Personal: whether ‖ express, by promising for another, and making himself liable to the same Penalty upon the other's failing: or impli∣cit, by speaking in one's behalf. 6. SPONSION, Stipulation, Bail, vouch, undertake for, Surety-ship, Hostage, Security, Warrant, Caution, engage, responsible for. INTERCESSION, Mediate or, interpose, speak for. Real, of ones Goods; either Absolute; by ingaging for the truth of a Promise either ‖ the Goods in specie, or only his right to them. 7. PAWN, Pledge, gage, engage. MORGAGE, Security, Statute, Caution, engage. Relative; by ingaging them for the success of a thing contingent, ‖ either as Principal, or as Accessory. 8. WAGER, Stake, vy, lay, prize. BET, Stake, vy, revy.
JUDICIAL RELATION. THe several Notions referring to matters of Law and Courts of Judicature,§. II. are comprehended under that which is styled JUDI∣CIAL RELATION, forensical, Court, Hall, extrajudicial. These are distinguishable into such as concern PERSONS. I. CAUSES and Actions. II. Faults. CAPITAL. III. NOT CAPITAL. IV. Punishments, CAPITAL. V. NOT CAPITAL. VI. I. PERSONS.I. PERSONS considerable under this Head of Judicial Relation, may be distinguished into such as are either More principal. Persons judging. Legally constituted; ‖ Principal: or Accessory. 1. JUDGE, Chancellour, Commissary, Censor, Moderator, Official, Iury, Inquest, Doom, Sentence, decide, determine, censure, Iudi∣catory, judicial, Court, Bench, Tribunal. ASSESSOR, Syndic, Bencher, Alderman, Canons, rebends, Chapter, Fellows, assist, Sides-men. Voluntarily consented to by the parties; ‖ to determin the Suit: or cease the Enmity between them. 2. ARBITRATOR, Vmpire, Days-man, comprimize, Referree, award MEDIATOR, Incercessor, deal-between, intermediate, Mean. Persons judged; whether ‖ active: or passive; in Criminals. 3. ACCUSER, Informer, challenge, Endite-ment, charge, attaint, peach, empeach▪ arraign, tax, lay to ones charge, call in question, Presentment, Bill, prosecute, Promooter. PRISONER, or reputed Criminal, Delinquent, Malefactor, Defen∣dant. Iudicials. 4. PLAINTIF, Accuser, complain, blame. DEFENDANT, Apology, excuse, vindicate. Less principal; relating either to the Iudges; for ‖ Writing: or saying publicly. 5. NOTARY, Register, Remembrancer, Secretary, Clerk, Scribe, Protonotary, Rolls, enoll. CRIER. Fetching: or keeping. 6. PURSEVANT, Messenger, Catchpole, Serjeant. MARSHAL, Keeper, Iailour. Parties; ‖ to advise and speak in behalf of either party: or to declare the truth indifferently betwixt both of them. 7. ADVOCATE, Counsel, Pleader, maintain, defend, vindicate, Lawyer, Barresier, Proctor, Clyent. WITNESS, Evidence, attest, testifie, Testimony, Affidavit.
II. To the more general words of Actions or PROCEEDINGS,II. PRO∣CEEDINGS. Cau∣ses, in Judicial Affairs, may be annexed those less general words of SUIT, Controversie, implead, commence, Case, Cause, Action, go to law, wage law, pre∣ferr a Bill, Barrester, Brabble. These are either Antecedent; on the part of the Plaintiff; in ‖ giving legal notice: or seizing on the person or goods of his Adversary. 1. CITATION, Subpoena, Process, call, warn, summon, Sumner, Appa∣ritor, Bailiff, Beadle. ARREST, attach, apprehend, distrein, seize, lay hold on, Embargo, Serjeant, Baily, Catchpole, Beadle, Replevy. Defendant; ‖ giving assurance of answering in Court: or coming him∣self, or by his Substitute, to answer it accordingly. 2. BAIL. APPEARANCE, forth-coming. Concomitant. Preparatory; by the Parties; ‖ active: or passive. 3. ACTION, Endictment, Bill, Process, arraign, implead, sue, com∣mence suit, wage law, Barretor. PLEA, Apology. Iudges; in their ‖ taking notice of and hearing the Cause: or making search into the merits of it. 4. COGNIZANCE, Hearing. EXAMINATION, Trial, sift out, Hearing Inquisition, interrogate, Scrutiny, scann, view, review, revise, canvase, gage, pumpe out. Decisive. Common; ‖ agreeing upon the state of the Question: or determining what the merit is. 5. JOYNING ISSUE▪ SENTENCING, Doom, Iudgment, Verdict, Censure, Decree, Or∣der, adjudge, decide, determin, award, definitive. Passive, in the parties; as they are found ‖ not to have transgressed the Law: or having transgressed it. 6. INNOCENT, clear, blameless, harmless, justifie-cation, vindicate, discharge, cleanse, purge, compurgation. GVITY, nocent, delinquent, peccant, convict, culpable, faulty, tardy, Offender, Transgressor, propitiate, expiate. Active, in the Iudge; pronouncing the party either ‖ free from: or obnoxious to Punishment. 7. ACQUITTING, absolving, assoil, clear, discharge, loosing▪ purging, quit, release. CONDEMNING, cast, damn. Consequent; in the Parties; ‖ expresly declining the Iudgment: or referring the Cause to some higher Iudicature. 8. PROTESTING. APPEALING. Iudges; by ‖ inflicting the Punishment: or freeing from it. 9. EXECUTING, inflict, suffer, Executioner, Hangman. PARDONING, forgiving, remit, release, venial, Indulgence, put up.
III CRIMES CAPITAL.III CRIMES CAPITAL, (Enormity, facinorous, criminal, Malefa∣ctor.) such as are or ought to be punished with Death, may be distinguish∣ed into such Offences as are more immediately against God and Religion; namely, the ‖ confederating with evil spirits; to which may be adjoyned for affinity (though not counted capital) the pre∣tending to discover secret, and foretel future things by foolish forbidden Arts. 1. WITCHCRAFT, Conjuring, Necromancy, Sorcery, Black-art, Magic, enchant, fascinate, fore speak, Charm Spell, Cunning-man. WIZARDING, Manteia, Divining, Gypsie, Fortune-telling, Sooth∣saying, Sorcery, Augury, Astrology, Geomancy, Pyromancy, Physiognomy, Cheiromancy, Palmistry, Sigil, Talisman. Man; whether A public person, or Magistrate. More general; implying ‖ declared hostility against him: or exposing him to his enemies. 2. TREASON, Traitor, betray. CONSPIRACY, betraying. More particular; ‖ a forcible opposing of him by Arms: or occasion∣ing some illegal tumultuous dissension in the Multitude. 3. REBELLION, Rising, Insurrection, Defection, Revolt, take head. SEDITION, Commotion, Combustion, Riot, Vproar, Mutiny, Tu∣mult, Hurly-burly, Scuffle, Stirrs▪ Quoil, Racket, Boute-feu, Incen∣diary, turbulent. Any private person; according to the General name; by which it is called in our English Laws. 4. FELONY. Particular kinds; distinguishable by their Objects, as being against Life; by taking it away illegally. 5. MURTHER, Assassin-ate, Homicide, Manslaughter, Massacre, Parricide, cut-throat, blood-thirsty. Chastity; by unnatural coition, either ‖ with Beasts: or Males. 6. BESTIALITY, Buggery. SODOMY, Buggery, Catamite. Estate; with respect to another's. Goods; taking them away either ‖ openly and forcibly: or secret∣ly and by craft. 7. ROBBERY, Rapine, Sacrilege, Thief, Bandito, Pyrate, Picke∣roon, pillage, take a purse. THEFT, steal, purloin, lurch, fich, pilser, nim, surreptitious, Plagiary, Sacrilege, Cut-purse, Pick-pocket, light-fingered, Larceny. Habitation; ‖ by burning it: or breaking into it. 8. HOUSE-BURNING, Incendiary. BURGLARY, House-breaking.
IV. Crimes or FAULTS NOT CAPITAL,IV. FAULTS NOT CAPI∣TAL. may be distinguished into such as are General; any action against ones Right, especially with contempt of the Per∣son. 1. INJURY, Wrong, Harm, Trespass, Hurt, Grievance, Abuse, Dammage. AFFRONT, Contumely, Outrage, Slur, Despite, Indignity, put a trick on. Special; against. Chastity; whether ‖ by a single: or a married person. 2. FORNICATION, Whoredom, Courtesan, Concubine, Harlot, Trull. Punk, Leman, Quean, Drab, Strumpet, prostitute, deflour, stuprate, vitiate, wenching, Brothel, Stews, Bawd, Pander. ADULTERY, Concubine. Estate; General; ‖ by unjust getting: or keeping of another's Right. 3. USURPATION, incroach, intrench, grow upon, invade, intrude, thrust in. DETENTION, with-holding, keep back. Particular, as to the manner of it; by abusing Skill; in ‖ taking advantage of another man's ignorance, especially in actions of Commerce: or misusing his own skill in the falsi∣fying of a thing. 4. FRAUD, Deceit, Guile, Cozening, Delusion, Collusion, Illusion, dodge, trepan, over-reach, prevaricate, circumvent, go-beyond, impose, gull, beguile, defraud, Imposture, Knave, Rook, Cheat, Shift, Shark, cog, slur, wheedle, come over one, supplant. FORGERY, counterfeit, false, adulterate, sophisticate, coin, de∣vise, forge, falsifie, foisting, Interpolation, Impostor, supposititi∣ous, surreptitious. Power; by ‖ taking advantage of another man's necessity or impo∣tence: or exceeding the allowance of the Law. 5. OPPRESSION, Force, Violence, exact, overcharge▪ EXTORTION, Exaction, Rapine, Rapacity, wresting, wring, griping, ravin, poling, pilling. Course of Law; by endeavouring to corrupt ‖ the Officers of Iustice: or the Witnesses. 6. BRIBERY, Corruption, dawbing. SUBORNATION. Good name; endeavouring to render another Criminal; by accusations ‖ not true: or made unlawfully against an absent person. 7. CALUMNY, Obloquy, Slander, Aspersion, opprobrious, Detraction, False accusation, carping, belie, defame, disparage, traduce. BACKBITING, Libel, Tale-bearer, Tell-tale, Whispering, Pick-thank. Infamous; by objecting ‖ another's failings: or our own favours. 8. REPROCHING, nip, taunt, scoff, twit, Opprobry, obloquy, tax, traduce. UPBRAIDING, cast in one's teeth, exprobrate, twit. Odious: or ridiculous. 9. REVILING, rail, scold, brawl, Contumely, inveigh, invective, foul-mouthed, Cucking-stool. MOCKING, deride, flout, jeer, scoff, twit, gibe, quip, gird, frump, bob, taunt, wipe, jerk, Sarcasm, Pasquil, Irrision, Illu∣sion, Satyr, Burlesque, play upon.
V. PUNISH∣MENTS CA∣PITAL.V. By Punishment is meant the evil of Suffering, inflicted for the evil of Doing; to which may be adjoyned the loss or inction of a man's Right in a thing which he formerly injoyed, styled FORFEITURE. PUNISHMENTS CAPITAL are the various manners of putting men to death in a judicial way, which in several Nations are or have been either Simple; by Separation of the parts; ‖ Head from Body: or Member from Mem∣ber. 1. BEHEADING, strike of ones head. QUARTERING, Dissecting. Wound. At distance; whether ‖ from Hand: or from Instrument, as Gun, Bow, &c. 2. STONING, Pelting. SHOOTING. At hand; either by Weight; ‖ of something else: or one's own. 3. PRESSING. PRECIPITATING, throwing or casting headlong. Weapon; ‖ any way: or direct upwards. 4. STABBING. EMPALING. Taking away necessary Diet: or giving that which is noxious. 5. STARVING, famishing. POISONING, Venom, envenom, virulent. Interception of the Air; at the Mouth; distinguished according to the place of the party, ‖ in the Air: or in the Earth 6. STIFLING, smoother, suffocate. BURYING ALIVE. Water: or Fire, 7. DROWNING. BURNING ALIVE. Throat; ‖ by weight of a man's own body: r the strength of others. 8. HANGING. STRANGLING, throttle, choke, suffocate. Mixed of wounding and starving; the body being ‖ erect: or lying on a Wheel. 9. CRUCIFYING, Cross. BREAKING ON THE WHEEL.
VI. PUNISHMENTS NOT CAPITAL are distinguished by the things or subjects receiving detriment by them,VI. PUNISH∣MENTS NOT CA∣PITAL. as being either of the Body; according to the General name; signifying great pain. 1. TORTURE, Torment, excruciate. Special kinds; by Striking; with ‖ a limber: or a stiff Instrument. 2. WHIPPING, lashing, scourging, leashing, jerk, Rod, slash, Switch, stripe, Beadle. CUDGELLING, bastinado, baste, swinge, swaddle, shrubb, slapp, thwack. Stretching of the limms violently; the body being ‖ laid along for that purpose: or listed up into the Air. 3. RACK. STRAPPADO. Liberty; of which one is deprived by Restraint ‖ Into ‖ a place: or instrument for custody. 4. IMPRISONMENT, Incarceration, Durance, Custody, Ward, clap up, commit, confine, mue, Pound, Pinfold, Gaol our, Counter, Cage, Coop, Toleboth, Dungeon, Marshal, release, secure, set fast. BONDS, Fetters, Gyves, Shackles, Manicles, Pinnion, Chains. Out of a place or country; whether ‖ with allowance of any other: or con∣finement to one other. 5. EXILE, Banish-ment, exterminate, prescribe, eject, expel, out-lawed. RELEGATION. Repute; whether ‖ more gently: or more severely by burning marks in one's flesh. 6. INFAMATION, Ignominy, Pillory. STIGMATIZATION, Branding, Cauterizing, burning in the hand, Mark. Estate; whether ‖ in part: or in whole. 7. MULCT, Fine, amerce, sconce. CONFISCATION, Forfeiture. Dignity and power; by depriving one of ‖ his Degree: or his capacity to bear Office. 8. DEGRADING, deposing, depriving. INCAPACITATING, cashier, disable, discard, depose, disfranchize. MILITARY RELATION. THis Head of MILITARY RELATION, is intended to contain such Notions as concern the various respects and capacities belonging to a state of War.§. III. The using of the united Force and Arms of many against others, is styled WAR-fare, martial, polemical, Militia, Chivalry. And the being without mutual opposition is called Peace. The Notions appertaining to this Head, do relate either to Military ACTIONS. I. EVENTS. II. Persons. SEGREGATE. III. AGGREGATE. IV. Instruments necessary to War, AMMUNITION. V. PLACES. VI.
I. MILI∣TARY ACTI∣ONS.I. Military ACTIONS may be distinguished according to the General name; denoting the endeavour of ‖ doing hurt: or preserving from hurt. 1. OFFENDING, Offence-ive, Annoy-ance. DEFENDING protect, guard, shelter▪ shrowd ward▪ preserve, keep, maintain, make good, tutelary. Particular kinds or degrees; whether such as are Opposite and in several. Declaring enmity on the ‖ offensive: or defensive side. 2. PROVOKING, challenge, irritate, invite, bait, stir up, dare, vy. DEFYING, dare Beginning of actual ‖ offence: or defence. 3. ASSAULTING, assail, attaque, invade, encounter, Onset, set upon, charge, Inrode, Rencounter, Incursion▪ fall on, run upon. RESISTING, withstand, stand against, bear up against, turn head, strug∣gle with, Antiperistatis. Endeavouring ‖ to dispossess one of his place: or to frustrate such endeavours; either by ‖ Keeping from necessaries: or supplying with necessaries. 4. BESIEGING, Siege, beleaguer, beset, block up, hem in, lay siege. RELIEVING, succour, supply, help, recruit, reinforce, subsidiary, Ayd. Vnderdigging the Sepiment; either ‖ to make a breach in it: or to hinder the making of such a breach. 5. MINING, undermine, Sapping. COUNTERMINING. Entring forcibly to assault the besieged: or going out to assault the besiegers. 6. STORMING, assaulting, boarding, attaque, scaling, on-slaught. SALLYING, issue out Reciprocal and in common; whether by wayes of Force; viz. the mutual endeavours of corporeal mischief to one another; according to the ‖ General name: or that which is betwixt two. 7. FIGHTING, Combat, Conflict, encounter, cope, bicker, Fray, impugn, scuffle, List. DUELLING, Single combat, Champion, List. Special kinds, betwixt numerous parties, according to set order and ap∣pointment; either of ‖ some part of the Army: or the whole 8. SKIRMISHING, Fray, Velitation▪ pickeer. BATTELLING, Set fight, Set battel, joyn battel, Shock. Skill, or some secret art to deceive an Enemy; according to the ‖ general name: or by concealing Souldiers for the sudden surprisal of others. 9. STRATAGEM, ensnare, Device, Trick, Train, surprize. AMBUSH, Ambuscado, insidiate, lay wait, lurk, way lay, surprize. II. MILI∣TARY EVENTS.II. Military EVENTS may be distinguished into such as are either Of Importance; when ‖ one keeps as before: or gains from the other: or loses his own; relating to the Condition usually befalling such as are ‖ equal: or stronger: or weaker. 1. COMING OFF UPON EQUAL TERMS. VICTOR, overcome, defeat, discomfit, beat, win, vanquish, get the day, -the better, -the upper hand, quell, predominant, prevail, subdue, suppress, over-bear, -master. OVERTHROWN, subdued, foiled, suppressed, routed, worsted, beaten, defeated, discomfited, brought under. Place of fighting. 2. STAND HIS GROUND. ADVANCE, get ground. RETIRE, retreat, give back, shrink, recede, recoyle. Country of fighting. 3. KEEP THE FIELD. PVRSVE, chas, course, follow, proscute, Hue and Cry. FLY, run away rout, fugitive, take ones heels, put to flight.
Town assaulted. 4. HOLD OUT, make good, maintain, stand out, hold tack. TAKE, win. LOSE, yield, surrender, Rendition. Goods of those that fight. 5. SAVE ONE'S OWN. BOOTIES, Forage, Plunder, Pillage, Quarry, Prey, Prize, Free-booter, Letters of Mart, Letters of Reprize. SPOILS, harras, havock, ravage, rifle, sack, ransack, Wreck, Devastation, Ruin, Wast, depopulate. Persons concerned. 6. ESCAPE, evade, scape eschew, get rid, get quit off, get off, shift away, get clear. CAPTIVATE, take prisoner. YIELD, give up, render, surrender, resign, deliver. Final issue of the War. 7. SAVE. CONQUER, bring under, master, mate, quel, vanquish, repress, suppress, tame subdue, win. SVBMIT, give up, humble, yield, surrender, come in. Of Shew on the Victor's side, (for the conquered makes none;) either by some ‖ solemn Actions to be publicly performed: or Things and Structures to remain in memory of the Victory. 8. TRIUMPH, exult, crow, exultation, Bonfire. TROPHEE. III. Military PERSONS (Souldier, Warrier, Reformado, serve, press,III. Mili∣tary PER∣SONS SE∣GRE∣GATE.) se∣gregate, may be distinguished by those several imployments for which they are designed; being either for Fighting; ‖ on foot: or on horse-back 1 FOOTMAN, Infantry, Lance-knight. HORSMAN, Cavalry, Light-horse, Curasier, Dragoons, Trooper, Reister, Rider Signs to the Army; belonging either to ‖ Foot: or Horse. Visible. 2. ENSIGN, Ancient, Colours, Standard, Pennon, Banner. CORNET, Banner, Colours. Audible. 3. DRUMMER, Drum, Tabor, Tabret. TRUMPETER, Trumpet. Distributing Orders; ‖ ordinary, belonging to each aggregate part: or extraor∣dinary, belonging to the Army. 4. SERJEANT. ADJUTANT. Discovery; either ‖ of the Country in general: or amongst the Enemies. 5. SCOUT, crusing, descry. SPY, Emissary, Setter, Intelligence. Prevention of danger that might happen either to ‖ Persons: or Places. 6. GUARD, Convoy, custody, keep, ward, keep guard, relieve the guard, Corps du guard WATCH, Ward, Corporal. Both Discovery and Prevention; denoting such a one as ‖ stands and examines: or lies on the ground to listen and observe 7. SENTINEL, Sentry. PERDUE. Digging: or other servil works; denoting such Servants of the Army as fol∣low the Baggage. 8. PIONER. CALO, Pedec, Black guard.
IV. Milita∣ry PER∣SONS AGGRE∣GATE.IV. Military PERSONS AGGREGATE (Party of Souldiers, Forces, disband) may be distributed according to such different names as do denote either the Whole; being an armed Multitude fit to assault or resist, consisting of many subordinate divisions. 1 ARMY, Host, Forces, Battalia. Parts; according to The first: or the second greatest subdivisions. 2. BRIGADE, Battalion, Terce. REGIMENT, Legion, Tribune, Colonel. The third: or fourth subdivision, belonging both to Horse and Foot. 3. COMPANY, Troop, Band, Captain, Centurion. SQUADRON. Order and Situation; whether with ‖ the side of every one towards the side of the next: or the face of every one towards the back of the next, 4. RANK. FILE, Roe. Vses and Services for which such persons are designed; whether To march before the Army, for clearing of the way: or to follow after, for help and supply in case of necessity. 5. VANCURRIER. RESERVE. To begin the Fight: or to ingage in the most difficult services, being usually a selected Company. 6. FORLORN HOPE. COMMANDED PARTY. To take care of and defend the Baggage. 7. TRAIN. V. AM∣MNITI∣ON.V. The Provisions necessary for Offence and Defence are styled by the general name of AMMUNITION, Magazin, charge, discharge, Arcenal. To which may be adjoyned the word BAGGAGE, Impediments, Lug∣gage, Lumber. They are distinguishable according to their Shapes, and those several Uses for which they are designed, into such as are more General; denoting the common names belonging to things of this nature; whe∣ther such as are ‖ offensive: or defensive. 1. WEAPON, Arms offensive. ARMOUR, defensive Arms, Mail, Headpiece, Helmet, Scull, Gorget, Gaunt∣lt, Habergeon, &c. Armorer, Armory. Special; for Offence. Comminus, near hand; being either for Striking chiefly; whether ‖ bruising: or cutting. 2. CLUB, Bat, Batoon, Battle-ax, Mace, Pole-ax, Cudgel. SWORD, Scimitar, Hanger, Rapier, Tuck, Ponyard, Stilletto, Dag∣ger, Fauchion, Glave, Cutler. Thrusting chiefly; of which the latter is sometimes used for striking. 3. PIKE, Spear, Launce, Iavelin, run at tilt. HALBERT, Partizan, Trident. Eminus, at a distance; whether Ancient and less artificial; denoting either the Instrument giving the force, being of a curved figure and elastical power; to be held in the hand, either ‖ immediately: or by the stock to which it is fixed. 4. BOW, shoot, Archer, Fletcher. CROSS-BOW, shoot. Instrument or Weapon projected; whether ‖ immediately out of the hand: or mediately from something else. 5. DART, Iavelin, Harping-iron. ARROW, Shaft, Bolt. Modern and more artificial, (i.) fire-Arms; denoting either the Vessels giving the force; according to the name of ‖ the whole kind: or of the bigger kind.
6. GUN, shoot, Snaphance, Fire-lock, Musket, Carbine, Blunderbuss, Piece, Arquebus, Petronel, Pistol, Dagg, Potgun, play upon. ORDNANCE, Cannon, Artillery, Saker, Minion, Basilisk, Drake, &c. shoot. Vtensils; signifying the thing ‖ enkindling: or enkindled. 7. MATCH, Tinder, Touchwood, Spunk. POWDER, Gunpowder. Things discharged; either ‖ sod: or hollow. 8. BULLET, Ball, Pellet, Shot. GRANADO, Petard. Defence: 9. BUCKLER, Shield, Target. VI. Such kind of Places, together with such kind of Contrivances belong∣ing to them, as relate to a state of War,VI. MILI∣TARY PLACES. may be styled MILITARY PLACES or Works, (Munitions, Fortifications, fenced, Hold, dismantle.) To which may be adjoyned for its affinity the common notion of such things as are used for the fencing of Places; SEPIMENT, Wall, Pale, Fence, Enclosure, Fold, Mound. These may be distinguished into such as are More principal; Comprehending the Area contained within them. Greater; in ‖ Country: or Town. 1. CAMP, encamp, quarter. GARRISON. Less; more ‖ independent: or dependent. 2. SCONCE, Fortress, Platform, Fort. BLOCK-HOUSE, Fort, Bastion, Strong-hold. Not comprehending the Area contained within them. General; denoting a Sepiment ‖ Ridge-like of Earth: or Furrow-like in the Earth. 3. RAMPIER, Wall, Bulwark, Line, Counterscarf, Mound, Out-work. DITCH, Dike, Foss, Trench, Mote. Special; signifying the ‖ outward: or inward Wall. 4. VAUMURE. LINING. Less principal; whether Parts. Geater; either of ‖ a round: or many-angled figure. 5. HALF-MOON. HORN-WORK. Lesser; either ‖ angular to defend the sides of a place: or the straight sides to be so defended. 6. REDOUBT. FLANKER. Accessions; belonging to the Out-parts▪ being a series of ‖ great Pins erected: or Holes dug in the earth. 7. PALLISADO. FURNACE-HOLE. Entrance; Military Doors ‖ to shut transverse: or to let down direct. 8. TURNPIKE. PORTCULLIS. Walls; signifying an erect crenated Margo upon the Walls; ‖ either built upon them: or made by setting on Baskets filled with earth. 9. PARAPET. GABION.
NAVAL RELATION. §. IV.THe Head of Naval Relation is intended to comprehend the various Notions and Expressions, belonging to mens affairs and traffick on the Waters; respecting either Things. KINDS OF VESSELS used for Passage. I. Parts of Vessels; relating to such as serve for Containing; HULL. II. PROGRESSIVE MOTION OR STAYING. III. RIGGING. IV. PERSONS. V. ACTIONS. VI. KINDS OF VES∣SELS.I. The KINDS OF VESSELS which are used for passage on the Waters, are in several Countries of so great variety and names, by reason of their being distinguished by some little accidental Differences, that it will be very difficult for the most expert person to give a sufficient enumeration of them: and therefore I shall in this place distribute them onely according to their various Magnitudes, and the Vses for which they are designed: according to which they may be distinguished into such as are denoted under the General name; belonging to the ‖ lesser, or greater kind. 1. BOAT, Oars, Wherry, Sculler, Canoe, Cockboat, Waterman. SHIP, Pink, Pinnace, Shallop, Sail, Vessel, Navy, Fleet, naval. Particular kinds; either Lesser for the Sea, or greater for Rivers. 2. KETCH, Bark, Flyboat.. BARGE, Lighter, Gallyfoist, Brigandine, &c. Greater; being moved either by Sails and Oars. 3. GALLY. Sails onely; and used chiefly for Burthen. 4. GALEOT, Caramosil, Carrack, Caravel. Traffick and Merchandize. 5. MERCHANT-MAN, Bottom. Fighting. 6. MAN OF WAR, Frigot, Caper, Armada, Privateer. Passage. 7. PACQUET-BOAT. II. By HULL is meant the main Bulk or Body of the Ship, considered abstractly from its Masts and Rigging.II. HULL. The parts of which may be distin∣guished into such as relate to Timbers. Fixed at the Bottom of the Ship; lying either ‖ direct, or transverse. 1. KEEL. RUNG. End; either the ‖ former, or hinder part. 2. STEM, Prow. STERN, Poop. Movable upon a Centre or Hindge; ‖ for lifting up the Anchor or any great weight: or for stearing the Ship. 3. CAPSTAIN. RUDDER, Helm, Steer.
Places or rooms; relating to the Former, or hinder part above. 4. FORE-CASTLE. ROUND-HOUSE. Middle space; ‖ betwixt the Main mast and Fore-castle, or the rooms built above this towards the Stem. 5. WAST. HALF-DECK. Apertures; in the Floor or Deck, supplying the office of Doors and Windows; ‖ greater, or lesser. 6. HATCHES. SCUTTLE, Gratings. Sides; ‖ for putting out the Ordnance, or for passage of Water from the Deck, 7. PORTHOLE. SCUPPER. Interstices; betwixt ‖ the edges of the planks, or the side-timbers of the Ship. 8. SEAM. SPURKET. Shape or figure of the Hull; with respect to ‖ the gathering or joyning together of the planks upon the Ship's quarter under water, or so much of the Hull as hangs over both ends of the Keel; styled 9. RAKE OF POST, Tuck. RAKE OF STEM. III. Parts of Vessels serving chiefly for the PROGRESSIVE MOTION or Stay∣ing of them, may be distinguished, by the matter of which they consist,III. Parts for PROGRES∣SIVE MOTI∣ON. into such as are of Wood; according to the more General names; denoting such woody parts as are either Fixed and upright; or the upper parts of these, round and prominent. 1. MAST. TOP, Boul. Moveable and transverse; applyed either to the ‖ top, or bottom of the Sail. 2. YARD. BOOM. Separate; serving for thrusting against ‖ the Water, or the Earth. 3. OAR, row. POLE. Particular kinds of Masts; (applicable likewise to Top, Yard, and Sails,) being placed either in the Fore-part; whether ‖ leaning, or upright. 4. BOUL-SPRIT. FORE-MAST. Middle, or hinder-part. 5. MAIN-MAST. MIZZEN-MAST. Cloth; serving for the Catching and opposing the Wind; either ‖ principally, or additionally. 6. SAIL, Course. BONNET, Drabler. Distinction of Nations, or the several Officers of a Navy; set up either ‖ above, on the Masts, or below, at the Stern. 7. FLAG. ANCIENT. Ornament and shew, or used to mark out the Wind's quarter. 8. STREAMER. JACK. Iron; for ‖ staying and holding the Ship, or the fastning of it to other Ships. 9. ANCHOR, Kedger. GRAPPLE.
IV. RIGGINGIV. By RIGGING is meant the several kinds of Cordage belonging to a Ship; in respect of the Masts; serving either for the Keeping them upright; namely, ‖ that are more declive on either side of the Masts: or those that are more transverse. 1. SHROUDS, Puttocks. STAYES. Ascent up to them; those smaller ropes which cross the Shrouds as the rounds of a Ladder. 2. RATLINGS. Yards; serving for the Tying of them: or the pulling of them to and fro. 3. PARREL. JEARS. Squaring or transversing: or making them to hang higher or lower. 4. BRACES. LIFTS. Sails; serving for the Tying of them to the Yards: or the pulling them to and fro. 5. ROBINS. SHEATS. Furling them across: or to raise up the bunt or protuberant part of the Sail. 6. BRALE. BUNT-LINE. Making of them to stand closer by a wind; being fastned either to ‖ the Clew or corner of the Sail: or the middle part of it. 7. TACKS. BOWLINE. Anchor; according to ‖ the more general name: or the name belonging to the lesser kind of such ropes. 8. CABLE. HAWSER, Halser. V NAVAL PERSONS.V. PERSONS belonging to the management of NAVAL Affairs, Mari∣ners, Seafaring-men, may be distributed into such whose Charge doth con∣cern the Defence of the Ship by fighting; either More principal; the Chief, who in Fight is to make good the Half-deck: or his Deputy, whose place in Fight is the Fore-castle. 1. CAPTAIN. LIEUTENANT. Less principal; having the charge of the ‖ Squadrons for the Watch: or being to take care for the setting and re∣lieving of the Watch, and that the Souldiers keep their Arms clean. 2. QUARTER-MASTER. CORPORAL. Ordnance, Shot, Powder, &c. 3. GUNNER. Sailing of the Ship, and the care of its parts and Lading; either More principal; whose charge it is to Direct the course, and command all the Sailors: or to bring the Ship safe to harbour. 4. MASTER. PILOT. Keep account of the Goods, what is received and delivered. 5. CAPE-MERCHANT. PURSER.
Preserve the Rigging and Tackle and the Long-boat: or to attend the Skiff with a peculiar gang to go to and fro upon occasion. 6. BOATSWAIN. COCKSWAIN. Less principal; serving to Keep the Decks clean. 7. SWABBER. Manage the Sails below: or to ascend for taking in the Top-sails, &c. 8. SAILERS, Mid-ship-men, Skipper. YONKERS, Fore-mast-men. VI. NAVAL ACTIONS may be distinguished into such as are doneVI. NAVAL ACTIONS. To the Ship; for the Securing of the Seams betwixt the Planks; either by ‖ beating in of Okum, (i.) pieces of old Ropes or hards of Flax: or putting a list of Canvas along the Seam, and then pouring hot Pitch upon it. 1. CALKING. PARSLING. Smoothing the outside; by ‖ washing or burning off all the filth with REEDS or Broom; or smearing over so much of the Ship as is to be in the water with a mixture of Tallow, Sope and Brimstone, boiled together, to preserve the Calking, and to make the Vessel mor slippery for passage. 2. BROMING, Breaming. GRAVING. Defending it against Worms; by ‖ casing that part of the Hull within wa∣ter with Tar and Hair, and then nailing over thin Boards: or inlar∣ging the Breadth, by ripping off some of the Planks; and then, having added other Timbers, to put on the Planks again, styled 3. SHEATHING. FURRING. Varying the Position of a Ship; either ‖ for the mending of it, by ma∣king it to lie on one side, the better to come at its lower parts: or for the motion of it, by so ordering the Lading and Rigging that it may be in the best condition for sailing. 4. CAREENING. TRIMMING. By the Ship; either Resting; when 'tis ‖ staid by the Anchor: or laid leaning to one side. 5. RIDING AT ANCHOR. HULLING. In motion; either more Direct; when it ‖ goes as it should: or runs its head in the wind more or less then it should. 6. KEEPING A WIND. GRIPING. FALLING TO THE LEEWARD. Lateral; when it ‖ doth lean too much on one side: or doth turn too much on each side. 7. HEELING, seeling. ROLLING.
ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION. §. V.UNder this Head of ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION (Clergy, Spiritual, Church,) are comprehended the several Notions and respects belonging to a Church-state. By Church is meant a Society of men as agreeing in the same kind of inward apprehensions of, and ex∣ternal demeanour towards, the Divine Nature: to which may be oppo∣sed the word TEMPORAL, Civil, Humane, Secular, Lay, Prophane. Notions of this kind, may be distinguished into such as do denote KINDS OF RELIGION. I. Persons; in regard of their ECCLESIASTICAL CALLINGS. II. STATES OF RELIGION. III. Actions; belonging to WORSHIP. IV. DISCIPLINE. V. INSTITUTIONS. VI. I. RELI∣GION.I. That habit of reverence towards the Divine nature, whereby we are inabled and inclined to serve and worship him after such a manner as we conceive most acceptable to him, is called RELIGION, Piety, God∣liness. The Privation of which is styled ATHEISM, Irreligion, Impiety. Men are distinguished by their kinds of Religion into such as Are wholly without any revelation of the true God and his Worship; but that knowledge which they have is either Simple, from the dictates of mere Reason. 1. NATURAL RELIGION. Mixed, and corrupted with the worship of false gods. 2. PAGANISM, Heathenism, Ethnic, Infidel, Gentil, Painim. Have revelations: or pretend to them; whether by Moses, in which they rest. 3. JUDAISM, Iudaical, Iew. Christ and his Apostles, added to Moses. 4 CHRISTIANITY. Mahomet, superadded to the rest. 5. MAHOMETISM, Turcism.
II. Those who apply themselves to the businesses of Religion as their particular Calling, may be stiled ECCLESIASTICAL PERSONS,II. ECCLE∣SIASTICAL PERSONS. Cler∣gy, Churchman, spiritual, Hierarchy. To which may be opposed, TEMPORAL, Lay-ic, civil, secular, pro∣phane. These may be distinguished into such as are Injoyned; being set apart to some peculiar function in the Church, and by way of office devoted to assist in the duties of Religion, whether such as were in use Before the Law; being ‖ the chief Administrators of religious Services, as Masters of Families: or such others as then and since were extraor∣dinarily called and gifted to foretell future things. 1. PATRIARCH. PROPHET-ical, divine, prophesie, foretell, presage, prognosticate, Prediction, Seer, Sibyl. Vnder the Law; ‖ appointed for the principal works of divine Service: or such as were subordinate and assistant to them. 2. PRIEST. LEVITE-ical. Vnder the Gospel; being either Temporary; ‖ who were first indued with the power of Miracles, of whom there were onely twelve: or such others as these took in for their help, to travel up and down for the spreading of Christianity. 3. APOSTLES-ical. EVANGELISTS-ical, Gospel. Permanent, and to be continued; whether More principal; denoting the chief Ecclesiastical Officer ‖ of a Pro∣vince, with several Cities: or some particular City and the Terri∣tory adjoyning. 4. PRIMATE, Arch bishop, Metropolitan, Mufty, Patriarch, Pro∣vince. BISHOP, Prelate, Ordinary, Episcopal-acy, Suffragan, Superin∣tendent, Pontificial, Diocess, See, Cathedral, Mitre, Crosyer, Hie∣rarchy. Less principal; such as are ‖ the chief Officers of particular Parish-churches: or others subordinate and assistant to these. 5. PRESBYTER, Priest, Elder, Minister, Incumbent, Curate, Chaplain, Parson. DEACON, Minister. Not injoyned; but voluntary, to be further distinguished, according to the General name; denoting those that are under a vow of Poverty, Coe∣libate, and obedience to their Superiours, to whom may be adjoyn∣ed for affinity, such others as oblige themselves to certain offices with them. 6. REGULAR, Religious Person, order, rule. PENITENTS, Confraternity, Convert. Particular kinds; such as live either ‖ together in Society: or alone by themselves. 7. MONK, Frier-ry, Nunn-ery, Novice, Abbot, Abbess, Abby, Prior-ry, Ge∣neral, Provincial, Gardian, Monastic, Monastery, Minster, Cloister, Covent, Society, Cowle, Father. HERMIT, Anchorite, Cell, Recluse.
III. STATES OF RELIGI∣ON.III. Persons considered according to their several STATES and Conditions in respect OF RELIGION, may be distinguished either by their Faith and Iudgments; whether ‖ true, or false, as to the essential points of Religion. 1. ORTHODOX, Believer. HERETIC-al, Heresie, Miscreant. Charity to and communion with the body of those that agreee in the same Profession: or being the faulty cause of the breach of such Communion. 2. CATHOLIC, Communicant, Communion, Son of the Church. SCHISMATIC, Schism-atical, Sect-ary, Recusant, Separate. Suffering upon the account of Religion; being either Great, but not unto Death. 3. CONFESSOR. Great unto Death. To which may be opposed the inflicter of suffer∣ings upon account of Religion. 4. MARTYR-dom. PERSEQUUTOR: Eminent degrees of ‖ Religiousness: or Irreligiousness. 5. SAINT, Hero-ical, canonize. SCANDAL-ous, profligate, Offence. Former state, in respect of the several terms from which and to which men are changed; either ‖ from bad to good: or from good to bad. 6. CONVERT, Proselyte, regenerate, reclaim, turn, come over. APOSTATE, Back-slider, Renegado, Defection, revolt, draw back, turn, forsake, fall away, relapse, Fugitive, Tergiversation. IV. That inward and outward reverence whereby we acknowledge the Esteem due to the Superiority and Excellency of another,IV. WOR∣SHIP. together with the two extremes of this, viz. Redundant, when men give this to such things as they ought not for the Matter, or in such a degree as they ought not for the Measure; and Deficient, when men do either contemn or neg∣lect sacred things and duties, are styled WORSHIP, Adoration, Veneration, Devotion, devout, Liturgy, Divine service, Mattins, Vespers, Even-song. SUPERSTITION, Bigot. PROPHANENESS, Impiety, impious, ungodly. The more special acts of Worship may be distinguished into such as are more Ordinary and constant; whereby we Apply our selves to God; whether more General; whereby we ‖ address to him for relief in all our wants and fears, upon the belief of his infinite Goodness and Power: or making solemn and religious promises to him. 1. PRAYER, Invocation, Collect, Orizon, Oratory, Ejaculation, call upon. VOW, Votary, devoted.
Special; whereby we do either ‖ Acknowledge our own faults and deserts: or intreat his favour and help. 2. CONFESSION, acknowledge, Shreeve. PETITION, supplicate, sue, beg, Litany, crave, request, Supply∣ant, Bedes-man, Boon. Return our acknowledgements to him for the good things we enjoy; either ‖ more general: or by Singing. 3. THANKSGIVING, praise, magnifie, extol, Grace. PSALM, Hymn, Anthem. Instruct others publicly, or excite them to religious duties; either ‖ in a more continued solemn Discourse: or by the asking and answering of Questions in the plainest manner about the most necessary points of Religion. 4. PREACHING, Homily, Sermon, Postil, Pulpit. CATECHISING, Catechism. Occasional; relating unto Solemnities of ‖ joy: or sadness. 5. FESTIVITY, Festival, Holy-day, High-day, Sabbath, Iubilee, Wake, genial, good time. FASTING, Humiliation, Ember-week, Lent, Vigil, Eve. Ritual Offices observed amongst Christians; pertaining to Entrance into the state of Wedlock: or dissolving of that state. 6. MARRIAGE, Wedd-ing, Matrimony, nuptial, Bride-groom, Hymen. DIVORCE. Return into the Congregation after Parturition. 7. CHURCHING. Actual taking upon themselves the Obligation made by their Sponsors in Baptism. 8. CONFIRMATION. Performing the Rites due to the Dead by putting their bodies ‖ into the ground: or under some Monument, to preserve the memorial of them. 9. BURYING, interr, Grave, Funeral, Obit, Obsequies, Herse, Se∣pulture, Church-yard, Charnel-house. ENTOMBING, Tomb, Sepulchre, Monument, Epitaph.
V. DISCI∣PLINE.V. Actions relating to Ecclesiastical Authority or DISCIPLINE, do concern the due ordering of the circumstances of Ecclesiastical or Sa∣cred things to the best convenience. The Notions belonging to this Head, do refer either to the work of, Setting things aside to a peculiar use; according to the More general Notion belonging to Things, and Times, and Places, as well as Persons; namely, the ‖ separating of them from common use: or abusing them as being but common. 1. CONSECRATION, sacred, sanctifie, hallow, devote, dedicae, Holiness. PROPHANATION, unhallowed, impious, common, Lustration. More particular kind, appropriated to Persons. 2. ORDINATION, Consecration, DEPRIVATION, depose. Regulating of abuses in Ecclesiastical matters; according to the more General name. 3. CENSURE. Particular kinds; consisting in a Temporary privation of Church-priviledges. 4. SUSPENSION. Permanent, being the highest Ecclesiastical punishment; by a ‖ cutting off from all Church-communion and privileges: or the re∣storing one so cut off. 5. EXCOMMUNICATION, Anathema, Curse, cut off, separate. ABSOLVTION, loosing, discharge, assoile, purge, clear pardon, acquit. VI. INSTI∣TUTIONS.VI. By INSTITUTIONS or Ordinans are properly meant such kinds of things or duties as we could not have known or been obliged unto without particular Revelation. These may be distinguished into Rules for our Instruction in Religion; which, according to the several manners of conveyance, were either ‖ written: or unwritten. 1. SCRIPTURE, Bible, Word of God, Holy Writ, Text, Testa∣ment. TRADITION, Delivery, Cabala. Services to be done; according to the more General name; consisting in our offering or giving things unto God. 2. OBLATION, Offering, Offertory. Particular kind, proper to the times under the Law; which required the offering of such things by Fire as were either ‖ for Food: or for Perfume. 3. SACRIFICE, Victim, Holocaust, Host, Oblation, Hecatombe. INCENSE, Censor. Certain external signs and means for the signifying and conveying of in∣ternal spiritual Grace; according to the more General name. 4. SACRAMENT-al. Particular kinds. Vnder the Law; for the ‖ initiating: or confirming men in that Re∣ligion. 5. CIRCUMCISION, Cutting off the fore-skin. PASSOVER. Paschal, Easter. Vnder the Gospel; whether for ‖ initiating: or confirming. 6. BAPTISM, Christen, Font, Paedobaptism EUCHARIST, Communion, the Lord's Supper, The Sacrament, Host, Mass, Missal.
CHAP. XII. I. A general Explication of the design of the foregoing Tables. II. Par∣ticular Instances in the six principal heads of it. III. Some things to be noted concerning Opposites and Synonyma. IV. An enume∣ration of what kinds of things are not to be particularly provided for in such tables. THe principal design aimed at in these Tables, is to give a sufficient enumeration of all such things and notions,§. I▪ as are to have names assigned to them, and withall so to contrive these as to their order, that the place of every thing may contribute to a description of the nature of it. Denoting both the General and the Particular head under which it is placed; and the Common difference whereby it is distinguished from other things of the same kind. It would indeed be much more convenient and advantageous, if these Tables could be so contrived, that every difference amongst the Predica∣ments might have a transcendental denomination, and not depend at all upon a numerical institution. But I much doubt, whether that Theory of things already received, will admit of it; nor doth Language afford convenient terms, by which to express several differences. It were likewise desirable to a perfect definition of each species, that the immediate form which gives the particular essence to every thing might be expressed; but this form being a thing which men do not know, it cannot be expected that it should be described. And therefore in the stead of it, there is reason why men should be content with such a description by properties and circumstances, as may be sufficien to deter∣mine the primary sense of the thing defined. Of these descriptions I shall re give an instance under each of the six Principal Heads.§. II. The word Goodness is a transcendental,TRANS∣CENDEN∣TAL. one of the General differences of things, or affections of entity, implying a respect to something with∣out it self, namely, to the Will, by agreement to which things are ren∣dered lovely and desirable, as by their disagreement they are rendered hateful and avoidable, which is the opposite notion of Evil. The word Diamond doth by its place in the Tables appear to be a Substance, a Stone, a pretious Stone, transparent, colourless,SUB∣STANCE. most hard and bright. The word Flower or blossom is one of the peculiar parts, belonging to Plants, an annual part, more principal, antecedent to the seed, considera∣ble for its beauty and colour. The words Newness and Oldness do signifie notions belonging to Quan∣tity, to space, to time, and more particularly to time past,QUANTITY. according to the degrees of less or greater, as the next pair, soonness and lateness, doth relate to time future, according to the same degrees of Less or Greater. The word Moderation is a Quality, a Habit,QUALITY. an Affection of intel∣lectual
virtue, whereby we are concerned for any truth▪ according to a due measure, not more or less then the evidence and importance of it doth require, to which the notion of fierceness or fanaticalness is opposed as the dficient extreme. ACTION.The word Pitty, doth by its place denote an Action, spiritual, of the soul in respect of the Appetite, whose actions are commonly stiled Af∣fections or Passions: 'Tis a mixed Passion, consisting of Grief and Love, occasioned by some evil, which (as we think) doth unworthily befall others. As Envy doth of Grief and Hate upon account of some good befalling others (as we think) unworthily. RELATION.The word Parent by the place of it in the Tables, doth denote the thing thereby signified▪ to be a Relation, Oeconomical, of Consanguinity, direct ascending; as Child is direct descending. And thus is it with all those other particulars, which are placed either directly or collaterally, either by way of Opposition or of Affinity. Only 'tis here to be noted. §. III.1. That some of those which are placed as Opposites, do not alwayes fall out to be under the same Predicament or Genus with those things to which they are adjoyned; as it must be in such things as are privatively opposed, as Blindness, Deafness, Darkness, &c. And so likewise for some of those species which are put in for their affinity, as Point, Center, Pole, and such other things as are not directly, but reductively only under any predicament. 2. That some Radixes, besides the redundant and deficient extremes, have likewise an Opposite common; so to the word Iustice, there is oppo∣sed an Opposite common, Injustice, besides the excess Rigor, and the defect Remission. So to Veracity, the Opposite common is lying; which may be either by way of Excess, over-saying, boasting, flattering: or of Defect, under-saying, detraction. So to Equality, the Opposite common is Inequality, imparity, disparity; the excess of which is Superiority, and the defect In∣feriority. This is natural to all Radixes that have double Opposites, though instituted Languages have not provided words to express it. 3. Many of the Synonymous word put to the Radixes, are referred to more heads then one, upon account of their various equivocal accep∣tions. And besides such words or phrases as are more plainly Synony∣mous, there is likewise an addition of such other, as are either more im∣mediate derivations, whether Adjectives, Verbs, Adverbs: or more medi∣ate, being by composition to be made off from those Radixes to which they are adjoyned: Of which I shall give an instance or two, under each of the six general Heads. TRAN∣SCENDEN∣TALS.In the Table of Transcendentals, T. III. 2. the Radical is GOOD∣NESS, to which these other words are adjoyned, Weal, welfare, right, re∣gular, well, rectifie, better, best. Amongst which, the words Weal, welfare, are mentioned as Synonoma, denoting such a state of being as is desira∣ble, and are supposed to be Substantives Neuter. Well-doing or Good action, is the Substan. Act. The words Good, right, regular, are the Positive adjectives from the root. Better, best, are the Comparative and Superlative adjectives. Well, right, &c. are the Adverbs. Rectifie is good make, and to be expressed by composition with the Transcendental particle of Cause. So for the Opposite to this, EVINESS to which these words are ad∣joyned,
Ill, bad, naught, wrong, amiss, shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid, horrible, corrupt, pravity, deprave, sin, fault, trespass, transgress-ion, Peccadillo, worse. Amongst which, the words Badness, pravity, are Synonymous to the Ra∣dicals, and supposed to be Substantives newter. The words Sin, fault, trespass, trangression, will be Substan. Act. which being compounded with the Transcendental Particle, Diminutive or Augmentative, will denote a Peccadillo or small fault, or an Enormity or heinous crime. The words Evil ill, bad, naught, wrong, corrupt, are Adjectives of this root, and being compounded with the Transcendental Particle of Augmentative, will be of the same importance with those other words, Shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid, horrible, &c. The words Ill, amiss, wrong, badly, naughtily, are the Adverbs. The words denoting to sin, trespass, transgress, are the Verb. Act. which being compounded with the Transcendental Particle of Cause, will signifie Corrupt, deprave. So in the Tables of Substance, Be. II. 1. the Radical is KINE,SUB∣STANCE. signify∣ing the Bovinum genus; the other words reduced to it are, Bull, Cow, Ox, Calf, Heifer, Bullock, Steer, Beef, Veal, Runt, Bellow, Low, Heard, Cowheard. Some of which are to be made off from this root by compositions with the Transcendental Particles. So the Root Kine with the Tran∣scendent. Part. will signi∣fie Male. Bull, Bullock, Steere. Female. COW, Heifer, Steere. Young. Calf. Voice Bellow, Low. Dimin. Runt. Aggregate Heard. Officer. Cowheard. The rest are to be made off by other Compositions: So Ox is untesticled or gelt Bull; Beef, Veal, is the flesh of Kine or Calf. Be. II. 2 The Radical is SHEEP; to which are adjoyned the words, Ram, Yew, Lamb, Weather, Mutton, Bleat, Fold, Flock, Shepheard. Each of which words are to be made off from this radical, y some kind of compo∣sitions. The word Sheep being compounded with the Transcend. Particle of will signi∣fie Male. Ram. Female. Yew. Young. Lamb. Voice. Bleating. Sepiment. Fold, Sheepfold. Aggregate. Flock. Officer. Shepheard. Gelt Ram is Weather, Flesh of Sheep is Mutton. Mag. III. A. the Radical is FIGURE,QUANTITY. to which these other words are annexed, viz. Shape, Feature, Fashion, Form, Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the make, well set or proportioned, transform, transfigure, deface, disfigure. Amongst which the former words, Shape, Feature, Fashion, Form, Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the make, are, according to one of those senses wherein each of them is commonly used, the more mediate Synonyma, the rest are to be made off by composition, either with Transcendental particles of the word change, transform, transfigure. Perfective, well-set or proportioned. Corruptive, defaced, disfigured. Sp. I. 1. The Radical is PRESENT, to which is adjoyned, at this time, now, immediately, instantly, current, ready. The more immediate Synony∣ma
are, This time or instant. The words Current, ready, are Adjectives. Now, immediately, instantly, are the Adverbs of this root. One of the Opposites to this Radical, is PAST, or time past; to which these other words are put, Expired, former, foregone, ago, already, even now, heretofore gone, over, out, a-late, erewhile, long since, which are thus to be made off. The words Expired, former, foregone, over, out, are the Adje∣ctives of this root. The words already, heretofore, out, are the Adverbs, which being compounded with the Transcendental Particle. Augment. will sig∣nifie. A great while ago, long since. Dimin. will sig∣nifie. Even now, a-late, erewhile, a little while ago. The other Opposite is FUTURE, to which these words are adjoyn∣ed, Time to come, after time, hereafter, presently, anon, by and by, shortly▪ strait∣way, ere long, henceforth, process of time, after a long while. Amongst which these words or phrases, Time to come, after time, process of time, are Syno∣nymous substantives. Hereafter, henceforth, are Adverbs, which being com∣pounded with the Transcendental Particle of Augment▪ will sig∣nifie After a long while. Diminut. will sig∣nifie Presently, by and by, anon, shortly, straitway, ere long. Sp. II. 3. is the Radical NEARNESS, to which these other words are added, Vicinity, Propinquity, Proximity, nigh, next▪ close, adjacent, adjoyn, neighbouring, imminent, impendent, immediate, ready at hand, accost, draw on, approach, at, by, hard by, beside, hithermost. Amongst which, the words Vici∣nity, Propinquity, Proximity, are Synonymous substantives. Nigh, close, ad∣jacent, adjoyning, neighbouring, imminent, impendent, immediate, next, hi∣thermost, are Adjectives. By, hard by, at, at hand, besides, are Adverbs. Approach, accost, draw neer or on, are Verbs. So for the Opposite to this, REMOTENESS, to which are adjoyned the words, farr, farther, aloof, wide of, distant, utmost, ultimate, great way off. Amongst which the words, far, farther, distant, utmost, ultimate, are Ad∣jectives. Aloof, wide of, a great way off, are Adverbs. QUALITY.NP. II. 3. the radical word is MEMORY, to which these other words are adjoyned, Recollect, recal commemorate, remember, call or come to mind, put in mind, suggest, record, recount, con over, getting by heart, by rote, without book, at ones fingers ends, memorable, Memorial, Memorandum, mindful. Amongst which the words, Remember, commemorate, record, re∣count, are Verbs, which being compounded with the Transc. Particle. Cause, will signifie Suggest, put in mind, or cause to remember. Endea∣vour. will sig∣nifie. For the present, Recal, recollect, call to mind. Endea∣vour. will sig∣nifie. For the future, Con over, get by heart, by rote, &c. Mindful is an Adject. Neut. Memorable is an Adj. Pass. Abstr. Memoran∣dum, Memorial, is to be compounded with the Transcend. Part. Sign, de∣noting a Sign for remembrance. NP. V. 9. the Radical is SWIFTNESS, to which these other words are adjoyned, Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, fast, apace, quick, sudden, rapid, hur∣ry, accelerate, hasten, cursory, hye, expedite, run, scud, whisk, post. Amongst which the words, Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, are Synonymous subst. Quick, sudden, fast, rapid, expedite, cursory, are Adj. Apace, quickly-er, are Adverbs. Hye, hasten, run, post, hurry, scud, whisk, are Verbs. Accelerate, expedite, as also hasten, hurry, when they denote a Transitive efficiency, are to be expressed by composition with the Transc. article of Cause or make. So for the Opposite to this, SLOWNESS; to which are adjoyned
the words, Heaviness, slackness, dull, slugg, tardy, leasurely, softly, dilatory, retard, foreslow, delay, Lob, Lubber, lumpish, Lurdan, torpid, unwieldy, gingerly. The words, Slackness, heaviness, are Synonymous substantives. Dull, slug∣gish, tardy, lumpish, torpid, unwieldy, dilatory, are the Adjectives of this root; which being compounded with the Transc. partic. of Person, will be of the same signification with those other words, Slugg, Lob, Lubber, Lurdan. The words, Slowly, leasurely, softly, gingerly, are the Adverbs of this Radical. Retard, soreslow, delay, are the Verbs. So Man. I. O. the Radical word is VICE; to which these other words are reduced, Sin, Crime, Dishonesty, Improbity, Trespass, Transgression, Fault, Failing, Infirmity, oversight, turpitude, unrighteous, unjust, vile, base, loose, evil, ill, bad, naught, corrupt, venial, wicked, heinous, debaucht, lewd, law∣less, licentious, fowl, flagitious, enormous, Profligate, Miscreant, Ruffian, Cai∣tiff, Villain, Rakehell, Libertine, defile, pollute, which are thus to be made off from this root. The words Sin, Dishonesty, Improbity, are Subst. N. Trespass, Transgression, are Substant. Ad. which Substantives being com∣pounded with the Transcendental Particle. Augment will sig∣nifie Crime, Enormity, Turpitude. Dim will sig∣nifie Fault, Infirmity, Failing, Oversight. Evill, ill, bad, naught, corrupt, vicious, unrighteous, unjust, are the Ad∣ject. Neut. which being compounded with the Transcend. Particle, Augment. will be of the same importance with those other words, Base, Foul, Lewd, Filthy, debauched, flagitious, Enormious, profligate, heinous, mortall. If it be compounded with the Transcendental Par∣ticle Dim▪ it will signifie Venial. If with the Transc. Partic. for Per∣son, it signifies, Ruffian, Villain, Rake-hell, Libertine, Miscreant, Caitiffe. Corrupt, defile, pollute, debauch, are the Verb compounded with the Transcendental Particle of Cause, or Make. In the Tables of Action. AS. V.4. O. The Radical is GRIEF;ACTION▪ to which are adjoyned the words, Sadness, Sorrow, Melancholy, Heaviness, dolefull, deplorable, disconsolate, bitter, pensive, dejected, tragical, rufull, amort, moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, dump, cast down, vex, trouble, Cutt, take on, whimper, pule, woe, agony, anguish, mourn, cry, take heavily. Which are thus to be made off from the Root. The Words. Sadness, sorrow, Heaviness, Melancholy, Trouble, are Synonymous Subst. which being compounded with the Transc. Particle Augmentative, will express those other words, Anguish, woe, Agony. Pensive, sad, Heavy, Melancholy, sorrowfull, dejected, disconsolate, cast down, are Adjectives; which being compounded as the former, will be of the same importance with those other words, Dolefull, rufull, bitter, tragical. Deplorable, dolefull, may be the Adject. P. Abst. Moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, mourn, cry, plain, are the Verb of this Root, which in some Acceptions is to be compounded with the Transcendental Particle of Sign. Take on, take heavily, Verbs to be compounded with the Transcendental Particle Augment. whimper, pule, whine, Verbs to be compounded with the Transcendental Particle Dimin. Vex, Cut, cast down, are Verbs Active. Dump, all amort, to be compounded with the Transc. Partic. Impetus.
AC. I. 7. O. The Radical is DYING; to which these other words are adjoyned, Death, deadly, mortall, fatall, dye, decease, depart▪ expire▪ give up the ghost, defunct, kill, slay, mortifie, dispatch, slaughter, mortality, Capital; which are thus to be made off. Death is Subst. N. Mortality is Subst. N. Abst. Slaughter is the Subst. compounded with the Particle Cause. Dead, defunct, is Adj N. Deadly, fatall, mortall, capital, is Adj. A. Abst. Dye, decease, depart, expire, give up the Ghost, is the Verb; which being compounded with the Transcendental Particle Cause or make, will signifie to Kill, slay, dispatch, mortifie. AC. III. 1. The Radical is SPEAKING; to which these words are ad∣joyned, Talke, utter-ance, mention, Elocution, pronounce, express, deliver, Pro∣lation, Spokesman, effable, voluble, fluent say, tell, mutter, mumble, jabber, jar∣gon, Vein, Grammar, Rhetoric, Oratory, Eloquence, Prolocutor, nuncupative, by word of mouth. Talking, Telling, Saying, Expressing, Delivering, Mentioning, are Substant. Synonymous to the Radical; which being compounded with the Transc. Particle of Manner, will denote the sense of those other words which denote a respect to the mode of speaking, viz. Elocution, Pronunciation, Vtterance, Vien: And being compounded with the Particle Officer, it signifies, Proloquutor. If with the Particle Art, it may denote the seve∣ral Acts of speaking. So the Art of speaking congruously is Grammar; ornately is Rhetoric, Eloquence; Perswadingly is Oratory, Eloquence. If with the Particle Corruptive, it may signifie, Muttering, Mumbling, Iabber, Iargon. The words Fluency, Volubility, are the Subst. Abst. Act. with the Particle Perfective. Nuncupative-ly, by word of mouth, are the Adj. and Adv. of this root. Talk, tell, say, utter, are the Verbs. Spokesman, is the pro, or instead, speaking person. AC. III. 7. The Radical is WRITING; to which these other words are annexed, Penning, Drawing, Engrossing, Hand, Manuscript, subscribe, su∣perscribe, inscribe, transcribe, postscript, interline, indorse, scrawle, scrible, Penman, Scribe, Scrivener, Secretary, Clerk, Note, Ticket, Docket, Shorthand, Tachygraphy, Brachygraphy, Cryptography, set ones hand, set down, take or put in writing, enter into book. Which words are thus to be made off from this root. The words Pen∣ning, drawing, and the Phrases, set ones hand, take or put in writing, enter into book, are the more immediate Synonyma of the Radical. Hand, Ma∣nuscript, draught, are the Substantive Passive. The Words Scribe, Penman, Writer Adj. Act. Secretary, Clerk, Scribe Adj. Act. Scrivener. Adj. Act. Note, Ticket, Docket Adject. Pas. Short-hand, Brachygra∣phy, Stenography Subst. Tachygraphy Subst. Cryptography Subst. Engrss, write out fair Verb Scrible, scrawl Verb Subscribe, superscribe, inscribe, &c. are the Verb, compounded with the Prepositions▪ Sub, super, in, &c. with the Transc. Partic. Person Officer Mechanic Thing Art of Short W Speedy W Secret W Perfective Corruptive
In the Tables of Relation. RO. I. 2. The Radical is PARENT;RELATION. to which are adjoyned the words Sire, Father, Mother, Damm, paternal, ma∣ternal, Grandsire, &c. Orphan, which are thus to be expressed, Sire, Father are Parent Male Mother, Damm are Parent Female Paternal, Maternal, are the Adjectives of Father, Mother; Grandsire is Fathers Father, or second Father; Orphan is un-parented. So for the Opposite Radical CHILD; to which these other words are adjoyned, Issue, Son, Daughter, Brood, Litter, filial, adopt, posthume, which are thus to be expressed. Issue, Brood, Litter By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Kind Son By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Male Daughter By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Female Adopt By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Cause Filial is the Adj. Posthume is a Child born after the Parents Death. RC. I. 2. The Radical is KING; to which these words are adjoyned, Soveraign, Emperor, Imperial, Monarch, Queen, regall, royal-ty, Majesty, Reign, Kingdom, Lord, Dynasty▪ Sultan, Cham, Liege Lord, Regent, Realm, Dia∣dem, Crown, Coronation, Scepter, Throne, inthrone, Viceroy. Which are thus to be made off. The Radical being a Substantive of the Person, these other words must be Synonymous to it, viz. Soveraign, Monarch▪ Emperor, Lord, Liege Lord, Sultan, Cham, Regent. The word Emperor being sometimes used for such a one as hath other Kings under his Dominion, may according to this notion of it, be expressed by com∣position, with the Transc. Particle of Augmentative. Queen by the Par∣ticle Foem. Majesty, Royalty, are Subst. Abst. Regal, royal, Soveraign, Im∣perial, are the Adject. N. Realm, Kingdom, are the Adj. Pass. with the Particle, Thing. The Reign is the Subst. Act. To Reign is the Verb. Viceroy, Regent, is Adj Act. with Trans. Part. Person and the Preposition Pro, or instead. Crown, Diadem, is Head-Sign of Majesty. Scepter is Staff-Sign of Majesty. Throne is Royal Seat. Coronation, inthroning, is solem∣nity of King-making, or King-declaring. By these Instances, it may appear, what course is to be taken, with that great variey of Words, adjoyned to other Radicals. The things and notions provided for in these Tables,§. IV. are such only as are of a more simple nature; others that are of a more mixed and com∣plicated signification, are to be expressed periphrastically, as may be seen in the Dictionary. Such words only, are absolutely necessary for such a design, as are purely simple; which if they could be acurately distingui∣shed, would be much fewer then those here enumerated; But for the preventing of frequent and large periphrases, it may be convenient to take in some others that are not purely simple. There are some kinds of things that are not capable of being provided for in a Character and Language, proposed for Universal use, as namely all such as are appropiated to particular Places or Times. I. Such as are peculiar to some particular place or Nation, As 1. Titles of Honour, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, Baronet, Knight, Esquire, &c. Which are to be expressed by the several degrees which they belong to in the Nobilitas Major, or Minor. 2. Titles of Office and Plce, as Sheriff, Maior, Bayliff, &c. Master,
Warden, President, Provost, Principal, Rector, &c. which are all to be expressed by the common notion of Prefecture. 3. Degrees in Professions, Doctor, Master, Bachelour, Serjeant at Law, Barrister, &c. 4. Law Terms of Tenures, Writ, &c. Copyhold, Freehold, Knights-service, &c. Habeas corpus, nisi prius, Defeasance, Certiorari, Replevin, supersedeas, Subpaena, &c. 5. To which may be added the several terms of Heraldry, as Fess, Che∣vron, &c. which are not common to all Nations. II. Such as are continually altering, according to several ages and times, As 1. Vests and Garments, to which there are every day new names as∣signed, according as several fashions do arise. 2. Kinds of Stuffs, as Baise, Flannel, Serge, Kersey, Grograin, Tammy, Tabby, Sattin, Plush, Velvet, Tiffany, Lawn, Douless, Canvas, Buc∣krom, &c. Diaper, Damask, &c. which are to be periphrastically ex∣pressed by their matter and figure. 3. Games and Plays, of which the old ones do continually grow into disuse, and every age produceth new kinds. 4. Drinks, The Wines of several Countries, and Grapes, as Malmsey Muskadell, &c. And so for other made Drink, as Tei, Coffi, Chocolate, Rambuze, Syllabub, &c. 5. Meats, as several prepared Dishes, Cullace, Bisk, Oglia, &c. The variety of Breads, Bisket, Cracknel, Bunn, Simnel, &c. Several confe∣ctions, as Marmalade, Codigny, &c. Confections in Physick, as Diascor∣dium, Mithridate, &c. 6. Tunes for Musick, or Dauncing, as Coranto, Galliard, Sarabrand, Jig, Pavan, Almain, &c And so for the various kinds of Musical Instru∣struments, Sackbut, Hauboy, Cornet, Lute, Theorbo, Viol, Cittern, &c. 7. The names of several Tools belonging to Trades, which are not the same in all Nations, and are every day multiplyed. 8. To which may be added the names of divers sects, whether Phi∣losophical, Political, or Religious; which are various according to se∣veral places and Times, many of them being derived from the names of Persons, and therefore not to be provided for in such a Theory of things as is proposed for Universal use. But as any of these may be periphra∣stically expressed in the Latin, or in the Language of any other Nation, which has no one word for them; so may they likewise, with the same facility be described in a Philosophical Character or Language.
PART. III. Concerning Natural Grammar. CHAP. I. 1. Concerning the several kinds and Parts of Grammar. 2. Of Etymo∣logy, the general Scheme of Integralls and Particles. 3. Of Nouns in general. 4. Of Substantives Common, denoting either Things, Acti∣ons, or Persons. 5. Rules concerning Nouns of Action. 6. Of Sub∣stantive abstracts. 7. Of Adjectives according to the true Philosophi∣cal notion of them. 8. The true notion of a Verb. 9. Of derived Adverbs. 10. A general Scheme of the fore-mentioned Derivations. HAving now dispatched the second thing proposed to be treated of, namely, the Scientifical part,§ I. containing a regular enumeration and description of such things and notions, as are to be known, and to which names are to be assigned, which may be stiled Vniversal Philosophy; I proceed in the next place to the Organical part, or an enquiry after such kind of necessary helps, whereby as by instruments we must be assisted in the forming these more simple notions into complex Pro∣positions and Discourses, which may be stiled Grammar, containing the Art of Words or Discourse. Grammar may be distinguisht into two kinds; 1. Natural, and Ge∣neral; 2. Instituted and Particular. 1. Natural Grammar, (which may likewise be stiled Philosophi∣cal, Rational, and Universal) should contain all such Grounds and Rules, as do naturally and necessarily belong to the Philosophy of letters and speech in the General. 2. Instituted and Particular Grammar, doth deliver the rules which are proper and peculiar to any one Language in Particular; as about the Inflexion of words, and the Government of cases, &c. In the Latin, Greek,De Causis L. L. Cap. 76. &c. and is defined by Scaliger to be scientia loquendi ex usu. The first of these only is upon this occasion to be considered. It hath been treated of but by few, which makes our Learned Verulam put it among his Desiderata; I do not know any more that have pur∣posely written of it, but Scotus in his Grammatica speculativa, and Caramuel in his Grammatica Audax, and Campanella in his Grammatica Philosophica. (As for Schioppius his Grammar, of this title, that doth wholly concern the Latin tongue;) Besides which, something hath been occasionally spoken of it, by Scaliger in his book de causis linguae latinae; and by Vossius in his Aristarchus. But to me it seems, that all these Authors in some measure (though some more then others) were so far prejudiced by the common Theory of the languages they were acquainted with, that they did not sufficiently abstract their rules
according to Nature. In which I do not hope, that this which is now to be delivered can be faultless; it being very hard, (if not im∣possible) wholly to escape such prejudices: yet I am apt to think it less erroneous in this respect then the rest. The parts of Grammar are principally these three. 1. Concerning the kinds of words, or those several modes and re∣spects, according to which the names of things may be varied in their Acceptions; being made either derivative Nouns, or Adverbs; toge∣ther with their several inflexions and compositions; which may be stiled Etymology. 2. Concerning the proper union or right construction of these into Propositions or sentences; which is called Syntax. 3. Concerning the most convenient marks or sounds for the ex∣pression of such names or words; whether by writing, Orthography; or by speech, Orthoepy. § II.The first of these concerning the Doctrine of Words, may refer either, 1. To the formal differences or kinds of them; or, 2. To the Accidental changes of them, in respect of Inflection, Derivation, Com∣position. Words, according to their formal differences and kinds, may be thus distributed. All words are either Integrals Nouns Substantives Neuter. Active. Passive. Adjectives Neuter. Active. Passive. Adverbs derived Passive. Particles Grammatical Essential and perpetual in every com∣pleat sentence. The Copula. Not essential, but occasional, Substitutive in the room of some Integral, Pronoun. Sentence, or com∣plex part of it Interjection. Connexive, ex∣pressing the Construction of word with word, Preposition. Contexture of sen∣tence with sen∣tence Adverb. Conjunction. Declarative of some Ac∣cident be∣longing to Integral, Article. Copula, Mode. Integral or Cop. Tense. Transcendental. See Chap. 6. By Integrals or Principal words, I mean such as signifie some entire thing or notion: whether the Ens or Thing it self, or the Essence of a thing, as Nouns Neuters, whether concrete or abstract; or the Do∣ing or Suffering of a thing as Nouns Active or Passive; or the manner and affection of it, as Derived Adverds. § III.Those instituted words which men do agree upon for the names and appellations of things, are stiled Nouns.
Every Noun which in conjunction with a Verb makes a compleat sentence, and signifies simply, and per modum subsistentis per se, is called a Substantive. That which signifies per modum Adjuncti, or adjacentis alteri, is called an Adjective. Substantives belong either to one, called Proper: or to many, and are therefore styled Common. The former of these are not to be brought under the rules of any science, because Individuals are Infinite; and therefore such proper names as pertain each to one only, should be esteemed as so many Ar∣ticulate voices, to be expressed by such particular vowels and conso∣nants as will make such respective sounds. Noun Substantives Common are such names as are assigned to the se∣veral kinds or species of things or notions; which,§ IV. though they are very numerous, yet are they capable of being stated and fixed accord∣ing to a Philosophical method, as is endeavoured in the fore-going Ta∣bles. Concerning which these rules are to be observed. 1. Every Radical word in the Tables is supposed to be a Substan∣tive; though they could not all of them be so expressed, because of the defect of proper words for them in the present Languages; upon which account there is a necessity of expressing some of them by Adje∣ctives, and some by an Aggregate of words: but they are all of them to be understood as being simple Substantives. 2. These Radical Substantives may be of various kinds, either 1. Of the Thing. 2. Of the Action or Passion. Or, 3. Of the Person, Besides those other kind of Substantives which proceed from these; whether Abstracts Neuter, as Deity, Regality, &c. or such other Ab∣stracts, whether Active or Passive, as denote a proclivity or capacity, as Amorousness, Amiableness, &c. which are provided for by the Tran∣scendental Particles. 3. When the Radical is a Noun Substantive of the Thing, the most immediate derivations from it, are the Substantives Active and Passive, to be expressed by the mark of Active or Passive upon the Radical. And the Substantive of the person, whether Agent or Patient, by the Adjective, Active or Passive in the Aorist Tense, with the Transcen∣dental mark of Person; So Dux and Calor, Light and Heat, are Sub∣stantives of the Thing▪ Illuminatio and Calefactio, Enlightning, Heat∣ing, are the Substantives Active, or of the Action;  illuminari, cale∣sieri, the being Enlightned and Heated are Substantives Passive: or of the Passion; Illuminator, Calefactor, or illuminans & calefaciens persona, the Enlightner and Heater, are Substantives of the Person agent; Illu∣minatus and Calefactus, the Illuminated or Heated, are Substantives of the Person Patient. 4. When the Radical is a Substantive of the Action, then the Sub∣stantive of the Person, is to be expressed as in the former rule; so Liga∣tio, Pastio, Salivatio; Binding, Feeding, Spitting, are Substantives of the Action; Ligator, Pastor, Salivator; Binder, Feeder, Spitter, are Substantives of the Agent; and Ligatus, Pastus, Salivatus; Bound, Fed, Bespit, are the Substantives of the Patient. And the Substantive of the Thing whether Active or Passive, is in this case to be expressed, by the Adjective, Active or Passive in the Aorist Tense, with the Tran∣scendental
mark of Thing. So Ligans res, a binding thing, is Ligamen∣tum, a Bond or String; and nutriens or pascens res, a nourishing or feeding thing, is nutrimentum, food or nourishment; so ligata res, a bound thing, is Ligatum, a Bundle or Fardle; so excreta or salivata res, is Excrementum, or Saliva, Excrement or Spittle. 5. When the Radical is a Substantive of the Person, then the Sub∣stantive of the Action or Passion (as was said before) are the most immediate derivations from it, and to be expressed by the Mark of Active or Passive upon the Radical; So Magistratus, Rex, Iudex, &c. Magistrate, King, Iudge, &c. are Radicals of the Person; The Sub∣stantives of Action belonging to each of these, are Gubernatio, Regna∣tio, Iudicatio, Governing, Reigning, Iudging; And the Substantive of the Thing whether Active or Passive, is to be expressed by the Adjective Active or Passive in the Aorist Tense, with the Transcendental note of Thing; So Gubernans res a governing thing; regens res a reign∣ing thing; and judicans res a judging thing, viz. A Canon or Rule by which we judge of streight and crooked, right and wrong; So Gubernata res, the governed thing, is Ditio, Territory, Dominion, Ju∣risdiction; Regnata res, is Regnum the Kingdom; Iudicata res, is Iudi∣cium, Judgment. As those names which are assigned to signifie things themselves, and do not denote either Action or Passion, are stiled Nouns neuter: so those names which are assigned to signifie the Doing or Suffering of things are stiled Active or Passive. The same notion which in the Greek and Latin is expressed by the Infinitive Mode Active or Passive, is that which I here intend by the Substantive Active or Passive; and that it may properly be so stiled, I shall endeavour to prove afterwards. Though every Noun Substantive have not an Active or Passive be∣longing to it either in the Greek, Latin, English, &c. yet according to the Nature and Philosophy of things, whatsoever hath an Essence, must likewise have an Act; either of Being or becoming: or of Doing or being done: or of making or being made: to be, or do. And consequently every Radical Substantive which is capable of Action, should have an Active or Passive formed from it, which is commonly called a Verb. As for such things which have not of their own any proper Act of Doing, they are not capable of the derivation of Active and Passive, ob defectum materiae; as in the words Stone, Mettle, &c. But the Verbs belonging to such Radicals can be only Neuter, denoting the Act of Being or becoming; unless when they are compounded with the Transcendental mark of Causatio, which will adde to them a Transi∣tive sense, as Petrifie, Metallifie, &c. § V.As for such other Radicals as are capable of Action or Passion, these Rules are to be observed concerning them. 1. More Generally these two. 1. Things which according to common acception have belonging to them any one proper Act of Doing; their Verbs Actives will denote this Act: For instance, the Verb or Substantive Active of the words Fire, Water, &c. is to burn, wet; and so for those Acts of the several parts, Tongue, Tooth, Mouth, Throat, Foot, Heel, whose active by this
Rule will be to lick, bite, devour, swallow, trample, kick, and the Active of Bow, Gun, is to Shoot as with a Bow, Gun. 2. Things which have not, according to common acception, any one kind of peculiar Act of Doing appropriate to them; the Actives belonging to such things, will signifie in the General to Act or do ac∣cording to the nature of such things. 2. More Particularly these four. 1. The Actives belonging to such Radicals as are Substances, whe∣ther Absolute or Relative, do signifie to Act according to the nature of such Substances; so in absolute Substances, the Active of God, Spi∣rit, Man, will signifie to Act as God, Spirit, Man; and so in Relative Substances, the Active of Father, Iudge, Magistrate, is to Act as a Fa∣ther, Judge, Magistrate. 2. The Actives of Quality, whether Predicamental or Transcen∣dental, do denote the Acts of those species, with particular reference to the differences under which they are placed; So the Active of East, West, Obliquity, &c. being under the difference of Situation, must sig∣nifie to situate a thing Easterly, Westerly, Obliquely. The words of Line, Surface, Body, being under the difference of Dimension; the Active belonging to them must signifie to Dimensionate as either of these. The words under the differences of Figure, must in their Actives signifie to Figure according to such particular shapes. Those under the difference of Time, the Actives of Present, Simul∣taneous, Newness, Oldness, Sooness, &c. must signifie to Act with such respects of Time. The Actives of the Differences and Species under Measure, should regularly signifie to Measure by Number, Magnitude, Gravity, Valour, Duration. The Active of Inch, Foot, Pace, Fathom, is to Measure by Inch, Foot, &c. and so for those other Species of Grane, Drachm, &c. Farthing, Penny, &c. The Active of Minute, Hour, Day, Night, &c. will signifie to conti∣nue for such portions or measures of time, according to the sense of the Difference, Duration, under which these species are placed. The Active of Infancy, Childhood, Adolescency, &c. may signifie to pass the time of one's Infancy, Childhood, Adolescency, &c. 3. The Active of such Radicals as are Qualities, whether Predica∣mental or Transcendental, signifie to do or deal according to the sig∣nification of the said qualities; So the Active of Fidelity, Severity, &c. will signifie to deal or Act, Faithfully, Severely, &c. The Active of Goodness, Evilness, &c. will signifie to Act or Do well or ill, &c. 4. The Active of such Radicals as denote Actions, need no other ex∣plication but this, that some of them are Active Absolute, which in the usual Grammars are stiled Neuter; as Sto, Sedeo, Curro; others Tran∣sitive, denoting a transient efficiency; into which latter kind, the former of these may be changed (as was said before) by composition with the Transcendental mark of Causation. There are several English Verbs, which, without admitting any change by Composition or Inflexion, have both a Neuter and a Tran∣sitive signification; as Corrupt, Feed, Starve, Famish, Move, Rest, Hang, Extend, Shrink, Stagger, Stay, &c. whose sense is to be distinguisht by the construction.
There are some Verbs of the same Natural Philosophical Radix, which are yet expressed by different words, as Laugh, Deride, Weep, Bemoan, must, need, Necessitate, &c. And the different notion of these and such like Verbs, is not capable of being expressed by the Transcen∣dental point of causation: but by placing after them such a Noun Sub∣stantive, or Pronoun Substantive, as may denote the object of those several acts. So the word Laugh, being put without any Substantive following, doth signifie in the Neuter sense the bare act of Laughing; but if the word me or him, &c. doth immediately follow the Verb, then it is to be rendered deride or laugh at, me, him, &c. § VI.Besides those Concrete Substantives, which signifie the Ens or thing it self, there are other Substantives which denote the Essence of things, stiled Abstracts. And these may likewise be distinguished into, Neuter, Active, Passive. That is stiled Neuter which denotes the naked Essence of a thing, without any inclination to Action or Passion, as Deity, Regality. That is stiled an Abstract Active, which implies a proclivity to Action, as Regnativity, Amativeness, or Amorousness. That is called Passive, which denotes a capacity or fitness for re∣ceiving or suffering of Action, as Regibility, Amiableness. Such Radicals as are Concretes, are capable (according to the nature of the things denoted by them) to have all these three kinds of Ab∣stracts formed from them. Whereas such Radicals, as are themselves Abstracts Neuter, (as namely several of those under the Genus's and Differences of Quality and Action) are capable only of the two latter kinds to be formed from them. § VII.As Noun Substantives are the names which are given to things, con∣sidered simply, and as subsisting by themselves: So Noun Adjectives are the names which are given to the Adjunct natures of things, the noti∣on of them consisting in this, that they signifie, the subject or thing to which they are ascribed, to have in it something belonging to the na∣ture or quality of those Adjectives, which are predicated of it, or li∣mited by it. And besides this common notion, they do sometimes likewise in the instituted Languages refer to other notions; as, 1. To aboundance, so the words populous, pretious, sumptuous, &c. so in Latin, fluvius piscosus, aquosa regio. 2. To likeness, so the word dogged, currish, waspish, Seraphicus, Angelicus, &c. 3. To Possession, so Domus regia, a royal house. 4. To the matter of which any thing doth consist; so scutum aheneum, A brazen shield. But each of these notions may be otherwise more distinctly provided for. The two first by the Tran∣scendental marks of Augmentative and Like; and the two next by the prepositions of Possessor and Material cause. And so the true genuine sense of a Noun Adjective will be fixed to consist in this, that it im∣ports this general notion of Pertaining to, or being Affected with. Those Adjectives are stiled Neuters which do not denote either Action or Passion; as Calidus, Lucidus, Hot, Light. Those are stiled Active or Passive, which denote the Action or Pas∣sion of the Adjunct thing or Essence. And because these according to
the common Theory do Participate both of Noun and Verb; there∣fore are they by Grammarians stiled Participles; Active, as Calefaci∣ens, Illuminans, Heating, Enlightning: or Passive, Calefactus, Illumina∣tus, Heated, Illuminated. And as Abstract Substantives, may be formed from the Concrete; so likewise may Adjectives, which are also distinguishable into Neu∣ters Active, Passive. That part of speech, which by our Common Grammarians is stiled a Verb, (whether Neuter,§ VIII. Active or Passive) ought to have no distinct place amongst Integrals in a Philosophical Grammar; because it is re∣ally no other then an Adjective, and the Copula sum affixed to it or con∣teined in it: So Caleo, Calefacio, Calefio, is the same with sum Calidus. Calefaciens. Calefactus. Concerning which Copula, and the use of it; more shall be said hereafter. That kind of word, which is commonly adjoyned to a Verb, to signifie the quality and affection of the Action or Passion,§ IX. is stiled an Adverb; which may be distinguished into Derived and Vnderived. The former of these is here particularly intended, and doth generally belong to Languages. The latter is afterwards treated of amongst the Particles. As every Radical is supposed naturally to have its Adjective, so like∣wise its Adverb; and though no Language in use doth admit of so general a derivation of Adverbs, yet the true reason of this is from their imperfection and deficiency; for the Signs ought always to be adequate unto the things or notions to be signified by them. As Adjectives were before distinguished into Neuter, Active, Passive, so likewise ought Adverbs to be. And as every Adverb is immediately derived from some Adjective, so every kind of Adjective hath some kind of Adverb derived from it. For the more easie understanding of these things, I shall here adjoyn a general Scheme of the fore-mentioned derivations; wherein I shall be necessitated to form several new words according to common analogy. All Integrals are either.§ X. Concrete. Substantive. Neuters  calere vel calor. Lucere vel lux. Heat. Light. Active. Calefactio. A. Illuminatio. Heating. Enlightning. Passive. Calefactio. P. Illuminari. Being Heated. Enlightned. Adjective. Neuter. Calidus. Lucidus. Hot. Light. Active. Calefaciens. Illuminans. Heating. Enlightning. Passive. Calefactus. Illuminatus. Heated. Enlightned. Adverb. Neuter. Calidè. Lucidè. Hotly. Lightly. Active. Calefacienter. Illuminanter. Heatingly. Illuminatingly. Passive. Calefactè. Illuminatè. Heatedly. Illuminatedly. Abstract.
Substantive. Neuter. Caloritas. Luciditas. Hotness. Lightness. Active. Calefactivitas. Illuminativitas. Calefactivity. Illuminativity. Passive. Calefactibilitas. Illuminabilitas. Calefactibility. Illuminability. Adjective. Neuter. Caloritativus. Luciditativus. Caloritative. Luciditative. Active. Calefactivus. Illuminativus. Calefactive. Illuminative. Passive. Calefactibilis. Illuminabilis. Calefactible. Illuminable. Adverb. Neuter. Caloritativè. Luciditativè. Caloritatively. Luciditatively. Active. Calefactivè. Illuminativè. Calefactively. Illuminatatively. Passive. Calefactibiliter. Illuminabiliter. Calefactibly. Illuminably. CHAP. II. 1. Of Particles in general. 2. Of the Copula. 3. Of Pronouns more generally. 4. More Particularly. 5. Of Interjections more gene∣rally. 6. More Particularly. § I.HAving thus explained what is meant by Integral words, which signifie entire things and notions, with the several kinds of them. I proceed in the next place to treat, concerning Particles, or less prin∣cipal words, which may be said to consignifie, serving to circumstan∣tiate and modifie those Integral words, with which they are joyned, being stiled by the Hebrew Grammarians Dictiones. The words of this kind are exceeding numerous and equivocal in all Languages, and add much to the difficulty of learning them. It being a very hard matter to establish the just number, of such as in all kinds are necessary, and to fix to them their proper significations, which yet ought to be done in a Philosophical Grammar. I shall in this Essay, select out of Instituted Languages, such of the several sorts, as I con∣ceive sufficient for this purpose. These were before distinguished, into such as refer, either to Gram∣matical, or Transcendental notion. Those are stiled Grammatical, which supposing words to retain their primary sense, do serve for the circumstantiating of them, either by union, abbreviation, inflexion, or some other way for the quali∣fying of their significations or constructions. The most necessary amongst all the rest, which is essential and per∣petual in every compleat sentence,§ II. is stiled the Copula; which serves for the uniting of the Subject and Predicate in every Proposition. The word Subject I use, as the Logicians do, for all that which goes before the Copula; which if it consist of only one word, then it is the same which Grammarians call the Nominative case. By the word Predicate, I mean likewise all that which follows the Copula in the same sentence, whereof the Adjective (if any such there be) immediately next after the Copula, is commonly incorporated with it in instituted Languages, and both together make up that which Grammarians call a Verb.
Amongst those Particles which are not essential and perpetual, but used according to occasion, some are stiled Substitutive; because they supply the room either, 1▪ Of some Integral word, as Pronouns, or 2. Of some Sentence or complex part of it, as Interjections. As Nouns are notes or signs of things, so Pronouns are of Nouns;§ III. and are therefore called Pronomina, quasi vice Nominum,Jul. Scalig. de caus. L. L. Cap. 127. as being placed commonly instead of Nouns. They represent things either 1. Immediately and in kind, without respect to the names of those things. So when its said, I exhort thee or him: The Pronoun I repre∣sent to our thoughts the person speaking, suppose Iohn; and the words thee, him, the person spoken to or of, suppose William or Thomas. 2. Mediately by their names, which are either 1. Exprest with the Pronoun, as commonly it happens upon the first intimation or mention of the thing; as this or that man or book, and in these cases the Pronouns are commonly called Demonstrative. 2. Supplyed by the Pronouns, as is usual for Brevities sake, at the re∣peating of the mention of a thing lately before spoken of; as he, it, &c. and then the Pronoun is called Relative. Examples of both sorts are to be had in the Grammars of Instituted Languages. More commodiously for our purpose, the Pronouns are to be con∣sidered either according to their, 1. Number. 2. Modifications. 1. As to their Number; there are twelve which may be stiled simple Pronouns, and three other that are Compound. The Simple Pronouns, for the better convenience of and comply∣ance with the Characters, are reduced into these three combinations; whereof the first and last combinations are single, the other double. I. Thou. He. This. Same. Certain one. That. Another. Some one. Any one. Every one. All. Of all which it is to be observed, that they are in some kind or other, Quantitatives; that is to say, every one of these Pronouns makes the whole Proposition, or at least that part of the Proposition, which is affected with it, according to its own nature, to be either Sin∣gular, Indefinite, Particular or Universal. 2. The Modifications of Pronouns, whereby they are varied into different significations, are of two kinds. 1. Possessive, denoting a relation of Propriety or Possession unto the person or thing spoken of, which is applicable to all Pronouns, as I, Mine; Who, Whose, &c. 2. Reduplicative, denoting a particular Emphasis, whereby a word is raised and intended in its signification; as I my self, Thou thy self, &c. Moreover it is to be observ'd, that the Personal Pronouns, and any of the rest being us'd Substantively, are capable of Number and Case; and that all other Pronouns beside the Personal, are capable of Com∣position with the Transcendentals of Person and Thing, of Place, Time and Manner. All these Pronouns I have thought fit to represent more largely un∣der four combinations in these following Tables.
§ IV.The first Combination of Pronouns denoting the three Persons are Substantives, and for their Quantity singular, and cannot properly re∣present any other then Individual being▪ I have here adjoyned to them their plurals, for the sake of their Possessives; ours, yours, theirs, which without them cannot be so conveniently expressed. Sing. Numb. I. Ego me.1. I. me Meus.Poss. My, Mine. Egomet.Redup. Even I. I my self. Ego ipse.Poss. Red. my own. Tu te.2. THOV. Thee. Tuus.P. Thy. Thine. Tu ipse, temet.R. Thy self, even thou. P. R. Thy own. Ille, iste.3. HE. Him. She. Her. Suus, ejus.P. His. Hers. Ipse, se.R. He himself, even he. P. R. His own, her own. Plur. Numb. We, us.Nos. OursNoster. We our selves.Nos ipsi, nosmet. Our own. Yee, you.Vos. Yours.Vester. Your selves.Vos ipsi, vosmet. Your own. They, them, those.Illi. Theirs.Suus, eorum. They themselves.Illi ipsi, Ssee. Their own. The second Combination of Pronouns as likewise the rest that fol∣low, are properly Adjectives, though by reason of Ellipsis they are some∣times used Substantively. The three first of them, this, that, the same, are for their Quantities singulars, and do denote several relations of Identity; The three last, viz. Another, A certain one, Some one, are for their Quantities, Singulars or Particulars indeterminate. The first of them implies the Relation of Diversity. II. Hic.1. THIS. Hujus.P. Belonging to this Person. Thing. Hic ipse.R. This very P. T. Hìc.Pl. Here. Nunc.T. Now. Hujusmodi.M. This manner Idem.2. THE SAME. Ejusdem.P. Belonging to the same. R. Self-same. Ibidem.Pl. T. M. Quidam.3. A CERTAIN. P. Belonging to a certain P.T. P. L. A certain place. T. A certain time. M. A certain manner. THAT.Ille, is, iste. Belonging to that, it.Illius. That very.Ille, ipse. There.Illic, ibi, istic Then.Tunc. That manner.Istiusmodi. ANOTHER, other, else.Alius. Anothers.Alterius. Wholy or quite ano∣ther. Elsewhere.Alibi. Otherwhile.Alias. Otherwise.Aliter. SOME.Aliquis. Somebodies. Somewhere.Alicubi. Some time.Aliquando. Some manner. Some wise.Quodammodo.
The third Combination of Pronouns are III. General or Particular indefinite; Vllus.1. ANY, ought, ever a. P. Any ones, any bodies. Vllibi, usquam.Pl. Any where. Vnquam.T. Any time. Vllo modo.M. Any manner. General distributive; Vnusquis{que}2. EVERY ONE. P. Every ones, belonging to, or concerning every one, Person, Thing. Pl. Every where. T. Every time. M. Every manner. General Collective; Omnis.3. ALL. P. Belonging to all, Persons, Things. Vbi{que}Pl. All places. Semper.T. Always, all times. Omnimodo.M. All manner of ways. The fourth and last Combination is of the mixed or compound Pronouns; so styled, because they are made up of some of the other Pronouns, compounded with the three first and most simple of the Conjunctions. The first of them Quis? WHO? is the Pronoun All, taken in pieces, with an interrogation; For he that enquires who did this, means, doubting of all, did such a one? or such a one? &c. of all them that were capable to do it: but he that doubts only of one, enquires, did he do this? where Quis is plainly resolved into a Pro∣noun incorporated with a Conjunction Interrogative. And as for the second of these, Qui it is commonly translated And he. And the third Whosoever is the same as If any one. They may be distinguished into, IV. 1. Interrogative; WHO? which? what?Quis? P. Whose? Cujus? Pl. Where?Vbi? T. When?Quando? M. How?Quomodo? 2. Relative; WHO, which, that.Qui. P. Whose.Cujus. Pl. Where.Vbi. T. When.Quando. M. After which manner.Quomodo. 3. Reduplicative; WHOSOEVER, whomsoever,Quisquis, Quicun{que} which∣soever, whatsoever. P. Whosesoever.Cujuscun{que} Pl. WheresoeverVbicun{que} T. Whensoever.Quandocun{que} M. Howsoever, after what manner soever.Quomodo cunqu;
And thus much may serve for stating the number, nature, signifi∣cation and use of this second kind of Grammatical Particle stiled Pronoun. § V.Those Substitutive Particles, which serve to supply the room of some sentence or complex part of it, are stiled Interjections. These are by some denyed to be words, or any part of distinct speech, but only natural signs of our mental notions, or passions, expressed by such rude incondite sounds, several of which are common with us to Brute Creatures. And as all Nations of men do agree in these kind of na∣tural passions, so likewise do they very much agree in the signs or in∣dications of their mirth, sorrow, love, hatred, &c. These kind of Particles are generally expressed by aspirated sounds, affectum enim notant,Scalig. L. L. Cap. 13. & ideo confertus editur spiritus, because of that affection and vehemence, which is commonly denoted by them. The kinds of these may be very numerous, according to the various motions and passions of the mind; but those that are of the most fre∣quent and general use, may be reduced under these three combinations, whereof the first only is single, the other two double. The two first Combinations may be styled Solitary and Passive, be∣ing used by us when we are alone,§ VI. or not so directly tending to dis∣course with others, in which the Party speaks as suffering some muta∣tion in himself. They are the result, either of a surprized. I. Iudgment, denoting either 1. Admiration. Heigh. 2. Doubting or considering. Hem, Hm, Hy. 3. Despising. Pish, Shy, Tysh. Affection; moved by the Apprehension of Good or Evil. II. Past; 1. Mirth. Ha, ha, he. Sorrow. Hoi, oh, oh, ah. Present; 2. Love, and pity, Ah, alack, alas. Hate, and anger, vauh, hau. Future; 3. Utinam,  si.Desire, O, o that. Aversation, Phy. The last Combination may be stiled Social and Active, being never used by us when we are alone, but immediately tending to discourse with others, in which the party speaks with design to procure some mutation in his Hearers. These may be distinguished into such as are III. Precedaneous to discourse. 1. Exclaiming. Oh, Soho. Silencing. St, Hush. Beginning of discourse. General; to dispose the senses of the Hearer. 2. Bespeaking attention. Ho, Oh. Expressing attention. Ha. Special; to dispose the Affections of the Hearer by way of 3. Insinuation or blandishment.  Eia, Now. Threatning.  Vae, Wo.
CHAP. III. § I. Of Prepositions in General. § II. The particular kinds of them. § III. Explication of the four last Combinations of them, relating to Place, or Time. THose are stiled Connexive Particles, whose proper use is to ex∣press,§ I. either 1. The Construction of word with word called Pre∣position; or 2. The Contexture of sentence with sentence, called Adverb and Conjunction. Prepositions are such Particles, whose proper office it is to joyn Inte∣gral with Integral on the same side of the Copula; signifying some re∣spect of Cause, Place, Time, or other circumstance either Positively or Privatively. These having such a subserviency to Nouns, in re∣spect of which, they are by some stiled Adnomia, or Adnomina and Praenomina, as Adverbs have to Verbs. They are therefore here trea∣ted of before Adverbs, whose office is chiefly to wait upon Verbs. There are thirty six Prepositions or eighteen paires of them, or six Combinations, which may, with much less equivocalness then is found in instituted Languages, suffice to express those various respects, which are to be signifyed by the kind of Particle. The two first Combinations of Prepositions, do comprehend such as are used to express Causality, and may be stiled Causal.§ II. The first Combination of Causal Prepositions are either, I. More General, denoting either the Author, Subject, or Possessor of any thing; expressed in the Latin by the Genitive case: or the Formal, or Instrumental cause, or Manner of doing, ex∣pressed in the Latin by the Ablative case: Neither of them having any Particle in that Language appointed for them. 1. OFCas. Gen. Cas. Abl. WITH, By More Particular; denoting either The Efficient, or the Final cause. 2. BYAb. a. per. Ob, pro, prop∣ter. FOR The Material cause, ex qua, or circa quam. 3. OVT OFEx, è. De, circa. CONCERNING, upon. The second Combination of Causal Prepositions doth contain such as do relate either to the notion of II. Ideal and exemplary, or Substitutive 1. ACCORDING TOInster, secun∣dum. Pro, vice. INSTEAD Social or circumstance of society; Affirmed, or Denyed. 2. WITHCum, Sine, abs{que} WITHOVT, void of Adjuvant and agreement with: or opposing and enmity against
3. Pro, Contra.FOR, on this side. AGAINST, opposite unto. The rest of the Prepositions do primarily refer to Place and Situa∣tion; Secondarily to time; And some of them, by way of Analogy, to Comparison. Some of these are Absolutely determined, either to Motion, or to Rest, or the Terminus of motion. Others are relatively applicable to both; Concerning which this rule is to be observed. That those which belong to motion, cannot signifie rest: But those which belong to rest, may likewise signifie motion in the Terminus. The third Combination doth consist of such as respect space in ge∣neral being either III. Absolutely determined to Motion; either ‖ of Coming, or Going 1. Ad. A.TO FROM Rest; or the Terms of this motions, denoting either; Near∣ness and contiguity: ro Distance 2. Apud. Procul.AT OFF Relative both to motion and rest, with respect to the Interme∣diate space betwixt those Terms, either ‖ Direct, or Indirect. 3. OVER Trans. Circum.ABOVT The fourth Combination doth consist of such Prepositions, as re∣spect Space, with a particular restriction to the notion of Containing, being either. IV. Absolutely determined to Motion; whether of ‖ Ingress, or Egress 1. INTO In. Ex.OVT OF Rest or the Terms of these Motions. 2. WITHIN Intra. Extra.WITHOVT Relative both to Motion and Rest, with respect to the Interme∣diate space either ‖ Direct or Indirect. 4. THOROVGH Per. Praeter.BESIDE The fifth Combination doth contain such Prepositions as relate to the Imaginary parts of a thing, whether the V. Head or Feet, being absolutely determined to Motion; either ‖ Ascent or Descent, 1. Sursum. Deorsum.VPWARDS DOWNWARDS Rest or the Terms of these motions, 2. Supra. Infra.ABOVE BELOW Face or Back, being Relative both to Motion and Rest. 3. BEFORE Ante. Post.AFTER The sixth Combination doth comprehend such Prepositions as are applicable both to Motion and Rest, relating to the situation of
some third thing spoken of, which the Speaker considers as being VI. Higher or Lower then that third thing, denoting a contiguity or nearness to it 1. VPONSuper. Sub. VNDER Nearer to it, or Farther from it 2. ON THIS SIDECitra. Ultra. BEYOND In the intermediate space unto two other things, or opposite to one of them. 3. BETWIXT,Inter Adversus. between AGAINST, over against. For the clearer explication of these Local Prepositions, I shall refer to this following Diagram.§ III. In which by the Oval Figures are repre∣sented the Prepositions determined to Motion, wherein the Acuter part doth point out the tendency of that motion. The squares are in∣tended to signifie rest or the Term of Motion. And by the round fi∣gures are represented such relative Prepositions, as may indifferently refer either to Motion or Rest.
Some of these Prepositions, viz. Above, Below, Before, After, are by common Analogy applicable to signifie comparison, which use being generally received, and the words having in them a natural sutable∣ness to this purpose, there is no danger of any ambiguity. Several of the Prepositions are sometimes used Adverbially, as Ante, Post, Praeter, Contra, Inter, Infra, &c. which use when it happens, the sense will easily distinguish. The difference between these two parts of speech, Prepositions and Adverbs, being so nice, that 'tis hard in some cases to distinguish them; upon which 'tis questioned, whether every Preposition as it compounds a Verb, do not put on the nature of an Adverb; and it seems to be so, because it Modifies the Act after the same manner as Adverbs do, as in the words Praeficio, Benefacio, &c. CHAP. IV. I. Of Adverbs in General. II. The Particular kinds of them. III. Of Conjunctions. § I.THose two kinds of Connexive Particles which serve for the con∣texture of sentence with sentence, are called Adverbs and Conjun∣ctions.Chap. 1. Sect. 8. The first of these are commonly described to be such kind of words as are for the most part adjoyned to Verbs to signifie some kind of Mode or Circumstance, belonging either intrinsecally or extrinse∣cally to them. Of Aduerbs derived from Integrals, enough hath been said in the Chapter of Integrals. The rest of those words which are commonly called Adverbs, according to their true Original, are either derived from As. So. From. This. That. Pronouns, or else they are Yea. Nay. Perhaps. Truly. Modes of Verbs, or else they are Rather. Than. Conjunctions; And some of them may be periphrastically expressed by Radicals. So that according to the true Philosophy of speech, I can∣not conceive this kind of words to be properly a distinct part of speech, as they are commonly called. But until they can be distri∣buted into their proper places, I have so far complyed with the Gram∣mars of instituted Languages, as to place them here together, and to branch them under the five following Combinations. § II.Whereof the first doth consist of such Adverbs as denote I. The manner of our Apprehension of Complex things, or the nex∣us betwixt the several terms of a Proposition; whether more Ita, immo, maximè. Non, nequa∣quam, minimè.Simple; ‖ Affirming or Denying 1. YEA, I, NAY, not, no, Mixed; applicable both to Affirmation and Negation; either ‖ Conjectural doubtful and contingent: or Certain and confi∣dent, implying a kind of attestation or something super∣added to bare Affirming or Denying. 2. Fortè, forsan. Profecto.PERHAPS, perchance, TRVLY, indeed, surely, in truth, verily. Similitude; the former being Comparative General, the other the Redditive of it.
3. AS,Ut. Sic. even as SO Semblably. The second Combination are all of them Comparative, either of II. Equality; the latter being the Redditive of the former 1. HOWQuàm. Tam. SO Inequality; according to several degrees Greater; 2. MOREMagis. Maximè. MOST Lesser; 3. LESSMinùs. Minimè. LEAST The third Combination doth consist of such as are; either III. Elective; whether of Prelation and preference: or Preterition and postponency. 1. RATHER THANPotiùs. Quàm. Local and Temporal, implying a respect betwixt something ab∣sent and past; either to ‖ that which is present: or to that which is at distance and future. 2. YET, still, hitherto,Adhuc, hactae∣nus. Done. VNTIL Temporal only; the former representing time existing and pre∣sent, the other implying a relation of posteriority after lap∣sing and expiring of some time. 3. WHILSTDum. Tandem. AT LENGTH The fourth Combination doth contein such as denote the Circum∣stance of IV. Society, ‖ Affirmed, or Denyed; Conjunction or Exclusion 1. TOGETHERUnà, simul. Tantùm. ONLY, alone, Repetition, or resemblance and equivalence 2. AGAINIterum. Quasi. AS IF Privation or Restitution; the former signifying the devesting a thing of its form; the other the re-investing of it with its precedent form; the first of these hath no Particle that is used simply for it, but only in Composition, both in Latin and English: the latter we sometimes express in English by Back: 3. VN,Un. dis. Re, retro dis. RE, back. The fifth and last Combination doth consist of three single Parti∣cles, denoting Proximity or nearness; being either V. Definite and determinate; whether Affirming some little defect or Imperfection 1. ALMOST, e'en, well-nigh, towards,Fere. within a little of Denying the utmost perfection 2. SCARCE,Vix. hardly Indefinite, and indeterminate to more or less, over or under;
but affirming a nearness to the chief term Circiter.3. THEREABOVTS, under or over. § III.Conjunctions are such Particles as serve for the joyning together of words, or rather of sentences. Of these there may be reckoned these four Combinations, or twelve paire; though all of them be not alike simple and of equal necessity, yet there is none of them without its particular convenience. The first Combination doth consist of such as are either I. Interrogative, ‖ Affirmative, or Negative. 1. An. Noune.WHETHER YEA? WHETHER NO? Conjunctive, ‖ Affirmative, or Negative, 2. Et, at{que} Nec.AND NEITHER Conditional, ‖ Affirmative, or Negative, 3. Si. Nisi.IF, so that, VNLESS. The second Combination doth contain such as are either II. Approbative, or Discretive and restrictive, 1. INDEED Equidem. Sed.BVT Concessive, or Exceptive 2. ALTHOVGH Etsi. Tamen.YET Disjunctive, ‖ Definite, or Indefinite, 3. OR Vel. Sive.EITHER. The third Combination are all of them Causal; either III. Adjunctive of the end; whether cause or Event; ‖ Affirma∣tive or Negative, 1. THAT, to the end that, Ut. Ne.LEAST THAT Ratiocinative, belonging to the Antecedent; whether ‖ that which makes it follow the Consequent: or that which may indifferently precede or follow. 2. Nam. Quia.FOR BECAVSE Ratiocinative belonging to the Consequent; whether ‖ inter∣rogative and indefinite: or illative, and demonstrative, 3. WHY, wherefore, what is the cause or reason, Cur. Ergo.THEREFORE. The last Combination doth consist of such as are either IV. Declarative; whether ‖ of the cause, or of the event, 1. WHEREAS, seeing that, sith that, Quum. Exinde.THEREVPON Additional, and transitional, whether ‖ continuative, or sup∣pletive, 2. LIKEWISE, also, together with, moreover, Etiam. Ecaet.AND SO FORTH, &c. Expositive; either ‖ by Synonyme, or by Instance, 3. Videlicet, nempe. Exemp. gr.TO WIT, viz. FOR EXAMPLE, EXGR.
The three last of these are not properly Particles or single words, but rather the Contractions of several words, they are here added to the rest for greater convenience, partly for compleating the number and filling up the vacancies; and partly in Complyance with the use of most vulgar Languages, when they write contractedly. CHAP. V. I. Of Articles. II. Of Modes. III. Of Tenses. IV. The most distinct way of expressing the differences of Time. BEsides these fore-mentioned Particles which may be called more Absolute; there are others more servile and auxiliary,§ I. serving for the fuller expression of some Accident belonging to a word. These were before distinguished into such as do belong either, 1. To an Integral alone, as Articles. 2. To the Copula alone, as the Modes. or 3. Both to Integral and Copula as the Tenses. Each of which are in some Langua∣ges taken in, or involved in the inflexion of words: But in others, they are provided for by distinct words to express them. Articles are usually prefixed before Substantives for the more full and distinct expression of them, they may be distinguished into Enuntiative, which may be used indifferently before any Substan∣tive, not already posest with the Demonstrative. A. An. Demonstrative, which gives a peculiar Emphasis to its Substantive, and is applyed only to such a Person or Thing, as the hearer knows, or hath reason to know, because of its eminence or some precedent mention of it. The Though these be not absolutely necessary to a Language, because the Latin is without them; yet are they so convenient for the greater di∣stinctness of speech, that upon this account, both the Hebrew, Greek, Slavonick, and most other Languages have them. To shew in what manner the subject is to be joyned with his Predi∣cate, the Copula between them is affected with a Particle,§ II. which from the use of it, is called Modus, the Manner or Mode. Now the Subject and Predicate may be joyned together either Sim∣ply, or with some kind of Limitation, and accordingly these Modes are either Primary or Secondary. The Primary Modes are called by Grammarians Indicative, and Im∣perative. When the Matter is declared to be so, or at least when it seems in the speakers power to have it be so, as the bare union of Subject and Predicate would import; then the Copula is nakedly expressed without any variation: And this manner of expressing it, is called the Indica∣tive Mode. When it is neither declared to be so, nor seems to be immediatly in the speakers power to have it so; then he can do no more in words but make out the expression of his will to him that hath the thing in
his power, namely to his Superiour by Petition Equal by Perswasion Inferiour by Command And the man∣ner of these affecting the Copula (Be it so, or sine esse, let it be so) is called the Imperative Mode; of which there are these three varieties, very fit to be distinctly provided for. As for th other use of the Imperative Mode, when it signifies Permission; this may be sufficiently expressed by the Secondary Mode of Liberty. You may do it. The Secondary Modes are such, as when the Copula is affected with any of them, make the sentence to be (as Logicians call it) a Modal Proposition. This happens when the Matter in discourse, namely, the being or doing or suffering of a thing, is considered not simply by it self, but gradually in its causes from which it proceeds either Contingently or Ne∣cessarily. Then a thing seems to be left as Contingent, when the speaker ex∣presses only the Possibility of it, or his own Liberty to it. 1. The Possibility of a thing depends upon the power of its cause, and may be expressed when Absolute by the Particle CAN Conditional by the Particle COVLD. 2. The Liberty of a thing, depends upon a freedom from all Obsta∣cles either within or without, and is usually expressed in our Lan∣guage, when Absolute by the Particle MAY Conditional by the Particle MIGHT. Then a thing seems to be of Necessity, when the speaker expresseth the resolution of his own will, or some other obligation upon him from without. 3. The Inclination of the will is expressed, if Absolute by the Particles WILL Conditional by the Particles WOVLD. 4. The Necessity of a thing, from some external obligation, whether Natural or Moral which we call duty, is expressed, if Absolute by the Particle MVST, ought, shall, Conditional by the Particle MVST, ought, should. § III.That kind of servile Particle which doth belong both to the Inte∣gral and the Copula, is stiled Tense. Tho Tenses in instituted Languages are appropriated only to Verbs, yet 'tis very plain that according to the true Philosophy of speech, they should likewise be ascribed to Substantives; And that this would in many respects be a great advantage to Language. As there is Ama∣tio, so there should be Amavitio and Amaturitio, &c. These kind of Auxiliary Particles, stiled Modes and Tenses, are in the Modern Languages expressed by such servile words, as do not signifie any compleat Act, but rather some respects and circumstances belonging to other Acts; and by that means have in them a natural fitness to be subservient to the inflexion of other Integral words. So the Conditional Modes are supplyed by the words Possum or Possible,
Licet, Libet, Volo; Necesse, Oportet, Debeo. And so are the Tenses, by those servile words of Facio, Habeo, besides the Copula, sum. The Tenses are usually distinguished into Present Active. Do, dost, doth, Passive. Am, art, is, are. Past Imperfect Active. Did, didst, Passive. Was, wert, were. Perfect Active. Have, hast, hath, Passive. Have been, hast been, hath been. Pluperfect Active. Had, hadst, Passive. Had been, hadst been. Future Active. Shall, will, shalt, wilt, Passive. Shall be, will be, shalt be, wilt be. But the most distinct and explicit way of expressing any Propositi∣on, is by affixing these Tenses, both to the Copula, and the Predicate;§ IV. the latter of which will shew the time of the Action, &c. whether past, present, or future: and the former, the state of the Person or Subject, who doth this Acti∣on, whether he Has been, either Past that Action, Is now, either Acting in it, Shall be hereafter. either Yet to do it. And a Proposition thus expressed, is in the very expressing of it, re∣solved into its parts of Subject, Copula, and Predicate, according to these following examples. I Have been Hot Calui I Am Hot Caleo I Shall be Hot Calebo I Have been having been Hot Calebam I Am having been Hot Calueram I Shall be having been Hot Caluero I Have been to be hot hereafter Fui caliturus I Am to be hot hereafter Sum caliturus I Shall be to be hot hereafter Ero caliturus I Have been Heating Calefeci I Am Heating Calefacio, or sum calefaciens I Shall be Heating Calefaciam I Have been Having heated Calefeceram I Am Having heated Calefaciebam, sum qui calefecit I Shall be Having heated Calefecero I Have been to Heat hereafter Fui calefacturus I Am to Heat hereafter Sum Calefacturus I Shall be to Heat hereafter Ero calefacturus I Have been Heated Fui Calefactus I Am Heated Calefio, velsum calefactus I Shall be Heated Calefiam, velero calefactus
I Have been having been Heated Fueram calefactus I Am having been Heated Calefiebam I Shall be having been Heated Fuero calefactus I Have been to be Heated hereafter Fui Calefaciendus. I Am to be Heated hereafter Sum Calefaciendus. I Shall be to be Heated hereafter Ero Calefaciendus. But if any should conceive this way needless or too laborious, as being too much distant from the manner of Institted Languages; he may by putting the Copula in the place of the Tense, as well express his mind in thi, as in any other Instituted Language. CHAP. VI. I. Of Transcendental Particles, The end and use of them. II. The usual ways for enlarging the sense of words in In∣stituted Languages. III. The General Heads of Transcen∣dental Particles. THose Particles are here stiled Transcendental, which do circum∣stantiate words in respect of some Mtaphysical notion; either by enlarging the acception of them to some more general signification, then doth belong to the restrained sense of their places: or denoting a relation to some other Predicament or Genus, under which they are not originally placed. Whereas in a Philosophical Language, every word ought in strict∣ness to have but one prope sense and acception, to prevent equivo∣calness; which sense is to be restrained according to that place and relation, which the words have in the Tables: And yet on the other side, it would much promo copiousness and elegancy, if there might be any way so to change and vary the sense of any word, as may with all, leave it free from ambigity. For this purpose, as likewise for the Abbreviating of Language are these Transcendental notes suggested. There are two ways used in Instituted Languages, specially in La∣tin for varying the sense of words; ther by Tropes: or by such a kind of Composition as doth alter the terminations of them. 1. The sense of a word is varyed by Trope; either in respect of some Agreement and convenience, which it hath with the word for which it is used; whether more General; as in Metaphore Special; when the Whole, whether Universal, Essential, Integral, is put for any of the respective parts, or contrary wise, Synecdoche. Subject, Object, Cause, &c. is put for the Adjunct, Adject, Effect, &c, or contrary wise, Metonymy. Opposition; when one Opposite is put for the other, Irony.
Of all which there are store of examples in the common books of Rhetorick; And there will be occasion to cite several of them in the following Chapter, amongst the instances that are given of the Transcendental Particles. Words are varied by changing their Terminations many ways; of which these that follow are some of the Principal in the Latin. 1. Preparatives or Meditatives; are expressed by the Termination (urio) Scripturio, Esurio, Parturio, Micturio. 2. Inceptives; by the termination (sco) Lucesco, Calesco, Senesco. 3. Frequentatives; by the termination (ito) Clamito, Agito. 4. Augmentatives; by the termination (osus) Aquosus, Fluviosus, Piscosus. 5. Diminutives; by the terminations (lo, lus, la, lum, aster) Can∣tillo, Scribillo, Libellus, Lapillus, Homunculus, Mercatulus, Vesicula▪ Cor∣pusculum, Corculum, Crepusculum, Surdaster, Medicaster, Grammati∣caster. 6. The Notion of Segregate; by the termination (tim) Viritim, Verbatim, Gradatim. 7. Power and Propensity Active; by (ivus, ivitas) Activus, Acti∣vitas. 8. Power and Propensity Passive; by (ilis, ilitas) Possibilis, Possibi∣litas. 9. Cause; by composition with Facio, Mortifico, Magnifico, Prolifi∣cum, &c. 10. Kind; by (plex and farius and genus) Simplex, Duplex, Multi∣plex, Bifarius, Multifarius, Omnigenus, Multigenus. 11. The notions of Officer, and Tradesman▪ whether Merchant or Mechanick promiscuously, are commonly expressed by the termina∣tion (arius) which doth originally and properly signifie the notion of belonging to, but is thus limited by reason of the words, Officiarius, Mercator, Faber, understood. Apiarius, Armentarius, Caprarius, Equarius, Accipitarius, Librari∣us, &c. Lanarius, Linarius, Piscarius, Aviarius, Pomarius, Lactarius, &c. Arcuarius, Armamentarius, Aurarius, Doliarius, &c. 12. Instrument or Iugament; by the termination (trum) Haustrum, Aratrum, Plaustrum, Rastrum, &c. 13. Vessel; by (bulum) Thuribulum, Infundibulum. 14. House; by (ile, ale, arium) Equile, Ovile, Bubile, Caseale, Avia∣rium, Columbarium, Gallinarium. 15. Chamber or Room; by (ina, arium, terium) Officina, Textrina, Tonstrina, Sutrina, Popina, Vestiarium, Carnarium, Apodyterium, Coni∣sterium, Sphaeristerium. 16. Place in General; by (arium, etum) Vivarium, Aquarium, Po∣marium, Colluviarium, Frutetum, Dumetum, Arundinetum, Ericetum, &c. 17. Person or Agent; by the termination (or) Pastor, Fossor▪ Fron∣dator, Vindemiator, Arator, Messor, &c. Now if all other respects and circumstances, which are capable and proper to be expressed by these kind of Particles, were in some such way provided for; this would exceedingly abbreviate the number
of words, prevent much circumlocution, contribute to perspicuity and distinctness, and very much promote the elegance and significancy of speech. What may be the most convenient number of such Transcendental Particles, is not easie to determine; But those mentioned▪ in the eight following Combinations, (though not all of the same extent and comprehensiveness) have each of them some peculiar pretence of be∣ing listed under this number. These may be distributed into such as are more General. Essential. I. Circumstantial. II. Special, whether belonging to Substance. III. Quantity. IV. Quality. V. Action. VI. Relation, with respect to Quality and Action. VII. Affections of Animals. VIII. The first Combination doth comprehend such General Essential re∣spects, as are either I. Comparative; denoting similitude and resemblance; whether that which consists chieflly ‖ in words or in things 1. METAPHOR LIKE Positive; denoting the nature or essence of the subject spoken of, as to those common notions of General beings, either ‖ the common essence, or common circumstances 2. KIND MANNER Individual beings, whether ‖ irraional or rational 3. THING PERSON The second Combination doth contein such General Circumstantial respects as are; either more II. Absolute; signifying, Position or Duration 1. PLACE TIME Relative; as to Effecting or Representing 2. CAVSE SIGN Being in conjunction with others, or separate from others 3. AGGREGATE SEGREGATE.
The third Combination doth contain such kind of Special respects, belonging to Substance, as result from their Application to other Sub∣stances, and the uses for which they are designed; namely, for Enclo∣sure and service, whether of III. Places; or Things 1. SEPIMENT ARMAMENT Men; either such coverings as are Contiguous and fitted to their bodies, serving for defence, ‖ against Weather or Enemies 2. VEST ARMOVR More remote, according to ‖ the more General, or Special kind or part 3. HOVSE ROOM The fourth Combination doth comprehend some of those Special respects belonging to Corporeal things, which do chiefly concern the Figure of them, whether IV. Shape alone; Broad and Flat, or Slender and Long 1. LAMIN PIN Shape and Vse More Simple; designed, either for Operation or Containing 2. INSTRVMENT VESSEL Less simple; whether ‖ such as are not necessarily designed for motion, being of a less complicate figure; or such as are designed for motion, whose figure is more complicate 3. IVGAMENT MACHIN The fifth Combination doth contain such kind of Notions as re∣late to the Quality of Things or Persons, whether considered more V. Abstractly; either the more General Quality, whereby the natural Powers are perfected, or more special relating to Practical matters 1. HABIT ART Concretely; denoting personal Qualifications, whether Degrees and Business; or Faculty and Skill 2. OFFICER ARTIST Professions of Manufacture or Exchange 3. MECHANIC MERCHANT
The sixth Combination doth contain such imperfect servile notions, as belong to Action or Passion, with respect to the VI. Ability, or Disposition of a thing 1. POWER APTITVDE Beginning or Repeating of an Action 2. INCEPTIVE FREQVENTATIVE Application of the Power; whether ‖ in a common and ordi∣nary, or in some sudden and vehement degree 3. ENDEAVOVR IMPETVS The seventh Combination doth contain such kind of servile Rela∣tive notions, as are common both to Quality and Action; denoting either the VII. Measures and degrees of things Great or Little 1. AVGMENTATIVE DIMINVTIVE Too much, or too little 2. EXCESSIVE DEFECTIVE Manner of a Thing or Action, whether ‖ as it should be, or as it should not be 3. PERFECTIVE CORRVPTIVE The eighth and last Combination doth relate to some Affections of Animals, either VIII. Sounds made by them, whether ‖ inarticulate, or articulate 1. VOICE LANGVAGE Sexes of them 2. MALE FEMALE The first most impotent and imperfect Age; to which may e adjoyned, that more general name belonging to any  which is likewise applicable to inanimate beings. 3. YOVNG PART.
CHAP. VII. Instances of the great usefulness of these Transcendental Parti∣cles, with directions how they are to be applyed. FOR the better explaining of what great use and advantage these Particles may be to Language, I shall give some examples seve∣rally to each pair of them, according to the order premised: Begin∣ning with the first. I. 1. METAPHORICAL LIKE These two are paired together because of their affinity, each of them denoting an enlargement of the sense of the word; the first more general; the other with reference to Similitude, properly so called. The note of Metaphorical affixed to any Character,Metaphor. will signifie the enlarging the sense of that word, from that strict restrained acception which it had in the Tables, to a more universal comprehensive signifi∣cation: By this, common Metaphors may be legitimated, retaining their elegancy, and being freed from their ambiguity. So These words, with this note will signifie Element Rudiment, Principle Root Original Way Means Thick Gross Thin Subtle Streight Upright Crooked Perverse Obtuse Dull Acute Quick Ripe Perfect Immature Imperfect Fertile Fruitful as to inventi∣on, &c. Barren Unfruitful Beautiful Decent, Comely Deformed Absurd, Indecent Ornate Elegant, Quaint Homely Rude Light Evident, Plain Dark Mystical, Obscure These words, with this note will signifie Shining Illustrious Hypocritical Counterfeit Banish Expel Companying Being together Strengthen Fortifie, fence Wrigle in Insinuate Prophesie Prediction Consecrate Dedicate Suiter Candidate Woo Canvase Rival Competitor Raise Prefer, Advance So in the Tables of Action; those Acts which are primarily ascribed unto God, as Preserving, Destroying, Delivering, Forsaking, Blessing, Cursing, &c. because they may by analogy be applyed to other things, therefore this mark will enlarge their acception. So for those other Acts belonging to the rational soul; as, Thinking, Believing, Knowing, Observing, Expecting, Consenting, Dissenting, Esteeming, Contemning,
Willing, Nilling, Fruition, Delectation, Election, Rejection, &c. though they are primarily acts of the Rational Soul; yet because there is somewhat analogous to them in other Creatures; therefore such words with this mark may without ambiguity be used in such a gene∣ral sense. So in Iudicial Relation; Accuse, Complain, Excuse, Witness, Register, Citation, &c. So likewise in Military Relation; Offend, Defend, Provoke, Resist, Besiege, Assault, Skirmish, Fight, Stratagem, Overcome, Yield, Fly, Pursue, Escape, &c. Each of these and many other words may by this note (when there is just occasion to apply it) be made more copious, and yet preserved distinct in their significations. The other Particle, Like, being affixed to any word, doth denote a varying of the sense of that word,Like. upon the Account of some simi∣litude, whether in respect of Quality and disposition, Resemblance, effect, and manner of doing, or outward shape and situation. 1. This similitude may sometimes refer to the Quality and disposi∣tion of a thing; in which sense 'tis frequently expressed in our English Tongue by Adjectives, with the Termination (ish) Devilish, Brutish, Currish, Waspish, Apish: and sometimes without it; as Angelical, Dogged, Cynical, Viperous, Serpentine, &c. which do not always signifie ac∣cording to the strict derivation of such Adjectives, but do many times denote only a similitude. 2. After the same manner are the several varieties of Colours to be expressed, namely, by their resemblance to other things commonly known. So Ashes-like, or Cineritius, is Ash-colour. So Flesh-like is Carnation; Blood-like is Crimson; Lyon-like is Tawny. So for those other resemblances to the Sky, to Gold, Grass, Straw. So Piceus, or Pitch-like, is a deep black; Coracinus, or Crow-like, is a shining black. So for Milky, Snowy, Ivory, kinds of White, &c. And thus like∣wise is it for the variety of Tastes and Smells; the differences of which are not provided for with distinct words in any Language, but may this way be sufficiently expressed; namely, by their likeness to such other things as are commonly known. 3. Sometimes it may refer to some kind of Resemblance in respect of effect, according to which sense these words are frequently used; Inflame, Sparkle, Cloud, Exhalation, Fumes, Vapour. 4. Sometimes to the manner of doing; so to speak Infant-like, is to Iabler; to graft-like Feathers is to Impe; to dart-like water, is to Spirt, Squirt; to tremble-like with the voice, is to Warble, Thrill; Dog-like crying, is Whining; Stealing-like, is Surreptitious, &c.
5. This Particle is likewise applicable in respect of shape and situ∣ation. So These words with this note will signifie Downe Thistle Downe Lint of Linnen Hoariness of Mold Fibre Grain of Wood Apple Pomander, Pommel Bullet Pellet Arme Arme of Tree, Sea Trunc Hulk of a Ship Beake Stemm of a Ship Foot Pedestal Bridge Bridge of a Musical instrument Money Medal, Counter. I. 2. KIND MANNER The first of these may be compounded with words of Number, to make them signifie under the notion of Multiplicative,Kind. which the La∣tins express by the Termination (plex) Simplex, Duplex, Multiplex, &c. And the English by the Termination (fold) Twofold, Threefold, Ma∣nifold. In its composition with other Characters, it will serve to express those words which are used to signifie the general or special kinds of things; and being affixed to any of the differences, will make them sig∣nifie as a Genus or Species. It is applicable both to Substantives and Adjectives. Some of our English words of this sense, are expressed by the Ter∣mination (age) as Herbage, Pascuage, Foliage, Vintage, Cordage, Stoage, &c. that is the kind of Herbs, Pasture, &c. These words wth this note will signifie People Populacy, Folk, Commonalty, Parent Parentage Child Off-spring, ProgenyIssue, Brood, Litter Foot Souldier Infantry Horse Sould. Cavalry These words thus marked will signifie Bisule Cattle Stag Red Deer Buck Fallow Deer Hog Swine Domestic bird Poultry Guns Artillery There are several Adjectives likewise expressible this way; as Mul∣tifarious, Homogeneous, or Similar, Heterogeneous, or Dissimular, &c. 2. The use of the second Particle is by its composition with Rela∣tive and Quantitative Pronouns, to express such words as these;Manner. Quo∣modo, how or after what manner; Hujusmodi after this manner; Ejus∣modi after that manner, &c. It is applicable likewise unto Adverbia moris, Meatim, Tuatim, Suatim (i) Meo, Tuo, Suo More. The Anti∣ents were wont to say, Canatim, Suatim, Bovatim, that is, after the manner of Dogs, of Swine, &c. And it is still in use to say Humanitus, after the manner of men.
The Composition with this Particle may likewise be useful in ex∣pressing those words which do in their proper notion contain a refe∣rence to the Mode of things. So This mark upon the word will make it signifie Loquution PronunciationEloquution Sentence Phrase, Style Joyning Connexion Using Usage Right Tenure Good, Well Right Evil Wrong These words thus marked will signifie Height Stature Feeding Diet Vest Garb, Tire Face Aspect, CountenanceMeen, Visage, Favour Air Weather Sound Tone I. 3. THING PERSON Each of these may be compounded with the Relative or Quantita∣tive Pronouns, serving to distinguish such as refer to Things, from those that belong to Persons. This, That, The same, Another, A certain, Some. Thing or Person. Thing.The former of these being affixed to any word in the Tables be∣longing to the Predicament of Quality, Action, Relation, or to any other word which doth primarily denote a person, will determine the sense of that word to a Substantive of the Thing; as it hath been already declared in the Doctrine of Substantives. This note may be affixed 1. To Adjectives Neuter. So The words with this mark will signifie Obscure Mystery Seeming Semblance Prestigtory Trick Frivolous Triflle. 2. To Adjectives Active, commonly called Participles Active. So The words with this mark will signifie Nutrient Nutriment or Aliment Medicating Medicament or Medi∣cine Purging Purge Binding Bond or String Buying Price 3. To Adjectives or Participles Passive, in the Aorist Tense. So The words will signifie Created Creature Acted Fact Believed Fides quae Fancied Phantasm Prophesied Prophesie Tyed Knot Bound Bundle, Fardle Tryed Experiment Weaved Web The words will signifie Inherited Inheritance, Patri∣mony Seen Spectacle Urinated Urin Dunged Dung Spit Spittle Seemed Pretence, Pretext Drunk Drink Eaten Food, Meat Eleemosynated Alms So the Adjectives Passive of the words Teaching, Learning, Reading, Singing, Selling, with this affix, will signifie Doctrine, Lesson, Lecture, Song, Ware.
The second of these Particles may refer either to,Person. 1. The Quality and relation; or 2. The Agency; or 3. The Patiency of the Person. If to the first of these; it must be affixed to an Adjective Neuter; if to the second or third, it must be affixed to an Adjective Active or Passive. Of the first kind are such examples as these. The words will signifie Vile Rascal, Varlet Miserable Wretch, Caitiff Perfidious Villain, Traytor Crafty Knave Idiotical Fool, Idiot Wandring Vagrant, Vagabond Licentious Royster, Blade Uncleanly Sloven Slow Lob, Lubber Idle Truant The words will signifie Flattering Parasite Facetious Jester, Wag Fornicating Whore, HarlotStrumpetWhoremonger Rustic Boor, PeasantHind, Swain Military Souldier Ecclesiastic Clerk, Clergy Secular Lay Proposititious (i) put in substitu∣tion Attourney, Sur∣rogate Aulical Courtier Art Artizan, Artist Nullus Nemo Of the second are such examples as these. The words will signifie Acting Actor Creating Creator Farming Farmer Lending Creditor Owing Debitor Pronegotiating Factor Beneficencing Benefactor Interpreting Truch-man The words will signifie Conveying Convoy Vowing Votary Giving Donor Receiving Receiver Beginning Inceptor, Novice Travelling Traveller, Passenger Seeing Spectator Hearing Auditor, Hearer Of the third are such examples as these. Sent Messenger Eleemosynated Eleemosynary Beneficenced Beneficiary Tryed Probationer II. 1. PLACE TIME This first pair in the second Combination of Transcendental Parti∣cles, are of more then ordinary extent and usefulness, because they may be serviceable to compound other words besides Integrals. The first of them may be Compounded with Pronouns,Place. as was shewed before in the doctrine concerning Pronouns; and so serve to express Adverbs of place, as in this, that, every, &c. here, there, every. where. Besides which, the Composition with this Particle may be proper to express other names of Places, which are commonly derived, either from,
1. The things contained in them. 2. The uses to which they are designed. 3. The Relations by which they are bounded. Of the first kind are such as these. The words will signifie Metal Mine Tin Stannary Stone Quarry Deer Park Conies Warren Trees Wood, Grove Shrubs Coppice Fruit-trees Orchard Vines Vineyard The words will signifie Hops Hopyard Flowers Garden Fire Hearth Smoke Chimney Ship resting Harbour, Haven, Rode Stream Channel, KennelGutter, Drain Abjectaneous Water Sink Of the second kind are such examples as these. The words will signifie Ambulation Tectised Cloyster High Terrace Baking-hol∣low Oven Fire-hollow Furnace Protection Asylum, refugeSanctuary, shelter Hiding Covert Meeting Rendezvouz Sacrificing Altar Preaching Pulpit The words will signifie Dwelling Mansion, Messuage Washing Bath Flesh-selling Shambles Publick Spectacle Theater Deers Lying Laire Birds Sleeping Roost Ship-making Dock Unshipping Wares Key, WharfHyth Of the third kind are such instances as these. These words will signifie Authority Territory, SignioryJurisdiction, Principality, Dominion Kings Authority Kingdom, Realm Tribe County, Shire Academical Academy, University Arch-Bishops Authority Province Bishops Authority Diocess Presbyters Authority Parish Time.The second of these Particles, namely, Time, may be Com∣pounded 1. With Numbers, to make them signifie as Adverbs Cardinals; as Semel, bis, ter, &c. Decies, vicies, centies, millies, multoties, &c. Once, twice, thrice, ten times, twenty times, a hundred times, a thousand times, many times, &c. 2. With Pronouns, to express Adverbs of time; as in this, that, all, Now, Then, Alway, &c.
3. With Integrals; as in such examples. These words will signifie Festival Holy time Paschal Easter Nativity of Christ Christmass Coming of the Holy Ghost Whitsuntide Grape gathering Vintage Forinsical Term Non-Forinsical Vacation II. 2. CAVSE, or make SIGN. When words are in their significations to be more peculiarly deter∣mined to their Transitive efficiency, then is this first note to be affixed.Cause. It is frequently in Latin expressed by a Composition with facio sub∣joyned, and sometimes in English by a Composition with (be) pre∣fixed; as in the words, Befool, Besot, &c. The instances of this kind do frequently occur, and are very nume∣rous. So These words will signifie Know Acquaint, Advertise Certain Certifie, assure Wonder Amaze, astonish Anger Provoke, incense Fear Fright, daunt, dismay Love Enamour, endear Shame Abash Humble Abase Contender Boutefeu, incendiary Boldness Embolden Powerful Enable Impotent Disable Great Magnifie, aggravate Little Diminish, abate Healthy Cure, heal Dye Kill, slay, mortal Live Enliven, quicken Fade Wear out, consume Rise Raise, rouse, startFlush, spring, unkennel Fall Fell, throw down These words will signifie Sit Set Lye Lay Sweat SudorificDiaphoretic Urine Diuretic Child Adopt Ignoble Attaint Free Enfranchize Slave Enslave Money Mint, coyne Erre Seduce Evil Deprave, marr Exceed Cloy Stay Detain, hold at bay Go Set packing Bleed Let blood Shine Burnish, polish Manifest Illustrate, clear Sparkle Strike fire Lose Endamage This mark is applicable both to Substantives and Adjectives, as in Adoption, Adopting, Adopted, Sudorification, Sudorific, &c.
Sign.The other Transcendental note of Sign is adjoined to the former, by reason of some kind of affinity (though somewhat remote) which there is betwixt them. As the former Particle doth import the notion of efficiency or making; so doth this of Representing or signifying. It is applicable both to Substantives and Adjectives. So These words will signifie Anchor Buoy Foot Footstep, track Wound Scar Percussion Vibex, Black and Blew Vest service Livery Wind Weathercock Fane Family, or Nobility Coat of Arms Regality Crown Magistracy Mace These words will signifie Arming or incursion pass. Alarum Jugam. Invas. Beacon Future event Evil Great evil Ominous Inauspicious Portentous Terminal or Limit Meer, land-mark To head or hand Becken To grief Lament, deplorebewail, bemoan To praise Applaud II. 3. AGGREGATE SEGREGATE Aggregate.The first of these doth denote a multitude in Society, unto which common speech doth needlesly assign several distinct names; whereas the Natural  the same in all of them; and therefore such va∣rious names may justly be reckoned amongst the redundancies of Language. So These words will signifie Assessors Bench Souldiers Party Travelling Merchants Caravan Waiters Train, retinue Ships Navy, Fleet Military Ships Armado Sheep Geese Flock Cows Deer Hoggs Heard Drove Drawing horses Teame Hunting dogs Pack Partridge Covey Bees Swarm These words will signifie Young Dogs Foxes Pigs Litter Hawks Airy Ducks Team Chickens Brood Fish Scour, Fry Scull Trees Wood, Grove Small trees Coppice Shrubs Thicket Ferne Brake Hay Straw Fewel wood Reek, Stack Cock Pile Twigs Bavin And so likewise may it be for those others words Jewels Carcanet Feathers Plume Berries Cluster, Bunch Counters Set Cards Pack Dice Silk, Cloth, &c. Bale
So the words Selling, or Hiring, with this mark, will signifie to sell by whole sale, and to hire by the Great. The second of these being opposite to the former,Segregate. will signifie things under the notion of distribution; and being segregated, which we commonly express by the words Each and Every; it is applicable to the Numbers to make them distributives: Singuli, Bini, Trini, &c. Each one, every two, every three, or one by one, by twos, by threes, &c. And so for all other things capable of the like notion. The La∣tins express it by the Termination (tim) as was said before. So Sigillatim One by one Viritim Man by man Ostiatim Door by door Verbatim Word by word Paulatim By little and little Pedetentim Foot by Foot Gradatim By degrees Seriatim By ranks or classes. The English, besides the above-mentioned peculiar way of Phra∣seology, doth sometimes express this notion by compounding with the Termination (ly) as Hourly, Daily, Weekly, Monthly, Annually, &c. It is applicable likewise to Nouns of Action, or Verbs. So These words will signifie Giving Distributing, Dispensing Gathering Picking up Selling Retailing Hiring Hiring by the day III. 1. LAMIN PIN The first pair in the third Combination do properly refer to the Figure of things; and the note of these, added to the name of the matter of which they consist, will be useful to supply the words for several things. The former of these doth denote a broad and flat Figure. These words will signifie Wood Board, Plank Glass Pane Paper Leaf, Sheet Mettal Plate Lead Sheet Iron supertinn'd Latin These words will signifie Fire Leam Ice, Snow Flake Pudding fryed Pancake Bread Sippet, Tost, Wafer Staffe Lath The second denotes a round and long Figure,Pin. and being affixed to the word signifying the matter of it, or the thing about which it is used, it may serve for the expression of several names. So Iron Nayle Wood Peg Vest Pin String Tag Cuspidated Tine
III. 2. INSTRVMENT VESSEL This pair is intended to signifie the General Names belonging to each of the two principal kinds of Vtensils. Instrument.By Instrument, is meant such a kind of Vtensil, as is of a more simple figure, and properly designed for Operation. This mark is to be af∣fixed to the Character of that particular Action or Operation, in which such instruments are used; and whereas there may be several kinds of instruments, that may be useful for the same kind of operation; they are to be farther distinguished by their Matter, Figure, Bigness, or some other circumstance. So These words will signifie Foraminating Little Great Aule, Piercer Drill, Bodkin Gimlet, Wimbel Auger Digging Spade, Shovel Cuspidate Pick-ax, Mattock Reaping, Great Little Sythe Syckle Fuel supporting Little Great Dog, Creeper Andiron, Cobi∣ron Striking, Cutting Little Great Hatchet Axe Lifting Leaver Weighing Ballance Cleaving Wedge Wheeling Wheel Screwing Screw Springing Spring Threshing Flaile Gathering Rake Scattering Fork Cribrating Sive These words will signifie Shaving Razor Filing File Sawing Saw Graving Graver, stile Planing Plane Contusion Pestle Painting Pencil Writing Pen Candle sup∣porting Candlestick Weaving Shuttle Clipping Shears Brushing Brush, Beasom Combing Comb Horary Dyal Star mea∣sure Astrolabe Sub-forging Anvil Ringing Bell Whipping Scourge, Rod Rosting Spit Vision Spectacles Signifer Colours, Aun∣tient, Cornet, Banner Vessel.Under this second Particle (Vessel) are comprehended such kind of simple Utensils, whose proper use is to contain; they are distin∣guishable either 1. By the things which they are designed to hold and contain. 2. By the operations and actions for which they are used. 3. By the matter of which they consist, together with their several figures and quantities.
Of the first kind are such instances as these. So The words will signifie Water Cistern Oyle Glass Earth Cruet, Cruce Jarr Drink Little Great Earthen Wooden Leather Cup, Pot, Chalice Goblet Pitcher Bowle Jack Pottage Porringer Sauce Saucer Table fire Chafing-dish Candle Lanthorn Inke Inke-horn Urine Chamber-pot Of the second are such as these. So The words will signifie Washing Little Great Bason Laver Boyling Little Great Earthen Skillet Caldron, Kettle Copper, Furnace Pipkin Frying Frying-pan The words will signifie Melting Crucible Distilling Still, Alembick Straining Colander Infusion Tunnel, Funnel Exfusion Ewer Contusion Mortar Incense Censor, Perfu∣mers pot Baptism Font Of the third sort there are such examples as these. So The words will signifie Earthen Narrow Broad Pot Urne Pan Wooden Oblong Great Trough Vatt Glassy Vial
III. 3. IVGAMENT MACHIN This next pair is put to signifie such kind of Utensils as are of a less simple figure then the former. Jugament.The word Iugament doth comprehend such kind of form as are distensoria longa; consisting of several distinct parts united by Art, be∣ing more complex then instrument, and less then Machin. The mark of it is to be affixed, either to the name of the Action or the Thing about which they are used: as in these examples. The words will signifie Carriage of Persons Barrow Carriage of Persons Dead Bier Carriage of Persons Living, by Men Sedan Carriage of Persons Living, by Horses Litter Traction Tumbrel Plowing Plow Harrowing Harrow Winnowing Fan Weaving Loom Beasts Food Rack, Cratch Bird restraining Coop, Pen, Cage Fish catching Weele Stream stopping Sluce Roling Roler Shadowing Canopy, umbrel∣la, Screen The words will signifie Printing Press Holding Pincers Suspension Gallows, Gibbet Extension Rack Feet imprison Stocks Head imprison Pillory Neck Yoke Sub-foot Pattin Broyling Gridiron Fewel Grate Session Stoole, Settle Bed Bedstead Clipping Cizzars Circle making Compass Wind music Organ Machin.By the second are intended such Utensils as are of a more complicate figure, being mixed either with Wheels, Scrues, or Pullies, and de∣signed for motion. The mark is to be affixed unto the Character of the Action for which they are used. So The words will signifie Hour Signing Sounding Portatile Watch Clock Pocket watch Grinding Mill Little Quern The words will signifie Rosting Jack Up-pulling Crane Holding Vice Compressing Press Way-measuring Way-wiser IV. 1. SEPIMENT ARMAMENT Sepiment.The first of these may serve to express and describe those several kinds of things and names which are used for Enclosure. So These words will signifie Wood Lamin Pale Staff or Beam Rail Shrub Hedge Earth Bank These words will signifie Water Mote Sheep Sheepfold Military of basket Line, outwork, &c. Gabion Transverse shutting Barricado
The second mark for ARMAMENT or Tackle,Armament. will serve to describe sufficiently several things of that nature, without affording distinct names for them, to be applyed unto the Character of the Action or Part to which it belongs. These words will signifie Horse, cohibiting Bridle instigating Spur Head Head-stall Mouth Bitt, Snaffle Neck Collar Tayl Crupper Foot Horse-shooe These words will signifie Horse back Saddle Rustic Pannel Pack-saddle Riders foot Stirrup Leg Gambado Circumligating Surcingle, girdle Finger for sowing Thimble IV. 2. VEST ARMOVR The first of these will help to describe those various names that are given o several sorts of Garments, according to the Parts, Things, or other circumstances most considerable in their use. So These words will signifie Head Margined Low Reticulate Cap Hat Bonnet Cawl Bishops head Miter Votaries head Cowl Fore-head Linnen Frontlet, cross-cloth Face Mask Chin Muffler Neck Band Trunc Doublet Sub-trunc Wastcoat Super-trunc Jerkin, Coat Loose super humeral Hood Inmost Linnen Shirt, Shift Outmost Linnen Surplice, Frock Bishops Linnen Stole Bishops Silk Rochet Service signing Livery Chamber Hanging Table Woollen Carpet Linnen Table cloth These words will signifie Breast Stomacher Bib, Biggin Arm Sleeve Hand Woollen Glove Mitten Belly Apron Thighs close Loose Breeches Petticoat Leg Leather Stocken, Hose Boot Foot Loose Inner Shooe Slipper Pantofle Sock Upper loose Close Cloak Cassock Long loose Gown Bed woollen Linnen Covering Blanket Sheet Coverlet, coun∣terpane Pensil shadowing Concealing Curtain Mantle, Veil The second Particle is designed only for defensive Armour,Armour. which bears some Analogy to Vests. The note of it may be affixed to the se∣veral Parts. So These words will signifie Head Helmet, murrion Head-piece Neck Gorget Trum Habergeon, Corslat Breast Breast-plate Back Back-piece These words will signifie Hand Gauntlet Leg Greaves, Jambeaux Defensive to be handed Shield, Buckler Target.
IV. 3. HOVSE ROOM House.The first of these will by its composition serve to express those vari∣ous names which are given to Houses, in reference to the several things or uses they are designed for. So These words will signifie Corn threshed Not threshed GranaryGarner Barn Hogs Sty Dogs Kennel Horses Stable Hawks Mew Pigeons Dove-cote Bees Hive Conny Borough Lions or Bears Den Ammunition Arsenal Magazine Bones of dead Charnel Water Conduit These words will signifie Publick hospitating Sale of Wine Ale Inn Tavern Ale-house Votaries Abby, Cloister Covent, Monastery Sick persons Spittle, Hospital Eleemosynated Alms-house Mad Bethlehem Idlers Bridewel Imprisonment Goal, Prison Forinsic Hall Discipling School Fornicat. Stews, Brothel Bordel Room.As the former Particle may be useful for the expression of the names of several Houses; so will this second for particular Rooms or Chambers. So These words will signifie Conventus Hall Eating Dining room Discourse Parlour Sleeping Bed-chamber Dormitory Walking Gallery Privacy Closet Books Library Meat Preparing Keeping Baking Kitchin LarderPantry Pastry Potation Buttery Potus Cellar Dunging Jakes, Privyhouse of office These words will signifie Cloths Wardrobe Clothing Vestrydressing-room Armory Armour Selling Shop Preserving Repository Drying Kill, drying loft Exter. dimin. LobbyAnti-chamber Way Passage, room Upper Loft, Garret Naval Cabbin Bees Cell Counsel Secret Ecclesiastic Conclave Consistory
V.Habit. 1. HABIT ART Each of these are applicable to Nouns. The use of the first Parti∣cle, is to denote the Habitualness of any such thing whose Radix is not primarily under that Genus of Habit. So these words Rejoycing, Worshipping, Obedient, Disobedience, &c. with this mark, will be de∣termined to the Habit of Chearfulness, Devotion, Obedience, Contu∣macy, &c. There are many Radical words under other Predicaments, as that of Action, Love, Zeal, Compassion, Envy, &c. Singing, Writing, &c. That of Relation, as Governing, Bargaining, Thieving, Whordom, De∣ceiving, &c. which when they are to be used under the notion of Habits, must be marked with this affix. The chief use of the second Particle,Art. is to supply the place of those several names which are commonly given to Arts and Sciences. So These words will signifie Quantity Mathematic Magnitude Geometry Number Arithmetic World Cosmography Star motion Astronomy Land Geography Times Cronology Harmony Music Vision Optic, perspe∣ctive These words will signifie Weight Static Building Architecture Wars Military order Chivalry Tactic Swording Fencing Language Grammar Oration Oratory Arguing Logic Manners Ethic Transcendent Metaphysic And so for those other cheating Arts of Manteia or Wizarding, with which the world always hath been and will be abused. In the naming of these it would be convenient to add the word Manteia, the better to distinguish these from such as are true Arts and Sciences. So The Art of is Star mant. Astrology Hand mant. Chiromancy Face mant. Physiognomy Fire mant. Pyromancy Water mant. Hydromancy
V. 2. OFFICER. ARTIST Though this second pair be not of any great affinity, yet are they here united, upon account, that they both denote personal respects. Officer.The first of them affixed to any single Character, will signifie the notion of Prefecture in any kind of place, imployment, relation; whe∣ther Honourable, or mean and Servile, as the Integral shall denote: But if the Integral be compounded with the Preposition Pro, or Vice, or instead of, which signifies the notion of Substitution, it will then ex∣press the Deputy or substituted officer; if with the Preposition Sub or Vnder, it will then denote the Inferiour or subordinate officer of that kind. So These words will signifie Navy Admiral, Vice-admiral Arms General, Lieuten-Gen. Brigade Major General Regiment Colonel, Tribune Company Captain, Centu∣rion Military Provision Commissary Ten Souldiers Corporal, Serjeant Tribe Sheriff, Under-Sheriff City Major University Chancellour, Vice-chan. College Master, Warden, President, Pro∣vost, Rector, Principal. Abby Abbot, Prior Manners Censor Alms Almner, Subalm∣ner Accounts Auditor Money Bursar, Trea∣surer Revenue Steward Gathering Collector Market Clerk of Market Poor Overseer Temple Church-warden Book Librarian Parturition Midwife Singing Chorister CleansingTemple Sexton These words will signifie Street Scavinger Citing Sumner, Ap∣paritor Peace Justice, Constable Degrees Herauld Writing Secretary, Clerk Speaking Prolocutor Ante-ambulant Usher, Beadle Pro-Presbyt. Curate Sub-Presbyt. Clerk Pasture Hayward Sheep Shepherd Cows Cow-herd Hogs Hog-herd Deer Keeper Conies Warrenner Hawks Falconer Provision Steward, Manciple, Caterer Meat ordering Sewer Drink Butler Door Porter Chamber Chamberlain Horse Groom, Hostler Agriculture Bailiff Arresting Baily, Beadle, Serjeant, Catchpole Imprisoning Jailour, Warder Whipping Beadle Executing Executioner Fornicating Pander, Bawd
The other Affix for ARTIST,Artist. is not of so much use or necessity as the rest, because it may be sufficiently expressed by those two Par∣ticles of Art and Person. It is here put in, because I could not think of any more convenient notion of the like affinity to supply this place. So These words will signifie Quantity Mathematician Magnitude Geometrician Number Arithmetician World Cosmographer Star Astronomer, &c. V. 3. MECHANIC MERCHANT The last pair in this Combination may properly serve to express those words which are commonly given to Persons from their several Trades and Occupations. The first, for the Trades of Manufacture,Mechanic. according to the several employments or object matters about which such Trades are conver∣sant; some of which will be capable of composition with the Preposi∣tion Sub or Vnder. So These words will signifie Stone Mason Wood Carpenter Metal Smith Gold Gold-smith Iron Black-smith Lead Plummer Pewter Pewterer Brass BrasierTinker Gems Lapidary Statues StatuarySculptor Painting Painter Musick MinstrelFidler Medicine Apothecary Printing Printer Writing Scrivener Cord Roper These words will signifie Leather Tanner Cloth Clothier Cloth thickning Fuller Vest TaylorBotcher Foot-vest ShoomakerCobler Head-vest Hatter Hand-vest Glover Spinning Spinster Sowing Sempster Washing Laundress Bed Upholster Tub Cooper Knife Cutler Bow Fletcher Candle Chaundler Book Book-binder And so for other particular Trades which belong to other matters, as Gun, Lock, Clock, Watch, &c.
Merchant.The second for the trades of Exchange, many of which were wont in their English names to be compounded with the Termination Monger; as Wood-monger, Iron-monger, Fish-monger, &c. From the old Latin word Mango, which signifies a Seller. So These words will signifie Flesh Butcher Cattle Grasier Spice Grosser Wine Vintner Victuals Victualer Medicament Drugster These words will signifie Linnen L. Draper Woollen W. Draper Head-vest Haberdasher Old-vest Broker Silk Mercer Book Stationer. VI. 1. POWER or Ability APTITVDE or Proneness. Betwixt these two there is an evident affinity, both of them being common servile notions, and of very general extent; they are appli∣cable to an Integral both Substantive and Adjective, and capable both of an Active and Passive sense: Being expressed in Latin by the Ter∣mination (tivus and bilis) and in English by the Termination (tive and ble) And when the words to which they are affixed are compounded with any Adverb of a Negative or Privative sense, they are by that Adverb made to signifie, Impotence or Ineptitude, either Active or Passive. Though the derivations of Abstracts before-mentioned may serve well enough for several of the following instances, yet to prevent the ambiguity that may otherwise happen in some of these derivations, it will be proper to make use of these Particles. We have not actually indeed such variety of words as may be suted to these notions; but this is from the defect of Language, for the things themselves are na∣turally capable of this kind of inflexion. Power.The first of these may signifie either Affirmatively Substantive, denoting Ability Active, to do, Sensitiveness, Visiveness Passive, to be done, Sensibleness, Visibleness Adjective, or Able Active, to do, Sensitive, Visive Passive, to be done, Sensible, Visible Negatively Substantive, denoting Inability Active, to do, Insensitiveness, Invisiveness Passive, to be done, Insensibleness, Invisibility Adjective, or Vnable Active, to do, Insensitive, Invisive Passive, to be done, Insensible, Invisible
By this Particle are all these common words to be exprest, Capable, Effable, Audible, Accessible, Comprehensible, Evitable, Fallible, &c. which being compounded with the Negative Particle (in) will signi∣fie the opposite, as, Incapable, &c. In this sense, to render a man Vnresponsive, is to Confound, Poze, Puzzle, Non-plus. A person insolutive, or (as we commonly say) insol∣vent, is a Bankrupt; Vnwalkative, is a Cripple; Non-surrective, is Bedrid; Vnfattable, is Flue, &c. The second of these may likewise signifie,Aptitude. either Affirmatively, whether affixed to Substantive, denoting Aptness Active, to do, Amorousness, Credulousness Passive, to be done, Amiableness, Credibleness Adjective, Apt Active, to do, Amorous, Credulous Passive, to be done, Amiable, Credible Negatively, whether affixed to a Substantive, Vnaptness Active, to do, Vnamorousness, Incredulousness Passive, to be done, Vnamiableness, Incredibleness Adjective, Vnapt Active, to do, Vnamourous, Incredulous Passive, to be done, Vnamiable, Incredible There are great variety of Integrals, to which these notes are appli∣cable. So These words will signifie Motion Agile, Nimble-ness Fear Timerous, Terrible Shame Bashful-ness Anger Hasty, Touchy, Peevish, Froward, Choleric, Tety, Pettish, Snappish, &c. Contention Captious-ness, Quarrelsom Contempt Scornful, Despicable Lust Salacity, Libidinous Inventiveness Sagacity Play Wanton, Gamesome These words will signifie Evaporative Volatile Imitative Mimical Cleanse Abstersive Corrode Corrosive Sickness Crazy Sickly Sleep Drowsie Grudge Querulous Kick Skittish Break Frail Brittle Correction Corrigible Associate Sociable To be found Obvious Inhabit Habitable Trouble Troublesom There are some words in our English Tongue which are used pro∣miscuously, both Actively and Passively; as Changeable, Mutable, Al∣terable, Pitiful, Fearful, Mortal, &c. whereby they are liable to mistake, which may be prevented by these Particles, being duely apply'd either to a Substantive or Adjective, Active or Passive, as the sense shall require.
VI. 2. INCEPTIVE FREQVENTATIVE Inceptive.The first signifies the beginning of Actions or Things; which being a kind of Mode or imperfect notion, is therefore fit to be joyned as a ser∣vile and auxiliary. 'Tis commonly expressed in English, by the word Wax or Grow; And in Latin (as was observed before) by the Termi∣nation sco, Senesco, Lucesco, Calesco; Wax old, Wax light, Wax hot, &c. There are in our Language some peculiar words and phrases, which do only import this notion, and by this mark will be rendred needless and redundant. So These words will signifie Fire Kindle, Tind, Light Break Crack Usurp Encroach Navigate Take shipping, Launch Itinerate Set forth Proceed Set forward These words will signifie Possess Take Livery and Seisin Repent Relent Trade Set up Work Set to work Hold Take hold Effluviate Tap, Broach So the word Morning, with this note will signifie, Dawning, Day∣spring, Aurora, Diluculum; And the word day or night, with this mark will signifie, Crepusculum, Twilight. Frequenta∣tive.The second of these doth signifie the repetition or wontedness of Actions, which is such a kind of servile notion as the former, and therefore fit to be this way provided for. It is of a very large exten in the use of it, being (as the other notion of inceptive likewise ) applicable to most Verbs; And there are some words in our English which will by this note be rendred needless. So These words will signifie Drink Bibble, Tipple Talk Babble Move in Water Dabble Come Haunt, Resort Repeat InculcateIngeminate These words will signifie Demand Solicit, Dunne Sigh Sob Disappear TwinckleGlimmer Pull Vellicate Bite Gnaw It may be worthy consideration to enquire, whether the opposite to each of these, viz. Desinative and Raritive or seldom, ought not to be particularly provided for in this kind.
VI. 3. ENDEAVOVR IMPETVS Both these may contribute to the Abbreviating of Language, when they are compounded as serviles; there being several distinct words and phrases, which by such composition will be rendred needless, their true notions being sufficiently expressable by the use of these Par∣ticles. The first denotes the Application of a Mans self to the doing of any thing.Endeavour. So These words will signifie Hear Listen, Hearken, Attend, Give Ear See Pry, Peep Feel Grope Lift Heave Catch Catch at These words will signifie Strike Strike at Strike thrust∣ingly Foine at Obtain Reach after Provide Purvey Sell Set to Sale The second doth denote the particular fit,Impetus. or sudden violence of any Action or Thing. So These words will signifie Motion Start, Jerk Thrust Rush Pull Twitch Percussion Rap Catch Snatch Bite Snap Exclamation Shout, Squeak, Squeal, Screan, Shreek These words will signifie Running Career Anger Fury Melancholy Dump Flame Flash Wind Flaw, Gust Rain Storm Battel Shock Disease Fit, Paroxysm VII. 1. AVGMENTATIVE DIMINVTIVE These are of very general comprehensive usefulness in Language. The former of them doth properly denote Transcendental Great∣ness, both Extensive and Intensive. When it is applyed to Bodies,Augmenta∣tive. 'tis of the same import with those usual words, Great, Huge, Vast, Main: and is by the Latins often expressed in Adjectives by the Termination (osus) whereby they signifie the notion of Abounding. When it is applied to Qualities or Actions, it denotes Intention of Degrees, being equivalent with those Articles, very, much, hard, sore, stark, sound, greatly; Valde, multum, oppido, magnopere, perquam, ad∣modum, vehementer, cumprimis, &c. It is applicable likewise by way of Allusion to the Amplitude, Gran∣deur, and eminency of any thing in its kind, which being a general Metaphor, may therefore fitly and safely be this way provided for: As the words Man, Physician, Merchant, with the note of Diminutive af∣fixed to them, do signifie, meanness and contemptibleness: So the same words with this mark of Augmentative, will denote eminency and considerableness, being proper to commend and set forth any thing for extraordinariness in its kind.
1. This mark may be applied to the names of Bodies. So These words will signifie Sea Ocean Wave Billow, Surge Staffe Stake, Batt Twig Pole Branch Bow, Arme of Tree These words will signifie Cord Cable, Rope Dish Charger Spoon Ladle Hammer Sledge Wooden hammer Beetle 2. It may be applied to such names as signifie Qualities or Actions. These words will signifie Hate Abhor, Abomi∣nate, Detest Fear Aghast, Hideous, Dread, Terrour, Anger Rage, Wrath, Fury, Rave, Grieve Take on Shame Confusion Wonder Astonish Consternation Malice Rancor Care Anxiety, Solicitude Willing Forward Desire Long for Known Notorious Ask Adjure, Urge Labour Toile, Moile, Drudge Endeavour Bestir, Stickle, Strive, Coil, Ado, Contend Affirm Averr, Avouch, Vouch Deny Renounce Sound Loudness, Noise Voice Clamour, Roar, Cry These words will signifie Past Antique, of old Oblique Steep Vicious Flagitious, Heinous, Profligate Hunger Greadiness, Eagerness Eat Devour, Voracious Drink Carouse, Quaff, Swill Spit Spawl Hot Torrid, Swelter, Soultry Pain Torment, Torture Price Pretious, Costly, Sumptuous, Dear Adorned Brave, Gallant, Gorgeous, Splen∣did, Sparke Beat Swing Pull Tug Prove Demonstrate Reprove Rate Solemnity Grandeur Fame Renown Diminutive.The second of these being directly opposite to the first, is of like extent and usefulness, and will not need any further explication but only by Instances.
1. 'Tis applicable to bodies and things. So These words will signifie Horse Nag Pike Pickerell, Jack House Cottage Bed Pallet Door Wicket Rain Mizling, drizling Skin Tunicle, Cuticle Bladder Vesicle Dust Atome, Mote Branch Sprig Images Babies, Puppets, These words will signifie Chamber Cell, Cabin Tower Turret Sword Dagger, Ponyard, Stilletto Gun Pistol, Dagg Stream Brook, Rivulet Prominence Stud Foss Wrinkle Script Ticket, Scrole Schedule Piece Scrap, Crum 2. 'Tis applicable to Qualities and Actions. So These words will signifie Hot Tepid, Lukewarm Moist Damp, Dank Light Glimmering Spot Speck Wild Skittish Gust Smack, Tang Sound Quatch Skill Smattering HandsomeGood Pretty More Great Many A little Greater More Price Cheap Move Wag Stumble Trip Halt Limp Fight Fray, Scuffle Bite Nibble These words will signifie Drink Bibb, Sip Cognition Hint, inkling, intimation Doubt Scruple Sin Peccadillo, Failing Vomit Puke Burn Parch, Scorch, Sweal Boil Parboil, reare Play Dally Sleep Slumber, Nap Ringing Jingle, Tinkle Prayer Ejaculation Comment Gloss, Notes, Annota∣tion Contention Jarring, Bickering Past Alate Future Shortly, soon Oblique Steep, slope Sum Driblet Proportion Pittance, Scantling Aggregate Parcel 3. This note may sometimes be applied in a Metaphorical sense to signifie contemptibleness or littleness of value, as well as littleness of bulk. So the word Man with this note may signifie either Dandiprat, Dwarf, Elf, Zany, Pigmy; or else Seru, Sorry fellow, Companion, Iack. So the word Physitian with this note, will signifie Mountebank, Quack∣salver, Empyrick: And the word Merchant being so noted, will signi∣fie Pedler, Huckster, &c.
VII. 2. EXCESSIVE DEFECTIVE Excess.These are joyned upon account of opposition, the meaning of each being very obvious. The former denoting all kind of excess; Particularly, 1. The re∣dundant extreme in all Qualities, or Vertues together. 2. With such other notions as bear some kind of Analogy or resemblance to these in other things. As likewise, 3. The Nimiety of any Quality or Action. 1. Of the first kind are such instances as these. So These words will signifie Diligence Double diligence Consideration Cunctation Heedfulness Carking Patience Obstinacy Constancy Pertinacy Knowledge Curiosity Prudence Craft Moderation Slightness, Neu∣trality Justice Rigor Fortitude Rashness Magnanimity Insolence Meekness Lentitude, stupor These words will signifie Modesty Abjectness Abstinence Maceration Cleanliness Finicalnessniceness Frugality Penuriousness Liberality Prodigality Magnificence Luxuriousnessriotousness Courtesie Fawning Taciturnity Shiness Urbanity Scurrility Gravity Formality Faith Credulity Hope Presumption 2. Of the second kind, these are some Instances. So These words will signifie Plane Mountain Oblique Direct Present Past Simultaneous Preceding Flet Gibbous These words will signifie Parabola Hyperbole Mean Acute Ripeness Over-ripe Equal Superior Sufficiency Excess 3. Of the third kind, there are these Instances. So These words will signifie Esteem Over-value Opinionate Over-weene Great Over-grown Load Over-charge Surcharge Adorned Gay, Gaudy Sweet Luscious Laugh Giggle Hasten Precipitate Chide Scold These words will signifie Long Tedious, prolix Old Stale Extension Sprain Dunging Scowring Soon Over-soon Repetition Battology, Tau∣tology Baked Over-baked Boiled Over-boiled Roasted Over-roasted
The mark of Defect is in each particular correspondent to the former,Defect. denoting either 1. The deficient extreme in all kind Acts, Habits, Vertues, as may be seen by the opposites to those before-mentioned. Diligence Idleness Consideration Rashness Heedfulness Carelesness 2. Some kind of resemblance to this in other things. Plane Valley Oblique Transverse Present Future, &c. 3. The deficiency of any Action, or the under-doing of a thing. Esteem Under-value Opinionate Under-weene Great Not sufficiently big, &c. Baked Under-baked Boyled Under-boyled. VII. 3. PERFECTIVE CORRVPTIVE This pair may be of very general use for all kind of Actions and Things. Besides those general notions referring to the measure and degrees of things in the two former pairs, it may be requisite to provide the like way for expressing the manner of them, as to Well or Ill; Right or Wrong; as it should be, as it should not be. The first of these is in many Greek words expressed by the composition with  and ,Perfective. and in English by Well and Right. So These words will signifie Figured Well-favoured Come Well come Advised Well advised Healthy Well in health Put Set right Understand Understand aright Use Use aright Time Oportunity, Season, Good time These words will signifie Event Prosper, Suc∣ceed, Speed, Fortunate, Lucky, Auspicious State Good plight Humour Debonair Voice Euphony Lettering Orthography Prove Demonstrate
Corruptive.The second of these is sometimes expressed in English by composi∣tion with those Particles Dis. or Mis. or Vn. So These words will signifie Colour Dis-colour Figure Dis-figure Place Dis-place Order Dis-order Proportion Dis-proportion Service Dis-service Temper Distemper Esteem Mis-prision Opinion Mistake Become Mis-become These words will signifie Conster Mis-conster Use Mis-use, Abuse Lead Mis-lead, Seduce Name Mis-call, Nic-name Event Mis-fortune Mis-chance Mis-hap Mis-adventure These words will signifie Timely Unseasonable, Untimely Figured Unfashioned, Defaced Event Unlucky, Unprosperous, Unhappy, Unfortunate, Unsuccessful, Sinister, Adverse This mark may likewise serve to express the true notion of several other words, which are not usually thus compounded. These words will signifie Fancy Caprichious, Freakish, Conceited Ancestor Degenerate Jester Buffoon Temper Humorist These words will signifie Horse Jade Write Scribble Cut, Carve Whittle, Hack Content Male-content VIII. 1. VOICE LANGVAGE The first of these will by its composition serve to express those se∣veral words which are used for the Voices of divers Animals: or for the voices that are used in expressing sundry Actions or Affections. So. These words will signifie Lion Roaring Horse Neighing Ass Braying Bull Bellowing Cow Lowing Sheep Bleating Wolf Howling Yelling Hen Cackle Chicken Peep Swallow Chatter These words will signifie Sparrow Chirp Hog Grunting Dog anger Barking Snarling Whelp Yelping Frog Croking Cock Crowing Goose Gaggle Owle Hoot Bee Buz, Hum
This note may likewise be applied to such kind of voices as belong to several affections. So These words will signifie Grudging Mutter, grumble, murmur Grief Wail, mourn, moan Anger Chafe, storm Contention Brangle, brawl, wrangle Praise Plaudit The second particular is paired with the former for its affinity to it.Language. The proper use of it is by its composition with the names or cha∣racters of several Countries or Nations, to express the notion of the Languages spoken by them. So the Character or word of English, Spa∣nish, French, Italian, German, &c. with this affix, will determine these words to the signification of those Tongues or Languages: And the same note affixed to the name of any Tribe, may signifie the Dia∣lect of it. There seems to be least necessity of this Particle; and it might well be spared, if any more proper could be thought of, to supply the place of it. VIII. 2. MALE FEMALE The second pair in this last Combination is for the distinction of such things as have Sex. And all those names of Animals or Relati∣ons, which are distinguishable only by their Sex, ought not to have any other distinction in their appellations but that of their Sex: So that whereas we say, Ram, Yew, Boar, Sow, &c. Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, &c. It would be more agreeable to the Philosophy of Speech, if these things were to be expressed a male sheep, a female sheep, a male or female swine; a male or female Parent or Child, &c. These marks are applicable 1. To kinds of Animals; of which there are such instances as these. These words will signifie Man Woman Lion Lioness Horse Mare Bull Cow Stag Hind Buck Doe These words will signifie Dog Bitch Cock Hen Drake Duck Gander Goose Drone Bee Milter Spawner 2. To Relations of Persons; as in these instances. So The words will signifie Brother Sister Uncle Aunt Nephew Niece Sutor Servant Mistress Sweet-heart Bridegroom Bride Husband Wife Batchelour Maid The words will signifie Widower Widow King Queen Lord Lady Master Mistress, Dame Man-servant Maid-servant Abbot Abbess Friar Nun Sloven Slut Whoremonger Whore, Strumpet
VIII. 3. YOVNG PART Young.By the first of these is meant the young ones or brood of any sorts of Animals, for which we have no proper word in English. So These words will signifie Horse Colt, Foal, Filly Cow Calf Deer Fawn Sheep Lamb Goat Kid Hog Pig Bear Cub These words will signifie Dog Puppy, Whelp Cat Kitlin, Chitt Cony Rabbet Hare Leveret Hen Chicken Frog Tadpole Herring Sprat Part.By the second of these may be expressed such kind of names as do comprehend in them the notion of Part, under the several relations of 1. Situation. 2. Proportion. 3. Figure or Colour. 4. Vse. 1. Of the first kind there are such examples as these. So These words will signifie Ship Fore Hinder Prow, Beak Poop, Stern Army Fore Middle Hinder Side Van, Vauntguard, Front Main Battel Rere, Rereward Wing Oration Fore Hinder Preamble, Preface, Proem, Prologue Epilogue, Conclusion 2. Of the second are such instances as these. A second Half A fourth Quarter A tenth Tithe, &c. And so a fourth part of a Circle is a Quadrant, a sixth part is a Sex∣tant, &c. 3. Of the third kind there are such instances as these. Hand Convex Concave Back Palm Leg Fore Hinder Shin Calf Egge White Yellow White Yolk Off-cut Segment
4. Of the fourth kind there are such examples as these. These words will signifie Covering Lid Stopping Stopple To be handed Handle, Haft, Helve, Hilt Bell striking Clapper Gun striking Cock Shoo-fastning Latchet It may happen sometimes that two of these Transcendental Parti∣cles should concur to the composition of some words: In which case it will be worth consideration, whether it may not be more distinct to express one of them by an Integral, and the other by an Affix. It may likewise deserve some farther inquiry, whether some of these Particles here nominated, may not be spared to make room for others more useful; as particularly those servile general notions of Continuing Discontinuing Permitting Hindering Facility Difficulty; as likewise, Flower, Fruits, Disease, &c. I have been somewhat the longer in treating concerning these Transcendental Particles; because being for the most part new, and not all of them used in any one Language, they do thereupon stand in greater need of being more particularly and fully explained and discussed. I have now done with the first part of Etymology; namely, con∣cerning the formal differences or kinds of words, whether Integrals Particles.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Accidental Difference of words. I. Inflexion. II. De∣rivation. III. Composition. THE next thing to be treated of, is concerning the Accidental Differences of words; and amongst these §. I.1. Concerning the Inflexion of them, which doth consist in the se∣veral ways of varying the same word to sundry modes of significati∣on. This is not arbitrary, as it is used in several Languages; much less should the rules to this purpose, which belong to the Latin, be ap∣plied to Vulgar Tongues, to which they are not suited (as many Grammarians use to do) but it ought to be founded upon the Philo∣sophy of speech and such Natural grounds, as do necessarily belong to Language. Integral words are all capable of Inflexion. 1. Noun Substantives are inflected in a threefold respect. 1. By Number, Singural and Plural, which being more Intrinsecal to them, ought to be provided for in the Character or word it self, and not by an Affix. 2. By Gender, in things that are capable of Sex, which are naturally but two, Masculine and Feminine: These being less Intrinsical to the primary notion of the word, may be more properly expressed by af∣fixes; and then the kind or species of every Animal (abstractedly from the respective Sexes of it) may be signifyed by the Radical word it self, without any sign of Sex, which will prevent much equivocalness. 3. By Cases, which is not so essential and natural to Substantives, as to be provided for in the word it self, by varying the Terminations of it; For though this course hath been used in the Greek and Latin: yet neither do the Oriental Tongues, Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, &c. nor those Occidental of French, Italian, Spanish; nor I think doth any Modern Tongue in the world this way express them. The true notion of the Nominative Case, is that which precedes the Verb, and the Accusative, that which follows the Verb; of which in speech that is suited to natural Structure and Syntax, there ought to be no other sign or note then the very order. As for the Genitive Case, the proper notion of that, is its following another Substantive in regimine: But because the following Substantive is not always go∣verned by that which precedes; as Vrbs Roma, Rhenus Fluvius, Taxus arbor, &c. therefore 'tis proper to have a Particle or Preposition for it, as our English (Of) and (De) in the French, Italian, Spanish, which was treated of before. The Dative Case is expressed by the Preposi∣tion (To) the Vocative by the Interjection of bespeaking (O) and the Ablative Case by such a Preposition as denotes Formal or Instrumental cause, or manner of Doing. So that the true notion of the Genitive, Dative, Ablative Case, is nothing else but that obliquity in the sence of a Substantive, which is caused and signifyed by some Preposition an∣nexed to it, as the Vocative is by an Interjection.
And besides these three ways of Inflexion, I have shewed before how Substantives are capable likewise of Active and Passive voice, and of Tenses. Noun Adjectives need not have any note to express Number, Gen∣der, Case, because in all these they agree with their Substantives; unless such Adjectives as are used Substantively, by reason of their composition with the Transcendental marks of Person, Thing, Time, Place, &c. In which case they have the same kinds of Inflexion with Substantives. But there is belonging to them, 1. A transverse Inflexion by degrees of Comparison, which may be best denoted by the extrinsical affixes of more, most; less, least. 2. An Inflexion by Voice Active and Passive, which makes them of the same nature with those words which we call Participles. 3. An Inflexion by Tenses. And though usually in the Latin there are but two Tenses, viz. Present and Future, in each voice of the Participle, Amans, Legens: Amaturus, Lecturus: Amatus, Lectus: Amandus, Legendus: excepting in some few words, Sequens, Sequu∣tus, Sequuturus; Gaudens, Gavisus, Gavisurus: and of Coenatum, which is used promiscuously both Actively and Passively; yet this is a defect in the Latin Tongue: For the natural notion doth render Participles as well capable of the Preter Tense; and accordingly the Greeks have : He that beats, he that hath beaten, he that will beat; he that is beaten, he that hath been beaten, he that will be beaten. The like would have been in Latin, if the Philosophy of Speech had been as well observed in the Institution of that Language. Derived Adverbs are capable of Inflexion by degrees of Comparison. Amongst the Particles, there are only two that are capable of In∣flexion; viz. the Copula, and Pronouns. The Copula is inflected by Mode and by Tense; which I have suffici∣ently explained before: Only 'tis here to be noted,Chap. 5. that besides those definite notions of time past, present, and to come, there is likewise Tempus Aoristicum, or indefinite time; and that whenever the Copula is used in materia necessaria, it ought to be understood as being inde∣terminate to any of those differences of time. So for such sayings, Homo est animal, Deus vivit, &c. there is no kind of time, whether past, present, or future, wherein these sayings are not equally true; so that the sense of such sayings is est, fuit, erit; vivit, vixit, vivet. And therefore it would be convenient to make some distinction for expressing this indefinite time. Pronoun Substantives are inflected by Number and Gender, and by Case, as Noun Substantives are; besides that kind of improper Inflecti∣on, whereby they are made Possessives; which is rather a kind of Deri∣vation, and reduplicative, which consists only in the doubling of them for the greater Emphasis. The other Particles are not capable of Inflexion, because they do not denote any Essence or Act, which is capable of several modes or re∣spects, as Integrals, and two of the Particles do: but only the Circum∣stances or Modifications of other words; and therefore may be stiled indeclinable or invariable.
§ II.As to Derivation, there ought naturally to be but one kind of Root, from which the several differences of Integrals should be derived; and this should be a Noun Substantive which signifies the Thing, or the Essence. If it be a Noun Substantive Neuter, then the first branches of it are Substantives Active and Passive; after which succeed the Adje∣ctives belonging to each of them, and then the Adverbs, which denote the Quality or Manner of being or doing. All which belong to one branch. Another branch is the Substantives Abstract, which have the same kind of derivations from them,Chap. I. § XI. as the former; as is more distinctly explained before. § III.As to the last accidental difference of words, viz. Composition. 'Tis to be noted, that the words of a Philosophical Language should be so suted unto natural notions, that there should be little need of other compositions, besides those by Prepositions, Adverbs, and Tran∣scendental Particles. But if this were desired for greater elegance and copiousness of Speech, it should be capable of any composition whatsoever, which may be signified in writing by some Hyphen or mark of Union, to joyn the words compounded; and in Speech by pronouncing them together as one word, without changing the na∣ture of either. So the word Idolatry is Idol-worship, &c. CHAP. IX. Of the second part of Grammar called Syntax. AS the first part of Grammar doth treat concerning the nature and differences of particular words: So the second part of Grammar stiled Syntax, doth concern the proper way of Union or right Construction of words, into Propositions, or continued Speech. And this may be distinguished into two kinds. 1. That which is Customary and figurative: or 2. That which is Natural and regular. 1. That structure may be stiled Customary and figurative, which is used in the Phraseologies or forms of Speech, peculiar to several Lan∣guages, wherein words are put together according to a Metaphorical and tralatitious sense of them; as in those Latin Phrases, Redigere in ordinem, which signifies, Privare magistratu; E medio tollere, for Oc∣cidere. And so for those English Phrases of Breaking a jest, Hedging in a Debt, Taking ones heels and flying away, Being brought to bed, Lying in, Being in Labour or Travail, &c. All which ought to be rendred according to the natural sense and meaning intended by those Phrases; which is observed in the regular Translation of any Lan∣guage. And he that would go about to render such forms of Speech, according to the strict and natural sense of the words, could not rea∣sonably expect to be understood in any other Language. But besides these kind of Metaphors which are peculiar to some Tongues, there are others of a more general use, which may be well enough retained in a Philosophical Language.
2. That structure may be called Regular, which is according to the natural sense and order of the words. The General Rule for this order amongst Integrals is, That which governs should precede; The Nominative Case before the Verb, and the Accusative after; The Substantive before the Adjective: Only Adjective Pronouns being Particles and affixed, may without incon∣venience be put indifferently either before or after. Derived Adverbs should follow that which is called the Verb, as denoting the quality or manner of the Act. As for the Grammatical Particles, those which serve for the Infle∣xion or Composition of words should naturally precede; and so like∣wise should other Adverbs, and Prepositions. Transcendental Particles are to be joyned in composition at the ends of words, to vary their termination. Besides the order required in Syntax▪ something ought to be sub∣joyned concerning the Quantity of Vowels or Syllables, together with the several distinctions or interpunctions to be observed betwixt words and sentences. As for that part usually treated of in instituted Grammars, stiled Prosodia, concerning the quantity of Vowels, there needs not any thing to be said unto that here; because in a Philosophical Language every Vowel is supposed to be in the writing sufficiently distinguished in this respect; every long Vowel having a note or mark to signifie its prolation. The expressing of any one syllable in a word, with a little higher tune, and longer time then others, is to be exprest by an accent; as in the words, Consènt, Contrìve, Compòse, Hàving, Wìsdom, Fòr∣tune, Pròfit, Pàrentage, Prìvilege, Consìder, Detèrmine, &c. The distinctions to be observed betwixt words and sentences, may refer either to 1. The time; or 2. The manner of pronouncing. 1. The first concerns those Pauses or intervals of rest to be ob∣served in Pronouncing, which were anciently distinguished into three kinds; namely, Comma, Colon, Period. The first of these being marked with a point by the middle of the Letter; The second at the top; The last at the bottom. Unto these, later times have added two others; namely, a mark to signifie something intermediate be∣twixt Comma and Colon, stiled Semicolon; and something more then a full point, which is usually exprest by a greater distance betwixt the words, or by a Breach in the line. The use of these Points is to direct what kind of pause is to be ob∣served, and how the tenor or tone of the voice is either to be conti∣nued or to fall. 2. The manner of pronouncing words doth sometimes give them a different sense and meaning, and Writing being the Picture or Image of Speech, ought to be adapted unto all the material circumstances of it, and consequently must have some marks to denote these vari∣ous manners of Pronunciation; which may be sufficiently done by these seven kinds of marks or Interpunctions.
1. Parenthesis. 2. Parathesis, or Exposition. 3. Erotesis, or Interrogation. 4. Ecphonesis, Exclamation or wonder. 5. Emphasis. 6. Irony. 7. Hyphen. 1. Parenthesis serves for the distinction of such an additional part of a sentence as is not necessary to perfect the sense of it, and is usu∣ally expressed in our Western Languages by the inclosing of such words betwixt two curve lines () 2. Parathesis, or Exposition, is used for distinction of such words as are added by way of explication of something preceding, and is usually expressed by inclosing such words between two angular lines; as [] 3. Erotesis, or Interrogation, is a kind of Period for the distinction of such sentences as are proposed by way of Question, and is usually thus marked? 4. Ecphonesis, or Wonder and Exclamation, is a note of direction for raising the tone, upon occasion of such words as denote some vehement passion, and is noted thus! 5. Emphasis is used for the distinction of such word or words, wherein the force of the sense doth more peculiarly consist, and is usually expressed by putting such words into another kind of Chara∣cter, as suppose the Italic. 6. Irony is for the distinction of the meaning and intention of any words, when they are to be understood by way of Sarcasm or scoff, or in a contrary sense to that which they naturally signifie: And though there be not (for ought I know) any note designed for this in any of the Instituted Languages, yet that is from their deficiency and imperfection: For if the chief force of Ironies do consist in Pro∣nunciation, it will plainly follow, that there ought to be some mark for direction, when things are to be so pronounced. 7. Hyphen is a note that signifies the uniting of two syllables or words into one, and may properly be used when two words are to be compounded together: It is usually expressed by two little strokes, thus ()
CHAP. X. Of Orthography. I. Concerning the doctrine of Letters: the Authors who have treated of this Subject. II. A brief Table of such simple sounds as can be framed by men. III. A fur∣ther explication of this Table, as to the Organs of Speech, and as to the letters framed by these Organs. ORthography is that part of Grammar,§ I. which concerns the doctrine of Letters, which being the most simple Elements of Speech, it ought therefore to be so stated, that there may be a sufficient number of them to express all Articulate sounds, and not more then are ne∣cessary to this end. Much consideration is requisite to the right esta∣blishment of these; upon which account this subject hath been largely debated, by several Authors of great names and reputation for Learning: Besides those Famous Emperours, Cajus Caesar, and Octa∣vius Augustus, who both writ upon this subject: arro likewise, and Appion, and Quintilian, and Priscian, did bestow much pains upon the same enquiry, concerning the just number of Letters. And in later times, it hath been treated of with great variety of Opinions, by Erasmus, both the Scaligers, Lipsius, Salmasius, Vossius▪ Iacobus Mat∣thias▪ Adolphus Metkerchus, Bernardus Malinchot, &c. Beside several of our own Country-men, Sir Thomas Smith, Bullokar, Alexander Gill, and Doctor Wallis; the last of whom, amongst all that I have seen published, seems to me, with greatest Accurateness and subtlety to have considered the Philosophy of Articulate sounds. But besides such (whose considerations upon this subject are made publick) I must not forget to acknowledge the favour and good hap I have had, to peruse from their private papers,Dr. William Holder. Mr. Lodowick. the distinct Theories of some other Learned and Ingenious persons, who have with great judgment applyed their thoughts to this enquiry; in each of whoe Pa∣pers, there are several suggestions that are new, out of the common rode, and very considerable. Letters may be conside∣red according to their Essence Accidents Names Order Affinity Figure Pronunciation The Essence of Letters doth consist in their Power or proper sound, which may be naturally fixed and stated, from the manner of forming them by the instruments of speech; and either is, or should be the same in all Languages. What variety there is of these, may appear from the Distribution of them into their several kinds, according to the following Table; wherein it is endeavoured and aimed at, to give a rational account of all the simple sounds that are, or can be framed by the mouths of men.
  Letters may be considered according to The organs by which they are framed, whether Their Natures Breathless Breathing through the Nose Mouth Intercepted Free Proceeding from Made by The mid∣dle of the mouth. Each side of the Mouth. Trepidati∣on of the Tongue Whistling Active Passive Dense Subtle Of a middle nature Vowels Tongue Root Inmost palate C G Ngh Ng Ch Gh § 11·                H Ƴ       Top Foremost palate, or Root of the Teeth. T D Nh N Th Dh Lh L Rh R Sh Zh S Z Hy ι e a α One Lip The other Lip Tops of the Teeth. P B mh m F V                 Hw {ou} o u     Mute Sonorous Mute. Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous  
For the better explication of this Table, there are these two things to be considered: 1. The Causes of these Letters.§ III. 2. The Letters themselves. 1. In the Causes of Letters there are observable The Organs by which they are formed, either more Common; Lungs, Throat, Mouth, Nose. Peculiar. Passive Palate; according to the parts Inmost or middle Foremost Teeth; either the Root or inner gums Top Lip Vpper Lower Active; whether the Tongue; according to the Root or middle Top Lips The Actions of these Organs, whether by Appulse; of the Lips; either To one another To the tops of the teeth Tongue; in respect of the Top of it; to the Teeth, their Tops Roots or gums Root or middle of it, to the Palate Trepidation, or vibration; either of the Lips Tongue; whether Top Root or middle of it Percolation of the breath, between the Lips contracted Tongue; either the Top of it, applied to the Tops Roots of the Teeth Root or middle of it, applied to the inward palate. These I conceive to be all the kinds of Actions and Configurations which the organs are capable of, in order to Speech. What kind of Letters are framed by these, will appear in the next Table.
All simple letters may be distinguished into such as are; either Apert and free, according to degrees Greater; stiled most properly Vowels, which may be distinguish∣ed into Labial, being framed by an emission of the breath through the Lips contracted, Less. (o) More, with the help of the Tongue put into a concave po∣sture long ways, the Whistling or French (u) Lingual; the breath being emitted, when the Tongue is put into a posture More concave, and removed at some distance from the pa∣late (α) Less concave or plain, and brought nearer the palate (a) Somewhat convex towards the palate (e) Lesser; being either Sonorous; of which it may be said, that they do somewhat approach to the nature of Consonants, and are mediae po∣testatis; because when they are joyned with any Vowel to compose that which we call a Dipthong, they put on the nature of Consonants; and when they are not so joyned, but used singly, they retain the nature of Vowels, which is the reason why it hath been so much disputed amongst some Learned Men, whether they are to be reckoned amongst Vowels or Consonants. These may be distinguished into Labial; by an emission of the breath through the Lips, more Contracted ({ou}) Lingual; when the breath is emitted betwixt the middle of the Tongue in a more Convex posture, and the pa∣late (ι) Guttural; by a free emission of the breath from the Throat (ƴ) Mute; When the breath is emitted through the Organs of speech, being in the same position as before: but without voice, to be distinguished as their three preceding correspon∣dents, into Labial (h{ou}) or ({ou}h) Lingual (hι) Guttural (h) Intercepted and shut; according to degrees Lesser; which because they have something Vowelish in them, are therefore by some styled Semivowels, being spiritous and breathed, whether Labial; being pronounced through the Mouth; by Appulse of either lip to the opposite teeth, framing V. Sonorous F. Mute Trepidation of the Lips, like that sound which is used in the driving of Cows, to which there is a correspon∣dent
mute, sometimes used as an Interjection of dis∣dain. Percolation of the breath, betwixt both the Lips con∣tracted round-wise, which makes the vocal whistling sound, to which likewise there is a correspondent mute whistling: But neither of these two last pairs being of use in Language, they need not therefore have any Marks or Letters assigned to them. Nose; by an appulse; either of the Lips against one another: or against the top of the Teeth, framing M. Sonorous. HM. Mute. Lingual; either in respect of the Top of the Tongue; being pronounced through the Mouth; by Appulse, of the top of the Tongue, to the Top of the Teeth; the breath being emitted through the middle of the Mouth, fra∣ming Dh sonorous. Th mute. Formost part of the Palate; the breath being emit-through the Corners of the mouth, framing L sonorous. H l mute. Trepidation or Vibration; against the inmost part of of the Palate, framing R. sonorous. HR. mute. Percolation of the breath; between the top of the the Tongue, and the roots of the Teeth, whether more Subtle, fra∣ming Z. sonorous. S. mute. Dense, fra∣ming Zh. sonorous. Sh. mute. Nose; by an appulse of the top of the Tongue to the roots of the Teeth, framing N. sonorous. HN. mute. Root or middle of the Tongue; being pronounced through the Mouth; by Appulse; to the inward Palate, framing Gh. sonorous. Ch. mute. Trepidation; which will frame a sound like the snarling of a dog, to which there is a correspondent mute, like that motion which we make in haaking, not necessary to be provided for by any Letter for Language. Percolation of the breath between the root of the tongue and the inward palate; to which there is a correspon∣dent mute, which makes a sound like the hissing of a Goose, not necessary to be provided for by any mark assigned to them for Letters. Nose; by an appulse of the root of the tongue to the inward
palate, fra∣ming NG sonorous. NGH. mute. Greater; which do most partake of the nature of Consonants, and may be stiled non-spiritous or breathless, to be distinguished ac∣cording to the active instruments of speech into Labial; Intercepting of the breath by closure of the Lips, fra∣ming B. sonorous. P. mute. Lingual; in respect of the Top, intercepting the breath, by an appulse to the bottom of the Teeth, fra∣ming D. sonorous. T. mute. Root, intercepting the breath, by an appulse to the inmost pa∣late; fra∣ming G. sonorous. C. mute. These I conceive (so far as I can judge at present) to be all the sim∣ple sounds that can be framed by the Organs of Speech.
CHAP. XI. Of Vowels. THose Letters are called Vocales, Vowels, in pronouncing of which by the Instruments of Speech, the breath is freely emitted; and they are therefore stiled Apert or open Letters. These may be distin∣guished either, 1. Formally, by their several Apertions, and the man∣ner of configuration in the instruments of Speech required to the fra∣ming of them, which constitutes the distinct species of Vowels; or 2. Accidentally, by the quantity of time required to their prolation, by which the same Vowel is made either long or short. There are (I conceive) eight simple different species of Vowels, easily distinguishable, whose powers are commonly used. I cannot deny, but that some other intermediate sounds might be found; but they would, by reason of their proximity to those others, prove of so difficult distinction, as would render them useless; these eight seem∣ing to be the principal and most remarkable periods, amongst the de∣grees of Apert sounds. As for the third of the Labials, the u Gallicum, or whistling u, though it cannot be denied to be a distinct simple vowel; yet it is of so laborious and difficult pronunciation to all those Nations amongst whom it is not used (as to the English) especially in the distinction of long and short, and framing of Dipthongs, that though I have enumerated it with the rest, and shall make provision for the expression of it, yet shall I make less use of it, than of the others; and for that reason, not proceed to any further explication of it. It will be difficult to express the several powers of these Vowels by writing; Pronuntiation being such a thing, quae nec scribitur, nec pin∣gitur, nec hauriri eam fas est, nisi vivâ voce.Lipsius de rect. Pronuntiatione L. Lat. cap. 3. And therefore the best way for the explaining of them, is by such known words as may be given for the instance of each of them. And as for the figure or wri∣ting of those four, which are not commonly esteemed to be distinct species of Vowels, I shall make choice to represent them by such Cha∣racters, as may seem least strange. What kind of power or sound that is, which is peculiar to each of these seven Vowels, may be easily understood by these following Instances: α Short Bot-tom Fol-ly Fot Mot Pol Rod α Long Bought Fall Fought   Paule Rawd a Short Batt Val-ley Fatt Mat Pal Rad-nor a Long Bate Vale Fate Mate Pale TRade e Short Bett Fell Fet Met Pell Red e Long Beate Veale Feate Meate Peale Reade i Short Bitt Fill Fitt Mit-ten Pill Rid i Long Beete Feele Feete Meete Peele Reede o Short             o Long Bote Foale Vote Mote Pole Rode {ou} Short   Full Fut   Pul   {ou} Long Boote Foole Foote Moote Poole Roode ƴ Short But Full Futt Mutt-on Pull Rudd-er ƴ Long           Amongst
Amongst these, the Vowels not commonly owned by us in writing, are these four, α.ι.{ou}.ƴ. But that they are distinct species of Vowels, and have peculiar powers of their own, not expressible by any other Letters, (supposing every Letter (as it ought) to be determined to one particular sound) may sufficiently appear from the above mentioned, and several other Instances. And that those two which are common∣ly used with us for distinct Vowels; namely, the third and the fifth, I, and V; as in the words Light, Lute, are not simple Vowels, but Dip∣thongs, I shall shew afterwards. Though the Vowel (O) do not admit of any instance in our Lan∣guage, wherein it is used Short, nor the Vowel (ƴ) wherein it is used Long; yet there are naturally such differences of these Vowels, as well as of the rest. Suppose a long Vowel to be divided into two parts; as Bo-ote, pronounce it then with half the time, and it must make the short Vowel Bote. And thus on the contrary, doubling the time of a short Vowel, as Bƴ-ƴt, will render it Long: which may serve to ex∣plain how these Vowels naturally are capable of being made both long and short; Though by reason of general disuse amongst us, such diffe∣rences would at first seem somewhat difficult, and not easily distin∣guishable. The Vowel (α) is placed first;  partly in conformity with other Alphabets, and because 'tis the most Apert amongst the Lingua-palatal Vowels. 'Tis expressed by this Character, because being one of the Greek Letters, 'tis more commonly known. 'Tis framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the Tongue and the Palate; the tongue being put into a more concave posture, and removed further off from the palate. The Vowel (a) is framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the tongue and the concave of the palate; the upper superficies of the tongue being rendered less concave, and at a less distance from the pa∣late. The Vowel (e) is framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the tongue and the concave of the palate, the upper superficies of the tongue being brought to some small degree of convexity. The Vowel (t) is expressed by this Character, because 'tis the most simple figure; and therefore doth best suit with the most acute Letter; as likewise, because this Letter, amongst many other Nations is alrea∣dy used and pronounced according to the sound which is here intend∣ed. 'Tis framed by an emission of the Breath betwixt the tongue and the concave of the palate, the upper superficies of the tongue being put into a more convex posture, and thrust up near the palate. The Vowel (o) is the first, and most apert of the Labials; being fra∣med by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the Lips, a little drawn to∣gether and contracted. The Vowel ({ou}) is the second of the Labials, requiring a greater con∣traction of the Lips. 'Tis expressed by this Character, which is used in Greek for ω Dipthong; because commonly that Dipthong, as also the French ou is pronounced in the sound of this simple Vowel. The Vowel (ƴ) is wholly Guttural, being an emission of the breath from the throat, without any particular motion of the tongue or lips. 'Tis expressed by this Character which is already appropriated by the Welsh for the picture of this sound.
The difference betwixt long and short Vowels, should alwaies be written as well as pronounced, that is, there should be some Note or Mark to express when a Vowel is to be used long. These eight Letters before enumerated, I conceive to be so many distinct species of Vowels, formally different in respect of their Powers; and though I cannot at present think of any other besides, yet having formerly, upon new considerations, and suggestions, so often changed my thoughts upon this enquiry, I dare not be dogmatical about it, or assert confidently, that there neither are, nor can be any more: For who knows how many other minute differences of Apertion may be now used, or hereafter found out, by others, which practise and custom may make as easie and distinguishable to them, as these are to us? Be∣sides that the measure of Apertion (as is well observed) must be like continued quantity, divisibilis in infinitum. Only this (I think) may be safely affirmed, that the establishment of Vowels here mentioned, will serve much better to express all articulate sounds, than can be done by any of the ordinary Alphabets now in use. I cannot but animadvert here on the by, upon that Argument which Capellus, and others do much insist upon,De Antiquitate Punctorum, l. 1. against the Antiquity of the Hebrew Points, or Vowels; Because (say they) the making of so many, is an injudicious, and irrational invention, for which there is no real ground; there being in nature, and amongst other Languages, but five distinct Vowels, and not fourteen: And therefore they conclude the Invention of them to be new, and not of any great Antiqui∣ty. To speak freely in this case (without inrposing as to the main state of the Question) This Reason doth not seem to be of any force. Though the Conclusion they infer should be true, yet this Argument urged for it, is false, both as to the Consequence, and Antecedent. The Imperfections and Defects of any Invention, do rather argue the Anti∣quity, than the Novelty of it; there being much time and experience required to the perfecting any invention: And it would rather fol∣low, that because they are imperfect, therefore are they more like to be Ancient. But besides, the Hebrew Vowels will upon considerati∣on, be found to be a contrivance full of more than ordinary Accurate∣ness, founded upon the Philosophy of Articulate sounds, and may without any force be applied to the number here established: Except∣ing the French (u). α Long a Long e Long ι Long α Short a Short e Short ι Short o Long {ou} Long ƴ Long   o Short {ou} Short ƴ Short   And though there be no distinct Character for {ou} short, and ƴ long, perhaps that Language as well as the English seldom using such distin∣ction in those sounds; yet is () sometimes in that Language used in stead of a short Vowel, and () for a long Vowel. The use of Scheva in the Hebrew, is to direct the joyning of such Consonants together, as would otherwise be of very difficult, pronun∣ciation, and not easily unite, as in the words  and  which
should be pronounced lmodh and mloch, but because LM and ML, will not of themselves coalesce, therefore is Schevah interposed, which being rapidly pronounced (and that probably as our short ƴ) does not seem to make any distinct Syllable. So that it seems much more colourable to infer the Novelty of the Hebrew Points, from the Accurateness, than from the injudiciousness of their contrivance. CHAP. XII. Of Consonants. THose Letters are stiled Consonants, in the pronouncing of which the Breath is intercepted, by some Collision or Closure, amongst the Instruments of Speech: And for this reason are they stiled Clausae Literae, as the Vowels are Apertae. The common distinction of these into Semi-vowels and Mutes, will not upon a strict enquiry be adaequate. And therefore I do rather chuse to distribute them into these three kinds; 1. , Spiritous, or Breathed. 2. , (if I may use that word) Semi-spiritous, or half Breath∣ed. 3. , Non-spiritous, or Breathless. 1. By Spiritous, or Breathed, are meant such Consonants, as re∣quire to the framing of them a more strong emission of the Breath, ei∣ther through the Nose. Mouth. 1. The Consonants which are to be breathed only through the Nose, may be again distin∣guished into 1. Sonorous, as M. N. Ng. 2. Mute, as hm. hn. hng. Both these kinds, as likewise those that follow through the Mouth, have some imperfect sound of their own, without the joyning of any Vowel with them; though the sonorous only be Vocal; and the mute sort are only a kind of Whisper. By Sonorous, are meant, such as require some voice or vocal sound, to the framing of them. By the Mutes of these, are meant other Letters of the same confi∣guration, pronounced with a strong emission of the Breath, without any Vocal sound. (m) is mugitus, the natural sound of Lowing, when the Lips are shut, and the sound proceeds out of the Nose. 'Tis counted of dif∣ficult pronunciation in the end of words: For which reason, the La∣tin Poets cut it off in Verse, when it comes before a Vowel in the next words: And the Greeks do not terminate any word with it. (N) is Tinnitus, when the breath is sent out, the Limbus of the Tongue being fixed towards the Gums, or bottom of the upper Fore∣teeth. In the pronouncing of this, the breath is emitted only out of the Nose, which makes it differ from (L). 'Tis counted a pleasant and
easie Letter, which may perhaps be the reason why this Letter N, and L, and R, are for the most part, both in Greek and Latin immutable, both in Declensions and Conjugations. (Ng) is framed by an appulse of the Root of the Tongue towards the inner part of the Palat. The sound of it may be continued simple, as well as any other; which makes it evident to be a single letter, and not a compound of n, and g, as we usually write it: Thus the word Anguis, in the true spelling of it, should be writ A, ng, G, {ou}, ι, s. The Hebrew  is supposed by divers Authors, but I think groundlesly, to be of this power. I know several things may be said, to render it pro∣bable, that the power here intended, may be sufficiently expressed, by a more soft and slight manner of pronouncing the letters N & G com∣pounded together: But I rather incline to reckon it a simple and di∣stinct Letter. To the Sonorous letters of this kind, there are three Mutes of affini∣ty, hm, hn, hng; which are formed when the breath is emitted through the Instruments of Speech, in the same position respectively as in the former, but without any Vocal Sound. The two first of these are in use amongst the Welsh and Irish: And the last of them, in the opi∣nion of Bellarmine, and some other Grammarians, is rather the true sound of the Hebrew . 2. The Spiritous Consonants to be breathed through the Mouth, are likewise of two kinds, Sonorous, V. Dh. L. R. Z. Zh. Mute, F. Th. hL. hR. S. Sh. (V) is the same with that which we call V Consonant: 'Tis of the same power which is commonly ascribed to B asperated, or rather in∣crassated. So the Western Jews pronounce their Letter () when not Dageshated. And 'tis observed that in Ancient Monuments amongst the Latins, these two Letters have been often put for one another: And that in some words,Scaliger de Causis L. L. cap. 28. where the sense hath been very much varied by this change; so Acerbus for Acervus: Veneficium for Beneficium. The power of this Letter was first expressed among the Latins by the Digamma Aeolicum, () (so stiled for its Figure, not its Sound) which is now the Character for the Letter (F) but had at first the power of the Consonant (V) and was written in Claudius his time invertedly, as DIFAI, AMPLIAFIT.Vossius Gram. lib. 1. cap. 15. This Letter is framed by a kind of straining or percolation of the Breath, through a Chink between the lower lip and upper teeth, with some kind of Murmure. (F) is the correspondent Mute to this: 'Tis framed by the same kind of position of the Lip and Teeth, and percolation of the Breath betwixt them, with this only difference, that as the former was with some kind of Vocal Sound, so this is wholly mute. This seems to be such an incrassation of the Letter (P) as (V) is of (B). 'Tis answera∣ble to the Greek (φ). And though several of the Greek words with (φ) are rendred in Latin by Ph, as Philosophia, Sophista, &c. yet the Ita∣lians write Filosofo, Sofista, &c. and some other words are so rendred in Latin, as , fuga,  fama. What that diluteness is,ibid. which Vos∣sius saith is more proper to F, than to φ, I understand not; nor is it easie to guess at the meaning of that in Cicero, concerning Fundanius, and Phundanius, unless perhaps it be, as Lipsius guesses, of pronoun∣cing it as Pfhundanius, or else as P-hundanius.
(Dh) and its correspondent Mute (Th) are of that power which we commonly ascribe to the Letters D, & T, aspirated or incrassated. And though these two Powers are commonly used by us without any provision for them by distinct Characters, yet our Ancestors the Sax∣ons had several Letters to express them. They represented (Dh) by this mark (ð) as in Faðer, Moðer, ðe, ðat, ðen: And (Th) by this mark (þ) as þeif▪ þick, faiþ. And 'tis most evident that the sounds of them (though we usually confound them, under the same manner of writing) are in themselves very distinguishable, as in these Exam∣ples. Dh. Thee, this, there, thence, that, those, though, thou, thy, thine. Father, Mother, Brother, Lea∣ther, Weather, Feather. Smooth, Seeth, Wreath, Be∣queath. Th. Think, thine, thigh, thing, thistle, thesis, thankes, thought, throng, thrive, thrust. Doth, death, wrath, length, strength, Loveth, Teacheth, &c. These Letters are framed by a percolation of the Breath through a kind of Chink betwixt the tongue and upper teeth, the first with some kind of vocal sound, the other wholly mute. (Gh) and its Correspondent (Ch) are both of them framed by a vi∣bration of the root or middle of the tongue against the Palate, the for∣mer being vocal, and the other mute. They are each of them of diffi∣cult pronuntiation: The first is now used by the Irish, and was per∣haps heretofore intended by the spelling of those English words, Right, Light, Daughter, Enough, Thorough, &c. Though this kind of sound be now by disuse lost amongst us, the latter of them (Ch) is now used amongst the Welsh, and was perhaps heretofore intended by the Greek Letter (χ.) Neither of them is easily imitable by any mouth not trained up to the practise of them. (L) is Clangor. 'Tis formed by an appulse of the Tip of the tongue to the Palate, and then forcing out the Breath. 'Tis esteemed facilli∣ma & liquidissima Literarum; in the pronouncing of which, most Na∣tions do agree. (Lh) or (hL) the correspondent Mute to this, is much used by the Welch: They seem to form it as the other (L) only by abstaining the voice, and a more forcible emission of the Breath, as is used in all other mute letters of the Spiritous kind. (R) is stridor vel susurrus: 'Tis called from the snarling of Dogs, Litera Canina: 'Tis made by a quick trepidation of the tip of the tongue being vibrated against the palate; for which, they who are disabled, by reason of the natural infirmity of their tongues, which is called , Balbuties, do commonly pronounce in stead of it, the letter (L) which is of a more soft and easie sound. Demosthenes, Alcibiades, Aristotle, Scaliger, the Fathers, are said to have laboured under this Infirmity. (Rh) or (hR) the correspondent mute to this, is made by a forcible emission of the breath, through the instruments of Speech in the same position as for the Letter (R) but without any vocal sound. 'Tis the same with the Greek () and much in use amongst the Welsh.
(Z) is by some stiled (S) molle. 'Tis properly the Greek () and the Hebrew (). 'Tis framed by an appulse of the tongue towards the upper Teeth or Gums, and then forcing out the breath from be∣twixt the tongue and the upper teeth, with a vocal sound, which makes a more dense kind of hissing, mixed with some kind of murmur, apum{que} susurro persimilem: 'Tis of the same affinity with S, as B with P, D with T, and G with C. That double Letter in the Hebrew () which is by some accounted equivolent to this, is of a quite different power, as were easie to illustrate by several examples. (S) the correspondent mute (though it be commonly reckoned for a semivowel) is framed as the former, but without any vocal sound. 'Tis stiled Sibilus. The power of it is the natural sound of Hissing; for which reason 'tis called Litera Serpentina. The Hebrews have two Characters for this Letter, besides two others for its Allies. Among the Persians all words that signifie Grandeur and Magnificence, are said to be terminated with it: Though others condemn it for a harsh, un∣pleasing, quarelling Letter. Messala Corvinus, a great man, and a famous Orator among the Romans, is said to have writ a particular Treatise against this Letter, much esteemed of amongst learned men. And Pindar likewise writ an Ode against it, versus , wherein there was no word that had any S in it. The disability of pronouncing this Letter, is called Blaesitas, Lisping, when 'tis corruptly sounded like (th). (Zh) the sonorous Consonant, and (Sh) its correspondent mute, are framed by a percolation of the breath, betwixt the tongue ren∣dered concave, and the teeth both upper and lower: The first being vocal, the other mute. Though they are not provided for common∣ly by distinct and simple Characters, yet are they distinct and simple letters; both of them facil and common: The first amongst the French, who express it by I, as in the word Iean, &c. and is easily imitable by us:Iudges 12.6. And though the other did once cost 42000 men their lives, for not being able to pronounce it, yet is it of common use with many Nations. 2. By Semispiritous or half breathed Consonants, are meant such as are accompanied with some kind of vocal murmure, as B, D, G. whereas 3. Those are stiled non-spiritous or breathless, which are wholly mute; as, P, T, C. (B and P) are framed when the breath is intercepted by the closure of the Lips; the first of them being more soft, with some kind of murmure, the other more hard and wholly mute. (D and T) are commonly framed, by an appulse or collision of the top of the tongue against the teeth, or upper gums; the first being more soft and gentle, with some kind of murmure, the other wholly mute. (G and C) are framed more inwardly, by an interception of the breath towards the throat, by the middle or root of the tongue, with such a kind of difference between them, as there is betwixt the two former pairs.
CHAP. XIII. Of Compound Letters, whether Vowels, Consonants, BEsides these simple Letters before enumerated, there are others commonly used, which may be stiled Compound, both Vowels. Consonants. The Compound Vowels are called commonly Dipthongs, or Trip∣thongs, or Bissona in Latin; but because the signification of those words may as well agree with double Consonants, therefore others would have them stiled Bivocales, or Trivocales. Iacobus Matthias in his Treatise de Literis, and our learned Gataker, in a particular Discourse to this purpose, do earnestly contend that there are no such things as Dipthongs. Their principal Arguments depend upon this Suppositi∣on, That (ι and {ou}) (which are necessary Ingredients to the framing of all usual Dipthongs) are Consonants, the same with y and w. Others would have them to be of a middle nature, betwixt Vowels and Con∣sonants; according to which Opinion I have already described them: From whence the Reason is clear, why these Vowels concur to the ma∣king of Dipthongs, because being the most contract of Vowels (as i also the Vowel (ƴ) of which more hereafter) They do therefore approach very near to the nature of Literae clausae, or Consonants; there being no Transition amongst these, either from one another, or to the other inter∣mediate sounds, without such a kind of motion amongst the Instruments of speech, by reason of these different Apertions, as doth somewhat re∣semble that kind of Collision required to the framing of Conso∣nants. Several Languages use several kinds of these Dipthongs, but how many there are in nature, may be easily collected by the former divi∣sion of Vowels (supposing that to be according to nature) One of these two Vowels ι or {ou} must be an ingredient into all usual Dipthongs, ei∣ther as Preposed. Subjoyned. 1. These Vowels ι and {ou} may be preposed in this mixture before each of the other; in which case they will have the same power that we commonly ascribe to y and w, and will frame these twelve Dip∣thongs. ια yall, yawne ιa yate yarrow ιe yet yellow ιo yoke ιu   ιƴ young {ou}α wall {ou}a wale {ou}e well {ou}o woe {ou}u   {ou}ƴ wunn, worse.
2. They may be subjoyned to each of the other; as in these In∣stances: αι boy aι Ay eι   o   uι   ƴι our English (i) in bite α{ou} aw a{ou}   e{ou} hew o{ou}   u{ou}   ƴ{ou} owr, owle. 3. They may be both preposed and subjoyned to themselves and to one another. ιι yee {ou}{ou} woo ι{ou} you {ou}ι wee As for the other intermediate Vowels being preposed before one another, they will not afford any coalescing sounds that are easily distinguishable. E being preposed before α, a, o, ƴ, will scarce be di∣stinguished from ια, ιa, ιo, ιƴ. A, before E, will be but as ā, before α, o, u, it will not coalesce into a plain sound. The same likewise may be said of the other Vowels, α, o. So that of this kind the whole number is twenty four. And this I conceive to be a sufficient enume∣ration of the natural Dipthongs. I cannot deny but that other Dipthongs may be made by the mix∣ture of the Vowel (ƴ) which were perhaps in use amongst the Jews, and exprest by () But being now, as I think, generally disused amongst other Nations, and for that reason very difficult to be pronounced, I shall not therefore take any further notice of them. When two Vowels are put together by way of Dipthong, so as to coalesce in one Syllable, 'tis necessary that there should be some Note or Mark in their Characters, to signifie their conjunction, as is usual in some of the Greek and Latin Dipthongs; as .— oe, ae, Otherwise there can be no certainty, whether the word be to be pro∣nounced as a Monosyllable, or Dissyllable, as in D-u-el, Duel. Sw-et, Swet. 'Tis a common Assertion amongst Grammarians, Priscian, Quinti∣lian, and others, That no one syllable can consist of three Vowels, and consequently that there can be no Tripthongs; which I conceive to be founded upon the former mistake; namely, that ι and {ou} are to be used as Consonants: For 'tis evident, that each of these may coalesce with every one of the first Dipthongs, as ιa{ou}, yaw, {ou}aι, way, ι{ou} yew, {ou}ƴι, in wile, wight, qui, &c. The compound Consonants are usually distinguished into such as are Asperated. Double. 1. Those are stiled aspirated, which seem to be mixed with (H) and are usually so written; as θ, , χ, . But in propriety of speech, if aspiration be defined to be an impetus of Breathing, then these Con∣sonants cannot so fitly be said to be aspirated, but rather incrassated by
compression of the breath in framing of them. Though not only the Europaean Nations do at this present express them by this mixture of (H,) but it was likewise the opinion of the Antients, as may appear; because before those Letters , φ, χ, were invented by Palamedes, the Grecians were wont to express the power of them, by adding the aspi∣ration H,Vossius de Gram. cap. 16. to Τ, Π, Κ. Yet 'tis very plain, that each of these Consonants esteemed to be aspirated, are simple Letters; because in the prolation of them, the same sound doth still continue, and therefore they ought not to be reckoned amongst the mixed Letters. 2. Double Consonants are such as are compounded of some of the other Letters, and for the Compendium of writing, are in several Lan∣guages expressed by single Characters, and reckoned in the Alphabet as if they were distinct species of simple Letters. Such are in the Latin Alphabet Q, X, and the double Letter Z, whose power is the same as DS. or TS. To which Claudius Caesar would have added an Anti∣sigma in this form () which should have had the power of the Greek ψ,Scaliger de de Causis L.▪ L. cap. 21. or PS. As for the Letter Q, 'Tis commonly granted to be a Compound of C and U;Vossius Gram. cap. 27. for which reason, in many ancient Books, the Letter V was not written after Q, as being involved in it; so qis, qae, qid. But what kind of V this should be, is much debated. Some would have it to be the Consonant, against which Ioseph Scaliger argues, that then it would not be pronounceable,Diatribe de varia litera∣rum pronuntia∣tione. being of near affinity to F, qfis, for quis. But upon consideration, it will be found to be the Letter  coalescing into a Dipthong with the subsequent Vowel, c{ou}am, being the same with quam. What the true Original is of (J) Consonant, and that power which we give to (Ch) in the words Charity, Cheese, Chosen, Chink, &c. is a question men have much differed about. 'Tis evident that neither of them are single Letters, because in the prolation of them, we do not end with the same sound with which we begin. As for that Con∣jecture,Alex. Gyll, Gram. cap. 1. that I Consonant may be expressed by dzy, dzyindzyer, Ginger, dzyudzy, Judge: or else that this sound is compounded of the Consonants dy,D Wallis Gram. as dyoy for joy, dyentle, gentle, lodying for lodging. And so for the power that we ascribe to Ch, that it may be sufficiently expressed by Ty, as ortyard, for Orchard, rityes, for riches: These I think need not any particular refutation. It seems to be plain, that J Consonant is a Compound of D, and Zh; and Ch of T, and Sh. As for the other three Consonants, that are reckoned in the common Alphabet, K, W, Y, enough hath been said to prove them unnecessa∣ry. If C be used alwaies in its proper power (as every Letter ought) then K must needs be superfluous; and therefore the Welsh who use C only for one kind of sound, have no K. And as for the Letters W, Y, their power is the same with that of the Vowels {ou}, and ι, as will evidently appear when they are rapidly pronounced before any other Vowel by way of Dipthong, so as to make but one Syllable; {ou}ι, wee {ou}arr warr, s{ou}im swim, ιes yes, ιoke yoke, ι{ou}th youth. The words young and younker being originally of the Dutch, are by them writ∣ten junk junker. And as for the Aspirations, wheele, where, when, &c. our Fore∣fathers the Saxons, did antiently prefix the Aspirations before the vow∣els;
as h{ou}il, h{ou}er, h{ou}en, which will in pronunciation be of the very same sound and power, wherein these words are now used, and there∣fore is more natural and proper than the common way of writing. According to this establishment, the simple Letters will be thirty four, whereof eight are Vowels, and twenty six Consonants, besides twenty four Dipthongs. The Greek Letters are said to have been at first only 16; namely, Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Ε, Ι, Κ, Λ, Μ, Ν, Ο, Π, Ρ, Σ, Τ, Υ.Vossius de Gram. cap. 18. To which Palamedes is said to have added the three Aspirates Θ, Φ X. Epicharmus the Si∣cilian the double Letters Z, ξ, Ψ. and Simonides the two long Vowels η and ω Notwithstanding which, that Alphabet is still in several re∣spects defective. What Theodorus Bibliander suggests in his Tract de ratione communi omnium Linguarum, that all sounds both articulate, and inarticulate, may sufficiently be expressed by 13 Letters, and an Aspiration, viz. the five ordinary Vowels, & B, G, D, L, M, N, R, S, is so very irratio∣nal, that I cannot think it needs any particular confutation. As for those other new Alphabets that are proposed by Sir Thomas Smith, Bullokar, Alex. Gill, they do none of them give a just enume∣ration of the simple Elements of speech, but what by the mixture of long and short Vowels, which do not differ specifically, together with the insertion of double Letters, they do too much increase the num∣ber of them. Besides that some other Letters are left out and omit∣ted. According to this establishment of Letters, if the Lords Prayer or Creed were to be written according to our present pronunciation of it, they should be each of them thus Lettered. The Lords Prayer. Ƴ{ou}r fadher h{ou}itsh art in héven, halloëd bi dhƴi nàm, dhƴi cíngdƴm cƴm, dhƴi {ou}ill bi dƴn, in erth az it iz in héven, giv ƴs dhis dai ƴ{ou}r daili bred, and fαrgív ƴs ƴ{ou}r trespassez az {ou}i fαrgív dhem dhat tre∣spas against ƴs, and lèd ƴs nαt int{ou} temptasiαn, bƴt deliver ƴs frαm ivil, fαr dhƴn iz dhe cingdim, dhe pƴ{ou}ër and dhe glαrι, fαr ever and ever, Amen. The Creed. Ƴi bilìv in Gαd dhe fàdher αlmƴiti màker αf héven and erth, and in Dzhesƴs Crƴist hiz onli sƴn ƴ{ou}r Lαrd, h{ou}{ou} {ou}az cαnsèved bƴi dhe holi Gost, bαrn αf dhe Virgin Màri, sƴffered ƴnder Pαnsiƴs Pƴilat, {ou}z cri{ou}sifiëd ded and bƴriëd. Hi dessended m{ou} hel, dhe thƴrd dai hi ròs again frαm dhe ded. Hi assended int{ou} héven, h{ou}èr hi sitteth at dhe rƴit hand αf Gαd dhe fàdher, frαm h{ou}èns hi shαl cƴm t{ou} dzhƴdzh dhe c{ou}ic and dhe ded. Ƴi bilìv in dhe holi Gost, dhe holi catholic tshƴrtsh, dhe cαmmi{ou}ni αf Saints, dhe fαrgivnes αf sinz, de resƴrrecsion αf dhe bady, and lƴif everlasting. Amen. Thus much may suffice, concerning the Forms, Essences, or Powers of the several Letters.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Accidents of Letters. 1. Their Names. 2. Their Or∣der. 3. Their Affinities and Opposition. 4. Their Fi∣gure, with a twofold Instance of a more regular Character for the Letters, the latter of which may be stiled Natural. 5. Of Pronunciation. 6. Of the several letters disused by several Nations. SOmething ought briefly to be added concerning the Accidents of Letters, viz. their 1. Names. 2. Order. 3. Affinity. 4. Fi∣gure. 5. Pronunciation. 1. Of their Names. Letters being of themselves the most simple Elements of Speech,§ I. ought therefore to be expressed by the most sim∣ple names,Names and such as do signifie their several Powers: In which re∣spect, the Roman Alphabet used in these Western parts of the world, hath an advantage above other learned Languages, wherein the Vow∣els are no otherwise named than by their own sounds, as A, not Aleph or Alpha; much less have they distinct names for long and short Vow∣els, as Kamets, Kametscatuph, &c. And those which they reckon as the two kinds of Consonants, Semi-vowels and Mutes, are likewise di∣stinguished in their very Names. The Vowels being preposed in those which they call Semi-vowels, el, em, en, ar, and subjoyned in the Mutes, be, ce, de, ge, pe, te. As for the other Letters before mentioned, which have a Right to be put in the Alphabet, they may be thus named: The sonorous ones, Eng, EV, Edh, Egh, EZ, EZh. The Mute ones, Hme, Hne, Hnge, Fe, The, Che, HLE, HRE, SE, She. § II.2. The most proper and natural Order of the Letters, I conceive to be the same in which they have been before treated of. Vowels should be reckoned up by themselves,Order. as being a distinct kind, and first, both for their priority in Nature, Necessity, and Dignity. If the order of these were to be regulated from the Instruments of speech, then u, o, {ou}, should be first, as being Labial, and α, a, e, i, next, as Lingual, or Lin∣guapalatal,De causis Ling. Lat. cap. 38. and ƴ last, as being Guttural. Scaliger would have A and O to be acknowledged for the first Vowels, as being Soni amplissimi, The next E, I, as being of a middle sound, and the last U, as being soni obscurissimi. That which to me seems the most proper Method, is to reckon them up according to their degrees of Apertion: Only in con∣formity with the common Alphabets, I begin with the Linguals, α, a, e, i, o, {ou}, u, ƴ. Amongst the Consonants, the Sonorous should precede, as approach∣ing nearest to the nature of Vowels. And amongst them, if those that are breathed through the Nose do precede, M must be the first, as be∣ing Labial; N next, as being Dental; and then NG, as being Lingua-palatal. Next, those that are breathed through the Mouth, accord∣ing to this order, V, Dh, Gh, L, R, Z, Zh. The first being Labial, the next Dental, the others Lingua-dental, or Lingua-palatal. Next
should follow the Spiritous Consonants that are Mutes; and first those pronounced through the Nose, HM, HN, HNG, then those pronoun∣ced through the Mouth, F, TH, CH, hl, hr, S, Sh. Then the semi-spiritous Consonants, B, D, G. And lastly, the non-spiritous, or breathless Consonants, P, T, C. 3. The Affinity of Vowels each to other is not difficul to determine, α and a of a middle sound, e and i of a more acute,§ 3. o and {ou} of a more grave tone. If they were to be opposed to one another,Affinity. this distribu∣tion would be most natural, (αi) (ao) (e{ou}) (vu) and so vice versa, (iχ) (a) ({ou}e) (uv.) The Affinity amongst the Consonants most obvious is this, (M, HM) (N, HN,) (NG, HNG,) (V, F,) (Dh, Th,) (Gh, Ch,) (L, HL,) (R, HR,) (Z, S,) (Zh, Sh,) (BP) (DT) (GC.) 4. Though all Nations do or should agree in the same power and sound of the Letters,§ 4. yet they differ very much in those Figures and Characters,Figure. whereby they represent them in writing according to those divers Alphabets that are received in the world: Amongst which, though some are much more convenient than others, yet none of them seem contrived upon a Philosophical ground. In the framing of such a Literal Character, these Conditions ought to be observed. 1. They should be the most simple and facil, and yet elegant and comely as to the shape of them. 2. They must be sufficiently distinguished from one another. 3. There should be some kind of sutableness, or correspondency of the figure to the nature and kind of the Letters which they express. It is not either necessary or convenient in the framing of a Language; to make use of all the Letters belonging to the Alphabet; but 'tis suffi∣cient that such only be made choice of, as are most easie and pleasant in the pronunciation and sound of them. But though it be not need∣ful to introduce all the Letters into the common use of a Language▪ yet it is most necessary that some way should be provided for represent∣ing the powers of all the simple Letters, because without this, there can be no way to express the proper names used in several Languages, whether of Places, or Persons, &c. as England, London, Oxford, Iohn, Mary, &c. There being frequent occasion in discourse to mention the names of such Individuals: And these being nothing else but such words or sounds as men have agreed upon to signifie such particular places or persons, must therefore be expressed by such Letters as make up these sounds. And though this real Character here treated of (as it is made effable) may serve for most of them, yet because there are several others not this way provided for, therefore may it be proper to offer some distinct Alphabet of Letters. Of which, I had provided several Instances and Examples agreeable to the Rules above mention∣ed. But I shall at present (because I would not too much digress) set down only two; which to me seem considerable in their several kinds. The former being more facil and simple, the other more complicate; but with this advantage, that it hath in the shape of it some resemblance to that Configuration which there is in the Organs of speech upon the framing of several Letters. Upon which account it may deserve the name of a Natural Character of the Letters. The Letters according to the first design, are represented in the fol∣lowing Table, consisting of 31 Ranks and 15 Columnes.
The first Rank doth contain the Characters for the six more sim∣ple Vowels, both preposed and subjoyned according to a threefold place, at the top, the middle, and the bottom of the Character, the former three being meer Rounds, the other Hooks. Those of a mid∣dle power, because they are necessary Ingredients to the making of all the usual Dipthongs, therefore have they a larger Character assigned to them, to which any of the other Vowels may be affixed, when they are to coalesce into Dipthongs. And though the Letter Y, be proper∣ly (as it is reckoned) one of those that are mediae potestatis, and may be compounded into a Dipthong with any of the other Vowels, yet because it is not now (for ought I know) made use of to this purpose, in any of those Languages that are commonly known and used amongst us; therefore is it at present reckoned only amongst the Vowels. The second Columne (besides the marks for those three Letters H, {ou}, i,) doth contain likewise the Characters for all the Consonants, according to their several affinities; where the Non spiritous Con∣sonants are expressed by straight lines, the Spiritous Consonants of affi∣nity to them being distinguished by a little hook affixed at one end. The other Consonants by curve lines, with the like distinction for their correspondent Mutes. The rest of the Ranks and Columnes consisting of mixed Letters, either the mixtures of the Vowels with H, {ou}, or I, or else the incorporating the Character for each of the six Vowels with that of the Consonant, the Vowel being preposed in the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Columnes, and subjoined in the other. As for the Characters that serve for Interpunction, the Comma may be expressed by a small, streight, oblique line (,) The Semicolon, Colon and Period, may continue as they are now used by most of the Europeans; there being nothing in their figure, of any such near resem∣blance to the other Characters, as may make them liable to mistake. And so likewise may those other Notes, which serve to distinguish the various manners of Pronuntiation, whether Explication [] Interroga∣tion? Wonder! Irony ¡ only the two curve Lines for Parenthesis () being here used for the Letters L, and R, may be supplied by these [] At the bottom of this Table there is an Instance of the Lords Prayer, being lettered sutably to our present pronuntiation of it. The Letters according to the second design may be thus contrived;
The first Columne doth contain the Vowels, as they are distinguish∣ed into Labial; being framed by an emission of the Breath through the Lips, whether Less contracted; O. More contracted, and somewhat compressed Downwards, {ou}. Vpwards, U. Lingual; the Tongue being put into a posture More concave; and removed, at some distance from the Palate, α. Less concave; or plain, and brought nearer to the Palate, a. Somewhat convex, towards the Palate, e. More convex, ι. Guttural, Ƴ. The other Columnes do contain the Consonants, as they are distin∣guished into Labial; whether such as are Breathless; Sonorous B. Mute P. Breathing; through the Mouth; Sonorous V. Mute F. Nose; Sonorous M. Mute HM Lingual; either in respect of the Top of the Tongue, whether such as are Breathless; Sonorous D Mute T Breathing, through the Mouth; by Appulse, of the top of the Tongue to the Top of the Teeth, the breath being emitted through the midst of the mouth, Sonorous Dh Mute Th Foremost part of the Palate, the breath being emitted through the corners of the mouth Sonorous L Mute HL. Trepidation or Vibration, against the inward part of the Palate, Sonorous R. Mute HR. Percolation of the Breath betwixt the top of the Tongue and the roots of the Teeth, whether more Subtle, Sonorous Z. Mute S. Dense, Sonorous Zh. Mute Sh. Nose; by appulse of the top of the Tongue to the Root of the
Teeth, Sonorous N. Mute HN. Root or middle of the Tongue appulsed to the Inward Palate, whe∣ther such as are Breathless; Sonorous G. Mute C. Breathing; through the Mouth, Sonorous GH. Mute CH. Nose, Sonorous NG. Mute HNG. Unto each of the Letters represented by a Face, there is adjoyned a lesser Figure, consisting only of the chief out-lines representing the Organs of speech. The Labials are represented by two curve Figures for the Lips. The Linguals by the Figure of the Tongue, according to its various applications; either of the Top or Root, to the several parts of the Palate, or of the Teeth. The Sonorous Consonants, of each kind, are distinguished from the Mutes, by the addition of (̄) to represent the motion of the Epiglot∣tis, by which sound is made. The Breathing or Spiritous Consonants are represented by a longer undulated Line, passing through the Mouth in some of them, either betwixt the Lips, in F, V. or between the Tongue and Palate, in Dh, Th, Gh, Ch, R, HR. In the two last of which, the top of the Tongue is divided, to represent that Trepidation or Vibration, in the framing of these Letters. Or by the sides of the Tongue in L, HL. Or betwixt the Top of the Tongue and the Teeth, in Z, S, Zh, Sh. In the two last of which, the undulated Line is doubled, to represent that more dense Percolation of breath, used in the framing of those Letters. Those that are breathed through the Nose, have this undulated line above the Palate, as in M, HM, N, HN, NG, HNG. I propose these only as being natural Pictures of the Letters, with∣out any Design of common use, for which they are less fit, by reason of their being so complicated. 5. Though each of the Letters have their distinct powers naturally fixed, yet that difference which there is in the various manner of Pro∣nunciation,§ 5. doth somewhat alter the Sound of them. And there are no two Nations in the world that do exactly agree in the same way of pronouncing any one Language (suppose the Latin) Amongst per∣sons of the same Nation,Pronunci∣ation. some pronounce more fully and strongly, o∣thers more slightly, some more flatly, others more broadly, others more mincingly. And in the hearing of forreign Languages, we are apt to think, that none of the Letters we are acquainted with, can frame such strange sounds as they seem to make: But this doth prin∣cipally proceed from the several modes of Pronunciation; the variety of which may well enough consist with the distinct power of the Let∣ters. 'Tis obvious to any one to observe, what great difference there will be in the same words, when spoken slowly and treatably, and when tumbled out in a rapid precipitate manner. And this is one kind of difference in the pronunciation of several Nations; The Spaniards and
Italians pronouncing more slowly and Majestically, the French more volubly and hastily, the English in a middle way betwixt both. Another different mode of Pronunciation betwixt several Nations, may be in regard of strength and distinctness of pronouncing, which will special∣ly appear in those kind of Letters which do most abound in a Lan∣guage. Some pronounce more deeply Guttural, as the Welsh, and the Eastern people, the Hebrews, and Arabians, &c. Others seem to thrust their words more forwards, towards the outward parts of the mouth, as the English; others more inward towards the palate, as the French;Prolegomena in Biblia Polyglot. some speak with stronger collisions, and more vehement aspirations, as the Northern people generally, by reason of their abundance of spi∣rits and inward heat; others more lightly and softly, as the Southern Nations, their internal spirits being more weak, by reason of the out∣ward heat. One principal Reason of the various sounds in the pronunciation of several Languages doth depend upon the nature of those Letters, of which they do chiefly consist and are ramed. Upon which account, the Greek, which abounds in Vowels and Dipthongs, is more smooth. And though the Latin have fewer Vowels, yet it is so equally mixed with them, as to be rendred facil and pleasant; whereas the Hebrew doth abound in some harsh Consonants, Aspirations and Gutturals. I cannot here omit the Censure which an ingenious person gives con∣cerning the difference of many of our European Languages,R. C. of Antho∣ny in Cambd. Remains. in respect of their pronunciation. The Italian (saith he) is in pronunciation, pleasant, but without Sinews, as a still flowing water; the French delicate, but inward and nice, like a woman that dares scarce open her mouth, for fear of marring her Countenance. The Spanish, Ma∣jestical, but withal somewhat terrible and fulsom, by the too much affectation of the Letter O. The Dutch manly, but withal harsh and quarrelsom. Whereas our English (saith he) hath what is comely and Euphonical in each of these, without any of their Inconveniences. 'Tis usual for men to be most favourable towards the Language unto which they have been most accustomed. 'Tis likely that Forreigners may be as apt to complain of several Defects in our Language as we are of theirs. That which doth generally seem most difficult to Strangers in our English Tongue, is the pronouncing of certain Aspirations (as they are stiled) very frequently and familiarly used amongst us, but hardly imitable by others, though these are but few; these five words (as it is said) comprehending all of them. What think the chosen Iudges? Which a little practise might overcome. It were desirable in a new invented Language, to make use chiefly of such Letters and Syllables, as are of general practise,§ 6. and universal∣ly facil in Pronunciation: But the custom of several Nations is so ex∣ceeding various in this respect, that 'tis very difficult to find out what these are; most of the Letters being disused, and not acknowledged for Letters, in several Countries. (α) is frequently used by other Nations, but not owned with a di∣stinct Character by the English. (a) is frequently used by us Englishmen, but not so much by other Nations. (e) is generally received, but very ambiguously pronounced.
(i) is not owned by us for a distinct Vowel, though we frequently use the power of it.Purchas. lib. 5. Chap. 9. And the Mexicans are said not to use the Letter (y) which is the same with this (as was shewed before.) Bp Walton In∣troduction.(o) is not in the Armenian Alphabet, nor do the Syrians own it, but use (u) or (aw) instead of it. Some of the Ancient Cities in Italy, those of the Vmbri and Tusci did not use this Vowel,Idem Proleg. 13.5. but u instead of it, (saith Priscian.) ({ou}) according to the true power of it, is not owned by us, nor by many other Nations with a distinct Character. (ƴ) is scarce acknowledged by any Nation except the Welsh. (u) is (I think) proper to the French, and used by none else. (M and N) are so general, that I have not yet met with an Account of any Nation by whom they are not used. (NG) is not owned for a Letter by any, except perhaps the He∣brews. (V) is not pronounced by the Mexicans, Arabians, Persians, Sax∣ons. (Dh) seems difficult to most Nations, though frequently used by us Englishmen. (Gh) is not any where, except amongst the Irish. (L) is not used by the Vincent le Blanc. Part 3.16. Brasileans, nor the men of Alex. Rhodes Diction. Anim. cap. 1. Iapan. Many of the Italians, especially the Florentines, do seem to dislike this Let∣ter, though others stile it the sweetest of all the rest, saith De recta scri∣ptione Linguae Anglicanae. Sir Thomas Smith. (R) is not used by the Mexicans, Brasileans, or the men of China, (say several of the same Authors) The Americans near New-England, pronounce neither L, nor R; but use N instead of both, pronouncing Nobstan for Lobstan. Alex. Rhodes ibid.(Z) is not owned for a Letter by the Inhabitants of CochinChina. (Zh) is not owned for a distinct Letter, either by us English, or al∣most any other, (HM, HN, HNG) are not, for ought I know) owned by any, ex∣cepting only the Welsh and Irish, and the last perhaps by the Iews. (F) is not pronounced by the Brasileans. (Th) seems difficult to many Nations, and is owned by very few, to be a distinct Letter. (Ch) is not used by any (for ought I can find) except the Greci∣ans and the Welsh. (HL) is almost proper to the Welsh, and scarce used by others. (HR) though frequent amongst the Grecians, yet is rarely used by others. Purchas. lib. 5. cap. 9.(S) is not used by the Mexicans. (Sh) That this was not universal among the Iews, may appear by the Scripture Story of Shiboleth, nor is it either in the Greek or La∣tin. Idem l. 10. c. 3. Item. vol. 5. c. 18. Sect. 6. Vossius de Gr. cap. 27.(B) is not pronounced by the men of China or Iapan. (D) is not used amongst the Inhabitants of China. (G) is not pronounced by the Mexicans. (P) is not acknowleded in the Arabick, nor was this used amongst the Iews before the Invention of Points. (T) is not used by the Inhabitants of Iapan.
(C) as restrained to the power of K, is for ought I know, of gene∣ral use. 'Tis not improbable but that there may be a difficulty and disuse of every one of these Letters in several Nations of the world; upon which account it is excusable, if in the framing of a Language, it be proposed to make use of all the Letters, without any particular choice of some, and seclusion of others. Or if any be excluded, they ought in reason to be such, as seem most difficult to those, amongst whom this Language hath its first Rise and Original. And such others should be most frequently used, as are generally esteemed most easie and pleasant. These 34 Letters before enumerated, will suffice to express all those articulate sounds, which are commonly known and used in these parts of the World. I dare not be over-peremptory in asserting that these are all the Articulate Sounds, which either are, or can be in Nature; it being perhaps as impossible to reckon up all such, as to determine the just number of Colours or Tasts: But I think that these are all the principal Heads of them, and that as much may be done by these (if not re) as by any other Alphabet now known.
PART IV. Concerning a Real Character, and a Philosophi∣cal Language. CHAP. I. The Proposal of one kind of Real Character (amongst many others which might be offered) both for the Integrals, whether Genus's, Differences or Species, together with the Derivati∣os and Inflexions belonging to them, as likewise for all the several kinds of Particles. THe next Enquiry should be, what kind of Character or Language may be fixed upon, as most convenient for the expression of all those Particulars above mentioned, belonging to the Philosophy of Speech; in order to which it may seem, that the first Enquiry should be con∣cerning Language; Because Writing is but the figure of Articulate sound, and therefore subsequent to it: But though it be true, that men did first speak before they did write, and consequently writing is but the figure of Speech, and therefore in order of time subsequent to it; yet in order of Nature there is no priority between these: But voice and sounds may be as well assigned to Figure, as Figures may be to Sounds. And I do the rather begin with treating concerning a com∣mon Character or Letter, because this will conduce more to that great end of Facility, whereby (as I first proposed) men are to be invited to the Learning of it. To proceed from the Language to the Chara∣cter, would require the learning of both; which being of greater dif∣ficulty, than to learn one alone, is not therefore so sutable to that in∣tention of ingaging men by the Facility of it. And because men that do retain their several Tongues, may yet communicate by a Real Cha∣racter, which shall be legible in all Languages; therefore I conceive it most proper to treat of this in the first place, and shall afterwards shew how this Character may be made effable, in a distinct Language. All Characters signifie either Naturally, or by Institution. Natural Characters are either the Pictures of things, or some other Symbolical
Representations of them, the framing and applying of which, though it were in some degree feasible, as to the general kinds of things; yet in most of the particular species, it would be very difficult, and in some perhaps impossible. It were exceeding desirable that the Names of things might consist of such Sounds, as should bear in them some Ana∣logy to their Natures; and the Figure or Character of these Names should bear some proper resemblance to those Sounds, that men might easily guess at the sence or meaning of any name or word, upon the first hearing or sight of it. But how this can be done in all the par∣ticular species of things, I understand not; and therefore shall take it for granted, that this Character must be by Institution. In the fra∣ming of which, there are these four properties to be endeavoured af∣ter. 1. They should be most simple and easie for the Figure, to be de∣scribed by one Ductus of the pen, or at the most by two. 2. They must be sufficiently distinguishable from one another to prevent mistake. 3. They ought to be comely and graceful for the shape of them to the eye. 4. They should be Methodical, Those of the same common nature, having some kind of sutableness and correspondence with one another; All which qualifications would be very advantageous, both for Vn∣derstanding, Memory and Vse. Those Characters must represent either Integrals Radicals. Derivations. Inflections. Particles Grammatical. Transcendental. The first thing to be enquired after, is to find out fitting Marks for the common Genus's or Heads in the former Tables of Integrals, which are there reduced to the number of forty. It were not difficult to offer several Varieties of these Marks or Generical Characters, with their different Advantages and Conveniences; to which purpose I had pre∣pared sundry kinds of them, which I once thought to have inserted here: but upon further consideration, I shall mention only one of them, which I have chosen out of the rest, as seeming to me to be in all respects the most convenient amongst them.
Transcend. General Rel. mixed Rel. of Action Discourse God World Element Stone Metal Herb consid. accord. to the Leaf Flower Seed-vessel Shrub Tree Animals Exanguious Fish Bird Beast Parts Peculiar General Quantity Magnitude Space Measure Quality Power Nat. Habit Manners Quality sensible Disease Action Spiritual Corporeal Motion Operation Relation Oecon. Posses. Provis. Civil Judicial Military Naval Eccles. The Differences are to be affixed unto that end which is on the left side of the Character, according to this order; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 The Species should be affixed at the other end of the Character ac∣cording to the like order. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 And whereas several of the Species of Vegetables and Animals, do according to this present constitution, amount to more than Nine, in such cases the number of them is to be distributed into two or three Nines, which may be distinguished from one another by doubling the stroke in some one or more parts of the Character; as suppose after this manner, . If the first and most simple Character be made use of, the Species that are affixed to it, will belong to the first combination of Nine; if the other, they will belong according to the order of them, unto the second Combination. Those Radicals which are paired to others uppon account of Oppo∣sition, may be expressed by a Loop, or (o) at the left end of the Cha∣racter, after this manner, Those that are paired upon the account of Affinity, are to be ex∣pressed by the like Mark at the other end of the Character, thus, The double Opposites of Excess or Defect, are to be described by the Transcendental points, denoting Excess or Defect, to be placed over the Character, as shall be shewed after.
Adjectives should be expressed by a Hook at the right end of the Cha∣racter in Genus's or Differences, thus Species Adverbs (being very near of kin to adjectives) may be expressed by a Loop in the same place. In Genus's and Diff. Species Abstracts may be expressed by a Hook at the left end of the Cha∣racter. In Genus's Differences and Species The Active and Passive voice may be expressed, one of them by a Hook, and the other by a Loop, at the left end of the Character, after this manner, in Genus's Active Passive Differences or Species Active Passive The Plural Number may be expressed by a hook at the right end of the Character, after this manner, in Genus's and Differences Species The Characters of the Particles should each of them be of a less fi∣gure, and capable of being varied to a threefold place. The Gramma∣tical Particles, being applied to the sides of the Character, and the Transcendental Particles to the top of it. These Grammatical Particles are here contrived to such a kind of distinct sutableness, so as each of the several kinds of them, hath a se∣veral kind of Character assigned to them. 1. The Copula, by the mark of () 2. Pronouns, by Points. () 3. Interjections by upright Lines streight or hooked, () 4. Prepositions, by small curved Figures 5. Adverbs, by a right angled Character 6. Conjunctions by an acute angled Character 7. Articles by two oblique Lines to be placed towards the top of the Character
8. Modes by circular Figures mixed 9. Tenses by a small streight transverse Line (-) Amongst these Grammatical Particles the first six are more principal and absolute, viz. 1. The Copula, being the Verb Sum, according to a threefold diffe∣rence of time. Have been, hast been, hath been. Am, art, is, are. Shall be. 2. Pronouns. I Thou He We Ye They This, That The same, Another A certain, Some body Any Every All Who? Which. Whosoever. If one of these Pronouns, suppose  be placed at the side of the Character before it,  it signifies the first Person (I.) If at the mid∣dle,  it signifies the second person (Thou.) If at the bottom,  it signifies the third person (He.) And if they are thus affixed after a Character that signifies Action, they will then denote the Accusative Case, Me, Thee, Him. so  is, I love him. If any of the Pronouns are to be rendered in their Possessive sence, this is to be expressed by a little curve Line under them, as () So  is My, or Mine, () is Ours, () is Thy or Thine, ( is His. And () is Theirs. The Reduplicative Notion of Pronouns may most naturally be ex∣pressed by a doubling of their Character with a Fulcrum or Arrectarius interposed. So  is I me, that is, I my self.  is Thou thee, Thou thy self.  He him, He himself. And so for the Possessives that are re∣duplicative  Mine mine, that is, My own, &c. And whereas several of the Pronouns were before said to be appli∣cable both unto Place, Time, and Manner, this ought to be expres∣sed in writing by the help of an Arrectarius, with the Transcenden∣tal Marks of PI. T. M. So  is, Which place. Thus  is, What place, or Where?  is, What time, or When?  is, What manner, or How? Interjections may be thus expressed; Admiring Doubting Despising Love, Hatred Mirth, Sorrow Desire, Aversation Exclamation, Silence Bespeaking, Expressing attention Insinuation, Threatning
The Marks for Prepositions may be thus applied; Of, With By, For Out of, Concerning According, Instead With, Without For, Against To, At From, Off Over, About Into, In Out of, Without Thorough, Beside Upwards, Above Downwards, Below Before, Behind Upon, Under On this side, Beyond Betwixt, Against The Marks for Adverbs may be thus applied; Yea, Nay Perhaps, Truly As, So How, So More, Most Less, Least Rather, Than Yet, Until Whilst, At length Together, Only Again, As if Un, Re Almost. Scarce. Thereabout. The Marks for Conjunctions may be thus applied; Whether yea, Whether no And, Neither If Unless Indeed, But Although, Notwithstanding Or, Either That, Least that For, Because Wherefore, Therefore Whereas, Thereupon Also, &c. viz. e. g. The other three kinds of Particles are more servile and auxiliary. The Articles may be expressed (as was said before) by two ob∣lique Lines to be placed towards the top of the Character A The The Mark for the Imperative Mood, according as it is applied to several places of the Character, may express the mode of Petition Perswasion Command
The Secondary Moods may have their Marks thus applied to them; Power Can Could Liberty May Might Will Will Would Necessity Must, shall Must, should Several of these Secondary Modes, will according to their places, towards the top, middle, and bottom of the Character, comprehend in them the several differences of time; so  is I would have writ. The Marke for the Tenses, Past, Present, and Future, may be thus applied; Have been, hast been, hath been. Am, art, is. Shall be. The Transcendental Marks to be put in three places over the head of the Character, may be thus applied; Metaphor Like Kind Manner Thing Person Place Time Cause Sign Aggregate Segregate Lamin Pinn Instrument Vessell Jugament Machin Sepiment Armament Vest Armour House Chamber Habit Art Officer Artist Mechanic Merchant Ability Proneness Inceptive Frequentative Endeavor Impetus Augmentative Diminutive Excess Defect Perfective Corruptive Voice Language Male Female Young Part Whereas there is somewhat peculiar in the nature of Numbers, di∣stinct from any of the other Heads, by reason of their great multitude, and various kinds; It may seem therefore necessary to offer some more particular directions for the expression of them, both as to the Numbers themselves, and as to the Grammatical Variations of them. Numbers are usually expressed in Writing either by words at length, or by Figures. The Character here proposed under the first difference of Measure, is that which doth answer to the writing of Numbers in words at length,
And because the Species enumerated under that difference, are but nine, for the nine Digits; therefore will it be convenient in the first place, to explain the manner how all other numbers above nine, are to be expressed in this Character; which may be done by affixing some of these four Marks, () put after the Character, closer to the Body of it than ordinary, to denote those round Numbers, Ten, Hun∣dred, Thousand, Million. Ten. Hundred. Thousand. Million. 20 200 2000 2000000 30 300 3000 3000000 But because those common Figures now in use, borrowed from the Arabians, are so generally known, and a kind of Universal Character already received; therefore it may be most convenient still to retain the use of them, as being much better fitted for all the Arithmetical Operations, of Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division, &c. than either that Numerical Character mentioned before, or the way of Numeration by Letters, or any other way that I can think of. As for those Variations of which Numbers are capable, and accord∣ing to which Grammarians do commonly distinguish them, they may be thus expressed. 1. Those which are called Cardinal Numbers, One, Two, Three, &c. are the Radical Numbers themselves. 2. Ordinals, as First, second▪ third, &c. are Adjectives Neuter. Firstly, secondly, thirdly, &c. are the Adverbs Neu∣ter. 3. Distributives may be exprest by the Substantive Neuter, with the Transcendental Mark of Segregate, the Substantive it self being put for one sort of Distributive in the singular Number, as sing. 3. (segr. will denote three, one by one; or for another sort of Distributive, being put in the plural number, as plural 3. (segr. will signifie by threes, or three by three. 4. Collectives may be exprest by the Substantive Neuter, with the Adverb together before it, with the transcendental Mark of Aggregate over it, as together-three, or three (Aggr. is a ternary, a leash, &c. 5. Multiplying a Number may be expressed by the Active of it, as a. three is trebling, and being multiplied by the Passive of it, as p. three being trebled. 6. Dividing a Number into parts, may be exprest by the Active with the transcendental Mark (Part. as a. three (part) is dividing into 3 parts, or active tripartition. Being divided into parts, may be ex∣pressed by the Passive with the mark of part; as p. three (part) is be∣ing divided into 3 parts, or passive tripartition. If this Division be into equal parts, one may express it by adding the Adverb equally.
7. A Fraction may be exprest; If it be the Aliquot part of a Num∣ber, by the Adjective Neuter, with the Transcendental Mark of Part, as adj. three (part) a third part, and it may be written thus, 3) 1; If it be not the Aliquot part of a Number, it may be exprest by both the Numbers which are to be considered in it, as three sevenths may be called a seventh part of three, and it may be written thus, 7) 3. 8. A Ration may be exprest likewise by both the Numbers which are to be considered in it, in speaking thus; as three to seven, in wri∣ting /7 9. Number of Species or Sorts, may be exprest by the Number with the Transcendental Mark of (kind) as threefold, 3 (kind. 10. Number of Times or Places likewise, by the Transcendental Marks of Time or Place respectively, as once, twice, &c. in one time place in two times places in three times places &c. 11. Abstract Numbers, as Unity, Duality, Trinity, may be exprest by adding the Mark of Abstract upon the Character. If the Question be how these Grammatical Variations may be con∣trived in the use of the ordinary Figures for Number, this may be done by affixing such variations upon a Transverse Line over the head of the Figure, So 1☐. 2☐. 3☐. will be the Adjective, first, second, and third, &c. So 1☐. 2☐. 3☐ will be the Adverb, Firstly, secondly, third∣ly, So 2☐. 3☐. 4☐. will be twofold, threefold, fourfold, &c So 1☐. 2☐. 3☐. &c. will be once, twice, thrice, &c. The Characters that serve for Interpunction, may be thus contri∣ved; Comma Colon Period Those other Notes to distinguish the various manners of Pronuntia∣tion may be Charactered after this manner; Hyphen Parenthesis () Explication [] Interrogation ? Wonder ! Irony ¡
These Marks having not any such near resemblance to the other Real Characters, appointed either for Integrals or Particles, need not therefore be changed, The Note for Emphasis, may be expressed either by a reduplication of the Characters, if it consist in one word; or by some variety in the shape of the Characters, if it consist in several words, as is usual in that way of printing Words in an Italic Letter The meaning of these things will appear more plainly by an Exam∣ple: To which purpose I shall set down the Lords Prayer, and the Creed written in this Character, which I shall afterwards explain and resolve according to the forementioned Rules.
CHAP. II. Instances of this Real Character in the Lords Prayer and the Creed. FOr the better explaining of what hath been before delivered con∣cerning a Real Character, it will be necessary to give some Exam∣ple and Instance of it, which I shall do in the Lords Prayer and the Creed: First setting each of them down after such a manner as they are ordinarily to be written. Then the Characters at a greater di∣stance from one another, for the more convenient figuring and inter¦lining of them. And lastly, a Particular Explication of each Chara∣cter out of the Philosphical Tables, with a Verbal Interpretation of them in the Margin. The Lords Prayer. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Our Parent who art in Heaven, Thy Name be Hallowed, Thy 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 Kingdome come, Thy Will be done, so in Earth as in Heaven, Give 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 to us on this day our bread expedient and forgive us our trespasses as 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 we forgive them who trespass against us, and lead us not into 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 temptation, but deliver us from evil, for the Kingdome and the 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80. Power and the Glory is thine, for ever and ever, Amen. So be it.
Our1. () The first Particle being expressed by Points, doth denote the thing thereby signified to be a Pronoun: And whereas there are two Points placed level, towards the upper side of the Character, they must therefore (according to the Directions premised) signifie the first Person Plural Number, viz. We. And because there is a curve Line under these Points, that denotes this Pronoun to be here used Possessively, and consequently to signifie Our. Parent2. () This next Character being of a bigger proportion, must therefore represent some Integral Notion. The Genus of it, viz. () is appointed to signifie Oeconomical Relation. And whereas the Trans∣verse Line at the end towards the left hand, hath an affix, making an acute Angle, with the upper side of the Line, therefore doth it refer to the first Difference of that Genus, which according to the Tables, is relation of Consanguinity: And there being an Affix making a right Angle at the other end of the same Line, therefore doth it signifie the second Species under this Difference, viz. Direct ascending, by which the Notion of Parent is defined. And this being originally a Noun of Person, doth not the need therefore Transc. Note of Person to be af∣fixed to it. If it were to be rendred Father in the strictest sense, it would be necessary that the Transcendental Note of Male should be joyned to it, being a little hook on the top, over the middle of the Character, after this manner (▪) The word Father in the most Philosophical and proper sense of it, denoting a Male Parent. And because the word Parent is not here used according to the strictest sense, but Me∣taphorically; therefore might the Transcendental Note of Metaphor, be put over the head of it, after this manner, (.) But this being such a Metaphor as is generally received in other Languages, there∣fore there will be no necessity of using this mark. 3. () This Character consisting of Points, must therefore denote a Pronoun;Who and because it consists of three Points, therefore must it denote one of the Compound Pronouns, and being placed towards the middle of the Character, therefore must it signifie Who personal, or Which real. Art4. () This Particle, being a small Round, doth therefore denote the Copula, and being placed towards the middle of the Character, it must therefore signifie the present tense of it, Am, art, is, are, and be∣ing joyned with a Noun of the second person, is therefore in English to be rendered (Art.) 5. () This Particle being of a curved figure, must therefore refer to Prepositions.In And by the shape of it, it must belong to one of the Opposites in the fourth Combination of Prepositions, and by the place of it, being towards the upper end of the Character, it is determined to the Preposition (In.) 6. () This Generical Character is assigned to signifie World, the right angled affix on the left side,Heaven. denoting the second Difference under that Genus, namely Heaven, which is defined to import either
a place or state of the greatest perfection and happiness; and because there is no affix at the other end, therefore doth it signifie the Diffe∣rence it self, and not any Species. 7. () This Particle,Thy for the Reason before mentioned (Numb. 1.) is a possessive Pronoun, for its consisting of a single Point, it must be of the singular number; and for its place towards the middle of the Character, it must relate to the second Person, viz. Thy, or Thine. 8. () The Genus denoted by this Character is Transcendental General; the affix to the end on the left side,Name doth signifie the first Difference under that Genus, viz. the Kinds of Things and Notions, or those essential Communities wherein the things of different natures do agree. The affix at the other end of the same Line, making an obtuse angle with the lower side of it, doth signifie the fourth Species under that Difference, viz. Name▪ which according to its primary sense is described to be the word assigned for the signifying any thing or notion. 9. () This Particle is appointed to signifie that which is called the Imperative Mode by way of Petition, or May it be,May it be or we pray that it may be. 10. () This Generical Character doth signifie Ecclesiastical Rela∣tion:Hallowed The affix making a right angle with the under part of the Ge∣nus, doth denote the fifth Difference, which refers to Discipline, or the due ordering of the Circumstances of Ecclesiastical or sacred things to the best advantage; under which the first Species denoted by the acute Angle on the other end and side, doth signifie the more general notion of separating things from their Commonness, and setting them apart by way of Honour to a more peculiar use, which is called Con∣secrating or Hallowing. By the Loop on the affix for the Difference, is signified the Passive Voice; and by the Hook on the other affix, the notion of Adjective. 11. () as Numb. 7.Thy 12. () This Generical Character doth signifie Civil or Politi∣cal Relation. The affix on the left side,Regnation, or  regnare. doth signifie the first Diffe∣rence under tha Genus which is Degrees of Persons. The affix on the Species side, doth refer to the second Species, which is King, defined to be the most principal and absolute amongst the kinds of Magistrates. The Hook at the end of the Difference affix doth signifie Action: So that the proper notion expressed by this Character is Regnation, or  regnare, which is the Substantive of Action, as King is of Per∣son. 13. () as Numb. 9.May it be 14. () The Genus denoted by this Character is Transcendental Action; the affix on the Difference side,coming. making an acute Angle with the lower side, doth signifie the sixth Difference, which according to the Tables doth refer to Ition, going, or passing; the affix on the Spe∣cies
side, being the first, doth according to the Tables, refer to the word Coming, which is described to be motion to a place nearer to us: The Hook on the Difference doth signifie Active voice, and the Hook on the other affix, the notion of Adjective, viz. Coming. Thy15. () as Numb. 7. Will16. () This Generical Character doth signifie the first Genus in Quality, which according to the Tables is Natural Power. The affix for the Difference, making an acute Angle, with the upper side of the Genus, must signifie Rational Faculty. The affix on the Species side, making an obtuse Angle with the lower side, must signifie the fourth Species, which is that Faculty we call Will, whereby we do rational∣ly follow after that which is good, and fly what is evil. The hook on the left side upon the Difference affix, denotes the Active voice. So that the proper Signification of this Character is Volition, or  velle. May it be17. () as Numb. 9. Done18. () The same Generical Character with Numb. 14. deno∣ting Transcendental Action. The obtuse angle on the left side signifies the third Difference, viz. General Actions relating to Business. The acute Angle at the other end, signifies the sixth Species, viz. the doing or effecting what we undertake and design, which we call performing or accomplishing; the Loop at the end of the Difference doth denote the Passive voice, and the Hook upon the other affix, the notion of Adjective; so that this Character signifies the Adjective Passive, of per∣form, viz. performed or done. So19. () This Character being a right angled Particle, doth denote some Adverb; and by its shape it appears to be one of the Opposites in the first Combination, and by its place towards the lower end of the Character, it is determined to the Particle (So.) In20. () as numb. 5. 21. () The same Generical Character as numb. 6. signifying World,Earth the affix making a right Angle, doth denote the second diffe∣rence under that Genus, namely, the Celestial parts of it in general, amongst which, this Globe of Sea and Land whereon we live, is reckoned as the seventh Species, denoted by the affix at the other end. As22. () This Particle being opposite to that numb. 19. signifying So, must therefore signifie As, the one being the Redditive of the other. In23. () as numb. 5. Heaven24 () as numb. 6. Maist thou be25. () The same as numb. 9. but being here joyned with a word Active of the second Person, it must be rendered in English, Maist thou be.
26. () The Genus of this Character is the same with number 14, & 18. denoting Transcendental Action; The affix on the left hand,Giving. making an obtuse Angle with the lower side of the Genus, doth there∣fore signifie the fourth Difference, which concerns Actions relating to Commerce: and the affix at the other end making such an obtuse angle, doth therefore signifie the fourth Species, which according to the Tables, is Giving, described to be the parting with something to ano∣ther, to which we our selves have a right. The Hook at the end of the Difference affix, doth signifie Active, and the other, Adjective, viz. Giving. 27. () This Particle, by the figure of it,To. must signifie a Prepo∣sition of the third Combination, and by its place at the upper side of the Character, it is determined to signifie the Preposition (To.) 28. () This Particle consisting of Points,Us. doth therefore denote a Pronoun; and because there are two Points placed in a Level towards the top of the Character, therefore must it signifie the first Person plu∣ral, as numb. 1. And coming after a Verb, it is to be rendered in En∣glish as we do the Accusative Case, (Vs.) 29. () as numb. 5.In 30. () This Pronoun particle consisting of two points placed ob∣liquely from the bottom towards the top,This doth therefore signifie one of the Relative Pronouns; and being placed at the top of the Chara∣cter, it must signifie (This.) 31. () This Generical Character is appointed to signifie the Genus of Measure. The affix on the left hand,Day making a right angle with the lower side of the Line, signifies the fifth Difference, which is Measure of Time. The affix at the other end, making the like angle, doth denote the fifth Species, viz. Day Natural, which is described to be the time of the Suns motion from any one Meridian to the same a∣gain. 32. () as numb. 1.Our 33. () This Character is appointed to signifie the Genus of Oeco∣nomical Provisions, of which,Bread the first Difference denoted by the affix on the left hand, doth refer to Sustentation ordinary, and the first Species at the other end, doth refer to such kind of ordinary food as is of a more solid consistence, made of Grain, or some other Vege∣table baked, without any considerable mixture, being of all other kinds of Food most necessary and common, which is Bread. 34. () The Genus of this Character doth signifie Transcenden∣tal General. as before, N. 8. The affix on the left hand being the fifth,Expedient doth denote the Differences of things relating to means; where the se∣venth Species, denoted by the affix at the other end, doth signifie that kind of usefulness, which may probably promote the end, which we call Expediency; and because the Hook at the end of the Species affix doth denote adjective; therefore this Character must signifie ex∣pedient.
And35. () The Particle represented by an acute angled figure, must therefore refer to Conjunctions. By the position of the Angle down∣wards, and by the situation of it towards the middle of the Character, it must denote the Conjunction, And. Maist thou be36. () as numb. 9. Forgiving37. () The Genus of this Character doth signifie Iudicial Re∣lation. The affix on the Difference side, making a right angle with the upper side of the Genus, doth therefore signifie the second Difference, viz. Iudicial Actions. The affix for the Species being the ninth, doth signifie that kind of Forinsic Action, which is consequent with respect to the Iudges, inflicting the punishment or freeing from it; the first of which is executing, to which is opposed (signified in the Character by the Loop on the left hand) Pardoning, or forgiving. The Hook up∣on the affix for the Difference, denoting the Active voice, and that up∣on the other affix, the Adjective. To38. () as numb. 27. Us39. () as numb. 28. Our40. () as numb. 1. Trespasses41. () The same Generical Character as numb. 8, & 34. signi∣fying Transcendental General. The obtuse angle on the left side doth signifie the third Difference, viz. the more common and absolute Diffe∣rences of things. The affix at the other end, making a right Angle with the upper side, doth signifie the second Species, namely, that Difference of things which doth include a respect to the Will, as to their agreement or disagreement with that Faculty, whereby they are rendered desirable, or avoydable; which we call Goodness or Evilness. The Loop towards the left hand, at the joyning of the Affix, doth denote the Opposite in the Tables, namely, Evilness: The Hook at the other end of the same Affix▪ doth signifie the Active voice; and the hook on the other side, the Plural Number: So that the true impor∣tance of this Character must be evil actions, which is the same with that which we stile Trespasses. As42. () as numb. 19. We43. () as numb. 24. Are44. () as numb. 4. But being here used with a word of the plural number, it must be rendered Are. Forgiving45. () as numb. 37. To46. () as numb. 27, Them47. () This Particle Pronoun consisting of two points placed le∣vel, must signifie the Plural Number of one of the Personal Pronouns, and being at the lower end of the Character, it must signifie They, and coming after the Verb, it must be rendered Them. Who48. () as numb. 3.
49. () as numb. 44. But being here placed towards the upper part of the Character, it must signifie the Copula in the Preter Tense,Have been Have been. 50. () The same Radical as numb. 41. Only the Hook on the Species affix, is on that side which signifies the notion of Adjective,Transgressing viz. Transgressing. 51. () This Particle doth by its figure appear to be one of the opposite Prepositions of the second Combination,Against and by its position towards the bottom of the Character, it is determined to (A∣gainst.) 52. () as Numb. 24.Us 53. () as Numb. 31.And 54. () This Particle by the figure of it, must be one of the Op∣posites of the first Combination of Adverbs, and by the place of it,Not it must be the Negative Particle No, or Not. 55. () as Numb. 9.Maist thou be 56. () The same Generical Character as Numb. 14, 18.26. sig∣nifying Transcendental Action, The Difference on the left hand,Leading be∣ing the same as Numb. 14. Namely, the sixth, denoting Ition; where the fifth Species signified by the right angled affix at the other end, doth by the Tables signifie Leading, which is described to be the caus∣ing of another thing to come after. The Hook on the Difference affix, doth signifie Active, and the other Hook Adjective. viz. Lead∣ing. 57, () as Numb. 28.Us 58. () This Particle by the place and shape of it, must be oppo∣site to that, Numb. 5. And consequently, according to the Tables,Into must signifie (Into.) 59. () The Generical Character the same with that, N. 14, 18, 26, 56. The right Angle on the left side denoting the second Difference,Temptation viz. General Relations of Actions Comparate: The right Angle at the other end and side, signifying the fifth Species, which in the Tables, is Comparing; to which is adjoyned by way of Affinity (signified by the Loop) the Notion of Trying, or the Examining of things, for the distinguishing of their Truth and Goodness. And because this is in it self of an indifferent nature, and consequently not to be deprecated; therefore the true Notion of it in this place, must be confined to such kind of Temptations or Trials as may be hurtful, which is expressed by the Transcendental Particle of Corruptive, set on the top of the Character towards the right hand. 60. () This Particle by the figure of it, must denote a Conjuncti∣on, and an Opposite belonging to the second Combination,But and by the place of it towards the upper end of the Character, it is determin∣ed to the Conjunction, (But.)
Maist thou be61. () as Numb. 9. Delivering62. () This Generical Character doth signifie Spiritual Action, under which the first Difference denoted by the acute Angle on the left side, doth refer to the Actions of God, (i. e.) such kind of Actions as do primarily belong to the Divine Nature; though some of them may in a secondary manner, and by way of participation be ascribed to other things. The right Angle made by the other affix, doth de∣note the fifth Species, which is defined to be the keeping or taking one from any kind of evil; which we call Delivering. The Hooks upon each affix (as hath been often said before) must denote Active, and Adjective. Us.63. () as Numb. 24. 64. () A Preposition of the third Combination, and by its place at the middle of the Character,From it is determined to the Preposition From. 65. () The same Radical Character as Numb, 41, 50. The lit∣tle upright stroke on the top towards the right hand,Evil being the Tran∣scendental Note of Thing. For66. () This Particle, by the shape of it, must be a Conjunction of the third Combination, and by the position of it about the middle of the Character, it must be the Causal Particle For, or Because. The67. () This oblique stroke towards the top is appointed to signi∣fie one of the Articles subservient to Substantives; and because the ob∣liquity of it, is from the bottom upwards towards the right hand, there∣fore doth it denote the Demonstrative Article The. Regnation, or  regnare.68. () as Numb. 12. And69. () as Numb. 35. The70. () as Numb. 67. Power71. () This Generical Character doth signifie Habit; the right angle on the left side, denoting the second Difference, which compre∣hends the Instruments of Virtue, commonly stiled the Goods of For∣tune: the right angle at the other end, signifying the fifth Species, which is Power, described to consist in an ability to protect our selves and others from Injury. And72. () as Numb. 35. The73. () as Numb. 67. Glory74. () The same Character, both as to the Genus and Diffe∣rence with Numb. 71. The affix towards the right hand signifying the second Species, which is Reputation, which by the transcendental mark of Augmentative over the Character towards the right hand, doth im∣port the Notion of Glory, viz. the greatest kind and degree of Repu∣tation.
75. () as Numb. 4.Is 76. () as Numb. 7.Thine 77. () This Generical Character,Everly doth signifie the Genus of Space. The acute angle on the left side to the top, doth denote the first Difference, which is Time. The other affix signifies the ninth spe∣cies under this Difference, which is Everness. The Loop at the end of this affix denotes the word to be used adverbially; so that the sense of it must be the same which we express by that phrase, For ever and ever. 78. () The word Amen in the Literal Character.Amen 79. () as Numb. 19.So 80. () as Numb. 9.May it be.
The Creed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I believe in God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven and 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 of Earth, and in Jesus Christ his Son only our Lord, who was 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 into hell, he did rise from the dead in the day third, He ascended 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 into heaven, where he sitteth at the right hand of God the Father, 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 from whence he shall come to judge the Quick and the dead. I believe 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 in the Holy Ghost, the Church holy Catholick, the Communion of 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the 108 109 life everlasting.
1. () This Particle being a single point,I must denote one of the demonstrative Pronouns in the singular Number: And by its place towards the upper end of the Character, and before the Verb, the Nominative Case of the first Person, viz. I. 2. () This Particle being a Round, must signifie the Copula,Am and being placed towards the middle, and joyned with the Nominative case of the first person, it must be rendered (Am.) 3. () This Generical Character is appointed to signifie the Genus of Habit.Believing The affix on the left hand making a right angle with the lower side, doth signifie the fifth Difference under that Genus, which according to the Tables, is Infused Habit. The other affix ma∣king an obtuse angle, doth signifie the fourth Species, viz. Faith; which is defined to consist in a readiness of mind to yield an effectual assent (without any affected captiousness) unto revealed Truths, up∣on such Grounds as their natures are capable of, and such as are in themselves sufficient to prevail with a prudent teachable man. The Hook upon the Difference denotes the Active voice, and the hook upon the Species, the Adjective, viz. Believing. The Word Believe being of an equivocal sense, may likewise be ex∣pressed by the Genus of Spiritual Action, the second difference, relating to the Acts of the Speculative Iudgment, and the affinis of the second Species, which is Believing, described to be an assent to any thing as truth upon the credit of others by whom it is related. But I rather chuse the former, as being more proper to this place. 4. () A streight Line being the most simple,God the Fa∣ther is put for the Cha∣racter of God. The acute angle on the left side doth denote the first Person of the Blessed Trinity, namely, God the Father; which by fol∣lowing the Verb, is supposed to be in the Object case. And this may better express the true notion of Credo in Deum, than by using the Pre∣position In, as the sense of that Particle is determined in the foregoing Tables. 5. () This Character doth by the two strokes denoting an Hyphen, appear to be a Compound.Almighty The two Points denote a Pronoun of the third Combination, and by the place of them at the bottom, they must signifie the Vniversal Collective, viz. All. The Integral Character with which this is compounded, is the Genus of Natural Power. The Hook at the end signifies the Grammatical notion of Ad∣jective. So that this compound Character may be rendered All-power∣ful, Omnipotent, or Almighty. 6. () This Particle doth signifie the Demonstrative Article The.The 7. () This Particle being a small transverse Line placed at the side,Having been must denote one of the Tenses, and being placed towards the upper part, it must signifie the Preter Tense. 8. () The Genus of this Character is appointed to signifie Spi∣ritualCreating per∣son
Action, or the Action of a Spirit, or Spiritual Faculty. The affix on the left, and that likewise on the right side, making acute angles with the upper side, must therefore signifie the first difference under that Genus which refers to Actions of God, and the first Species of that Difference, namely, Creation; which is defined to be, the putting of things into their first being. The hook at the end of the Difference affix, doth signifie Active, and the other Adjective. The transcen∣dental mark, of a little flat Line on the top towards the right hand, doth denote Person; so that this Character with the precedent affixes, doth properly signifie, the having been Creating Person. Of9. () This Particle doth by its figure appear to be one of the Prepositions of the first Combination, and by its position towards the top of the Character, it is determined to be the first of them, which in Latin and Greek is expressed by the Genitive case, and in English by the Particle Of. Heaven.10. () The Genus of this Character signifies World. The affix on the left side denoting the second Difference, is Heaven. And11. () This Particle, by the shape of it, appears to be a Conjun∣ction of the first combination, and by the position of it towards the middle of the Character, it must be the second of them, viz. the Con∣junction Affirmative, namely, And. Of12. () as Numb. 9. Earth13. () The same Character as to Genus and difference with Numb. 10. The affix for the Species making an acute Angle, and pas∣sing below the middle line, doth denote the seventh Species, which according to the Tables, is this Globe of Sea and Land. And14. () as Numb. 11. Jesus Christ15. () The same Generical Character as Numb. 4. The right Angle denoting the second Person in the Blessed Trinity, viz. Iesus Christ. His16. () This Particle being a single point, must denote one of the Demonstrative Pronouns in the singular number; and by its place to∣wards the bottom of the Character, it must signifie the third Person, or He; and being made possessive by the curve line under it, it must be rendered His. Son17. () The Genus of this Character doth denote Oeconomical Relation. By the acute angle on the left side, is signified the first Diffe∣rence, which is Relation of Consanguinity. By the right angle at the other end, is denoted the second Species, which is described to be Di∣rect Ascending, namely, Parent; to which is opposed Direct Descend∣ing, namely, Child, which opposition is denoted by the Loop on the left side of the Character. Only18. () The same Genus with the former, the fourth Diffe∣rence,
denoting Relations of Equality; the second Species signifying that particular Relation which is founded upon our Conversing with others, namely, Companion. To which the opposite (signified by the Loop at the joyning of the difference affix) is being in a state of Segregation from others. The hook upon the Species affix, denoting Adjective, viz. Alone, or Only. 19. () These two Points standing level, must signifie one of the Demonstrative Pronouns, in the Plural number.Our By the place of them towards the upper side of the Character, they must denote the first Person, We; which being by the curve line rendered Possessive, must signifie Our. 20. () The Genus of this Character is assigned to signifie Civil Relation;Soveraign of which the first difference doth denote Degrees of Per∣sons. The second Species signifying the supreme Magistrate, to whom others owe Subjection and Obedience, viz. King, Lord, Soveraign. 21. () This Particle consisting of three Points, must therefore signifie one of the Compound Pronouns.Who By the position of it to∣wards the middle of the Character, it denotes the second of them, to be rendered Who, when we speak of a Person: and Which, when we speak of a Thing. 22. () The Copula, as Numb. 2. but being here placed towards the top of the Character, it must be rendered in the Preter tense,Was viz. Hath been, or Was. 23. () The Genus of this Character is assigned to Corporeal A∣ction. The acute angle on the left side, denoting the first Difference,Conceived namely, such corporeal actions as belong primarily to Vegetative and living bodies. The right angle at the other end, signifies the second Species, which in the Tables is Impregnation; to which the Word Conception is adjoyned by way of Affinity, signified by the Loop on the right side. The Loop on the Difference affix, signifying the Passive voice; and the Hook upon the Species affix, Adjective. 24. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the second in the first combination of Prepositions,By relating to the Effi∣cient Cause, which we render By. 25. () as Numb. 6.The 26. () The same Genus with numb. 4, and 15.Holy Ghost The obtuse an∣gle signifying the third Person of the Blessed Trinity, viz. Holy Ghost. 27. () The same Genus and Difference as numb. 23. The af∣fix towards the right hand making an obtuse angle with the upper side must signifie the third Species, which is Parturition, or bringing forth.Borne The Loop at the end of the difference affix, denoting Passive voice, and the Hook on the other side, Adjective, viz. Borne. 28. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it,Of doth ap∣pear
to be the third of the first combination of Prepositions, relating to the Material Cause, ex qua (Of) The29. () as numb. 6. Virgin30. () The same Genus as numb. 17, & 18. The affix towards the left hand, denoting the second Difference, which is Relation of Affinity; the other affix denoting the first Species, viz. that preceding state, whereby persons are rendered capable of Marriage, namely, Celibate, to which the notion of Virgin is joyned as an affinis (denoted by the Loop on the right side) described to be one that hath not cou∣pled with any other. Mary31. () The name Mari in the Literal Character, as being a proper name. Capitally pu∣nished32. () The Genus of this Character doth belong to Iudicial Relation; the difference affix being the fifth, must denote Capital pu∣nishment; the Loop upon the Difference affix signifying Passive, and the hook upon the other affix, Adjective. Under33. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the first Opposite in the sixth combination of Prepositions, namely, Vn∣der. 34. () These being proper Names, are to be ex∣pressed only by a Literal Character,Pontius Pilate according to our English pronun∣ciation. Was35. () as numb. 22. Crucified36. () The same Genus and Difference with numb. 32. Un∣der which Crucifying is reckoned as the ninth Species. The Loop on the Difference affix doth denote the notion of Passive voice; and the Hook at the other end, the notion of Adjective, Crucified. Dead37. () The same Genus and Difference with numb. 23, & 27. signifying such corporeal Actions as do primarily belong to Vegeta∣tives. The affix on the right side, making an acute angle with the upper part of the transverse, and passing below it, doth signifie the seventh Species, which is Living; to which Dying is opposed. And that the Opposite is here intended, may appear by the Loop at the joyning of the Difference affix; the hook on the Species affix signifying Adjective. And38. () as numb. 11. Buried39. () The Genus of this Character is assigned to Ecclesiasti∣cal Relation; the fourth Difference comprehending the more com∣mon Actions belonging to Religion: the affix at the other end, being a thorough stroke, and making an obtuse angle to the upper side, must denote the ninth Species, which is Burying, described in the Tables to be one of those Ritual Offices consisting in performance of the Rites due to the dead, by putting their Bodies into the Ground. The
Loop on the Difference affix, doth signifie (as before) Passive, and the other Hook Adjective. 40. () A Pronoun of the third person, singular number, viz. He.He 41. () as numb. 22.Was 42. () This appears by the Hyphen,Descending to be a compound Character. The Particle in this composition, doth by the figure and position, denote the Opposite to the first of the fifth Combination of Prepositions, viz. Downward. The Genus of the Integral Chara∣cter, is Transcendental Action. The affix on the left side, making an acute angle with the bottom of the Line, doth denote the sixth Diffe∣rence, which is Ition, or the passing of things from one place or state to another; and because there is no affix at the other end, therefore this Character must denote the Difference it self. The Hooks on each side, do signifie Active and Adjective. 43. () This Particle doth by the figure and position of it,Into appear to be the first of the fourth Combination of Prepositions, and conse∣quently to signifie Into. 44. () This Character is the same for Genus and Difference with numb. 10. which doth there signifie Heaven;Hell and whereas here there is a Loop at the joyning of the Difference affix; therefore must it de∣note that which is opposite to the former; namely, Hell. This Clause might perhaps be more properly expressed thus; He became in the state, or he passed into the Invisible place, of the having died persons. 45. () as numb. 40.He 46. () as numb. 22.Was 47. () The same Genus with numb. 23, 27, & 37. Denoting Corporeal Action. The acute angle on the left side,Rising doth denote the sixth Difference, which is Gesture; namely, such animal motion whereby the situation of the Whole or Parts is altered. The acute an∣gle at the other end to the upper side, doth denote the first Species, which is motion upwards direct; namely, Rising. The Hooks on each affix denote Active and Adjective. 48. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the second of the third combination of Prepositions, viz. From.From 49. () as numb. 6.The 50. () as numb. 7.Having been 51. () This Charcter is in all respects the same with numb. 37. Excepting only,Dead persons that there is another hook upon the Species affix to signifie Plural Number, together with the transcendental Note of Person at the top of the Character towards the right hand, which makes the importance of this Character, with the two preceding Particles to be, The having died Persons.
On52. () Though this Preposition be properly local signifying in, as being opposite to numb. 43. Yet it is applicable, as the others of the same kind are, to Time; in which case it may be rendered On. The53. () as numb. 6. Day54. () The Character is the Genus of Measure. The affix both on the left and right side, denote the fifth Difference, which is Mea∣sure of Time, and the fifth Species, which is Day Natural. Third55. () The same Genus with the former, denoting Measure. The Difference affix making an acute angle with the upper side of the transverse, doth denote the first Difference, which refers to Number. The obtuse angle at the other end of the transverse, denoting the third Species, which according to the Tables, is the number Three. The Hook on this affix, shews this Word to be used adjectively, viz. Third. He56. () as numb. 40. Was57. () as numb. 22. 58. () Such a Compound as numb. 42. Only the Prepositi∣on here,Ascending being the first of the fifth Combination, must signifie Vpwards; and consequently, as the numb. 42. did signifie Descending: so this must be the Opposite to it; namely, Ascending. Into59. () as numb. 43. Heaven60. () as numb. 10. In61. () as numb. 52. Which place62. () A Compound of the Pronoun Which, and the transcenden∣tal Mark of Place, viz. Which place. He63. () as numb. 4. 64. () The Copula in the present tense, which being applied to the third Person singular,Is must be rendered (is.) Sitting65. () The same Character, both as to Genus and Diffe∣rence, with that, numb. 47. The species affix making a right angle with the bottom of the transverse, must denote the fifth Species; namely, sitting; the hook upon this affix, signifying the notion of Ad∣jective. 66. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it, doth ap∣pear to be the first Opposite in the third combination of Prepositions,At and to signifie At. The67. () as numb. 6. Right hand68. () The Genus of Space. The obtuse angle on the left side,
denoting the third Difference under that Genus; namely, Situation: the oblique line at the other end of the transverse, passing by both sides of it, doth denote the ninth Species under that Difference, viz. Right Side, or Right Hand. 69. () as numb. 9.Of 70. () as numb. 4.God the Fa∣ther 71. () as numb. 48.From 72. () as numb. 62.Which place 73. () as numb. 40.He 74. () The Copula in the Future tense, signifying, Shall be.Shall be 75. () The Genus of transcendental Action,Coming the sixth Dif∣ference, as before, numb. 42, 58. The first Species, viz. Come. The hooks on each affix, denoting Active, Adjective, viz. Coming. 76. () This Particle, by the figure and position of it,For doth ap∣pear to be the second opposite in the first combination, and to signifie a respect to the final Causes in Latin, ob, propter, in English, For. 77. () The Genus of Iudicial Relation. The first Difference,Judging which is Forinsic Persons; and the first Species, which is Iudge. The hook upon the difference affix, denotes this to be a Noun of Action, viz. Judication, or Iudging. 78. () as numb. 6.The 79. () as numb. 51. Only,Quick there wants the Note of Oppo∣site; so that as that signified dead persons, this must signifie living per∣sons. 80. () as numb. 11.And 81. () as numb. 6.The 82. () as numb. 7.Having 83. () as numb. 51.Died persons 84. () as numb. 1.I 85. () as numb. 2.Am 86. () as numb. 3.Believing 87. () as numb. 6.The Holy Ghost 88. () as numb. 26.The 89. () The Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation;Church the transcendental
mark 'over it, denoting Aggregate, which is the proper notion of Church. Holy90. () The same Genus and Difference, as numb. 3. Denoting Infused Habit; the second Species being Holiness, described to be that habitual frame, whereby one is fitted for virtuous actions; more espe∣cially for the duties of Religion: the hook upon the Species affix, de∣noting the Notion of Adjective, viz. Holy. Universal91 () The Genus of this Character is assigned to signifie Tran∣scendental Relation mixed; the obtuse angle at each end, must denote the third difference, and the third species: the third difference under that Genus, containing such transcendental relations as concern Number. The third species, being that more distinct relation of one Indetermi∣nate, or All, viz. Particularity, or Vniversality. The Loop at the joyning of the difference affix, denoting an Opposite, doth determine the Character to the second of these: And the Hook at the end of the species affix, doth make it signifie as an Adjective, viz. Vniversal, Catholick. The92. () as numb. 6. Communion93. () The Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation, as numb. 89. The third Difference, concerning states of Religion; the second speci∣es, Catholick, or Communicant, which is described to be one that is in a state of Charity with the body of those that agree in the same pro∣fession: the Abstract of which, denoted by the hook upon the diffe∣rence affix, is Communion. Of94. () as numb. 9. Saints95. () The same Genus and difference, as numb. 93. The fifth species denoting such as are eminently religious; the hook upon the species affix, signifying the Plural Number, viz. Saints. The96. () as numb. 6. 97. () The Genus of Iudicial Relation, as numb. 77. The second difference denoting Iudicial Actions.Being forgiven The ninth species signi∣fying that kind of Judicial Action, which concerns the inflicting of pu∣nishment, or freeing from it, Executing, or Pardoning. The Loop, at the joyning of the difference affix, denotes this to be an Opposite, viz. Pardoning or Forgiving. The Loop upon the top of this affix, signifies the passive voice, viz. the being forgiven. Of98. () as numb. 9. 99. () The Genus of Transcendental General; the third diffe∣rence respecting the more common and absolute differences of things;Sins the second species denoting that difference of things, which doth in∣clude a respect to the Will, as to the agreement or disagreement of things with that Faculty, stiled Goodness or Evilness. The Loop to∣wards the left hand, at the joyning of the affix, denoting opposite, viz.
Evilness; the hook at the other end of the same affix, doth signifie the Active voice; and the hook upon the other affix, doth denote the plu∣ral number: So that the meaning of this Character, must be evil acti∣ons, the same as Trespasses, or Sins. 100. () as numb. 6.The 101. () The mark of Future tense.Future 102. () A compound Character. The Particle, doth by the figure and the position of it,Relife, or li∣ving again appear to be the third Opposite in the fourth Combination of Adverbs, which is Re, denoting Restitution to what was before. The Integral Character signifies Life; as numb. 79. 103. () as numb. 9.Of 104. () as numb. 9.The 105. () The same Genus as numb. 10. signifying World.Body The first difference under that Genus, being Spirit. The Opposite to which, denoted by the Loop at the joyning of the Affix, is Body. 106. () as numb. 11.And 107. () as numb. 6.The 108. () as numb. 101.Future 109. () The same Integral as 102.Life 110. () A compound with the Pronoun All, as numb. 5.Everlasting The Genus of the Integral being the same with numb. 54, 55. doth de∣note Measure; the fifth difference of which, doth signifie measure of time, to which the word Duration is adjoyned by way of Affinity, signified by the Loop at the right side, where the hook denotes Adje∣ctive: So that the true sense of this Character, is All-during, or Ever∣lasting. I forbear any other Examples out of Aristotle, Euclid, Tully, Terence, which I once thought to have subjoyned; because if what hath been already delivered, be sufficiently understood, it will appear easie enough to render any thing out of those Authors, in this Character. I shall only add concerning the Character here proposed, that be∣sides the Facility, Comliness and Distinctness of it, containing a Descri∣ption of what is to be expressed by it, both as to the nature of the things, and the Grammatical Variation of the words; 'tis likewise a much shorter way of writing, than that by Letters: and by the great Variety which it is capable of, would afford the surest way for Crypto∣graphy or secret Writing.
CHAP. III. How this Real Character may be made effable in a distinct Lan∣guage, and what kind of Letters or Syllables may be conveni∣ently assigned to each Character. BY what hath been already delivered, it may sufficiently appear, how any thing or Notion, which falls under humane Discourse, may be expressed by such a Character as shall be legible to men of all Nations and Languages. I come now to shew how this Universal Character may be made effa∣ble in a distinct Language: The unfolding of which (supposing what hath been said about the Character and Grammar, to be well under∣stood) will need but little time and pains. The Qualifications desirable in a Language, should have some ana∣logy and proportion to those before mentioned concerning a Character or way of Writing; Namely, 1. The words of it should be brief, not exceeding two or three Syl∣lables; the Particles consisting but of one Syllable. 2. They should be plain and facil to be taught and learnt. 3. They should be sufficiently distinguishable from one another, to prevent mistake and equivocalness; and withal significant and copious, answerable to the conceipts of our mind. 4. They should be Euphonical, of a pleasant and graceful sound. 5. They should be Methodical; those of an agreeable or opposite sense, having somewhat correspondent in the sounds of them. The order to be observed in the assigning of Letters and Sounds to these Characters, must be after the same manner with the Method before made use of, in treating concerning these Characters: Beginning first with Integrals, according to their several Varieties, and then proceed¦ing to the Particles. The Integrals may be considered, either as they are Radicals, placed in the Tables, either more direct, whether Genus, Difference, or Species; or else Laterally, either by way of Affinity or Opposition. And next to the Words or Sounds appointed for each of these Radi∣cals, it is to be considered, by what kind of Changes or Varieties, the several Derivations and Inflections may be expressed. The first thing to be stated in such an Institution, is to assign several Letters and sounds for the 40 Genus's. It were not difficult to offer great variety of these; but to pitch upon that which upon all accounts would be the best, will require so much consideration, and practise, and so many Trials as I cannot pretend unto.
That which at present seems most convenient to me, is this; Transcend. General Bα Rel. mixed Ba Rel. of Action Be Discourse Bi God Dα World Da Element De Stone Di Metal Do Herb consid. accord. to the Leaf Gα Flower Ga Seed-vessel Ge Shrub Gi Tree Go Animals Exanguious Zα Fish Za Bird Ze Beast Zi Parts Peculiar Pα General Pa Quantity Magnitude Pe Space Pi Measure Po Quality Power Nat. Tα Habit Ta Manners Te Quality sensible Ti Disease To Action Spiritual Cα Corporeal Ca Motion Ce Operation Ci Relation Oecon. Co Posses. Cƴ Provis. Sα Civil Sa Judicial Se Military Si Naval So Eccles. SƳ The Differences under each of these Genus's, may be expressed by these Consonants in this order; B, D, G, P, T, C, Z, S, N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7.8 9. The Species may be expressed by putting one of the seven Vowels after the Consonant, for the Difference; to which may be added (to make up the number) two of the Dipthongs, according to this order α, a, e, i, o, {ou}, ƴ, ƴi, ƴ{ou}. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. For instance, If (De) signifie Element, then (Deb) must signifie the first difference; which (according to the Tables) is Fire: and (De∣bα) will denote the first Species, which is Flame. (Det) will be the fifth difference under that Genus, which is, Appearing Meteor; (Detα) the first Species, viz. Rainbow; (Det) the second, viz. Halo. Thus, if (Ti) signifie the Genus of Sensible Quality, then (Tid) must denote the second difference, which comprehends Colours; and (Tida) must signifie the second Species under that difference, viz. Redness: (Tide) the third Species, which is Greenness, &c. Thus likewise, if (Be) be put for the Genus of Transcendental Relati∣on of Action, then (Bec) must denote the sixth difference, which is Ition; and (Bec{ou}) will signifie the sixth Species, which is Follow∣ing. As for those Species under Plants and Animals, which do exceed the number of Nine, they may be expressed by adding the Letters L, or R, after the first Consonant, to denote the second or third of such Combinations. Thus, if Gαde be Tulip, viz. the third Species in the first Nine, then Glαde must signifie Ramson, viz. the third in the second Nine, or the twelfth Species under that Difference. So if Zana be Salmon, viz. the second species in the first Nine, them Zlana must signifie Gudgeon, viz. the second in the second Nine; or the ele∣venth Species under that Difference.
It must be granted, that there is one inconvenience in this Contri∣vance for the supernumerary Species, namely, that according to this way of expressing them, they are scarce capable of the derivation of Adjective: But this is more tolerable, because in such matters, where this will happen, there is no necessary occasion for this deriva∣tion. Those Radicals which are joyned to others by way of Affinity, may be expressed; 1. In Monosyllables, by repeating the Radical Vowel before the Consonant. For example, if (De) signifies Element, then (Ede) must signifie that which is joyned to it by way of affinity, viz. Meteor. If (Di) be Stone, then (Idi) will signifie Concretions, &c. 2. In Dyssyllables, by repeating the second Radical Consonant after the last Vowel: Thus, if (Dade) be Planet, (Daded) will signifie Co∣met. If (Dego) be Ice, (Degog) will signifie Snow, &c. Those Radicals which are paired together upon the account of sin∣gle Opposition, may be expressed, 1. In Monosyllables, by putting the opposite Vowel before the first Consonant, according to that order of Opposition before set down; namely, of α a e to ι o {ou} or ƴ. Thus, if (Dα) be put to signifie God, then (idα) must signifie that which is opposed, namely, Idol. If (Dab) be Spirit, (odab) will be Body. If (Dad) be Heaven, (odad) will signifie Hell. 2. In Dyssyllables, by adding the Letter (S) to the last Vowel: Thus if (Pida) be Presence, (Pidas) will be Absence. If (Tad{ou}) be Power, then (Tad{ou}s) will be Impotence. As for those double Opposites by way of Excess or Defect, which some∣times occur, as they are to be represented in writing by the Transcen∣dental Points of Excess or Defect, on the top of the Character, so are they to be expressed in speaking by those Syllables appointed to these Characters, which must be added to the termination of the word: Thus if (Teba) be Iustice, (Tebas) will signifie the Opposite Common; namely, Injustice: And (Tebasla) the Opposite by way of Excess; namely, Rigor, and (Tebaslo) the Opposite by way of Defect, viz. Remission. Tepα Veracity. Tepαs Lying. Tepαsla Over-saying. Tepαslo Vnder-saying, Detracting. Adjectives should be expressed by changing the first radical Conso∣nant, according to this establishment; B, D, G, P, T, C; Z, S, N. V, D{ou}, G{ou}, F, T{ou}, C{ou}, Zh, Sh, Ng.
Thus, if, Dα De Do do signifie God Element Stone then D{ou}α D{ou}e D{ou}o must si∣gnifie Divine. Elementary Stony. Adverbs may be expressed by turning the first Radical Vowel into a Dipthong. So Dαι is Divinely. (Sƴιb) is Religiously. (Sƴιgas) is Schismatically. Abstracts may be expressed, 1. In Monosyllables of the Genus, by ad∣ding the Letter (r) after the first Radical Vowel. So Dαr is Deity or Divinity. In Monosyllables of the Difference, and Dissyllables of the Species, by changing the second Radical Character Consonant thus; B, D, G, P, T, C, Z, S, N. V, Dh, Dzh, F, Th, Tsh, Zh, Sh, Ng. The Letters Dzh, and Tsh, being the same power which we English∣men give to the Letters G, and Ch, in the words Ginger, and Charity. Thus (Bαd) is Cause; (Bαdh) is Causality. (Saba) is King, (Sava) is Regality or Majesty. There are only two things noted in the Character belonging to the Inflection of words; namely, 1. The Active and Passive voice, to be expressed by the Letters L, and N, after the first Vowel: thus (Salba) is Regnation; and (Samba) is  regnari. 2. The Plural Number in Substantives, which is sometimes likewise affixed to Adjectives, when they are used substantively, by reason of any transcendental Mark joyned to them. And this may be done by prolonging the first Vowel, which upon all other occasions, is to be pronounced as being short. But because it will be difficult to prolong this Vowel in Monosyllables of the Genus, when no Consonant doth follow; therefore in this case it may be proper to add the Vowel {ou} to the Radical Vowel. So if Dα be God, Dα{ou} will be Gods. According to this establishment, every Radical Genus Difference and Species, may be expressed by such words as are facil and pleasant. Those words that are most harsh and difficult, will happen amongst such of the Derivations as are seldom used; as in some of the Active or Passive Adverbs, and in some of the Abstracts. By these Instances it will be easie to understand all the rest. The Particles may be expressed either by simple Vowels or Dip∣thongs, or by some of those Monosyllables, not used for any of the Genus's or Differences. Amongst the Grammatical Particles, the more principal are, the Copula, Pronouns, Interjections, Prepositions, Adverbs, Conjuncti∣ons.
1. The Copula, or Verb Sum, according to its threefold place in the Character, may be expressed by these Dipthongs ια. ιa. ιe. 2. The Pronouns, according to their several kinds, may be expres∣sed by these Vowels and Dipthongs; α αι ι o α{ou} ∴ oι. a aι {ou} ƴ a{ou} ∴ {ou}{ou}. e eι ƴι ƴ{ou} e{ou} ∴ ι ι Possessive Pronouns by prefixing (H.) Reduplicative, by interposing (L.) So Hα is mine, Hαlα is my own. 3. The Interjections, being Natural sounds themselves, need not have any assigned to the Characters of them, than what are General. So Heigh Hm, Hu. Pish, Shu, Tush Ah, alack, alas. Ha, ha, he. O, O that. Vauh, Hau. Hoi, ah, oh. Phy. Oh, soho. Ho, oh. Eja, now. St, hush, mum, whist. Ha. Vae, wo. 4. The Prepositions may be expressed by Monosyllables framed of L, and R; after this manner. Lα, Li. La, Lo. Le, L{ou}. Rα, Rι. Ra, Ro. Re, R{ou} Lαl, Lil Lal, Lol Lel, L{ou}l Rαl, Ril Ral, Rol Rel, R{ou}l Lαr, Lir Lar, Lor Ler, L{ou}r Rαr, Rir Rar, Ror Rer, R{ou}r 5. Adverbs may be expressed by Monosyllables, with the initial Let∣ter M. after this manner; Mα, Mi Ma, Mo Me, M{ou} Mαl, Mil Mal, Mol Mel, M{ou}l Mαr, Mir Mar, Mor Mer, M{ou}r Mαs, Mis Mas, Mos Mes, M{ou}s Mƴ. Mƴι. Mƴ{ou} 6. Conjunctions may be expressed by Monosyllables, with the Initial Letter N, after this manner; Nα, Ni Na, No Ne, N{ou} Nαl, Nil Nal, Nol Nel, N{ou}l Nαr, Nir Nar, Nor Ner, N{ou}r Nαs, Nis Nas, Nos Nes, N{ou}s
The more servile Particles are of three kinds; Articles, Modes, Tenses. 1. The Articles being but two, may be thus expressed, el. αl. 2. The Imperative Mode, according to its threefold difference of Petition, Perswasion, Command, may be expressed by these Dipthongs, ιo, ι{ou}, ιƴ. The Secondary Modes, by Dipthongs or Tripthongs, according to their differences of Absolute or Conditional. So the Mode of Power Liberty Will Necessity whether Absolute or Conditional, is to be expressed by {ou}α, {ou}αι. {ou}a, {ou}aι. {ou}e, {ou}eι. {ou}o, {ou}oι. 3. The Tenses, Past, Present, and Future, may be expressed by these Dipthongs, {ou}ι, {ou}ƴ, {ou}ƴι. The Transcendental Particles, to be added by way of Composition in the termination of words, may be expressed by these Syllables, ια, ιa, ιe ι{ou}, ιo, ιƴ {ou}α, {ou}a, {ou}e {ou}ι, {ou}o, {ou}ƴ Mα, Ma, Me Mι, Mo, M{ou} Mαl, Mal, Mel Mil, Mol, M{ou}l Nα, Na, Ne Nι, No. N{ou} Nαl, Nal, Nel Nil, Nol, N{ou}l Lα, la, le Lι, Lo, L{ou} Rα, Ra, Re Rι, Ro, R{ou} In which Constitution, the Marks made use of before, either for Pre∣positions, Adverbs, or Conjunctions, have the same Syllables assigned to them. It is here to be noted, that as Numbers are provided for in writing, by distinct Characters from the rest, so should they likewise have some sutable provision in speaking. And because there are two waies before suggested for the expression of Numbers by writing, namely, either by words at length, or by Figures, there should therefore be some provi∣sion answerable to each of these for speaking. 1. The Words at length for the nine Digits, are to be made off from the Tables after the same manner as all other Species are; and as for the other Numbers above this, viz. Ten, Hundred▪ Thousand, Milli∣on, they may be expressed by adding the Letters L, R, M, N. after the last Vowel; according to these Examples:
Pobαl 10. Pobal 20. Pobel 30. Pobαr 100. Pobar 200. Pober 300. Pobαm 1000. Pobam 2000. Pobem 3000. Pobαn 1000000 Poban 2000000. Poben 3000000, &c. Pobαm Pob{ou}r Pob{ou}l Pob{ou}. One thousand Six hundred Sixty Six. 2. The Figures of Numbers, may be most conveniently expressed in Speech,Arithmet. Pract. cap. 17. in that way suggested by Herrigon; namely, by assigning one Vowel or Dipthong, and one Consonant to each of the Digits, sup∣pose after this manner, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. α, a, e, ι, o, {ou}, ƴ, ι{ou}, ƴι, ƴ{ou}. b, d, g, p, t, c, l, m, n, r. According to which constitution, a word of so many Letters, may serve to express a number of so many places. Thus either of these words, αc{ou}c, α{ou}c{ou}, b{ou}c{ou}, will signifie 1666; which is as much a better and briefer way for the expressing of these numbers in speech, as that other is for writing, betwixt Figures and Words at lngth. The Grammatical Variations belonging to Number, whether Deri∣vations or Inflexions, may for the nine Digits be framed according to common Analogy. For greater Numbers, it may be convenient to prefix the Difference denoting number in general; namely, Pob be∣fore the wod▪ for any Particular; as suppose αc{ou}c be the word for the number, let it be made Pobαc{ou}c Pobαc{ou}l for the Cardinal Number 1666 1667 then Fobαc{ou}c Fobαc{ou}l will be the Ordinal, or Adjective Neuter, denoting the 1666th 1667th &c. By what hath been said, it is easie to conceive, how this Character may be made effable as to all the Species of things, together with their Derivations and Inflexions. As for Individuals, I have shewed before, how the names of them are to be expressed by a Literal Cha∣racter. But these things will more distinctly appear by instance of something written in this Language: In Order to which, I shall offer an Exam∣ple of it in the Lords Prayer and the Creed.
CHAP. IV. An Instance of the Philosophical Language, both in the Lords Prayer and the Creed. A Comparison of the Language here proposed, with fifty others, as to the Facility and Euphoni∣calness of it. AS I have before given Instances of the Real Character, so I shall here in the like method, set down the same Instances for the Phi∣losophical Language. I shall be more brief in the particular explicati∣on of each Word; because that was sufficiently done before, in treat∣ing concerning the Character. The Lords Prayer. Hαι coba {ou}{ou} ιa ril dad, ha bαbι ιo s{ou}ƴmtα, ha salba ιo velcα, ha tαlbι ιo vemg{ou}, m{ou} ril dady me ιl dad ιo velpι rα αi ril ι poto hαι sαba vatƴ, na ιo s{ou}eldƴ{ou} lαl αι hαι bαlgas me αι ιa s{ou}eldƴ{ou}s lαl eι {ou}{ou} ια vαlgas r{ou} αι na mι ιo velco αι, rαl bedodl{ou} nil ιo c{ou}albo αι lal vαgasιe, nor αl salba, na αl tado, na αl tadalα ιa ha pi{ou}bƴ{ou}  m{ou} ιo. 1☐ 2☐ 3☐ 4☐ 5☐ 6☐ 7☐ 8☐ 9☐ 10☐ 11☐ Hαι coba {ou}{ou} ιa ril dad, ha bαbι ιo s{ou}ƴmtα ha Our Father who art in Heaven, Thy Name be Hallowed, Thy 12☐ 13☐ 14☐ 15☐ 16☐ 17☐ 18☐ 19☐ 20☐ 21☐ 22☐ 23☐ 24☐ 25☐ 26☐ salba ιo velcα, ha tαlbi ιo vemg{ou}, m{ou} ril dadƴ me ril dad, ιo velpι Kingdome come, Thy Will be done, so in Earth as in Heaven, Give 27☐ 28☐ 29☐ 30☐ 31☐ 32☐ 33☐ 34☐ 35☐ 36☐ 37☐ 38☐ 39☐ 40☐ 41☐ rαl αι ril ι poto hαι sαba vatƴ, na ιo s{ou}eldi{ou}s lal aι hαι bαlgas to us on this day our bread expedient and forgive to us our trespasses 42☐ 43☐ 44☐ 45☐ 46☐ 47☐ 48☐ 49☐ 50☐ 51☐ 52☐ 53☐ 54☐ 55☐ 56☐ 57☐ 58☐ me αι ιa s{ou}eldƴ{ou}s lal eι {ou}{ou} ια vαlgas r{ou} αι, na mι ιo velco aι rαl as we forgive them who trespass against us, and lead us not into
59☐ 60☐ 61☐ 62☐ 63☐ 64☐ 65☐ 6☐ 67☐ 68☐ 69☐ 70☐ 71☐ 72☐ bedodl{ou} nil ιo c{ou}αlbo aι lal vαgasιe nor αl salba, na αl tado, na temptation but deliver us from evil for the Kingdom, & the power, and 73☐ 74☐ 75☐ 76☐ 77☐ 78☐ 79☐ 80.☐ αl tadalα ιo ha pι{ou}bƴ{ou}  m{ou} ιo. the Glory is thine, for ever and ever. Amen. So be it. Our1. (Hαι) This Dipthong (αι) is assigned to signifie the first Person plural amongst the Pronouns, viz. We. The Letter h prefixed to it, doth denote that Pronoun to be used possessively, viz. Our. Parent2. (Coba) Co doth denote the Genus of Oeconomical Relation; the Letter (b) signifying the first difference under that Genus, which is Relation of Consanguinity; the Vowel (a) the second Species, which is Direct ascending; namely, Parent. Who3. ({ou}{ou}) This Dipthong is appointed to signifie the second of the compound Pronouns, Who, personal; or Which, Real. Art4. (ia) This dipthong is appointed to signifie the present tense of the Copula (est) and being spoken of the second person, is to be ren∣dered Art. In(ril) is a Preposition, the first Opposite of the fourth combination; and therefore must signifie (in.) Heaven6. (dad) The Syllable (da) is appointed to signifie the Genus of World; the addition of the Letter (d) doth denote the second diffe∣rence under that Genus, which is Heaven. Thy7. (ha) The Vowel (a) is assigned to signifie a Pronoun of the sin∣gular number, and second person. The Letter (h) before it, doth denote it to be understood possessively, and to signifie (Thy) or (Thine.) Name8. (bαbi) The Syllable (bα) doth denote the Genus of Transcen∣dental General. The Letter (b) doth denote the first difference, and the Vowel (ι) the fourth Species, which is Name. 9. (ιo) This Dipthong is appointed to signifie that kind of Impera∣tive Mode (as it is commonly stiled) which is by way of Petition;May it be the sense of it being, I pray that it may be. Hallowed10. (S{ou}ƴmtα (Sƴ) is put for the Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation. The Consonant (t) for the fifth difference, and the Vowel (α) for the first species, which according to the tables, is, Consecration, or Hal∣lowing. The Addition of the Vowel ({ou}) to (S) doth signifie the noti∣on of Adjective; and the addition of the Letter (m) at the end of the
first Syllable, signifies the Passive voice, viz. Hallowed. 11. (ha.) as numb. 7.Thy 12. (Salba) (Sa) is Civil Relation; (b) denotes the first difference,Kingdom or Regnation which is degrees of persons; and (a) is the second species, which, ac∣cording to the tables, is King; the addition of (l) to the first Syllable, doth denote a word of Action, viz. Regnation. 13. (ιo) as numb. 9.May it be 14. (Velcα) (Be) is the Genus of transcendental action;Coming. (c) de∣notes the sixth difference under that Genus, and (α) the first species, which signifies Coming: the turning of (b) into (v) denotes this word to be an Adjective, and the Letter (L) to be an Active. 15. (ha) as numb. 7.Thy 16. (αlbi) (tα) doth denote the Genus of Natural Power,Will or voli∣tion (b) the first difference, and (ι) the fourth Species; namely, Will: the Letter (l) denoting a Noun of Action, viz. Volition. 17. (ιo) as numb. 10.May it be 18. (vemg{ou}) (be) is the Genus of Transcendental Action;Done or ac∣complished (g) de∣notes the third difference, and ({ou}) the sixth species; which is, Per∣forming, or Accomplishing: the change of (b into v) denoting this word to be an Adjective, and (m) Passive, Performed. 19. (m{ou}) This Monosyllable with (m) must denote an Adverb,So and the last opposite of the first Combination; which is, So. 20 (ril) as numb. 5.In 21. (dadƴ) (da) is the Genus of World,Earth (d) is the second diffe∣rence, which is Heaven; the Vowel ƴ signifying the seventh species under that difference, which is this Earth, or the Globe of Land and Sea, whereon we inhabit. 22. (me) Paired with numb. 19. and therefore must signifie,As As. 23. (ril) as numb. 5.In 24. (dad) as numb. 6.Heaven 25. (ιo) The same Particle as numb. 9.Maist thou be But being here joyned with a word active, and relating to the second person, it must be ren∣dered, Maist thou be. 26. (velpi) (be) is Transcendental Action (p) the fourth diffe∣rence, and (ι) the fourth species, which is Giving:Giving. b changed into v, denoting adjective, and (l) active.
To.27. (lαl) A Preposition of the first Combination, signifying To. Us28. (αι) A Pronoun, first person, plural number; namely, We, or Vs. In29. (ril) as numb. 5. This30. (ι) The first of the relative Pronouns, signifying This. Day31. (poto) po is the Genus of Measure, (t) the fifth difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is Day. Our32. (hαι) as numb. 1. Bread33. (Sαba) Sα denotes the Genus of Oeconomical Provisions, (b) the first difference, and (a) the second species, which is Bread. Expedient34. (Vαtƴ) (bα) is the Genus of Transcendental General, (t) the fifth difference, ƴ the seventh species; the change of b into v, de∣notes this Word to be an Adjective, and to signifie Expedient. And35. (Na) A Conjunction, the second of the first Combination, viz And. Maist thou be36. (ιo) as numb. 25. Forgiving37. (S{ou}eldƴ{ou}s) Se is the Genus of Judicial Relation d, the second difference, ƴ{ou} the ninth species, which is Forgiving: {ou} joyned to the first Consonant, signifying the notion of Adjective, and l, of Active, (s) the Opposite. To38. (lαl) as numb. 27. Us39. (αι) as numb. 28. Our40. (hαι) as numb. 1. 41. (bαlgas) (bα) the Genus of transcendental general, (g) the third difference,Trespasses or Male-actions (a) the second species, (s) at the end, denoting the word hereby signified, to be placed in the Tables as an Opposite, and the Letter (l) in the first syllable, signifying the Active voice, and the prolonging of the first Vowel, exprest by the Accent over it, deno∣ting the Plural Number. As42. (Me) as numb. 22. We43. (αι) as numb. 28. Are44. (ιa) as numb. 4. But being here adjoyned to a word of the first Person Plural, it must be rendered, Are. Forgiving45. (s{ou}eldƴ{ou}s) as numb. 37. To46. (lαl) as numb. 27. Them47. (eι) A Pronoun, third person, plural number, They, or Them.
38. ({ou}{ou}) as numb. 3.Who 49. (ια) the preter tense of the Copula.Have been 50. (Vαlgas) as numb. 41. Only that was a substantive of Action,Transgressing and of the plural number, denoted by the length of the first Radical Vowel; whereas this is an Adjective, signified by (v.) 51. (ι{ou}) A Preposition being the last Opposite of the second Combi∣nation; and therefore must signifie, Against.Against 52. (αι) as numb. 28.Us. 53. (na) as numb. 35.And 54. (mi) An Adverb, the first Opposite of the first combination,Not signifying No, or Not. 55. (ιo) as numb. 25.Maist thou be 56. (Velco) (be) is the Genus of Transcendental Action.Leading (c) de∣notes the sixth difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is Leading; the Letters (v) and (l) signifying: Adjective Active. 57. (αι) as numb. 28.Us 58. (rαl) a Preposition, the first of the fourth Combination; and therefore must signifie, Into.Into 59. (bedodl{ou}) (be) is transcendental action,Temptation (d) denotes the second difference, (o) the fifth species, which is Trying; the second (d) doth denote this word to be joyned in the Tables as an affinis: the last syl∣lable (l{ou}) signifies the transcendental particle Corruptive, which in composition, must denote the worst sense of a word, and here it must signifie such temptation or trial sas ought not to be. 60. (ril) a Conjunction,But the first opposite of the second combinati∣on, signifying, But. 61. (io) as numb. 25.Maist thou be 62. (c{ou}αlbo) (cα) is the Genus of Spiritual Action,Delivering (b) signifies the first difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is, Delivering; the Letters {ou} and l signifying Adjective Active. 63. (αι) as numb. 28.Us 64. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third combination;From and therefore must signifie, From. 65. (vαgasie) as numb. 41. Only the b is turned into v,Evil to denote Adjective, and the (l) is here left out, which signifies action, and the transcendental Particle (ie) is here added, to denote Evil thing. 66. (nor) a Conjunction,For the second Opposite in the third combi∣nation, signifying, For.
The67. (αl) The demonstrative Article, viz. The. Kingdom68. (Salba) as numb. 12. And69. (na) as numb. 35. The70. (αl) as numb. 68. Power71. (tado) (ta) is the Genus of Habit, (d) is the second difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is Power. And72. (na) as numb. 35. The73. (αl) as numb. 68. Glory74. (Tadalα) (tad) is the same Genus and Difference with numb. 72. the second (a) denoting the second species, which is Reputation or Fame; the last syllable (lα) being added to the termination, doth signifie the first of the seventh combination, amongst transcendental notions, viz. Augmentative, the highest kind or degree of Reputation, which is, Glory. I75. (ιa) as numb. 4. But being here applied to the third person, and singular number, is to be rendered Is. Thine76. (ha) as numb. 11. Everlastingly77. (Pι{ou}bƴ{ou} (Pι) doth denote the Genus of Space, (b) the first difference, (ƴ{ou}) the ninth species, which is (Everness,) the adding of the Vowel ({ou}) to make a Dipthong with the first Vowel, signifies the word to be an Adverb, Everlastingly. Amen78. () the word Amen in the Literal Character. So79. (m{ou}) as numb. 19. May it be.80. (ιo) as numb. 9.
The Creed. α ιa t{ou}alti dαb e{ou}-t{ou}α, αl {ou}ι c{ou}αlbαi{ou} lα dad na lα dadƴ, na dαd he cobas c{ou}opas hαι saba, {ou}{ou} ια c{ou}ambab la αl Dαg, c{ou}ambe le αl codαd , s{ou}emt ir , ια s{ou}emtƴ{ou}, c{ou}abƴs, na s{ou}ƴmpƴ{ou}, e ια lir-velc rαl odad, e ια c{ou}alcα lal αl {ou}ι c{ou}abƴsι{ou}, ril αl poto fobe, e ια lαr-velc ral dad, ril {ou}{ou}-{ou}α e ιa c{ou}alco lil αl pigƴ{ou} lα dαb, lal {ou}{ou}-{ou}α e ie velcα lo selbα αl c{ou}abƴi{ou} na αl {ou}ι c{ou}αbƴsi{ou}. α ιa t{ou}alti Dαg, αl sƴ-{ou}e t{ou}ata vages, αl sƴdzha lα sƴgo αl semdƴ lα bαlgas αl {ou}ƴι m{ou}s-calbƴ lα αl odab na αl {ou}ƴι cabƴ e{ou}ƴfƴt. 1☐ 2☐ 3☐ 4☐ 5☐ 6☐ 7☐ 8☐ 9☐ 10☐ 11☐ α ιa t{ou}alti dαb e{ou}-t{ou}α αl {ou}ι c{ou}αlbαi{ou} lα dad na I am believing God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven an 12☐ 13☐ 14☐ 15☐ 16☐ 17☐ 18☐ 19☐ 20☐ 21☐ 22☐ lα dadƴ na dαd he cobas c{ou}opas hαι saba {ou}{ou} ια of Earth, and in Jesus Christ his Son only our Lord, who was 23☐ 24☐ 25☐ 26☐ 27☐ 28☐ 29☐ 30☐ 31☐ 32☐ c{ou}ambab la αl Dαg c{ou}ambe le αl codαd s{ou}emt conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered 33☐ 34☐ 35☐ 36☐ 37☐ 38☐ 39☐ 40☐ 41☐ 42☐ rir , ια s{ou}emtƴ{ou} c{ou}abƴ na s{ou}ƴmpƴ{ou} e ια lir-velc under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended 43☐ 44☐ 45☐ 46☐ 47☐ 48☐ 49☐ 50☐ 51☐ 52☐ 53☐ 54☐ 55☐ 56☐ 57☐ rαl odad e ια c{ou}alcα lal αl {ou}ι c{ou}abƴsi{ou} ril αl poto fobe, e ια into hell, he did rise from the dead in the day third, He was 58☐ 59☐ 60☐ 61☐ 62☐ 63☐ 64☐ 65☐ 66☐ 67☐ 68☐ 69☐ 70☐ lαr-velc ral dad ril {ou}{ou}-{ou}α e ιa c{ou}alco lil αl pigƴ{ou} lα Dab ascending into heaven, in which place he is sitting at the right hand of God the Father
71☐ 72☐ 73☐ 74☐ 75☐ 76☐ 77☐ 78☐ 79☐ 80☐ 81☐ 82☐ 83☐ 84☐ 85☐ 86☐ lal {ou}{ou}-{ou}α e ie velcα lo selbα αl c{ou}abƴι{ou} na αl {ou}ι c{ou}abƴsi{ou}α ιa from whence he shall come to judge the Quick and the dead. I am 87☐ 88☐ 89☐ 90☐ 91☐ 92☐ 93☐ 94☐ t{ou}alti Dαg αl sƴ-{ou}e t{ou}ata vages αl sƴdzha lα believing in the Holy Ghost, the Church holy Catholick, the Communion of 95☐ 96☐ 97☐ 98☐ 99☐ 100☐ 101☐ 102☐ 103☐ 104☐ 105☐ 106☐ 107☐ sƴgo αl semdƳ lα bαlgas al {ou}ƴι m{ou}s-calbƴ lα αl odab na αl Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the 108 109 110 {ou}ƴι cabƴ c{ou}-ƴfƴt. life everlasting. I1. (α) a Pronoun of the first person, and singular number, I. Am2. (ιa.) The copula, est, in the present tense, which being used with the first person, doth signifie Am. 3. (t{ou}alti) (ta) denotes the Genus of Habit t the fifth difference, i,Believing the fourth species, which is Faith; the adding of {ou} to t, denotes the word to be an adjective, and the Letter l signifies the active voice, Believing. 4. (Dαb) The Monosyllable Dα is appointed to signifie God, or the divine nature;God the Fa∣ther the addition of the Consonant b, will denote the first person in the Blessed Trinity. 5. (e{ou}-t{ou}α) A Compound of a Particle, and an Integral, the Par∣ticle being a dipthong,Almighty appointed to signifie All. The Syllable tα, denoting the Genus of Power; the addition of {ou}, makes it to be an adjective, viz. potent, or powerful. The6. (αl) the demonstrative Article, The. Having been({ou}ι) the sign of the preter tense. 8. (c{ou}αlbαi{ou}) (cα) is the Genus of spiritual action (b) denotes the first difference,Creating per∣son and α the first species, which is Creation; the ad∣dition of {ou} to c, signifies adjective, and the Letter (l) active; the last dipthong (ι{ou}) denotes the transcendental composition of Person. So that this word with the two preceding Particles, does import, the ha∣ving Created Person.
9. (lα) the first Preposition, signifying Of.Of 10. (dad) (da) the Genus of World, and (d) the second difference,Heaven. which is Heaven. 11. (na) the second Conjunction of the first Combination,And signify∣ing And. 12. (lα) as numb. 9.Of 13. (dadƴ) The same Genus and difference, as numb. 10. The Vowel Ƴ signifying the seventh species, which is, This Earth.Earth 14. (na) as numb. 11.And 15. (dαd) the second person of the Blessed Trinity.Jesus Christ 16. (he) the Vowel e signifies a Pronoun of the third person,His and singular number, the Letter h prefixt, shews it to be used possessively, for His. 17. (cobas) the syllable (co) is assigned to the Genus of Oeconomi∣cal Relation, the Letter (b) to the first difference,Son and the Vowel (a) for the second species, the Letter (s) denoting the word hereby signi∣fied, to be an Opposite, viz. Son. 18. (c{ou}opas) the same Genus as the former (p) signifying the fourth difference, and (a) the second species, and the Letter ({ou}) an Opposite▪Only viz. Alone, or Only. 19. (hαι) A Pronoun, first person possessive, plural number.Our 20. (Saba) (Sa) the Genus of Civil Relation, (b) the first diffe∣rence, viz. Degrees of persons, (a) the second species,Soveraign which is Sove∣reign, or Lord, to whom we owe Obedience, or subjection. 21. ({ou}{ou}) the second of the compound Pronouns, signifying Who, or Which.Who 22. (ια) The Copula Est, in the preter tense.Was 23. (c{ou}ambab) (ca) is the Genus of corporeal action,Conceived (b) the first difference, and (a) the second species; the adding of the second Ra∣dical Consonant (b,) denotes this word to be adjoyned in the tables, by way of affinity, and consequently to signifie Conception, ({ou}) signi∣fying Adjective, and (m) Passive. 24. (la) the second Preposition in the first Combination,By (By) 25. (αl) as numb. 6.The 26. (Dαg) the third Person in the Blessed Trinity.Holy Ghost 27. (c{ou}ambe) the same Genus and Difference with numb. 23. (e) signifying the third species,Borne which is Parturition ({ou}) denoting Adje∣ctive, and (m) Passive.
Of28. (le) the third Preposition in the first Combination, relating to the Material Cause, Of. The29. (αl) as numb. 6. The Virgin30, (codαd) the syllable (co) as was said before, is assigned to Oeconomical Relation, (d) is the second difference, and (α) is the first species; the repeating of the second Radical Consonant at the end, makes this word to denote something adjoyned by way of Affinity, viz. Virgin. Mary31. () the name Mari in the literal Character. Capitally pu∣nished32. (s{ou}emt) the syllable (se) is for Judicial Relation, the Letter (t) is the fifth difference, viz. Capital punishment, ({ou}) is Adjective, and (m) Passive, 33. (rir) A Preposition, the first opposite of the sixth Combination, viz. Vnder.Uner Pontius Pilate34. () the name Pontius Pilate, in the Literal Chara∣cter. Was35. (ια) as numb. 22. Crucified36. (s{ou}emtƴ{ou}) the same Genus and Difference as numb. 32. the last Dipthong (ƴ{ou}) denoting the ninth difference, which is Crucifying, the first ({ou}) being the mark for Adjective, and the Letter (m) for Pas∣sive. 37. (c{ou}abƴs) the same as to genus and difference, with numb. 23, & 27. the Vowel (ƴ) signifying the seventh species,Dead the Letter (s) an opposite, and the vowel ({ou}) adjective. And38. (Na) as numb. 11. Buried39. (s{ou}ƴmpƴ{ou}) The syllable (sƴ) is Ecclesiastical Relation, (p) the fourth difference, and (ƴ{ou}) the ninth species, which is Burial; the first ({ou}) being the sign of adjective, and (m) of passive. He40. (e) Pronoun of the third person, singular number, viz. He. Was41. (ια) as numb. 22. 42. (lir-velc) This word is a Compound, the first syllable (lir) is a Preposition,Descending the first opposite of the fifth Combination, signifying down∣wards; (be) is the Genus of transcendental action, the Letter (c) the sixth difference, which is Ition, ({ou}) the adjective, and (l) the active, Down-going, or Descending. 43. (rαl) a Preposition, the first of the fourth Combination, signi∣fying Into.Into
44. (odad) (da) is the Genus of World,Hell (d) is the second diffe∣rence, which is Heaven, the vowel (o) which is opposite to (a) being prefixt, denotes this to be the word opposite to Heaven, viz. Hell. 45. (e) as numb. 40. He.He 46. (ια) as numb. 22.Hath been 47. (c{ou}alcα) (ca) is Corporeal Action, (c) is the sixth difference,Rising and (α) the first species, viz. Rise, ({ou}) the adjective, and (l) the active. 48. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third Combination,From From. 49. (αl) as numb. 6. The.The 50. ({ou}ι) as numb. 7.Having been 51. (c{ou}abƴsι{ou}) The same radical word with numb. 41. the Dip∣thong (ι{ou}) being a transcendental composition, denoting Person.Dying persons 52. (ril) a Preposition,On the first opposite of the fourth Combinati∣on, signifying In. 53. (αl) as numb. 6.The 54. (Poto) the syllable (po) doth stand for the Genus of Measure, (t) the fifth Difference, and (o) the fifth Species, which is Day.Day 55. (fobe) The same Genus as the former, (b) the first Diffe∣rence, relating to Number, (e) the third Species, the turning p into f,Third signifying adjective, viz. Third. 56. (e) as numb. 40.He 57. (ια) as numb. 22.Was 58. (lαr-velc) a Compound as numb. 42.Ascending Only the Prepositi∣on here, being the first of the fifth Combination, must signifie Vpwards; and the word Ascending. 59. (rαl) as numb. 43.Into 60. (dad) as numb. 10.Heaven 61. (ril) as numb. 52.In 62. ({ou}{ou}-{ou}α) A Compound of the Pronoun Which,Which place and the transcen∣dental Mark of Place. 63. (e) as numb 40.He 64. (ιa) as numb. 2.Is But being here spoken of a third Person in the singular number, must be rendered (is.)
Sitting65. (c{ou}alco) The same Genus and Difference as numb. 47. (o) being the fifth Difference, which is Sitting, ({ou}) adjective, and (l) active. At66. (lil) a Preposition, the first Opposite in the third combination, signifying At. The67. (αl) as numb. 6. Right hand68. (pigy{ou}) (pi) is the Genus of Space, (g) the third Difference, and (ƴ{ou}) the ninth species, which is Right hand. Of69. (lα) as numb. 9. God the Fa∣ther70. (Dαb) as numb. 4. From71. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third Combination, signi∣fying From, Which place72. ({ou}{ou}-{ou}α) as numb. 70. He73. (e) as numb. 45. Shall be74. (ie) the Copula in the future tense, Shall be. Coming75. (velcα) be is the Genus of transcendental Action, c the sixth difference, and α the first species, which is Come, the turning of b in∣to v, denoting adjective, and l Active. 76. (lo) a Preposition, the second opposite of the first Combination, viz. For.For Judging77. (Selbα) (Se) is Judicial relation b the first difference, and α the first species, which is Iudge; the Letter l signifies a Noun of action, viz. Iudging, or Iudication. The78. (αl) as numb. 6. Quick79. (c{ou}abƴι{ou}) ca is the Genus of corporeal action, b the first diffe∣rence, and ƴ the seventh species, which is Life, the vowel {ou} signify∣ing adjective, viz. Living, ι{ou} being the transcendental composition for Person. And80. (na) as numb. 11. The81. (αl) as numb. 6. Having82. ({ou}ι) as numb. 7. Died persons83. (c{ou}abƴsi{ou}) as numb. 51. I84. (α) as numb. 1. Am85. (ιa) as numb. 2. Believing86. (t{ou}alti) as numb. 3. The Holy Ghost87. (Dαg) as numb. 27. 88. (αl) as numb. 6. The Church89. (sƴ-{ou}e) the syllable sƴ is put for the Genus of Ecclesiastical Re¦lation,
the Dipthong ({ou}e) being the transcendental for Aggregate. 90. (t{ou}ata) Ta is the Genus of Habit, t the fifth difference,Holy and a the second species, which is Holiness; the addition of ({ou}) to the first Radical, doth signifie the word to be an adjective, viz. Holy. 91. (vages) (ba) is the Genus of Transcendental Relation mixed, g the third difference, and e the third species,Universal (s) the note of oppo∣site, {ou} the sign of adjective, viz. Vniversal. 92. (αl) as numb. 6.The 93. (Sƴdzha) Sƴ the Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation,Communion g the third difference, a the second species, which is Communicant, or Catholic; the turning of g into the same power that we give to J consonant, sig∣nifies this word to be an Abstract, viz. Communion. 94. (lα) as numb. 9.Of 95. (Sƴgo) Sƴ is Ecclesiastical Relation, g the third difference,Saints o the fifth species, which is Saint, the prolonging of the first Vowel denotes the plural number. 96. (αl) as numb. 6.The 97. (semdƴ) Se is the Genus of Iudicial Relation, d the second dif∣ference, and ƴ the seventh species, which is Remission,Being forgiven or Forgive∣ness, m denotes the passive voice. 98. (lα) as numb. 9.Of 99. (bαlgas) bα is transcendental general, g the third difference,Sins a the second species, s denotes an opposite, l a Noun of action, and the prolonging of the first Radical Vowel, the plural number. 100. (αl) as numb. 6.The 101. ({ou}ƴι) the Future Tense.Future 102. (m{ou}s-calbƴ) a compound, the Particle m{ou}s signifying re,Relife, or li∣ving again or again, (cabƴ) being before rendered Life, l denoting Active. 103. (lα) as numb. 9.Of 104. (αl) as numb. 6.The 105. (odab) Da is the World, dab is Spirit, to which is opposed Body, signified by prefixing the Vowel o, which is opposite to a.Body 106. (a) as numb. 11.And 107. (αl) as numb. 6.The 108. ({ou}yι) as numb. 101.Future 109. (cabƴ) the same Radical as numb. 37, and 102.Life Only this is not an Opposite, nor an Adjective.
Everlasting110. (e{ou}-ƴfƴt) (e{ou}) is all, as numb. 5. (pƴ) is the Genus of Measure, (t) the fifth difference, which is measure of time, the affinis to which, (here denoted, by preposing the Radical Vowel ƴ) is Duration, p being turned into f, signifies Adjective, i e. All-during, or Everlasting. I am sensible that this Contrivance for the Language is not ordered (as to the facility and pleasantness of the sound) to so good an advan∣tage as it might have been upon further consideration and practise: But as it is, I think it may (even in these respects) come into compa∣rison with any of the Languages now known. For the better trial of which, I shall give several Instances of the Lords Prayer, as it is ren∣dred in fifty several Languages, and written in our common Letter; most of which, I have taken out of Gesner, Mithridates, and Megise∣rus his Specimen, as they have collected and lettered them to my hands. For the rest, I am beholding to other Books, and the assist∣ance of some particular Friends.
English 1. Our father who art in heaven Hallowed be thy Name   Hebrew 2. Abinu Shebbaschamaim Iikkadesch schemecha   Arabic 3. Yâ Abânalladi phissamawati. Yatakaddasu smoca   Syriac 4. Abun dbashmajo Nethkadesh shmoch   Aethiop 5. Abúna xabashamâjath Yithkádash shimácha   Greek 6. Páter hemôn ho en tois our anoîs Hagiasthéto tò onoma sou   Copti 7. Peniot etchennipheoui Mareftoubonje pecran   Latin 8. Pater noster qui es in coelis Sanctificetur nomen tuum   Spanish 9. Padre nuestro que estas en loscielos Sanctificato sea el tu nombre   Porteguese 10. Padre nosso que stas nos ceos Sanctificado seja o teu nome   French 11. Nostre pere qui es és cieulx Ton nom soit sanctifie   Italian 12. Padre nostro che sei ne' cieli Sia sanctificato il nome tuo   Friulian 13. Pari nestri ch'ees in cijl See santificaat la to nom   Sardinian of the City 14. Pare nostre che ses en loscels Sia sanctificat lo nom teu   Sardinian of the Countrey 15. Babu nostru sughale ses in soschelus Santufiada su nomine tuo   Grysons 16. Bab nos quel tii ist in eschil Santifichio saia ilgtes num   Germ. ancient 17. Pater unser du in himel bist Din namo werde geheyligot   Germ. modern 18. Unser Uatter der du bist im Him∣mel Geheyliget werde dein nahm   Old Saxon 19. Uren fader thic arth in heofnas Sic gehalgud thin noma   Dutch 20. Onse vader die in den hemelin (zijt Uwen naem werde geheylight   Danish 21. Pader vor du som est i himmelen Helligt vorde dit naff Megiserus Island 22. Bader vor sun ert ai himmum helgikt bitt nam ti M. Lappian 23. Isa meidhen joko oledh taju ahissa Puliettu olkohon siun nimes M. Suedish 24. Fadher war som est i himlom helghat warde titt nampn M. Gothic 25. Atta unsar thu in Himmina Wihnai namo thein M. Carnish 26. Ozha nash kir si v'nebesih Posvezhénu bodi iime tvoie M. Dalmatian 27. Otsce nas koyi yessina nebissih Szvetisse gyme tvoye   Hungarian 28. Miattynackki vagy azmenyegbe Megh stentel tessek az te newed. M. Croatian 29. Ozhe nash ishe esina nebesih Svetise jme tuoe M. Servian 30. Otze nash ishe jesi v' nebesih Posvetise jme twoje M. Walachian 31. Tatal nostru cineresti in ceriu Sfincinschase numelie teu M. Bohemian 32. Oozie nass genz syna nebesich Oszwiet se meno twe Gesnerus Lusatian 33. Wosch nasch Kensch sy nanebebu Wss weschone bushy me twove M. Polonian 34. Ocziecz nasch ktory jestosz wniebye Swyecz sie gymye twa G. Lituanian 35. Tewe musu kursey esi danguy Szweskis wardas tawo   Livonian 36. Abes mus kas tu es eek sckan debbessis Schwetitz tows waarcz M. Russian 37. Oche nash Izghae yease nanaebaesaegh Da sueatesa Ima tuoae   Tartarian 38. Atcha wyzom hhy hokta sen algusch Ludor senug adongkel suom M. Turkish 39. Babamoz hanghe gugtesson Chuduss olssum ssenungh adun M. Armenian 40. Hair mer or iercins des Surb eglizzi anun cho M. Persian 41. Ai pader makeh dar osmân Pàk bashoud nâm tou   Chinish 42. Ngò tèm fu chè tsay thiaen Ng tèm yuèn ùl niûn chîm xím   Welsh 43. Ein Tad yr hwn wyt yn y nefo∣edd Sancteiddier dy enw   Irish 44. Air nathir ataigh air nin Nabz far hanimti Megiserus Biscan 45. Gure aita cerue tan aicena Sanctifica bedi hire icena   Frisian 46. Ws haita derstu biste yne hymil Dyn name wird heiligt M. Madagascar 47. Amproy antsica izau hanautangh and anghitsi Angharanau hofissahots   Poconchi 48. Catat taxah vilcat Avi nim ta incaharcihi   New England 49. Nooshun kesukquot Quittiana ta munach koowesuonk   Philos. Language 51. Hαι coba {ou}{ou} ιa ril dad Ha bαbι ιo s{ou}ymtα   52. Ƴ{ou}r fádher h{ou}itsh art in héven: Hαlloed bι dhƴι nαm  
  English 1. Thy Kingdome come Thy Will be done   Hebrew 2. Tabo malcutecha Teasaeh rezonecha   Arabic 3. Tâti malacûtoca Tacûno mashiátoca   Syriac 4. Thithe malcuthoch Nehue zebionoch   Aethiop 5. Thymtsa mangystcha Yichún phachâdacha   Greek 6. Elthéto he Basíleia sou Genethéto t thelemá sou   Copti 7. Maresinje tecme touro Netehnacmarefshopi   Latin 8. Adveniat regnum tuum Fiat Voluntas tua   Spanish 9. Venga el tu reyno Fagase tu voluntad   Porteguese 10. Venna à nos ò teu reyno Seja ferta à tua voluntade   French 11. Ton royaume advenie Ta volunte soit facte   Italian 12. Venga il regno tuo Si a fatta la voluntà tua   Friulian 13. Vigna lu to ream See fatta la too voluntaat   Sardinian of the City 14. Venga lo regne teu Fasase la voluntat tua   Sardinian of the Countrey 15. Bengiad su rennu tuo Faciadsi sa voluntade tua   Grysons 16. Ilgtes ariginam uigna ter nus a thia uoeglia d' uainta   Germ. ancient 17. Din riche chome Din wi llo gescehe   Germ. modern 18. Dein Reich komme Dein Will geschehe   Old Saxon 19. To cymeth thin rye Sic thin Willa sue   Dutch 20. Uw Coninckrijcke icome Uwen Wille geschicde Megiserus. Danish 21. Til komme dit Rige Borde din Bilie M. Island 22. Komi tit ricke Uerdi tinn vile M. Lappian 23. Tulkohon siun waltakunta. Si oskohon siun tahiosi M. Suedish 24. Till komme titt rike Stee tin Wilie M. Gothic 25. Uimai thiudinassus theins Werthe Wilga theins M. Carnish 26. Pridi k' nam kraylestvu tvoie S' idise volia tvoia   Dalmatian 27. Pridi kralyess tvo tvoze udi volya tvoya M. Hungarian 28. Iujonel az te orssagod Legyen te akaratd   Croatian 29. Pridi cesa rastvo tvuoe Budi volia tvoja M. Servian 30. Pridi Krailestvo tuoie Budi volia tuoia M. Walachian 31. Seuie imparacia ta Suse fie voia ta Gesnerus. ohemian 32. Przid kralowstwii twe Bud wule twa M. Lusatian 33. Poshish knam krailestwo twoio Sostany woli twoia G. Polonian 34. Przydzy twa kroliestwo Bandz wolya twa   Lituanian 35. Ateyk karaliste tawo uk wala tawo M. Livonian 36. Enack mums tows walstibe Tows praatz buska   Russian 37. Da predet Tzaazstuia tuoae Da boodet Volya tuoya M. Tartarian 38. Chanluchong bel sun senung arkchueg Alei gier dauk M. Turkish 39. Gelson ssenung memlechetun Olsum sshénung issted gunh M. Armenian 40. Eceszzae archaiuthai cho Eglizzin camch cho   Persian 41. Bayaïd padshah tou Shoud howást tou   Chinish 42. ùl gúë lîn úl chì chîm hîm   Welsh 43. Dued dy deyrnas Bid dy evvyllys   Irish 44. Tigiuh da riatiathe Deanturda hoilamhuoil M. iscan 45. Et hor bedi hire rehuma E guin bedi hire vorondatea   Frisian 46. Dyn ryck to komme Dyn Wille moet schoen   Madagascar 47. Uahoijachanau honui aminay Fiteiannau hocfaizangh M. Poconchi 48. Avihauri inchalita pan cana Nava invanivita   New England 49. peyaumooutch kukketassootamoonk Kuttenantamoonk   Philos. Language 50. Ha salba ιo velcα Ha tαlbi ιo vemg{ou}   51. Dhƴι cingdƴm cƴm. Dhƴi {ou}il bi dƴn
English 1. In earth as it is in Heaven Give us this day our daily bread   Hebrew 2. Ci basschamaim u baarez Lachmenu temidi ten lanu bajóm   Arabic 3. Camâ phissamâï wa ala'l ardi Chúbzana 'iladi lil gadi ahtinaol yaum   Syriac 4. Aikano dbashmajo hocano oph barao Havlan lachmo dsunkonan jaumomo   Aethiop 5. Bachama bashamaï wabamdyrni Shishâjana zalalà ylathanà habanà yom   Greek 6. Hôs en ourano kai epi tes ges Tòn árton emôn ton epiousion dôs hemin semero   Copti 7. Phredichentphenemhi jenpicahi Penoiki terasti meisnanphoou   Latin 8. Sicut in coelo sic etiam in terra Pnem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie   Spanish 9. Assy en el cielo, como en la tierra Nuestro pan cotidiano dad le a nosotros oy   Porteguese 10. Assi nos ceos, come na terra O pao no sso de cadadia dano lo oie nesto dia   French 11. Ainsi en la terre, comme au cieulx Nostre pain quotidiain donne nous aviourdhuy   Italian 12. Si come in cielo cosi in terra Dacci heggil nostre pane quotidiano   Friulian 13. Sice' in cijl et in tierra Da nus hu'el nestri pa cotidian   Sardinian of the City 14. Axicom en lo cel i en la terra Lo pa nostre cotidia dona anosaltres hui   Sardinian of the Countrey. 15. Comenti in chelo et in sa terra Su pane nostru dogniedie dona anosateros hoc   Grysons 16. In terra sco la fo in cschil Do a nus nos paun houtz & in miinchia di   German ancient 17. In erde also in Himele Unser cagolicha brot cib uns hinto   Germ. modern 18. Auf erden, wic im Himmel Unser taglich brot gib uns heut   Old Saxon 19. Is in heofnas and in eortho Uren hlaf ofer wirtlic sel us to daeg   Dutch 20. Gelijck in den hemel oockop der actden Ons daghelijcks broot gheeft ons heden   Danish 21. Saa paa jorden som hander i him∣melen Giff oz i dag vort daglige Brod   Isleland 22. Suoms ai himme so aipodn Burt vort daglgt geb tu oz i dag Megiserus Lappian 23. Kwuin-tai vahissa nyn man' palla Meidhen joka paiwen leipa mehilen tana paiwane M. Suedish 24. Sa lom i himmelen saock pa jor∣denne Wart dagligha brod giff oss idagh M. Gothic 25. Sue in himmina gah ana arte Ll laef vnsatana thana senteinam gif unss himmadaga M. Carnish 26. Kakor nanebi taku nasemlij Kruh nah usak dainii dai nam dones M. Dalmatian 27. Kako na nebu tako i na zemlyi Kruh nas ssvagdanyni day nam danass M. Hungarian 28. Mi keben menyben azon kepen it ezse old ounis. Mi kenyerunk & mindèn napyat adgyad neke unk mà M. Croatian 29. Jako na niebesih j tako nasemlij Hlib nash usag danni dai nam danas M. Servian 30. Kako vnebi i takos nafemlij Hib nash usak danii dai nam danas M. Walachian 31. Cum in cerin usa prepo mortu Puine noa de tote zilelle dene noba astazi M. Bohemian 32. Yakona nebi tak y na zemi Chleb nasz wezdeyssi dey nam dnes Gesnerus Lusatian 33. Takhak nanebu tak heu nasemu Klib nasch schidni dynam shensa M. Polonian 34. Yako wniebi y na zemii Chlieb nasch pow schedny day nam dzy say G. Lituanian 35. Kayp and dangaus teyp ir andziam es Donos musu wisu dienu dok mumus szedien M. Livonian 36. Kasch kan debbes ta wursan summes Musse denische mayse duth mums schodeen   Russian 37. Yaco na nebesoe Jnazemlee Ghlaeb nash nasou schneei dazgd nam dnaes M. Tartarian 38. Achtaver visungundaluch Ot mak chu musen vougon M. Turkish 39. Nicse gugthe ule gyrde Echame gumozi hergun on vere bize bugun M. Armenian 40. Orpes jercins en jercri Zhazt mer hanapazord rue mez aisaur   Persian 41. hamzienánkeh dar osmân niz dar zamin Bedih marah amrouz nân kefaf rouz mara   Chinish 42. Yu ty su sim thyaen Ngò teng uwàng uul kyu jûn ngò ngò zié jong leârg   Welsh 43. Ar y ddaiar, megis y mae yn y ne∣foedd Dyro i ni heddyw cin bara bennyddiol Megiserus Irish 44. Air nimh agis air thalamhi Air naran aidhthuil tabhar dhuin a niomh   Biscan 45. Cervan be cala lurrean ee Gure eguneco oguia igue egun M. Frisian 46. Opt yrtrick as yne hymil Ws deilix bre jovws juved   Madagascar 47. An tanetona and anghits Mahon mehohanau anrou anion abinaihane antsica   Poconchi 48. Yah uir vach a cal he invan taxah Chaye runa tahunun ta quih vije   New England 49. Nen nach ohkeit neane kesukqut Nummectiuongash asekesukokish assamjnean yeuyeu kesukod   Philos. Language 50. M{ou} ril dady me ril dad Io velpi rαl αι ril poto i hαι sαba vaty   51. In erth az it is in héven Giv ƴs dhis daι ƴ{ou}r daιlι bred  
  English 1. And forgive us our trespasses As we forgive them that trespass against us   Hebrew 2. Uslach lanu eth cobothénu Caascher anachnu solechim lebaale chobothenu   Arabic 3. Waghphir lanâ mâ aleina Camâ nághphiro náhno limàn lanâ alcihi   Syriac 4. Vashbuk lan chaubain Aikano doph chanan shbakan Ichaibeian   Aethiop 5. Hydyg lanà abashana Chamà nyhhnani nyhadyg laxà abashà lanà   Greek 6. Kai aphes hemin tà ophilemata hemôn Hos kai hemîs aphiemen tois ophiletais hemón   Copti 7. Ouohchanieteron nanebolmphretitio Tenchoebol neete   Latin 8. Et remitte nobis debita nostra Sicut & nos remittimus debitoribus nostris   Spanish 9. Y perdona nos nuestras deudas Assi como nosotros perdonamos à nuestros deu∣dores   Porteguese 10. E perdoa nos sennoras nossas dividas Assi como nos perdoamos aos nossos dividores   French 11. Et pardonne nous noz faultes Comme nous pardonnons a ceulx qui nous ont offenzes   Italian 12. Et perdonaci i nostri debiti Si com noi perdoniamo à debitori nostri   Friulian 13. Et perdonni nus glu nestris debiz Sicu noo perduin agl nestris debitoors   Sardinian of the City. 14. I dexia anosaltres losdeutres nostres Axicom i nosaltres dexiam als deutois nostres   Sardinian of the Countrey. 15. Et lassa anosateros is debitus nostrus Comente e nosateros a isdebitores nostrus   Grysons 16. Parduna à nus nos dbits Sco aus fain à dbitaduors   German ancient 17. Unde unsere sculde belas uns Als auch wer belasendt unseren sculdigen   Germ. modern 18. Und vergib uns unsre schuld Als wir auch vergeben unsern sculdigern   Old Saxon 19. And forget us scylda urna Sue we forgefen scyldgum urum   Dutch 20. Ende vergheeft ons onse schulden Gelijck vock wy vergheven onsen schulde∣naren Megiserus. Danish 21. De forlad oz vor skyld Sm wi forlade vore shyldener M. Isleland 22. Og bergeb oz skulden vorn Suofem vi bergebunsku Idun vorn M. Lappian 23. ja anna anteixe meiden syndia Kwin moe annamma vastahan rickoillen M. Suedish 24. Och forlat oss wara skuld Sasom ock wy forlate them oz skydgh aro M. Gothic 4. Gah aflet unsthatei sculanssigaima Sua sue gah weiz afletam thaim skulam vnsarem M. Carnish 26. inu odpusti nam dulge nashe Kakor tudmi odpustimo dulshnikom nashim   Dalmatian 27. Jod pussti naam duge nase Kako i my odpuschyamo duxnikom nassim M Hungarian 28. Es bochasdmegh neck eunkaz mi vetkeyn∣ketmi Kepen meg bochatunk ellen wnck vetetteknek M. Croatian 29. Jodpusti nam dlgi nashe Jaco she imi odpushzhamo dlshnikom nashim M. Servian 30. Jodpusti nam duge nashe Kako imi otpushzhamo dushnikom nashim Gesnerus. Walachian 31. Sunc jerta gresalelle nostre Cum sunoi jerta ma gresitilor nostri M. Bohemian 32. Y odpust nam nasse winy Yako y my odpaustime nassim winikom G. Lusatian 33. Awoday nam wyni nashe Ack my wodawamij winikam nashim   polonian 34. A odpusz nam uyny nascha Yako y my odpusczamy winowaytzom naschym M. Lituanian 35. Ir atlayisk mums musu kaltes Kayp ir mes atlaydziam sawiemus kaltiemus   Livonian 36. Pamniate mums musse grake ka mess pammart musse partadveken M. Russian 37. Jo staue nam dolghij nasha Yaco Imwee Ostauelayem dolzgnecom nashim M. Tartarian 38. Kai visum ja sachen Alen bisdacha kaielbe rin bisum jasoch namasin   Turkish 39. Hem bassa bize borsligomozi Nycse bizde baslaruz borse tigleremozi M. Armenian 40. Eu thogl mez zpaartis mer Orpas eu mech thoglumch merozt partpanazt   Persian 41. Wodar kedsar mara konáhan ma Chenankeh ma niz mikedsarim ormân mara   Chinish 42. uul myaen ong-o tsi ay Ziu ngò ijé ssa tû' ngò tso ay tsié   Welsh 43. A maddeu i ni ein dyledion Fel y maddewn ni in dyled▪ wyr M. Irish 44. Agis math duin dairfhiacha ammnil Agis mathum vid dar feuthunuim   Biscan 45. Ea quitta jetrague gure corrac Nola guere gure corduny quittatzen baitra vegu M. Frisian 46. In veriov ws vvs schylden As wy vejac ws Schyldnirs   Madagascar 47. amanhanau manghafaca hanay ota antsica Tonazahai manghafaca hota aurcomanona∣nay   Poconchi 48. Nachach ta camac he incachachve quimac Xim acquivi chi quih   New England 49. Kah ahquontamaijnneau numat cheseongash Neane matchenehu queagig nuta quonta∣mounnonog   Philos. Language 51. na ιo s{ou}eldy{ou}s lαl αι hαι bαlgas me  s{ou}eldy{ou}s lαl eι {ou}{ou} vαlgas r{ou} αι   52. and fαrgiv ƴs ƴ{ou}r tre∣spassez az {ou}ι fαrgìv dhem dhat tre∣spass against ƴs.
English 1. And lead us not into temptation, But deliver us from evil, Amen.   Hebrew 2. Veal tebienu lenissajon, Ella Hazzilénu mera, Amen.   Arabic 3. Walâ túdkilná hagiârib, Lakín nagjinnâ minnash shirriri.   Syriac 4. Ulotalaan Inesiuno Elo pazzan men visho. Amin.   Aethiop 5. Waïthabyana wysh tha manshúthi, Alâ adychnana balhhánana ymkûl ychûï,   Greek 6. Kai me isenenkes hemas is pirasmon, Alla rhysai hemas apo tou ponerou, Amen.   Copti 7. Ouo omper tenechou epirasmos, Alla nah menebolch enpipethmou.   Latin 8. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem, Sd libera nos à malo, Amen.   Spanish 9. Y no nos dexes caër en la tentation, Nas libra nos de mal, Amen.   Porteguese 10. E nao nos dexes cahir in tentacao, Mas libra nos do mal. Amen.   French 11. Et ne nous induy point en tentation, Mais deliure nous de mal, Amen.   Italian 12. Et non c' indurre in tentatione, Ma liberaci dal male. Amen.   Friulian 13. E no nus menaa in tentation, Mà libora nus dal mal.   Sardinian of the City. 14. I no nos iuduescas en la tentatio, Mas liura nos del mal.   Sardinian of the Countrey. 15. E no nos portis in sa tentatione. Impero libera nos da su male.   Grysons 16. Nun ens mener in mel aprouaimaint, Dimpersemaing spendra nus da tuots mels   German ancient 17. And in chorunga uit leitest du unsich Un belose unsich fone ubelc   Germ. modern 18. Und fuhreuns nicht in versuchung Sondern erlose uns vom bosen   Old Saxon 19. And no inlead usith in custnung Ah gefrig urich from isle   Dutch 20. Ende en leydtons niet i verwee∣kinghe. Maer verloft ons van den bosen.   Danish 21. Oc leed oz icke vdi fristelse Men frels oz fra out. Megiserus. Isleland 22. Ant leidt oz e ki breizlni Helldur brelsa oz ver illu M. Lappian 23. Ia ale sata mei ta kin sauxen Mutta paasta meite pahasta M. Suedish 24. Och inleedh oss ickei frestelse Uchan frels oss ifram ondo M. Gothic 25. Gah ni brigges vns in fraestub Ak lauzii uns af thamma oblin. M. Carnish 26. Inu neupelai nas v' iskushno Tamazh reshi nass od slega M. Dalmatian 27. Ine naass uvediu-napasst Da osslobodi naas od assla.   Hungarian 28. Es ne vigy mynket az kesertet Ben de szabaditz megh minket azgonosztul M. Croatian 29. Ine isbavi nas od nepriasni     Servian 30. Ine vauedi nas v' napast Dais bavi nas od sla M. Walachian 31. Sunu ne duce prenoi in Kale deispirra Sune men tu jaste preroi de reu. M. Bohemian 32. Y ne uwod nasz do pokussenii Ale zbaw nas od zleho. Gesnerus. Lusatian 33. Neweshi nass dospi towana A le wimoshi nas wot slego, Amen. M. Polonian 34. Nyewodz nasz napokus chenye Alye zbaw nasz od zlego. G. Lituanian 35. Ir newesk musu ing pagúndynima Bet giaf bekmus nog pikto, Amen.   Livonian 36. Ne wedde mums louna badeckle Pet passatza mums nuwusse loune M. Russian 37. Ineuedi nas fpapast No Jzbaue nas ot loocauaho, Ameen.   Tartarian 38. Datcha koima visn sunan acha Illa garta visenn gemandam. M. Turkish 39. Hem yedma bizege heneme De churtule bizy jaramazdan. M. Armenian 40. Eu mi tanir zmezi phorxuthai Ail pharceai zmez i zarae. M. Persian 41. Wodar azmaish minadâr mara Leikan halats kon mara az sharir, Amin.   Chinish 42. Yeéu' pu ngo chiù chi éu iu' ìeáū caan Nây kyeéa ngo yu' chiu' o.   Welsh 43. Ac nac arwain ni i brofedigaeth Eithr gwared ni rhag drwg, Amen·   Irish 44. Agis na trilaic astoch sin anau seu Ac sar sino ole, Amen. M. Biscan 45. Eta ezgai zala sar eraci tentatio∣netan Baina delivra gaitzac gaich totic.   Frisian 46. In lied ws nact in versicking Din fry ws vin it quaed. M: Madagascar 47. Aman hanau aca mahatetseanay abin fivetsevetse ratsi Fcha hanau metezahahanay tabin ha∣ratsian abi.   Poconchi 48. Macoacana chipan catacchihi Coaveçata china unche tsiri, Amen.   New England 49. Ahque sagkompagunainnean en qutchhuaonganit Webe pohquohwussinean wutch ma∣chitut, Amen.   Philos. Language 50. Na mi ιo velco αι rαl bedodl{ou}. Nil ιo c{ou}αlbo αι lal vαgasie, Amen.   51. And léd ƴs nαt int{ou} temp∣tasiαn Bƴt delìver ƴs frαm ívil,  
It would be convenient, that every one of these Instances should be Philosophically Lettered, according to the true pronunciation used in each Language; but this being a thing of too great difficulty, I do not attempt it. 'Tis probable that the doing of this, would make most strange Languages seem more harsh and uncouth, than now they do; as appears by that Instance of the English, this way written, which I have subjoyned in the last place, for the more accurate com∣paring it with the Philosophical Language. In the comparing of these Languages, it may be granted that some few words of each Language may seem preferrible to others in this: But take it altogether, and in the whole, and it may at least stand in competition with the best of them, as to its facility and pleasantness. 'Tis most likely, that the generality of Readers will be apt in the com∣paring of these Instances, to give the precedence to those Languages they are acquainted with. I should desire no more from them, but that they would be content to permit this new Language to come in the next place, which would be a sufficient testimony for it. But then for the Philosophy of this Language, it hath many great ad∣vantages above any other. Every Word being a description of the thing signified by it; Every Letter being significant, either as to the Nature of the Thing, or the Grammatical Variations of the Word, which cannot be said of any of the rest; besides the constant Analogy obser∣ved in all kind of Derivations and Inflexions.
CHAP. V. Directions for the more easie Learning of this Character and Language, together with a brief Table containing the Ra∣dicals, both Integrals and Particles; together with the Character and Language by which each of these is to be exprest. IF any Man shall think it worth his time and pains to learn this Character; the most facil and natural order to be observed in this, will be, to begin with the 40 common Heads or Genus's, which should be learnt out of that General Scheme, Part II. Chap. I. where there is expressed some reason of their order; the understand∣ing of which will much facilitate the fixing of them in the me∣mory. Next to these, he may proceed to the Differences belonging to each Genus, which though they are in the Character expressed by that numerical institution of First, Second, and Third, &c. yet are they to be committed to memory from their real significations. So the First, Second, and Third differences under the Genus of Beast, are to be learned and remembred, not as First, Second, and Third, &c. but as Whole-footed, Cloven-footed, and Clawed, &c. (not Rapacious, Ra∣pacious Dog-kind, Rapacious Cat-kind) and Oviparous. Thus when we see any of the differences belonging to Measure, we are not to name them by their numerical order of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, but by the things which they denote, as Measure of Multitude, Magnitude, Gra∣vity, Valour, Duration, Age. And to this end all the differences are to be learned out of the larger Tables, where there is some reason to be seen for the order of most of them. Next to these, the several Species are to be learned, belonging to each Difference, at least so many of them as are like most frequently to occur in discourse. As for the various kinds of Meteors, Stones, Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, Exanguious Animals, Fishes, Birds, Beasts, and the kinds of Diseases, though they are to be provided for in the Ta∣bles, that they may be written when there shall be occasion for the mention of them; yet 'tis not ordinarily necessary to commit them all to memory, because those who are most expert in any Language, may not yet be able to remember all the names of such things. But as for such Species as are fit to be remembred, they are to be learned out of the first and larger Tables, where they are each of them de∣scribed and determined, as to their primary significations, and some reason is attempted of their number and order, the understanding of which will make them more easily remembred. After these the Particles are to be learned, which should be likewise out of the first Tables, where the meaning of them is described and determined. But for the better helping of the memory in cases of doubt or
forgetfulness, it may be proper to have recourse to the Synopsis here adjoined, by which it is easie at the first or second view to find out the true place of any Integral or Particle, together with the Derivati∣ons and Inflexions belonging to the Radicals. 'Tis here to be noted concerning this briefer Scheme or Table, that in several of the Genus's pertaining to Substance, there are only some few of the first Species or Pairs of them mentioned under each diffe∣rence as instances; the rest being to be sought for in the larger Table. Those that are paired by way of opposition, are put in a di∣stinct Character. The first Part, and the former half of the second, do contain a Philosophical Dictionary for all Integral, Radical words: The re∣maining Part doth contain all the Particles necessary to Speech, be∣sides a Summary of the whole Grammar, with reference both to the Character and Language; which I conceive to be so plainly set down, as not to need any particular explication. But now because there is no more general inclination amongst per∣sons of all Ages and Qualities, then that of Gaming, which Men can continue at for a long time with much pleasure, and are least apt to be weary of: Therefore the reducing of the Learning of this Chara∣cter to a Game, may be a special help and furtherance to it. In order to which it were not difficult to shew, how it might be brought into several Games, like to those either at Dice or Cards. Of the former of which I had once thought to have given an instance, with relation to the Particles, by which it would be easie to understand how the like might be done for all the rest: But upon second thoughts I do at present forbear it.
TRANS. G. PREDIC. I Kind Species 1 Being Nothing 2 Thing Appearance 3 Notion Fiction 4 Name Person 5 Substance Accident 6 Quantity Quality 7 Action Passion 8 Relation Absoluteness II Cause fect 1 Efficient Instrument 2 Impulsive Cohibitive 3 Exemplar Type 4 Condition Occasion 5 Adjuvant Impedient 6 Fnd Means 7 Matter Form III Divesity 1 Truth Falshood 2 Goodness Evilness 3 Positiveness Privativeness 4 Genuineness Spuriousness 5 Actualness Potentialness 6 niteness Infiniteness 7 Naturalness Factitiousness Simplicity Mixedness Perfection Imperfection IV Diteence Conveniency 1 Profitableness Hurtfulness 2 Pleasantness Vnpleasantness 3 Dueness Vndueness 4 Possibility Impossibility 5 Importance Vanity Worthiness Vnworthiness V Dif. rel. to the Meanes 1 Lawfulness Indifferency 2 Decency Indecency 3 Safety Danger 4 Easiness Difficulty 5 Gentleness Violence 6 Congruity Contrariety 7 Expediency Inconveniency 8 Necessity Contingence VI Mde   1 ubject Adjunct 2 Object   3 Circumstance Solemnity 4 State   5 Signe   6 Room as Suc. Stead as Subst. 7 Degree Impetus 8 Turn Reciprocation 9 Cognation Opposition TRANS. REL MIX. I Of Quan. more Ger.   1 Indifferent Greatnes little. 2 Mediocrity Abund. scarcity 3 Sufficiency Ex. deficiency 4 Indifferent Excell. sorry 5 Equal Superior infer. 6 Equivalency Betternes wors. 7 At a stand Increase dimin. 8 Just temper Intention remis. 9 Keep at a stay Mending marr. II Of Contin. Quan. 1 Length Shortness 2 Bredth Narrowness 3 Deepness Shallowness 4 Highness Lowness 5 Thickness Thinness III Discotin. Quan.   1 Multitude Fewness 2 Singularity Plurality 3 Particularity Vniversality 4 Specialness Generalness 5 Evenness Odness 6 Segregateness Aggregateness 7 Series Catalogue 8 Suit   IV Of Qual. more largely   1 Primitiveness Derivativeness 2 Immediatenes Mediateness 3 Absoluteness Dependency 4 Principalness Accessoriness 5 Pertinency Impertinency 6 Properness Commonness V more strictly   1 Likeness Vnlikeness 2 Order Confusion 3 Ordinariness Extraordinari. 4 Regularness Exorbitancy 5 Publickness Privateness 6 Ornateness Homeliness 7 Purity Defilement VI Of Whole Part 1 Best part Worst part 2 Say Vantage 3 Scum Sediment 4 Lump Powder 5 Chip Fragment 6 Additum Sum 7 Ablatum Residue 8 Multiplier Product 9 Divisor Quotient TRANS. REL. of ACT. I Belonging to sing. things   1 Putting Altering 2 Apropriating Alienating 3 Claiming Abdicating 4 Taking Leaving 5 Having Wanting 6 Holding Letting go 7 Seeking Finding 8 Shewing Concealing 9 Manifesting Seeming II To diverse things   1 Joyning Separating 2 Adhering Abandoning 3 Applying Abstracting 4 Comprehend. Exempting 5 Comparing Trying 6 Repeating Changing 7 Restoring compensating 8 Representing Imitating 9 Repairing Spoiling III Businesse Leasure 1 Designing Undertaking 2 Preparing Furnishing 3 Beginning Offering 4 Endeavouring Essaying 5 Dispatching Protracting 6 Performing Violating 7 Finishing Miscarrying 8 Erring Omitting 9 Preventing Remedying IV Commerce   1 Yielding Submitting to 2 Offering Demanding 3 Delivering Receiving 4 Giving Accepting 5 Disbursing Refunding 6 Reckoning Ballancing 7 Being Credi. Being debtor 8 Paying Failing 9 Acquitting Forgiving V Event   1 Obtaining Frustrating 2 Gaining Losing 3 Saving Spending 4 Laying up Squandering 5 Keeping Loosing 6 Using Abstaining 7 Injoying Being sick of 8 Refreshing Wearying 9 Quieting Troubling VI on Stapg 1 Coming Going 2 Proceeding Turning 3 Travelling Wandring 4 Sending Fetching 5 Leading Driving 6 Following Overtaking 7 Meeting Avoyding DISCOURS. LANG. Elements   1 Letter Character 2 Vowell Consonant 3 Syllable Dypthong 4 Interpunction Hyphen 5 Comma Semicolon 6 Colon Period 7 Parenthesis Parathesis 8 Emphasis Irony. 9 Accent P. Accent. E. II Word Mening 1 Integrall Particle 2 Abstract Concrete 3 Substantive Adjective 4 Verbe Adverbe deri. 5 Subject Predicate 6 Copula   7 Pronoun Interjection 8 Preposition Article 9 Adverb und. Conjunction III Complex. Gram. parts 1 Clause Sentence 2 Verse Section 3 Chapter Book 4 Prose Verse 5 Meetre Rythm 6 Proper Tralatitions 7 Simple Figurate 8 Express Vnderstood 9 Plain Obscure IV Comp. Log. parts   1 Distinction Equivocation 2 Limitation Ampliation 3 Definition Description 4 Division Partition 5 Rule Exception 6 rgumentation Illation 7 Syllogism Enthymem 8 Induction Example Quotation Allusion V Mixed   1 Proposition Adage 2 Oration Epistle 3 Narration Rumour 4 Interpretation   5 Translation Paraphrase 6 Commentary   7 Epitome   8 Prologue Epilogue 9 Transition Digression VI Mos o Disc.   1 Question Answer 2 Affirmation Negation 3 Supposition Concession 4 Opposition Contradiction 5 Objection Solution 6 Probation Confirmation 7 Confutation Retortion 8 Posing Conviction 9 Confession Recantation BIRD I Carnivorous Birds   1 Eagle Vulture 2 Hawk Kite 3 Cuckoe Butcher b. 4 Owle horned Owle not h. 5 Raven Crow 6 Daw Chough, &c. II Phytiv. of short Wings   1 Cock   2 Peacock Turky 3 Pheasant Attagen. 4 Bustard Anas cam. bell. 5 Cock of thew Heath cock 6 Partridge Red Partr. &c III Phytiv. of long Wings   1 Pidgeon Ringdove 2 Stock-dove Turtle 3 Mislle b. Thrush 4 Stare Merula sax. 5 Feldefare Redwing 6 Black bird Passer soli. &c. IV Graniv. of thick Blls   1 Bunting   2 Yellow hamer Hortulane 3 Sparrow Mountain sp. 4 Cocothraustes Cocoth. crista. 5 Bullfinch Shell apple 6 Greenfinch Canary b. &c. V Insectivorous greater   1 Swallow Swift 2 Martin Sand martin 3 Nightingale   4 Larke Titlarke 5 Redbrest Red start 6 Beccafigo Wheat ear, &c VI Insectivorous lesser   1 Ligurinus Serinus 2 Citrinella   3 Wron   4 Regulus crist. Reg. non crist. 5 Humming bi.   6 Great titmous &c. vii Aquatic. near wet places   1 Lapwing   2 Green plover Grey plover 3 Dotterell Sea larke 4 Redshank Ruffe 5 Tringa ma. Tringa mi. 6 Knot Stint &c. viii Aquatic. issed. 1 Crane Stork 2 Phaenicopter Grus Balear. 3 Hearne Ard. cin. min. 5 Great white h. Less w. Hearn 6 Bittour Brasilean, &c. IX Aquatic Palmipede 1 Swan Goose 2 Sheldrake Drake 3 Widgin Teale 4 Solan goose Pelican &c. BEAST I Whole footed   1 Horse   2 Asse Mule 3 Camel   4 Elephant   II oen footed   1 Kine   2 Sheep Goat 3 Elke Stagg 4 Buck Rein deer 5 Roe buck   6 Rhinocerot   7 Camelopard   8 Hogg   III Clawed not rpaceous   1 Baboon Ape 2 Monkey Sloth 3 Hare   4 Conny Marmotto 5 Porcupine Hedghogg 6 Squirrell Ginny pigg 7 Ratt Mouse 8 Mole   IV Rapaceous Cakind 1 Lion Beare 2 Tygre Pard 3 Ounce   4 Catt Civet catt 5 Ferret Polecatt 6 Martin   7 Stoat Weasle 8 Castor Otter V Rapaceous Dog-kind 1 Dog Wolfe 2 Fox Badger 3 Morse Seale 4 Jackall   5 Ant Beare Armadillo 6 Caraguya   VI Ovinatous Feast 1 Tortoise Turtle 2 Frogg Toade 3 Crocodile Senembi 4 Lizard Chamaelion 5 Land salam. Water salam. 6 Serpent   7 Snake Viper 8 Slow-worm   PARTS PECUL. I Last p. of pl. Wood 1 Root Knot 2 Stock Sucker 3 Branch Thorn 4 Stick Wand 5 Rinde Pith Gumm Resin 7 Juice Balsam II Annual parts   1 Flower Catkin 2 Pulpe Stone 3 Husk Beard 4 Cluster Eare 5 Sprout Leafe 6 Stile Stamen 7 Stalk Tendril 8 Cup Pericarpium III Fruit Excrecences 1 Apple   2 Plum Berry 3 Nut   4 Mast Key 5 Cone Cod 6 Grane Kernel IV Of swim. Animals chiefly 1 Scale   2 Shell Crust 3 Gill   4 Feeler   5 Swim. bladdr   6 Finn Ray 7 Claw   8 Milt Spawne V Of flyin Animals chiefly 1 Feather Quill 2 Wing Train 3 Talon Palmipes 4 Beake Trunk 5 Spurr Sting 6 Egg Chrysolite 7 Comb Gill 8 Rump Oil-box VI Of going Animals ch. 1 Hair Wooll 2 Bristle Downe 3 Furr Fleece 4 Beard Mane 5 Hoof Nail 6 Horn Tail 7 Embrio Secondine PARTS GEN. I Contain Homogen. parts 1 Spirit   2 Serum Succus nutri. 3 Chyle Milk 4 Sperm Menstrua 5 Blood   6 Bloud Choler 7 Phlegm Melancholy 8 Braine Marrow II Containing Homog. 1 Bone Gristle 2 Ligament Tendon 3 Skin Membrane 4 Vein Artery 5 Nerve Fibre 6 Flesh Muscle 7 Fatt Glandule III Head   1 Face Pate 2 Eye Eare 3 Mouth Nose 4 Tongue Tooth 5 Palate Throat 6 Forehead Ey-brow 7 Cheek Temple 8 Lip Chin 9 Jaw Place of Tons. IV Trunk   1 Neck Shoulder 2 Breast Dugg 3 Back Vertebra 4 Loine Ribb 5 Side Flank 6 Belly Navel 7 Grojn Share 8 Buttock Fundament V Limb Ioynt 1 Arme Shoulder 2 Cubit Elbow 3 Hand Wrist 4 Thigh Huckle 5 Shank Knee 6 Foot Heel 7 Finger Knuckle VI Inwards   1 Gullet Wind-pipe 2 Heart Lungs 3 Diaphragm Mediastine 4 Stomach Gutt 5 Liver Spleen 6 Mesentery Cawle 7 Kidney Bladder 8 Privities Testicle 9 Wombe  
GOD IDOL I Father   II Son   III Holy Ghost   WORLD I Spirit Body 1 Angel   2 Good-angel Devil 3 Soul   4 Vegetative   5 Sensitive   6 Rational   II Heaen Hell 1 Starr   2 Fixed-starr Sun 3 Planet Comet 4 Saturn Jupiter 5 Mars Venus 6 Mercury   7 Globe of earth   8 Moon Satelles III Earth Country 1 Plain Mount. Valley 2 Continent Island 3 Rock Cliff 4 Promontory Pen-isle 5 sthmus Bank 6 Shore Washes 7 Quicksands Oaz IV Water Sea 1 Aequor Wave, whirlpool 2 Ocean Lake 3 Well Spring 4 Bay Pene-lake 5 Fretum Channel 6 Shore Tide 7 Stream Staguum V Animate parts   1 Mineral   2 Plant   3 Herb Grasse 4 Animal   5 Man   VI Imag. Circle. Ore 1 Horizon   2 Equator   3 Ecliptic Zodiac 4 Meridian Azimuth 5 Artic Antartic 6 Tropick of ♋ Tropic of ♑ 7 Parallel Almacantor ELEMENT METEOR I Fire   1 Flame Spark 2 Comet Falling-starr 3 Lightning Thunder 4 Beam Dart, &c. II Ar   1 Aether Atmosphere 2 Exhalation Vapor 3 Fume Smoak 4 Wind Whirlwi. &c. III Water   1 Drop Bubble 2 Cloud Mist 3 Rain Dew 4 Frost Snow, &c IV Earth   1 Dust   2 Durt   3 Ashes Soot 4 Clay Morter, &c. V Appea. Meteors 1 Rainbow   2 Halo   3 Parelius Paraselene, &c. VI Weather   1 Clearness Haziness 2 Mizzling Showr 3 Spout   4 Storm Sleet, &c. STONE CONCRET. I Uulgar   1 Freestone Brick 2 Ragg   3 Flint Marchasite 4 Pibble, &c.   II Midle prized   1 Alabaster   2 Marble Agat 3 Jaspis Lazul. 4 Christal Glass, &c III Gemm less transparent   1 Opal Cats-eyes 2 Pearl   3 Sardius, &c·   IV Gemm more transparent   1 Diamond Wh. Saphire 2 Ruby Granate 3 Chrysolite Topaz, &c. V Concretions dissolvibe   1 Salt Nitre 2 Allum Sal gemmae 3 Vitriol   4 Tartar Alcali, &c. VI Concretions not dissolvible   1 Chalk Marle 2 Yellow-Oker Red-Oker 3 Gett Pitcoal 4 Orpiment Arssnic, &c. METTAL I Naturall   1 Gold   2 Silver   3 Tinn   4 Copper   5 Lead   6 Iron   II Factitious   1 Brass   2 Pewter   3 Steel   III Imperfect kinds   1 Mercury   2 Antimony   3 Bismute   4 Spelter   5 Cinnabar Vermilion 6 Black Lead   IV cremenus parts   1 Litharge   2 Spodium Pompholyx 3 Scoria   4 Rust   5 Verdigreece Ceruse HERB accord to the LEAF I Imperfect   1 Mushrome Molde 2 Trubs Fuzball, &c. II Frumentaceous   1 Wheat Ry 2 Maiz &c. III Gramineous not frumentac.   1 Canary Grass Panic 2 Fox tayle Cats tayle, &c IV Gram. H. of Bulbous routs   1 Crown Imperiall   2 Lilly Martagon, &c. V H. of Affin. to Bulbous   1 Kings speare Spider wort 2 Dogs tooth &c. VI Round leaved Herbs   1 Colts foot Butter burr 2 Great Burdoc Little bur. &c vii Nervous leaved Herbs   1 W. Hellebore Helleborine 2 Plantain Bucksth. &c. viii Succulent Herbs   1 Housleek Aloe 2 Orpine Rosewort, &c. IX Superficies of the Leafe   1 Burrage Bugloss 2 Alkanet Vipers grass HERB accor. to the Flow. I Sammeous   1 Rubarbe Dock 2 Sorrell French S. &c. II Folaceous not pappous   1 Sun Flower Hierus. Harti. 2 Marigold &c. III Fol. Pappous   1 Thistle Hartichoke 2 Blew Bottle A. Sneezw. &c. IV Umbellif. broader leaves   1 Annis. Coriander 2 Bast. stone parsly, &c.   V Umbel. Narrower leaves   1 Fennel Dill 2 Hogs Fennel Sampire, &c. VI Uerticillae fruticose   1 Sage   2 Germander. Tree Ger. 3 Mastic Goats ma. &c. VII Uert. not fruticose   1 Mint Catmint 2 Balm Calamint, &c. viii Spicate   1 Teasil Fringo 2 Globe Thistle Shep. rod, &c. IX Button-like head   1 Wild Tansey Avens 2 Cinquefoil Tormentil &c HERB acc to the SEEDV. I Corniculate   1 Peiony Fraxinella 2 Larks heele Columbine &c II Papilion. Climbers   1 Kidney-Beane   2 Bean of the An. Pease, &c. III Panil. not climbers   1 Beane Lupin 2 Chich pease &c. IV Not Papil. Tetrapetala 1 Stock Gilly F. Wall F. 2 Dames violet Toothwort &c V Capsulate Pentapetala   1 Gilly Flower Pink 2 Campion Catchfly, &c. VI Tripetala & Tetrapetela   1 Fre. wa. sould. Arrow head 2 Bulbonach Madwort, &c. VII Monopet. Campanulate 1 Pompeon Melon 2 Gourd Citrul. &c. viii Mon. not companulate   1 Primrose Paigle 2 Bears eare Birds eye, &c. IX Bacciferous   1 Strawberries   2 Apple of love Mad apple, &c MAGNIT. EXTENS; I Dimension. Division 1 Point   2 Line   3 Superficies Area 4 Solid   II Rel. of Dimens.   1 Center Pole 2 Vertex Intersection 3 Diagonal Side 4 Tangent Secant 5 Diameter Axis 6 Signe Chord 7 Parallel Diverg. Conver. 8 Oblique Drect. Transv. 9 Reflected Refracted III Affect. of Mag. more simple   1 Streightness Crookedness 2 Circle Angle 3 Right angle Obtuse, Acute 4 Plain Convex, concave 5 Sphere Cube 6 Cylinder Prisme 7 Cone Pyramid 8 Parabola Hyperb. Ellipsis 9 Spiral Helix IV Compound fig. Linear   1 Pinn Hole 2 Tooth Notch 3 Protuberance Dent 4 Figure T Cross 5 Staple Windle 6 Tuft Asterisk 7 Whip Flagg 8 Hook Fork 9 Undulated Crenated V Comp. sig. Planary   1 Triangle Square 2 Ring Loop 3 Bow Wheel 4 Lamin Chink 5 Tressel Pinion 6 Edge Gutter 7 Ridge Furrow 8 Forme Step 9 Tube square Tube round VI Comp. sig. Solidary   1 Porousness Hollow. Massin. 2 Bottle Pinn 3 Pedestal Turret 4 Gudgeon Mallet 5 Buoy Hour glass 6 Ovall Bowle 7 Bottom Skein SPACE I Time Instant 1 Present Past Future 2 Simult. Dist. Proceed Succ. 3 Newness Oldness 4 Soonness Lateness 5 Date Epocha 6 Permanency Transitoriness 7 Frequency Seldomness 8 Perpetuity At times 9 Everness Neverness II Place   1 Presence Absence 2 Contigu. Dist. On this side, By. 3 Neerness Remoteness 4 Home Rise 5 Ampleness Narrowness 6 Obviousness Rareness 7 Continuance Discontinuance 8 Ubiquity Nullibiety III Situation Uergency 1 East West 2 North South 3 Middle, Exre. End, Begi. 4 Side Margin 5 Upper Vnder 6 Inside Outside 7 Top Bottom 8 Forepart Hinder part 9 Righthand si. Left hand side MEASURE PROPOR. I Multitude. Number 1 One   2 Two   3 Three   Foure   5 Five   6 Six   7 Seven   8 Eight   9 Nine   II Magnitude. Capacity 1 Line   2 Inch   3 Foot   4 Standard   5 Perch   6 Furlong   7 Mile   8 League   9 Degree   III Gravity. Weight 1 Graine   2 Scruple   3 Dramm   4 Ounce   5 Pound   6 Stone   7 Hundred   8 Thousand   9 Tunn   IV Ualor. Money 1 Farthing   2 Penny   3 Shilling   4 Angel   5 Pound   6 Hundred   7 Thousand   V Time. Duration 1 Year   2 Spring Summer 3 Autumn Winter 4 Moneth Week 5 Day Natural   6 Day Artificial Night 7 Morning Afternoon 8 Houre Minute VI Life time. Seculum 1 Infancy Chilehood 2 Adolescency Youth 3 Manhood Declining age 4 Old age Decrepidness N. POWER IMPOT. I Rational Irrational 1 Understand. Idioticalness 2 Judgment Injudiciousness 3 Conscience Vnconscionabl. 4 Will Listlesness II Sensitive Internal 1 Com. sense Stupor 2 Fancy Dotage 3 Memory Forgetfulness 4 Appetite Loathing III Sensitive External 1 Sight Blindness 2 Hearing Deafness 3 Smelling   4 Tast   5 Touch Numness IV Tempers of Mind   1 Ingenuity Disingenuity 2 Sprightliness Dulness 3 Seriousness Wantoness 4 Gentleness Fierceness 5 Op. to Rapaci. Rapacity 6 Stoutness Laziness 7 Hardiness Niceness V Corp. Tēp. resp. the Individ.   1 Wholeness Mutilousness 2 Soundness Rottenness 3 Indolence Pain 4 Vigor Decaying 5 Fatness Leaness 6 Beauty Deformity 7 Strength Weakness 8 Agility Lumpishness 9 Swiftness Slowness VI Corp. Tem. res propag of Sp.   1 Sex   2 Male Female 3 Fruitfulness Barrenness 4 Ripeness Overripe, unripe
SHRUB I Baceit decid. Spinous   1 Rasberry Bramble 2 Rose Bryar 3 Goosberry White thorn 4 Sloe tree Barbery 5 Purging thor.   6 Christs thorn Box thorne 7 Bucks thorn   II Bac. decid. not Spinous   1 Vine Curran 2 Bilberry   3 Wayfaring T. Wh. beam T. 4 Dogberry T.   5 Birds cherry Wild rock ch. 6 Dwarfe medl. Sweet whort 7 Berry bearing Alder 8 Woodbine Upright woo. 9 Pepper &c. III Bac. Evergreen   1 True Balsom. Thorny. Bur. 2 Dwarfe palm   3 Phyllyraea Green Privet 4 Strawbery T. Greenthorn 5 Spurg Laurel   6 Spurg olive Widow waile 7 Laurel of Al. Horsetongue 8 Butchers broom   9 Wild bay &c. IV Siliquous   1 Lilach   2 Caper Thorny broo. 3 Beane tref. Shrub Trefoil 4 Sena Bastard Sena 5 Licorice   6 Binding bea. t. Locust Tr. 7 Humble plant   8 Broom Furz 9 Goats thorn Doryenium V Gracious Deduous 1 Chast tree Spik'd willow 2 Tamarisk   3 Jessamine White pipe tr 4 Shrub mallow   5 Galls Red Symach 6 Tree spurge   7 Clematis Travellers joy 8 Virginian climber   VI Grani. Eerotes 1 Holy rose Oleander 2 Sana munda Guttwort 3 Herb terrible   4 Rosemary Sage mullein 6 Hartwort Sw. moun. Ro. 5 Sea purslain Silver bush 7 Heath   8 Rose of Jerico   TREE I ointrerous   1 Apple   2 Peare Quince 3 Medlar Lazarole 4 True Service Com. service 5 Figg   6 Pomegranate   7 Orange Adams ap. &c. II Prutecous   1 Peach Nectarine 2 Apricok Plumm 3 Cherry Cornelian 4 Olive Date 5 Mirobalane Sebesten 6 White Jujub Common Juj. III Bacciferous   1 Mulberry   2 Elder Symach 3 Quicken Tr. Turpentin tr. 4 Nettle tree   5 Bay Laurell 6 Yew Holly 7 Box &c. IV Nuciferous   1 Wallnut Almond 2 Pistachio Storax 3 Filbert Small nut 4 Chesnut Beech 5 Bladder nut   6 Coco Nutmeg 7 Chocolate Coffi, &c V Glandif. or Conrous   1 Oake Bitter oake 2 Holme Cork tr. 3 Alder Larch tr. 4 Cedar Pine 5 Male Firr Fem. firr 6 Cypress Tree of life VI Of single egum.   1 Carob   2 Cassia Tamarind 3 Judas tree   4 Elme Hornbeam 5 Ash   6 Maple Sycamore 7 Birch Aspin, &c. vii Woods or Barks   1 Aloe tree   2 Guaiacum Snakewood 3 Red Saunders Yellow saun. 4 Lign. Nephrit. Rosewood 5 Brasill wood Logwood 6 Ebony Princes w. &c. vi Gumms or Rosins   1 Myrrh   2 Gum Arabic Sarcocolla 3 Frankincense Gum Elemi 4 Gum Animae Copal 5 Caranna Benjamin 6 Camphire &c. EXANG. INSECT. I sect not winged   1 Earthworm Belly worm 2 Leech Snail 3 Ascarides Botts 4 Fluke Asilus 5 Glow-worm Meale worm 6 Proscarab. &c. I ns. wing. or more then b. .   1 Locust Mantis 2 Crichet Fenn cricket 3 Cimex silv. Wing. cockro. 4 Water spider Cicada aquat. 5 Spider Scorpion 6 Tick Punice, &c. III Anoma▪ Insect.   1 Maggot   2 Bee mag. Shining fly m. 3 Gentil Wasp fly mag. 4 Libella wor. Cadew. 5 Beetle hexap. Whirl worm 6 Caterpillar Silkworm &c. IV Naked Winged   1 Bee Humble Bee 2 Waspe Hornet 3 Bee like fly Wasp like fly 4 Flesh fly Dung fly 5 Ant Gnat 6 Cicada Papil. fly, &c. V Sheathed wing. or Beetle   1 Rhinocerot Weevil 2 Stag beetle Bull beetle 3 Goate chafer Knobbl. hor. b. 4 Common beet. Dung b. 5 Dorr Green chafer 6 Death watch Ladycow, &c. VI Gr. Crustaceous   1 Lobster Long oyster 2 Sea bear   3 Craifish   4 Shrimp Squilla mant. 5 Hermit fish   6 Common crab Sea cock, &c. vii Testaceous turinated   1 Nautilus Water snaile 2 Murex Purpura 3 Cylindroides Aporrhais 4 Sea snaile Nerites 5 Buccinum Turbo 6 Trochus Periwincle &c viii Testac. not turbinated   1 Limpet Center fish 2 Button fish Mermaids h. 3 Mother of pe. Galades 4 Oyster Spondyl 5 Scollop Cockle, &c. IX Soft Erang.   1 Pourcontrel. Sweet polyp. 2 Cuttle Lesser cuttle 3 Sleve Less sleve 4 Sea hare Holothyr &c. FISH I Uiip. long   1 Whale Porpoise 2 Sawfish Swordfish 3 Sharke Glaucus 4 Houndfish Spotted H. F. 5 Thornback d. Hogfish 6 Great dogfish Less. D. F. &c. II Uiip. not long   1 Pastinaca Aquila 2 Flare Thornback 3 Maide Squatino raia 4 Crampfish Toadfish 5 Scate   6 Mole Lump III Ovi: of ste flus   1 Codfish Colefish 2 Haddock Whiting 3 Ling Haak 4 Tunny Pelamis 5 Mackerell   6 Kitefish Swallow fi. &c IV Of two fins,  and   1 Amia Glaucus 2 Coracinus Umbra 3 Lupus Engl. mullet 4 Red gournet Grey gourn. 5 Tubfish Lyra Rondel. 6 True mullet Lesser mul. &c V Of one sinn   1 Guilt head Sparus 2 Cantharus Salpa 3 Sargus Mormylus 4 Pagrus Rubellio 5 Melanurus Dentex 6 Gr. scorpion Less scorp. &c VI Eel figured   1 Conger Muraena 2 Sea serpent Ophidion Pli 3 Taenia maj. Taenia mi. 4 Tinca mar. Sandeele; 5 Lamprey Lampern 6 Sheat fish Eele pout, &c. vii Flat fish·   1 Common sole Spotted sole 2 Pole   3 Turbut Halibut 4 Bret   5 Plais Flounder vii Of Crustaceous Skins   1 Globe fish Hairy orbe. 2 Orbis Murie. Orbis Echin. 3 Triang. fish Horned Tr. F. 4 Holosteus   5 Acus Arist. Hippocam. &c IX Squamous River fish   1 Pike   2 Salmon Smelt 3 Trout Charr 4 Grailing Umber. &c. HABIT DISPOS. I Reward Punishment 1 Happiness Misery 2 Prosperity Adversity 3 Contentation Anxiety 4 Salvation Damnation II Instr. of Uirtue   1 Liberty Restraint 2 Riches Poverty 3 Pleasure Vnpleasantness 4 Reputation Infamy 5 Dignity Meanness 6 Power Impotence III Affect. of Intellect. Uirtue   1 Sagacity Dulness 2 Faith Credul. Incred. 3 Sobriety Conceitedness 4 Moderation Slight. Ferce. IV Affect. of Moral Uirtue   1 Consideration Cuncta. Rash. 2 Heedfulness Cark. Careles. 3 Alacrity Grudging 4 Sincerity Hypocrisie 5 Diligence Double Dil. Sloth 6 Integrity Partiality 7 Constancy Pertina. Light. V ufus. hab. Vngracious 1 Repentance Impenitence 2 Holiness Vnholiness 3 Self-denial Selfishness 4 Faith Infidelity 5 Hope Despair 6 Charity Vncharitabl. VI Acquired Intell. hab. 1 Science Curios. Ignor. 2 Wisdom Craft, Folly 3 Art Vnskilfulness 4 Experience Inexperience 5 Learning Vnlearnedness MANNERS CONVERS. I tue Gen. Vice 1 Justice, Injust. Rigor, Remissi. 2 Equity Summum Ius 3 Candor Censoriousness 4 Goodness Mischievousnes 5 Mercy Cruelty 6 Gratitude Ingratitude 7 Fortitude Rashness Cowa. 8 Patience, Imp. Obstinacy, Soft. 9 Meekness Lentitude R. an. II Resp. our Bodies   1 Temperance Sensuality 2 Abstinence Maceration, Gl. 3 Sobriety Drunkenness 4 Vigilance Sluggardliness 5 Mod. in Recre. Immod in Recr. 6 Cleanliness Niceness, Slov. 7 Chastity Vnchastity III Resp. our Estates & dignities   1 Liberality Prodigal. Covet. 2 Providence Scraping, Slatt. 3 Frugality Penurio. Squa. 4 Generosity Riotous. Sordid 5 Almsgiving Churlishness 6 Hospitality Inhospitableness 7 Modesty Sheepish. Impat. 8 Magnanimity Insolence, Pusil. Modesty Abject. Ambition IV Hmilet. Com. Insociableness 1 Veracity, Lyin. Oversay, Vnde. 2 Fidelity, Vnf. Officious, Treach. 3 Peaceabl Vnp Tameness, Cont. 4 Frankness Openess, Reserv 5 Taciturnity Loquacity 6 Gravity, Van. Formal. Lightn. 7 Courtesie Fawning Moro 8 Complaisance Assenta. Magis. 9 Urbanity Scurril, Rusti. V Hom. to Super   1 Dutifulness Vndutifulness 2 Humility Pride 3 Reverence Irreverence 4 Respect Disrespect 5 Subjection Rebellion 6 Loyalty Treachery 7 Obedience Disobedience 8 Submission Contumacy VI Hom. to Infer.   1 Graciousness Harshness 2 Condescent. Insolence 3 Affability Superciliousness 4 Protection Tyranny 5 Good-gover. Maladministr. 6 Reasonablenes Vnreasonable. 7 Severity Fondness 8 Clemency Austerity SENS. QUALITY I Primary Uisible   1 Twilight Light, Darkness 2 Light Shadow 3 Brightness Dimness 4 Transparency Opacity 5 Clearness Spottedness II Secondary visible Colour   1 Greines White. Black. 2 Redness Yellowness 3 Greeness Blueness 4 Purple   5 Variegatednes Unchangabl. 6 Spleckledness Striatedness 7 Dappledness Chequerdness III Sound Silence 1 Meane Acute, Grave 2 Ringing Jarring 3 Voice Articulate 4 Hissing Whistling 5 Note Sharp, Flat 6 Tune Consort 7 Clearness Hoarsness 8 Concord Discord 9 Harmony Iangling IV Belonging to ast or Smel   1 Sweetness Vnsavoriness 2 Fattiness Acrimonious. 3 Austereness Acerbity 4 Acidity Bitterness 5 Saltishness Freshness 6 Freshness Dadness 7 Mustiness Rottenness V Tact. Qu more Active   1 Temperateness Heat, Cold 2 Moistness Wetness, Driness 3 Closeness Density, Rarity 4 Weightiness Gravity, Levity 5 Consistency Hard. Fluidness 6 Flexibleness Limber. Stiffnes VI Tact Qu. more Passive   1 Yieldingness Softness, Hard. 2 Eveness Smooth. Rough. 3 Ordinariness Coursness, Fine. 4 Sliminess Clamm. Vnctu. 5 Firmness Toughn. Brittle. 6 Steddiness Fastness, Loos. SICKNESS HEALTH I General Cau. o Sick.   1 Contagion   2 Wound Bruise 3 Plethora Cacochymia 4 Distemper Inflammation 5 Obstruction Inflation 6 Abscessus   7 Ulcer Fistula 8 Gangrene Sphacelus II Distempers   1 Fever Ague 2 Hectic Consumption 3 Malign. Fever Plague 4 Pox Measils 5 Itch Tetter 6 Leprosie Scurf 7 Lues Venerea   8 Gout Erysipelas III Tumors   1 Pustule Scab 2 King's evil Boil 3 Cancer Carbuncle 4 Wen Schirrus 5 Wart Crn 6 Childblane   7 Varix Aneurisma 8 Ganglion   IV Of Head and Nerves   1 Frenzy Madness 2 Veternus Ephialtes 3 Lethargy Apoplexy 4 Catarrh Rheumatism 5 Vertigo Epilepsy 6 Palsie Numness 7 Convulsion Cramp 8 Rachitis   9 Squinancy   V O Middle Region   1 Shortness of Br.   2 Asthma Orhopnoea 3 Consumption Empyema 4 Palpitation   5 Fainting Swouning 6 Pleurisie   VI Of the Bowels   1 Cardialgia   2 Green-sick. Jaundise 3 Dropsie Timpany 4 Scorbute Hypocon. Vap. 5 Colic Iliac passion 6 Diarrhaea Dysentery 7 Hernia Haemorrhoids 8 Hysteric. pass. Suffocation 9 Stone Strangury
CHAP. VI. The Appendix, containing a comparison betwixt this Natural Philosophical Grammar, and that of other instituted Lan∣guages, particularly the Latin, in respect of the multitude of unnecessary Rules, and of Anomalisms. Concerning the China Character. The several Attempts and Proposals made by others towards a new kind of Character, and Language. The advantage in respect of Facility, which this Philosophi∣cal Language hath above the Latin. HAving thus briefly laid the Foundations of a Philosophical Gram∣mar; I am in the next place to shew the many great advantages both for significancy, perspicuity, brevity, and consequently facility, which a Character or Language founded upon these Rules, must needs have above any other way of communication, now commonly known or used. And because the Latin doth in these parts of the world supply the place of a Common Tongue, therefore I shall chiefly in∣sist upon the comparison with that. 1. As for the first part of Latin Grammar concerning Orthography, it will be needless here to speak any thing further to this, having be∣fore mentioned the imperfections of that Alphabet; the redundancy of it in some respects, and the deficiency of it in others; the incongruity of giving several powers to the same Letters, &c. which particulars are further manifested by what hath been delivered concerning na∣tural Orthography. As to the other parts of the Latin Grammar Etymol. Syntax. I shall en∣deavour to prove that they do exceedingly abound with unnecessary Rules, besides a vast multitude of Anomalisms and exceptions, which must needs render it exceedingly perplexed and difficult to the Learner. 2. In the second part concerning Etymology. 1. There is a great imperfection as to the just number and true sense of Radical words. 1. In some respects too many, by reason of the Synonima's which do very much abound in it. 2. In other respects too few. There is a common word for the notion of Parent, abstracted from either Sex, Father or Mother. And so for Child, Liber. But none for the relation of Brother, Sister, Hus∣band, and Wife, Vncle, Aunt, Nephew, Niece, &c. And so for the names of seral Plants, and Living Creatures of every kind, which no Dictionary doth sufficiently express. And though the Latin doth provide for some of those notions expressed by the Transcendental Particles, yet is not their number sufficient, there being several others (not provided for) which may as conveniently be in like manner exprest. And, which is another great incongruity, as to the indi∣stinctness of those which are thus provided for; neither are all words
of the like notion expressible by such terminations, nor doth the same termination always express the same notion. 3. The words of it are exceeding Aequivocal, scarce one amongst them which hath not divers significations, either absolutely, or in phrase, or both ways; from which Homonimy, those Particles which occur most frequently in discourse are not free, ut, pro, &c. 2. There are many improper and preternatural Rules concerning Inflexion. 1. As to Noun Substantives, both in respect of Genders, Cases, Declensions. 1. In respect of Genders, which are needlesly multiplyed, there be∣ing but two in nature; nothing properly having Gender but what hath Sex. That which is called the Neuter, doth by its very name signifie that it is no Gender; and besides these Genders are irrationally applyed. 1. Things that have no Sex are expressed by words, Masculine, Gladius, Arcus, Foeminine. Vagina. Sagitta. 2. Things that have Sex are denoted, 1. Sometimes by words of the Neuter Gender, Scortum, Amasium, &c. 2. Those words whose significations are common to Male and Female, are sometimes ren∣dred only in the Masculine Gender, as Fur, Latro, Homicida, &c. and sometimes only in the Foeminine, as Proles, Soboles, &c. and sometimes only in the Neuter, as Animal, Mancipium, &c. 3. Many words which signifie the same thing, and are Synonimous, are yet used in several Genders Appetitus, Aviditas, Desiderium. Sermo, Oratio. Domus, Domicilium. Crinis, Coma. Capillus, Caesaries, &c. He that would see more of this kind, may consult Nonius Marcellus, de indiscretis generibus: Where he reckons up abundance of words, which according to Ancient Authors, were used both in the Masculine, Foeminine, and Neuter Gender. 2. In respect of Cases, which are not so conveniently exprest by varying Nouns with Terminations, which is the Latin way as by placing them in the natural order of Construction and Affixing Pre∣positions to them (as was said before.) 3. In respect of Declensions, of which the Latin hath five, which add no small difficulty and trouble to the learning of that Language▪ Now if the expression of Cases by varying the Termination be unne∣cessary and inconvenient, these are much more so; because they are but several ways of varying such Cases. 2. As to Noun Adjectives, neither Number, nor Gender, nor Case, nor Declension do naturally pertain to them; but thy are suffi∣ciently qualifyed in all those respects by the Substantives to which they belong: As for their inflexion by degrees of comparison, which is proper to them; 'tis not so natural that these should be expressed in the Terminations of the words, as by Auxiliary Particles. The Adverbs of more, and most, less, and least, being upon other accounts necessary, and sufficient to express this notion in Adjectives, therefore the other way must needs be superfluous. Which is likewise appli∣cable
unto the comparison of Participles, and derived Adverbs. 3. As to Verbs, there are very many unnecessary Rules concerning their Kinds, Inflexion, in respect of Conjugations, Number, Persons and Tense in the Termination, Modes, Gerunds, Supines. 1. For their Kinds; 'tis not according to the Philosophy of speech to distinguish Verbs into Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent, and Common, or into Personal, and Impersonal. 1. Those sorts of Verbs which they call Active, Passive, Neuter, and which are properly to be expressed by the Verb Sum, and the Ad∣jective Active, Passive, Neuter, are all the distinct kinds of Verbs. 2. As for those that are stiled Deponents and Common, they are acknowledged to be but irregularities and kinds of exceptions from the common rule of Verbs. 3. All Verbs are naturally capable of Persons, though in some Verbs the Latin doth not admit this, 'Tis proper to say, I ought,Scaliger de causis L. L. cap. 124. I am ashamed, &c. as well as Oportet, Pudet. 2. As to the inflexion of Verbs. 1. The several Conjugations, of which there are four in Latin, are such a preternatural incumbrance, as Declensions are in Nouns, being but several ways of varying those Terminations or Cases of the Verb, which in themselves are needless and troublesome. 2. Number doth not naturally belong to Verbs, but only quia Ver∣bum à nomine dependet, as Scaliger speaks;Ibid. cap. 121. upon which account it might as well have Gender too, as it is in the Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, Arabick, Aethiopick, which yet we account very superfluous and improper. 3. The expression of the Persons and Tenses by the Terminations of the words, is both unnecessary and improper, because there is in other respects a necessity of using those Pronouns by which these Persons are expressed. And supposing that a man must therefore learn Ego, Tu, Ille, Nos, Vos, Illi. It would much facilitate and contract Grammatical Rules, if the Verbs themselves might remain invariable. The same may likewise be said of Tenses, which may properly be ex∣pressed by auxiliary Particles. 3. For Modes, (to say nothing of the distribution of them, which is quite irrational) the expression of the Optative and Subjective is most naturally made out by Auxiliary Particles. That which is called the Infinitive Mode, should according to the true Analogy of that speech be stiled a Participle Substantive. There hath been formerly much dispute amongst some Learned Men, whether the notion called the Infinitive Mode, ought to be re∣duced according to the Philosophy of speech. Some would have it to be the prime and principal Verb, as signifying more directly the notion of Action; and then the other varieties of the Verb, should be but the Inflexions of this. Others queston whether the Infinitive
Mode be a Verb or no, because in the Greek it receives Articles as a Noun.De causis L. L. Cap. 117. Scaliger in the stating of this question, concludes it to be a a Verb; because it signifies with Time, but will not allow it to be a Mode; because it is without Person or Number. To which Vossius adds, that though it be not Modus actu,De Analogia lib. 3. cap. 8. yet it is Modus in potentia, because it is resolveable into other Modes. e. g. Laetor me venisse, (i.) quod vene∣rim. And so are other Modes resolveable into this, Est miserorum ut malevolentes sint & invideant,Plaut. Capt. (i.) malè velle & invidere bonis. All which difficulties will he most clearly stated by asserting it to be a Substantive Participle. For which this reason is to be given; be∣cause it hath all the signs both of a Noun Substantive and a Verb. The Properties or Criteria whereby a Substantive is to be known are these four; 1. That it is capable of the Articles A, or The, to be prefixed before it, which is ordinary in the Greek for the Infinitive Mode, and doth well enough agree to the natural notion of it in other Languages. 2. 'Tis capable of that kind of Obliquity by prefixing Prepositions, which is commonly stiled variation by Cases. The Gerunds in di, do, dum, being in the true notion of them, but the Cases of that which we call the Infinitive Mode. 3. It may be joined in construction with Adjectives or Pronouns Possessive. 4. 'Tis capable of Number in the natural notion of it, though it be not so used in Languages; the words Actiones and Lectiones, be∣ing but the Plural number of Agere, Legere. The signs or Properties whereby a Verb may be known, are these three; 1. In our English tongue the Particle (To) may be prefixed before it. 2. It signifies with time. 3. It hath two voices, Active and Passive. And therefore being both a Substantive, and a Verb, it should ac∣cording to the Theory of the Latin be stiled a Participle Substantive. To which may be added, that it is in the true notion of it, frequently resolveable into a Noun Substantive, as in these Instances. Virtus est vitium fugere, (i.) Fuga vitii est virtus. Magis paratus servire quam im∣perare. (i.) servituti quam imperio. Dignus Amari. (i.) Amore. As for the Imperative Mode, that is in this respect defective, because it makes no distinct Provision for those different notions to be ex∣pressed by it, viz. Petition, Perswasion, Command. Vossius de A∣nalog. Lib. 3. cap. 9. and 11.5. Gerunds and Supines are unnecessary inflexions of Verbs, the notion of them being expressible by the Infinitive Mode, whose Cases they are. Venio Spectatum (i.) Spectare. Turpe dictu (i.) dici. Caesar venit ad oppugnandum urbem (i.) oppugnare. And sometimes by a Noun that signifies Action. Defessus ambulando (i.) ambulatione. De Lingua Latina, Lib. 5.I cannot here omit the mentioning of what Varro hath observed, that the inflexions of a Verb through its several voices of Active, Passive, together with Modes, Tenses, &c. amount to about five hun∣dred several Cases of inflexion. Now there being four distinct ways of conjugating Verbs, these variations may upon that account be reckoned to be two thousand, the learning of which (though all
Verbs were regular) would be no small labour and difficulty. But then consider the vast multitude of Anomalisms and exceptions in the inflexions of Verbs, and that will more than double this difficulty and labour. 2. As to the derivation of Latin words; whereas the Radix should according to Philosophy be only a Noun Substantive, 'tis here sometimes a Verb, a Participle, an Adverb, a Preposition, which is unnatural and improper. And then besides, there is no certain Analogy amongst these; à Scribo, Scriptor; but they do not say, à Bibo, Biptor, but Bibax, &c. 3. The Rules of Composition are not fixed to any certain Ana∣logy. 'Tis Aenobarbus, not Aenibarbus, and yet they say, Magnilo∣quus, not Magnoloquus. The same Prepositions, when in Composition, do sometimes encrease and augment the force of the word, as in Infractus, Incavus, Incurvus. per Perfidelis, Perfruor. de Deamo, Demiror. ex Exclamo, Exaggero. dis Discupio. Again, the same Prepositions do sometimes in Composition import a denial or privation of the sense of the word. in Indoctus, Improbus. per Perfidus, Pervicax. de Demens. ex Excors, Exanguis. dis Diffido. So the Particle re doth in Composition sometimes signifie repetition, as retego; and sometimes privation, as revelo, than which nothing can be more irrational and incongruous. Vnnecessary Rules in the Latin Syntax. That is called figurative and irregular Syntax, which customary use, and not any natural popriety doth make significative; wherein there are some words away either redundant, or deficient, or transpo∣sed, or changed, from their proper notion. These Phraseologies are to be accounted an imperfection of Language, and one degree added to the curse of the confusion; because they do exceedingly encrease the difficulty of Learning Tongues, and do not adde to the brevity or perspicuity of expression, but rather cumber and darken it with am∣biguities. The regular Syntax of the Latin doth consist in Concord, Regimen. 1. Concord is the agreement of several words in some accidents and circumstances; as betwixt, 1. Substantives and Adjectives. 2. Two Substantives. 3. Substantives and Verbs. 4. Antecedent and Relative. Concerning which there are so many difficult perplexed Rules, as are
enough to tire out and discourage any young Learner, most of them being founded upon such principles as are not natural to the Philo∣sophy of speech. 3. The Regimen of words doth concern their government of others in respect of Case, Mode. 1. There are a great multitude of Rules that concern Substan∣tives, Adjectives, Pronouns, in reference to their governing of the Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Ablative Case. 2. So for Verbs, that some of them must govern the Nominative, others the Genitive, others the Dative, others the Accusative, and others the Ablative Case; some promiscuously both Genitive, Accusative, Genitive, Ablative, Accusative, Ablative. Besides the several Rules concerning those divers Cases which may precede the Infinitive Mode; some words requiing a Nominative▪ others a Dative, others an Accusative. To which may be added those various Rules about Gerunds, Supines, Participles, in reference to the several Cases, Genitive, Accusative, Ab∣lative, governed by them. 3. There are several Rules that concern the Regimen of Adverbs, both as to Cases, Nomin. Gen. Dat. Accus. Ablat. Modes, Indicat. Imperat. Optat. Subjunct. 4. Other Rules refer to the Regimen of Prepositions, some of which govern the Accusative, others the Ablative Case, and some both. 5. Other Rules refer to the Regimen of Conjunctions, both as to Cases and Modes. 6. Others to Interjections, divers of which are said to govern the Nominative, Dative, Accusative, Vocative Case. Beside these for Syntax, there is a great multitude of Rules in the Latin Prosodia, about the Accenting and quantity of words: whereof some are General, referring to the nature of Letters and Syllables; others more particular, concerning the first or middle Syllables in any word, amongst which there is no certain and constant Analogy: They say, Hectōrem, & Praetōrem. It cannot be denyed but that all these Rules are necessary to the Latin Tongue; but this argues the imperfection of that Language, that it should stand in need of such and so mny Rules as have no foun∣dation in the Philosophy of speech. I am no igorant that our Learned Verulam,De Augment. Scient. lib. 6. cap. 1. speaking concerning the inflexions used in the more Ancient Languages by Cases, Modes, Tenses, &c. in which the modern Lan∣guages are very sparing, supplying them by auxiliary particles; from thence infers, ingenia priorum seculorum nostris fuisse multo acutiora & subtiliora. But with reverence to the judgment of that incompara∣ble Man, though it must be granted, that the Language being so, there was great wit in reducing the inflexions of words to such Rules of Art; yet if these Rules be not necessary to Language, and according to nature, but that words may signifie sufficiently and in some respects better without them, then there is greater judgment shewed in laying them aside, or framing a Language without them. If all these Rules were general and constant, yet the multitude and
variety of them would adde much difficulty to the Latin: But now the exceptions and Anomalisms to these Rules are so very numerous, that there is much more pains required for the remembring of them, than of the Rules themselves; insomuch that many eminent Gram∣marians have written against Analogy, both in Greek and Latin. I shall offer a very brief view of them. As to the inflexions of Nouns in respect, 1. Of Number; there are abundance of Substantives, whose sence and signification is naturally capable of both Numbers;Vossius de A∣nal. Lib. 1. Cap. 39. ad Cap. 44. some of which want a singular, others a plural number. 2. In respect of Gender; the Rules to discover the Genders of words by their Terminations, are not without multitude of excepti∣ons. There are divers words that are of one Gender in the singular, and another in the plural number. Tartarus, Tartara. Locus, Loci, & Loca. Carbasus, Carbasa. Supellex, Supellectilia. Coelum, Coeli. Epu∣lum, Epulae, &c. 3. In respect of Cases; some words abound in Cses. Avaritia, Avarities. Araneus, Aranea. Antidotus, Antidotum, &c. Others have no Cases, and are stiled Aclita, or Aptota; as Sinapi, Pondo, Ne∣quam, Cornu, Quatuor, Quin{que} Sex, Septem, Octo, Novem, Decem, Vi∣ginti, Triginta, &c. Centum, Mille, &c. Others called Monoptota, have ut one oblique Case, which in some is the Genitive, as Hujusmodi, Ejusmodi; in others an Accusative, as Inficias; in others the Ablative,Vossius de Anal. Lib. 1. Cap. 47.48. Lib. 2. à 1o ad vicessimum ca∣put. Promptu, Iussu, Injussu, &c. Other Nouns have but two Cases, and are therefore stiled Diptota, as Necesse, Necessum; Suppetiae, & Suppetias. And there are divers others that are Triptota, Tetraptota, Pentaptota. 4. In respect of Declensions; the Terminations of the Cases both in the singular and plural number in divers Declensions are not with∣out many exceptions, as Musis, Filiabus, &c. Some words are of seve∣ral Declensions, as Pascha, Paschae, Paschatis. 2. As to the inflexions of Adjectives by the degrees of comparison; there are many words which signifie quality, and are naturally capa∣ble of increase, and decrease, and consequently of this inflexion, which are yet exempted from it: So Cicur, Opimus, Clandus, Egenus,Ibid. Lib. 2. Cap. 22. Al∣mus, &c. Some want only a Positive, as Prior Primus, Vlterior Vltimus: Others a Comparative, as Novus Novissimus, Falsus Falsissimus, Pius Piissimus. Others a Superlative, as Iuvenis Iunior, Senex, Senior, &c. Besides that those which are inflected through all degrees, have several irregularities in the manner of it; Similis Simillimus, not Similissimus. Bonus, Malus, Magnus, Parvus. 3. As to the inflexion of Verbs;Ibid. Cap. 3.5. many Verbs of the Active voice are sometimes used in a Passive signification, and several others of the Passive voice used Actively. The exceptions about the Conjugations of Verbs, especially those referring to the praeter tense and supines,Ibid. à Cap. 19. ad Cap. 47. are so exceeding numerous, that it is not easie to recite them: Some are wholly without them, others have them without any Analogy; as Fleo Flevi, Sero Sevi, Fero Tuli. Vbi à Dissimilibus Similia, à Simi∣libus Dissimilia.
Sometimes divers Verbs have the same Praeter tense, as Cresco, Crevi. Cerno, Crevi. Luceo, Luxi. Lugeo, Luxi. Fulgeo, Fulsi, &c. Fulceo, Fulsi, &c. And so for Supines, Cresco, Cretum. Cerno, Cretum. Pando, Passum. Patior, Passum. Vinco, Victum, &c. Vivo, Victum, &c. Some Verbs are of several conjugations, aggero ras, Dico ris, Dico Dicas, &c. Dicis, &c. Some are of none of the four conjugations; as Sum, Volo, Fio, Eo, &c. Others are defective in respect of Modes and Tenses; as Aio, Ave, Dari, Fari, Forem, &c. Those particular Terminations which signifie a Verb to be Incho∣ative, Frequentative, Diminutive, are not without many exceptions. As for the several Anomalisms in Syntax, referring either to Concord or Regimen; they are so exceeding numerous, that it would be too tedious to recite them: And they may be seen in every Grammar. Adde to these the several exceptions in the Rules of Prosodia, about the right accenting and quantity of words. And from all these particulars put together, it is sufficiently evi∣dent that there may be very many and great advantages in a Philoso∣phical Language, above that of the Latin Tongue; especially in these two respects, that this hath no unnecessary Rules, no Exceptions. As for the China Character and Language so much talked of in the world, if it be rightly represented by those that have lived in that Country, and pretend to understand the Language, there are many considerable faults in it, which make it come far short of the advan∣tages which may be in such a Philosophical Language as is here designed. 1. The multitude of Characters and Words, of which there are about 80000. others say 120000. and of these a man must have in readiness about eight or ten thousand before he is to be counted one that can write the Character,Trigaltius Hist. Sinensis, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. Semedo Hist. of China, Part 1. Cap. 5. or judged fit to express his mind by it. 2. These Characters are strangely complicated and difficult as to the Figure of them, as may sufficiently appear by the following in∣stance of the Lords Prayer in this Character: The Manuscript of which, together with a Catechism in the China Character and Lan∣guage, was communicated to me by that Ingenious, and Inquisitive Person, Mr. Lodowick; in which there was both the Creed and Ten Commandments, with several Questions and Answers about the Prin∣ciples of Christian Religion: The Language being writ on one side of the Character in our common Letters; and a verbal Translation in Latin on the other side. I did purpose out of this to have inserted the Lords Prayer as it was in that Copy; in order to which I procured a Cut to be made of the Character: but this Manuscript being destroyed in the late Fire, and not knowing where to procure a supply of it, I am necessitated to offer the Characters without the Verbal Interpretati∣ons of them. Their way of reading is known to be from the top on the right side downwards.
Chiu tsi ngò lin Ngò ó ay ngò ùl tèm   tsiè zié chì fu'   yée'u jong chim che   pu leang him tsay   ngò 'u'ul y'u thiaen   chiù myen ty ngo   chi ong-o s'u tem   eu tsi sim     ju' áy thyaen yuen   jedū ziu ngò ul   caan ngò teng niûm   nay yé ūwáng chîm   kyeea ssa ú'ul xím   ngò tóu' kyn ul     yu' ngò jûn gúë Besides the difficulty and perplexedness of these Characters, there doth not seem to be any kind of Analogy (so far as I am able to judge) betwixt the shape of the Characters, and the things represented by them, as to the Affinity or Opposition betwixt them, nor any tolerable provision for necessary derivations.
Theoph. Spi∣zelius de Re¦literaria Sinen∣sium, lately Published 1661. Sect. 6. Histor. Chinae, Part 2. Cap. 2.3. To this may be added the great Aequivocalness of the Language, every word having divers significations, some of them no less than twenty or thirty several sences; upon which account Alvarez Seme∣do affirms it to be more difficult than any other Language in the World. 4. The difficulty of pronouncing it, every Syllable (as this of Ko) hath no less than ten several ways of pronunciation, as saith one Author; and it hath more than thirty several significations in the Anamitish Language, as Alexander Rhodes observes in his Dictionary. Such various Accents they are necessitated to make use of, as other people cannot imitate.Lingua Ana∣mitica, cap. 2. The Syllable Ba, according to its various Accents, hath six several sences, of no kind of affinity or nearness to one another. And the most expert Men among themselves are not able so exactly to distinguish in pronunciation, without using several attempts and repetitions to explain what they mean; or sometime by making the Figure of the Character they would express with their Fingers in the Air, or upon a Wall, or Table. Hist. Part 1. Cap. 6.5. Though in some particulars they seem to found their Character upon the Philosophy of things, yet 'tis not so in others. The Cha∣racter put for a precious Stone (saith Semedo) must be used with ad∣ditions to it for several kinds of Gems, as Pearls, &c. So the Cha∣racter for any kind of Tree, must have joined to it, the Character for Wood; and the letter that signifies Metals, must be annexed to the Character of Iron, Copper, Steel, &c. The meeting with which pas∣sage, was no small satisfaction to me, in reference to that way which I had before pitched upon for the most natural expression of things. But this (saith he) is no constant Rule amongst them. It should seem to be observed only in some few species of nature which are most obvious, there being reason to doubt whether they had any such general Theory of Philosophy, as might serve for all other things and notions. Ibid.In this it is to be acknowledged that they have a great advantage above the Latin, because their words are not declined by Terminati∣ons, but by Particles, which makes their Grammar much more easie than that of the Latin. To this I might adde something concerning the advantage of this Philosophical way, above those attempts towards a Universal Cha∣racter which have been made by others. That of Marks or Letters by Cicero; that of numbers by an Ingenious Country-man of our own,Mr. Beck of Ipswich. followed since by Beckerus, and by Athanasius Kircher; together with that other attempt towards an Universal Language, by Philip Labbé. All which are in this one respect defective, because they are not Philosophical; upon which account they are much more diffi∣cult, and less distinct. These things being premised concerning the many needless Rules, and great variety of exceptions in the Latin; it will not be very dif∣ficult to make a comparison betwixt that, and the Character and Language here proposed. For the right estimating of the difficulty which there is in the Learning of any Language, these two things are to be enquired into.
1. The multitude of words. And 2. The Grammatical Rules belong∣ing to such a Language. 1. As to the first of these,De origine Scribendi, Cap 4. Bp Walton, Davies. Boxhornius. Hermannus Hugo asserts that no Language hath so few as 100000 words; and Varro is frequently quoted by di∣vers Learned Men, as if he affirmed that there are in the Latin no less than five hundred thousand. But upon enquiry into the scope of that place they relate to, it will appear that he doth not there de∣sign to give an account of the just number of words in the Latin, but only to shew the great variety which is made by the Inflexion and Composition of Verbs: To which purpose the first thing he lays down is, That there are about one thousand Radical Verbs in the Latin. And then Secondly, That every Verb in the Declensions of it, hath about five hundred several varieties or Cases of Inflexion, which make up the number of five hundred thousand. And then Thirdly, He supposeth each of these to be compounded with nine Prepositions, as for instance, the word Cessit, Recessit, Accessit, Abscessit, Incessit, Ex∣cessit, Successit, Decessit, Concessit, Processit; this will raise the whole number to five millions: in which account he reckons only the Cases and Compositions of Verbs, and takes no notice of the Particles of speech, nor such other words as are not radically Verbs, which are very numerous. Of all other Languages, the Greek is looked upon to be one of the most copious; the Radixes of which are esteemed to be about 3244. But then it doth exceedingly abound in Composition, in which the Latin Tongue being more sparing, must therefore upon that account have more Radicals. What the particular number of these may be, is not easie to determine; because Learned Men do not agree about many of them, whether they are Radicals, or Deri∣vatives. They may be by moderate computation estimated to be about ten thousand, most of which are either absolutely, or in phrase, or both ways equivocal. Notavi ex Varrone, Nounio & Festo, non ex∣tare vocabulum apud Latinos quod plures significationes non habet, saith Campanella. Many of them have no less than twenty distinct signi∣fications, and some more. Now for every several sense,Grammar. Philosoph. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. we may justly reckon so many several words, which will much augment the former number. But suppose them only to treble it, and then the Latin words are to be reckoned thirty thousand. 2. Now for the Latin Grammar, it doth in the common way of Teaching take up several of our first years, not without great toyl and vexation of the mind, under the hard tyranny of the School, before we arrive to a tolerable skill in it. And this is chiefly occasioned from that great multitude of such Rules as are not necessary to the Philosophy of speech, together with the Anoma∣lisms and exceptions that belong to them; the difficulty of which may well be computed equal to the pains of Learning one third part of the words; according to which the labour required to the attain∣ing of the Latin, may be estimated equal to the pains of Learning forty thousand words. Now in the way here proposed, the words necessary for commu∣nication are not three thousand, and those so ordered by the help of natural method, that they may be more easily learned and remem∣bred
than a thousand words otherwise disposed of; upon which ac∣count they may be reckoned but as one thousand. And as for such Rules as are natural to Grammar, they were not charged in the former account, and therefore are not to be allowed for here. So that by this it appears, that in point of easiness betwixt this and the Latin, there is the proportion of one to forty; that is, a man of an ordinary capacity may more easily learn to express himself this way in one Month, than he can by the Latin in forty Months. This I take to be a kind of Demonstration à Priori; and for an Argument à Posteriori, namely, from Experiment. Though I have not as yet had opportunity of making any tryals, yet I doubt not, but that one of a good Capacity and Memory, may in one Months space attain to a good readiness of expressing his mind this way, either in the Character or Language. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL DICTIONARY, Wherein all ENGLISH WORDS According to their VARIOUS SIGNIFICATIONS, Are either referred to their Places in the PHILOSOPHICAL TABLES, Or explained by such Words as are in those TABLES. LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Samuel Gellibrand and Iohn Martin, 1668.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER. FOr the better understanding of the References in the following Dictionary, the Reader is desired to take notice, that the Ab∣breviations therein used, are thus to be explained; A. Affinis. a. active AC. Action Corporeal adj. adjective Adv. Adverb underived adv. adverb derived (aggr. aggregate (apt aptitude, or proneness. AS. Action Spiritual (arm. armament (aug. augmentative Be. Beast Bi. Bird Conj. Conjunction (corr. corruptive D. Deficient extreme D. Discourse (def. defective (dim. diminutive E. Exceeding extreme El. Element (end. endeavour Ex. Exanguious (ex. excessive (fem. female Fi. Fish (freq. frequentative G. God Ha. Habit HF. Herb considered according to the Flow∣er Leafe Seed-vessel HL. Herb considered according to the Flow∣er Leafe Seed-vessel HS. Herb considered according to the Flow∣er Leafe Seed-vessel (inc. inceptive (imp. impetus, or fit (instr. instrument Int. Interjection (jug. jugament (lam. lamin (mach machin. Mag. Magnitude Man. Manners Mea. Measure (mech mechanic (merc. merchant Met. Metal Mo. Motion NP. Natural Power O. Operation O. Opposite (off. Officer p. passive (perf. perfective PG. Parts General Po. Possessions (pot. Power, or ability PP. Parts Peculiar
Pr. Provisions Pre. Preposition Pro. Pronoun Q. Quality sensible RC. Relation Civil RE. Relation Ecclesiastical RJ. Relation Judicial RM. Relation Military RN. Relation Naval RO. Relation Oeconomical S. Sickness (segr. segregate Sh. Shrub Sp. Space sp. specially St. Stone T. or TG. Transcend. General TA. Transcendental Action TM. Transcendental Mixed Tr. Tree v. verb W. World The Literal Figures, as I, II, V, &c. denote the order of the Dif∣ferences under each Genus; and the other Figures, the order of the the Species under each Difference. So the word Sheep in the Dictio∣nary is marked Be. II.2. The meaning of which is, That the thng signified by that word is described in the Philosophical Tables under the Genus of BEAST, the second difference, and the second Species. And Goat is Be. II.2. A. (i. e.) 'tis joyned as an Affinis to the same Species. The Design of the Philosophical Tables is to enumerate and describe all kinds of Things and Notions: And the Design of this Dictionary, is to reckon up and explain all kinds of words, or names of things. And that the Reader may the better understand the usefulness of having all words set down according to their different Acceptions, and by what kind of Analogy they come to be used in such various sences (which is one of the particular advantages of this Dictionary) I shall here select out of it one particular Instance, for each of these several kinds of words, viz. a Substantive, an Adjective, a Verb, a Par∣ticle; by which it will be easie to understand any of the rest. So the word CORRVPTION, according to that Notion of it which is Primary and proper, doth denote the Being, or Making of a thing, evil, or worse, whether by Admixtion with that which is bad, and then it is of the same importance with the word Defiling. Privation, as to a thing Being, so corruption is destroying. Vsefulness, so corruption is spoiling. Secondary, as applied to things Natural, so Corruption will denote according to the Degree of it, either Infection, or Decay, or Putrefaction. Moral, whether more General, so it denotes the Evilness of the mind or manners, Vnholiness, Viciousness. Special, so 'tis peculiarly applied to Vnchastity and Bribery.
So the word CLEAR, may signifie either Entire of it self; so clearly is wholly. Not mingled with others; so Clear is Simple. specially not with worse; so Clear is Pure. Being free from impediments, or not being hindered from Being, doing, or receiving, which notion of Clear may be often exprest by the Transcendental mark of Perfe∣ctive. There may be Instances of it given in every Ge∣nus; as particularly, Quality, whether Natural Power, so a clear sight or understanding is a good s. or u. It is applied to the Mind, as a clear Wit, or Spirit. Body, so we say one is clear of sickness or pain, has a clear skin, &c. Habit, as a clear Reputation, that is a good R. sp. Sagacity and Sincerity are thus called Clear∣ness. Manners, as Clear Dealing, that is Candor or Frank∣ness. Sensible Quality. Visible, as clear weather, or sky or water, &c. Audible, as clear sound. Sickness, as clear of any disease (i. e.) not Infected, or not Diseased. Relation. Civil, as a Clear Estate. Iudicial, as Clear of any Crime. Military, as Clear Coast. Ecclesiastic, as Clear of any Censure. Being Done, so Clear is Easie, or not difficult; Being Known, so Clear is Plain or manifest; Being come to, or Passed through, so Clear is Accessible, or Passable, or Empty. So the word DELIVER, according to its primary sence, is the mo∣tion (Met.) or the passing of a thing, or of the Possession of it, or of the Power over it, from one to another. It is commonly used in rela∣tion either to the Subject, or thing deliver'd, whether Things; so Deliver may signifie Depositing, Paying, Resigning. Words, as to the Matter, whether concerning Fact, so Delivering is Narration Doctrine, so Delivering is Teaching Manner, whether Immediately by Mouth, so to deliver, is to speak. Pen, so to deliver, is to write Mediately, so Delivering is Tradition Terms of this motion, either from a
Better condition to a worse, being used Passively, so Delivering is Dereliction Actively, whether Involuntary, so Delivering is yielding Voluntary, so Delivering is Betraying Worse condition to a better. Temporal, whether by way of Prevention, so Delivering is Preserving, or Causing to escape: Remedy, from Captivity, so to deliver, is to Vncaptivate. Bondage, so to deliver, is to Vnslave. Prison, so to deliver, is to Vnimprison. Danger of Child-birth, so to deliver, is the Active of Parturition. Eternal, so delivering is Redemption. So the Particle BY, is sometimes used in the sence of an Integral, signifying the notion of Digression or Accessory, as on the by; and is of the same importance with such kind of Ne∣gatives, as not principal, not pertinent, not public, not ordi∣nary; as a By-way: And sometimes 'tis used to denote a common speech implying something of contempt, as a By word. Preposition Causal, Efficient, By such an Author. Instrumental, Slain by the sword. Final, or end, By reason of, &c. Local or Temporal, being sometimes used in that same sence with those other Prepositions. Before, as, By God, (i.) before God. At, as, Come by, (i.) obtain, or come at. In, as, by day, (i.) in the day time. Through, as, by such a street, (i.) through such a street. Besides, as, by the mark, (i.) besides. Adverbs denoting the Circumstance of Nearness, whether Local. So By, or hard by, is near such a Place. Temporal. So By and by, is nearness in Time, signifying future (dim.)
Besides those Phraseologies wherein the Particle is used to signifie the Manner of things, as, By the By, By the Great, By Retail, By it self, &c. Which Phrases are to be expressed by the Adverbs Neuter of Digression, Aggregate, Segregate, Solitary, &c. So those Forms of Speech, By course, By the day, or day by day, By degrees, By turns, House by House, Year by Year, &c. are to be expressed by the Adverbs of Course, Day, Degree, Turn, House, Year, with the Transcendental Note of Segregate.
The Alphabetical DICTIONARY. A A Article, 1. Abandon. T A. II. 2. O. Abase. [a. Lowness,] T M. II. 4. O. [a. Meanness,] Ha. II. 5. O. [a. Humility,] Man. V. 2. Abash, [a. Shame.] AS. VI. 2. A. Abate [a. Little,] TM. I. 1. D. [a. Diminution,] TM. I. 7. D. [a. Remission,] TM. I. 8. D. [a. Subduction,] TM. VI. 7. Abbat, [Abby's (Officer.] Abbie, [Colledge of Monks.] Abbreviate, [a. Brevity,] TM. II. 1. O. [a. Epitome,] D. V. 6. Abbridge, [a. Abbreviate.] Abdicate, TA. I. 3. O. Abecedarian, [Learner of ele∣ments,] D. I. Abed, [in bed,] brought, [adj. pret. parturition.] Abet. [v. Accessary,] TM. IV. 4. O. [v. Incourage,] RO. VI. 2. [a. Help.] T. II. 5. Abhor. [v. Hate, AS. V. 3. O. (augm.] [v. Aversation, AS. V. 5. O. (augm.] Abide. [continue.] [v. Duration,] Mea. V. A. [v. Permanent,] Sp. I. 6. [v. Constancy,] Ha. IV. 7. [v. stay] TA. VI. O. [dwell] Po. I. A. suffer. [v. Passion,] T. I. 7. O. [v. Patience,] Man. I. 8. Abject. [Mean,] Ha. II. 5. O. (augm.) [Contemptible,] AS. II. 8. O. (augm.) excess of modesty, Man. III. 9. E. Ability. [Potentialness] T. III. 5. O. [Nat. Power] NP. per tot. [Possessions] Po. Abjure, [Swear. RC. VI. 4. (a∣gainst.] Ablatum, TM. VI. 7. Able, [adj. Ability.] Abode, vid. Abide. Abolish. [a. Nothing] T. I. 1. O. [Annihilate] AS. I. 1. O. [Destroy] AS. I. 4. O. —Law [v. Law (un.] —Act [v. Act (un.] Abominate. [v. Hate] AS. V. 3. O. (aug.) [Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. (aug.) Aboord [into, or in Ship.] Abortion, AC. I. 3. O. Above, Prep. V. 1. O. [adv. Upper] Sp. III. 5. [More then, &c.] Abound, v. TM. I. 2. E. [v. Redundance,] TM. I. 3. E. About, as round—Prep. III. 3. O. [more or less] Adv. V. 3. [concerning] Prep. I. 3. O. Abroad, [out of] Prep. IV. 2. [without] Prep. IV. 2. O. [in public] adv. TM. V. 4. Abrogate [un-law.] RC. IV. 3. Abrupt. [confused] TM. V. 2. O. sp. ended confused∣ly.] discontinued confused∣ly.] Absence, Sp. II. 1. O. Absolving. [Acquitting,] RJ. II. 7. [un-excommunicate,] RE. V. 5. Absolute. [perfect] T. III. 9. op. to dependent, TM. IV. 3. O. op. to relative, T. I. 8. O. Absolution, vid. Absolve. Abstein, TA. V. 6. O. [v. Abstinence] Man. II. 2. Abstemious, [adj. Abstinence,] Man. II. 2. sp. from Wine. Abstersive, adj. [a. purgation (dim.] [a. purity] TM. V. 6. Abstinence, TA. V. 6. O. vertue, Man. II. 2. Abstract, D. II. 2. [epitome] D. V. 7. Abstruse. [obscure] D. III. 9. O. [concealed] TA. I. 8. O. Absurd. [foolish] HA. VI. 2. D. [nor congruous] T. V. 5. Abundance, TM. I. 2. E. Abuse, [Use, TA. V. 6. (corr.] [speak Injuriously] RJ. IV. 1. Abusiveness. [proneness to abuse.] [scurrility] Man. IV. 9. E. Abutt [v. Margin,] Sp. III. 4. A. Abysse [Deep] TM. II. 3. (aug.) Academy, RC. III. 6. Acara, Fi. V. 8. A. Accelerate. [a. Swift] NP. V. 9. [a. Soon] Sp. I. 4. Accent, D. I. 9. Accept, TA. IV. 4. A. Acceptable. [adj. p. Accept,] TA. IV. 4. A. sp. (apt.] [delighting] AS. IV. 7. Acception of a word. [meaning] D. II. A. Access. [v. Come] TA. VI. 1. [power of a p to come.] [leave of a p to come.] [opportunity of a p to come.] Accessary, TM. IV. 4. O. Accident. op. to Subst. T. I. 5. O. [adj. Contingent] T. V. 8. O. (thing.) [adj. Fortune] AS. I. 2. D. (thing) sp. Event. TA. V. Acclamation. AC. III. 3. O. [Exclamation through Joy] of Praise] Accommodate. [a. Congruous, T. V. 6. (make] [a. Means] T. II. 6. O. [a. Provision] Pr. Accompany. [v. Companion] RO. IV. 2. [v. Being, T. I. 1. with or together] [v. Going, TA. VI. with or together] Accomplish. [a. Perfect] T. III. 9. (make) [Perform] TA. III. 6. [Finish] TA. III. 7. Accord. [a. Assent] AS. II. 3. [a. Congruous] T. V. 5. Of one— [with simultaneous Spontane∣ity] Of ones own— [adv. Spontaneous,] AS. IV. 9 According. [adv. Congruous,] T. V. 5. —as. Adv. I. 3. —to. Prep. II. 1. Accordingly. Adv. I. 3. O. Accost. [a. Near] Sp. II. 3. [Address] AC. V. 2. [Salute] AC. V. 3. Accounting. [Reckoning] TA. IV. 6. [Esteeming] AS. II. 8. Accoutred. [Clothed] Pr. IV. [Armamented] Pr. IV. A. Accrue. [p. Effect] T. II. O. [v. Event] TA. V.
Accumulate, [a. Heap] O. II. 6. Accurate. adj. Perfect. T. III. 9. Accurse [Curse] AS. I. 3. O. Accuse. [as Informer] RJ. I. 3. [as Plaintiff] RJ. I. 4. —falsly. a. Calumny. RJ. IV. 7. Accustom. a. Custom. RC. IV. 1. A. —to doe, &c. a. do, &c. (frequent) Ace. [One,] Mea. II. 1. [Point] Mag. I. 1. Acerbity. Q. IV. 3. A. Ach [Pain] NP. V. 3. O. Achieve. [a. Perfect] T. III. 9. [Perform] TA. III. 6. [a. Action] T. 1. 7. Acid. Q. IV. 4. Acknowledge. [Assent] AS. II. 3. [Concession] D. VI. 3. A. [Confess] D. VI. 9. Aconite. (Woolv's-bane] Winter. HS. I. 3. Acorn [Mast of the Oke.] Acquaint. [Know (make] Acquaintance. RO. IV. 4. Acquiesce. [v. Rest.] Mo. O. [v. Content] Ha. I. 3. Acquire. [Obtain] TA. V. 1. [Gain] TA. V. 2. Acquitting. —of debt. TA. IV. 9. —of guilt. RJ. II. 7. Acre. [Area of 160 Pole square.] Acrimony. Q. IV. 2. O. Act. [Action] T. I. 7. [Chapter] (as an act in a Play) D. III. 3. [Law] RC. IV. 3. [Edict] RC. IV. 3. A. [real existence] T. III. 5. to— a. Action. —in a Play. RC. III. 9. Action. T. 1. 7. Spiritual— AS —of God. AS. I. —of the Speculative Vnder∣derstanding. AS. II. —of the Practical Vnder∣standing. AS. III. —of the Will. AS. IV. Corporeal— AC. —of Vegetative. AC. I. —of Sensitive. AC. II. —of Man. AC. III. [Gesture] AC. VI. A. Iudicial.— RJ. II. [Suit] RJ. II. A. Active. [adj. Action (apt.] [adj. Business, (apt.] [adj. Nimbleness] N P. V. 8. Actual. T. III. 5. Acus Aristotelis, Fi. VIII. 5. Acute. Sharp. [adj. cut. (apt] —angle. Mag. III. 3. O. [Intense] TM. I. 8. E. [Sprightly] NP. IV. 2. —Sound. Q. III. 1. E. [Sagacious] Ha. III. 1. Adage D. V. 1. A. Adamant [Diamond] St. IV. 1. Adapt. [a. Proportion (perf.] [a. Congruous.] Add. [to—pur.] [together—pur.] [adj. Sum (make] [adj. Aggregate, (make] [Find [reckon Sum] Aggregate] Adder, [Viper] Be. VI. 7. A. —s Blt. Ex. IV. 7. —s Tongue. HL. I. 9. A. Addice. [Cuting Hammer— of Barrel mech.] Instrument of Barrel mech.] Addict. [v. Incline naturally] habitually] Addition. TM. VI. 6. vid. Add. Addle [Putrid] NP. V. 2. Address. AC. V. 2. Adequate. adj. Equality. TM. I. 5. Adhere. TA. II. 2. Adherent, [adj. a. TA. II. 2.] [Accessary] TM. IV. 4. O. Adjacent. [Margining] Sp. III. 4. A. [Near] Sp. II. 3. Adjective. D. II. 3. O. Adieu, [Valediction.] AC. V. 8. O. Adjoin. [Join] TA. II. 1. [Margin] Sp. III. 4. A. [Near] Sp. II. 3. Adjourn. [discontinue till a set day] [a. Late. Sp. I. 4. O.] by dis∣continuing. TM. III. Adjudge to—a. Sentence. RJ. II. 5. A. Adjunct. T. VI. 1. O. Adjure. [a. Swear] RC. VI. 4. (make) [Entreat [Command for God's sake. Adjust. [a. Equal] TM. I. 5. (make) [a. Congruous] T. V. 5. (make) [Balance] TA. IV. 6. A. Adjutant. RM. III. 4. A. Adjuvant. T. II. 5. Administer. [Serve] [Yield] TA. IV. 1. [Give] TA. IV. 4. Administration, [Vice-Executor∣ship to—sentenced.] Male— Man. VI. 5. Admiral, [Navy (Officer.] Admiring. AS. V. I. Admit. [Permit] sp. to enter.] [Concession] D. VI. 3. A. [Allow of] Admonish, Warn. RO. V. 4. A. Adolescence. Me. VI. 2. Adonis-flower. HF. IX. 5. Ado, [Endeavour.] TA. III. 4. Adopt. [instead-a. child, RO. I. 2. O. (make] Adore, [worship.] RE. IV. Adorn, [a. ornate.] TM. V. 5. Advance. [go forward] RM. II. 2. E. [a. Direct. Mag. II. 8. E. (make] [a. Lift] O. I. 1. A. [a. Upper] Sp. III. 5. [a. Superiority [a. High] TM. II. 4. TM. I. 5. E. RO. III. Prefer. [a. Dignity.] H. II. 5. Advantage. [Superiority] TM. I. 5. E. [Gain] TA. V. 2. [Occasion] T. II. 4. A. Advent, [to-Coming.] TA. VI. 1. Advntitious. [besides Intention Sp. Ca∣sual.] Expecta∣tion. Sp. Ca∣sual.] [Accessory] TM. IV. 4. O. Adventure. [Contingency] T. V. 7. O. [Fortune] AS. I. 2. D. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. [Danger] T. V. 3. O. [Out-sent, adj. Commerce thing] At- [without fear of the event.] Adverb. Derived. D. II. 4. Vnderived. D. II. 9. Adverse. [Opposite] T. VI. 8. O. [Contrary] T. V. 5. O. [Enemy] RO. IV. 1. O. [Adversity] Ha. I. 2. O. Adversary, [Enemy] RO. IV. 1. O. Adversity. Ha. I. 2. O. Advert, [observe] AS. III. 1. A. Advertise. [Know, AS. II. 5. (make] [Warn] RO. V. 4. A. Advise. Giving— [a. Advice.] RO. V. 4. Taking— [p. Advice.] RO. V. 4. Advised. [adj. p. Advise.] [adj. Considerate] Ha. IV. 1. [adj. Heedful] Ha. IV. 2. Adulation, [Fawning] Man. IV. 7. E. Adult, [adj. Adolescence.] Me. VI. 2. Adulterate, [Forgery] RJ. IV. 4. A. Adultery. RJ. IV. 2. A. Adumbrate, [a. Shadow.] Q. I. 2. O. Advocate. [Pleader] RJ. I. 7. [Mediator] RJ. I. 2. A. Advowson, [Right RC. IV. of fu∣ture giving Presbyters (place] Adust. [adj. p. preter. Fire.] Afar. [adv. Remote.] Sp. II. 3. O. Affable. [adj. Man. VI. 3.]
[adj. Courtesie] Man. IV. 7. Affair. [adj. p. fur. Do (thing) [Business] TA. III. [Thing] T. I. 2. Affect. [v. Affectation.] [v. Affection.] [Delight] AS. IV. 7. Affectation., [Conceitedness.] HA. III. 3. O. —of Empire [Ambition.] MA. III. 9. D. Affection. Passion, AS. V. & AS. VI. [Desire] AS. V. 4. [Love] AS. V. 2. Affiance. [etrothing] RO. II. 3. [Confidence] AS. V. 6. Affidavit, [Sworn Testimony.] RJ. I. 7. A. Affinity. RO. II. Affirming, D. VI. 2. Affix [to fasten.] Put.] Afflict, [a. Adversity,] Ha. I. 2. O. Affluence, [Abundance.] TM. II. 2. E. Afford, [permit to have.] [Yield] TA. IV. 1. [Grant] D. VI. 3. A. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Sell] RC. V. 3. Affraid, [adj. Fear.] AS. V. 5. O. Affront, RJ. IV. 1. A. Afresh. [adv. New. Sp. I. 3. Repeated. TA. II. 6. [again] Adv. IV. 2. After. [op. to before] [behind] Prep. V. 3. O. [adv. Posterior] [adv. Follow] [According to] As by patern. Prep. II. 1. [adv. Congruous to] —Birth, [secundine.] PP. VI. 7. A. —Noon, [after—adj. noon. (time.] —Time, [adj. Future.] Sp. I. 1. D. (Time.] Again. Adv. IV. 2. [adv. p repeating.] TA. II. 6. Against. Prep. II 3. O. Over— Prep. VI. 3. O. Agaric, [Fungus of Larix-tree.] Agast, [adj. Fear. AS▪ V. 5. O. (augm.] Agat. St. II. 1. A. Age. [Life-time] Mea. VI. of what— [adj. preter. Age, how many years?] under— [of Pupillar age.] of full— [Un-pupilled by Age] [adj. pret. Adolescence.] middle— [Manhood.] Me. VI. 3. Declining— Mea. VI. 3. A Old— Mea. VI. 4. Decrepit— Mea. VI. 4. A. [Generation] Mea. VI. A. Agent. [adj. a. Action. (person] [pro—adj. Business, TA. III. (Officer.] (Person.] Aggravate. [a. Great] TM. I. 1. E. [a. Intension] TM. I. 8. E. Aggregate. TM. III. 6. O. Agility. Nimble, NP. V. 8. [Swift] NP. V. 9. Agitate [Move] Mo. (freq.) [Drive] TA. VI. 5. O. [Swing] Mo. VI. 3. [a. vice-business. TA. III. Aglet, [round Lamin. (dim.] Agnus-Castus. Sh. I. 6. A. Agoe, [adv. Past.] Sp. . 1. E. Agony, AS. VI. 8. [Grief (Impetus.] [Anger (Impetus.] Agree. [v. Congruous] T. V. 5. [a. Contract] RC. V. —to [Consent] AS. II. 3. [Grant] D. VI. 3. O. —together. V. Man. IV. 3. Agreeable. [Congruous] T. V. 5. [Expedient,] T. V. 6. Agriculture. O. III. Agrimony, HF. VIII. 3. Dutch— HF. III. 8. Aground on earth] contiguous to the earth.] Ague, S. II. 1. A. Ah, Interject. sp. Love. Sorrow. Desire. Insinuation. Ay, [adv. Ever.] Sp. I. 1. Aid, [Adjuvant.] T. II. 5. Ail. [v. Passion] T. I. 7. O. [v. Impot.] NP. V. O. [v. Want] TA. I. 5. O. Aim. [Object] T. VI. 2. [End] T. II. 6. Air, El. II. —Ethereal, El. II. 1. —of face, [Figure, (modus] [Tune.] Wood, [Maple tuberous (augm.) to—abroad, [put in the Air.] Airy. [adj. Air.] [Wanton] NP. IV. 3. O. [Conceited] Ha. III. 3. O. —of Hawks, [Younglings (aggreg.) of Hawks.] Ake, AC. II. 7. Akorn, [Mast of the Oke.] Alabaster, St. II. 1. Alacrity, Ha. IV. 3. Alarm. [Arming (sign] [Assaulting (sign] Alass, Interject. II. 1. Alate, [Past. Sp. I. 1. E. (dim.] Alaternus, Sh. IV. 4. Albeit, [Although.] Conj. II. 2. Alchimy, [Chimic.] O. VI. Alcoran, [Scripture of Mahome∣tans.] Alcyon [King-fisher.] Bi. III. 9. Alder, Tr. V. 3. Berry bearing, —Sh. II. 7. Alderman, [Assessor of Corpora∣tion (Officer.] Ale, Pr. I. 7. Ale-cost, HF. II. 4. Ale-hoof, [Ground-Ivy] HL. VI. 11. Ale-house, [adj. Selling (house) of Ale.] Alembick, [adj. Distillation (ves∣sel.] Alexanders, HF. IV. 4. Algebra, [adj. Invention (art) in quantity (Science.] Alien, [Foreiner.] RO. IV. 3. O. Alienate, Po. O. [un- a. Propriety from him∣self.] [a. Stranger] R. IV. 4. O. Alight. [un- Ride] Sit] Down-go] TA. VI. Alike. [adv. Like.] TM. V. 1. [adv. Equal] TM. I. 5. Aliment, [adj. Nutrition. AC. I. 6. (thing] Alimony, [Proportioned (thing) for Provisions.] Alisanders, H. IV. 4. Alive, [adj. AC. I. 7.] —Cole, [n. adj. Fire cole.] Alkakengi, [Winter-cherry.] HS. IX. 8. Alkanet, HL. IX. 2. All, Pron. V. 3. at— [adv. Any.] —be it Conj. II. 2. —though Conj. II. 2. —one, [Equal.] TM. I. 5. —ready, vid. Already. —together. [adv. Total] TM. VI. [adv. Aggregate] TM. III. 6. O. [adv. Perfect] TM. III. 9. —waies in all (times) adv. all (times) Sp. in all times when it ought to be.] Allay. [a. Remiss] TM. I. 8. D. [a. Little] TM. I. 1. D. [v. more-remiss, &c.] Allege. [a. Argumentation.] [a. Quotation.] Allegiance. [Loyalty] Man. V. 6. [Duty of Subjection.] Allegory, [continued Trope,] sp. Metaphor.] Alley.
[narrow Street Way Area All-heal, HF. V. 8. Hercules— HF. IV. 10. Alligator [Crocodile] B. VI. 3. Ally, vid. Alliance. Alliance. [League] RC. III. 8. [Affinity] RO. II. Alloy Stiffen by mixture] un-price by mixture] Allot, [Appoint Measure] Proportion] Allow. [Appoint sp. Measure] [Permit sp. Proportion] [Stipendiate] RO. VI. 4. A. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Yield] TA. IV. 1. [Grant] D. VI. 3. A. [Approve] AS. III. 3. [Consent] AS. II. 3. Allowance. [appointed Measure] [Permitted Proportion] [Stipend] RO. VI. 4. A. [Maintenance] RO. VI. 4. Allude, [a. Allusion.] D. IV. 9. A. Allure. RO. V. 5. Allusion. D. IV. 9. A. Almanack, [adj. Year-book, of pl. Series of Daies, of every Month,] Almes, [adj. p. Almsgiving (thing] —giving. the Virtue, Man. III. 5. the Act, [a. Almsgiving.] Man. III. 5. Almicantar. W. VI. 7. A. Almighty, [all-adj. Power.] Ha. II. 6. Almner, [Alms (officer] Almond. Tree, Tr. IV. 1. A. Fruit, Tr. IV. 1. A. (Fruit) [Glandule] PG. II. 7. Place of them, PG. III. 9. A. Almost. Adv. V. 1. Aloe. Herb, HL. VIII. 1. A. Tree, Tr. VIII. 1. Aloft [Adv. High.] TM. II. 4. Alone. [Solitary] RO. IV. 2. O. [Only] Adv. IV. 1. O. Along. [on this side] Prep. VI. 2. [beside] Prep. IV. 3. O. [adv. p. continue.] all— [adv. Lying] AC. VI. 7. A. Aloof [adv. Remote.] Sp. II. 3. O. Aloud [adv. Sound. Q. III. (aug.] Alpe [Bullfinch] Bi. III. 5. Alphabet Series of Let∣ters.] Catalogue of Let∣ters.] Already. [having been before] [adv. preter. Past.] Sp. I. 1. E. [which is now] [before this time] Also. Conj. IV. 2. Altar, Sacrificing (place.) Po. II. 4. A. Alter, [Change.] TA. II. 6. A. Altercation, [Contentiousness.] Man. IV. 3. D. Alternation, [Turn.] T. VI. 7. Althaea, HF. IX. 7. Altitude, [Height.] TM. II. 4. Alum. St. V. 2. Am. [v. Being] T. I. 1. Copula. Amain, [adv. Intension.] TM. I. 8. E. Amalgama, Mingle with Quick∣silver. Amaranthus. [Princes Feather] HF. I. 15. A. Amass, [a. Heap.] O. II. 6. Amate, [a. Fear.] AS. V. 6. O. Amaze. [a. Extasie] AS. VI. 8. A. [a. Stupor] NP. II. 1. O. with admiration, AS. V. 1. Ambages, [about—Wandring Speeches.] Ambassage. [Political RC. Sending] TA. VI. 4. Amber St. II. 8 A. —gris. St. V. 9. Ambient. [about the outside] Sp. III. 6. O. [adj. Periphery] Ambiguous, [adj. p. abst. Doubt.] [adj. Equivocation.] Ambition, Man▪ III. 9. E. Ambling, Mo. II. 2. Ambedexter. [using equally all his hands.] [seeming of all parties.] Ambulatory, [adj Walk] Mo. II. 1. Ambush. RM. I. 9. A. Amen [it Imper. Being] Copula.] Amend, [v. Better.] TM. I. 9. E. make—s [v. compens.] TA. II. 7. A. Amerce, [Mulct.] RJ. VI. 7. Amethyst, St. IV. 6. Amia▪ Fi. IV. 1. Amiable [adj. p. Love (abstr.] Amicable, [adj. a. Friend.] RO. IV. 1 Amiss. adv. adv. Evil.] T. III. 2 O. Err.] TA. III. 8. Transc. (corruptiue] Amity, [a. Friend RO. IV. 1. (abst.) Ammi, [Bishops-weed.] HF. V. 4. A. Ammunition. RM. V. Amomum.   Among, [betwixt.] Prep. VI. 3. Amorous, [adj. a Love. AS. V. 3. (Abstr.] Amort, [adj Grief. AS. V. 4. O. (impetus] Amount, [p Sum.] TM. VI. 6. A Amphibious, [Inhabiting Lan and Water.] Amphiboly, [Doubtfulness of sense.] Amphitheatre, [Round building for Shews.] Ample. Wide, Sp. II. 5. [Great] TM. I. 1. E. [Broad] TM. II. 2. Ampliation. D. IV. 2. O. Amplifie, a. D. IV. 2. O. Amulet, [adj. a. Physitian (thing) with—adj. p. carry (abstr.) adj. hang at neck, &c.] An Article. I. Anabaptist, [Rebaptizing Schis∣matic.] Anacardium. Tr. IV. 8. A. Anagram, [Play of changing the orders of Letters.] Analem, [Representing (thing) by lines;] sp. of the Sphere imaginary.] Analogy, [Proportion.] Me. O. Analysis, [Artificial Segregation.] Anarch. R. O. Anas Campestris Bellrii. Bi. II. 4. A. Anathema, [Excommunication.] RE. V. 5. Anatomy. Cutting up, [Segregation by cutting.] Body cut up, [Body segrega∣ted by cutting.] Ancestor. [Progenitor.] RO. I. 1. Anchor. RN. III. 9. Anchorite, [Hermit. RE. II. 7. A. circumsepimented.] Anchove. Fi. III. 12. Ancient. [adj. Old] Sp. I. 3. O. [adj. Old-age.] Mea. VI. 4. [Ensign] RM. III. 2. —of hip. RN. III. 7. A. Anckle, [Protuberant end of the Leg-bone.] Ancome, [Porous bile.] And, Conj. I. 2. Andiron. [Fewel-supporting (In∣strument.] Anemony, H. IX. 3. Aneuresma. S. III. 8. A. Anew. [adv. New. Sp. I. 3. Repeat. TA. II. 6. [again] Adv. IV. 2. Angel. [Spirit.] W. I. 1. Good— W. I. 2. Bad— W. I. 2. O. In money, Mea. IV. 4. Fish. [Scate] Fi. II. 5. Angelica. HF. IV. 5. Anger. AS. V. 9. viious— Man. I. 9. D. Angle. Mag. III. 2. O. right— Mag. III. 3. obtuse— Mag. III. 3. E. acute— Mag. III. 3. D. to— [Hunt Fish with Wand and Line.] Aguish. [Anxiety.] Ha. I. 3. O. [Pain] NP. V. 3. O. (augm.)
[Grief] AS. V. 4. O. (augm.) [Trouble] TA. V. 9. O. (aug.) Angular, [adj. Angle.] Mag. III. 2. O. Any. the particular, Pron. II. 3. O. the Indefinite, Pron. III. 1. —whither, [to any (place] —where, [in any (place.] Animadversion, [Observation.] AS. III. 1. A. Animal. W. V. 4. Animate parts of the world. W. V. to— [Encourage] RO. VI. 2. Animosity old anger.] perverse anger.] Aniseed. HF. IV. 1. Ankle, vid. Anckle. Annals, [adj. Year (segr.] History] Annats [Tribute out of the Years Revenue.] Annex, [to-joyn.] TA. II. 1. Annihilate. AS. I. 1. O. Anniversary. [adj. Year (segr.] sp. Solemnity.] Annoy. [a. Hurt] T. IV. 1. O. [a. Trouble] TA. V. 9. O. Annotations, [Comment.] D. V. 6. D. Annual. [adj. Year (segreg.] Annuity. [adj. year (segr.) Paiment.] Rent.] Stipend.] Annull. [a. Nothing] T. I. 1. O. [Annihilate] AS. I. 1. O. [un-do] Annulet, Mag. V. 2. (dim.) Annunciation, [Narration] D. V. 3. Anint, [smear] O. V. 6. A. Anomalous. [not- (adj. p.) Rule] D. IV. 5. [exorbitant] Anon, [Adv. Futur. Sp. I. 1. O.] Anonymous, [not- (adj. p.) name.] T. I. 4. Another. Pron. V. I. & diff. T. III. Answer. D. VI. 1. O. —able. [adj. Congruity] T. V. 5. [adj. Fur. Reckoning] TA. IV. 6. Ant. EX. IV. 5. —bear, Be. V. 5. Antagonist. [Enemy] RO. IV. 1. O. [Contrary] T. V. 5. O. [Opposite] T. VI. 8. O. Antarctic. —Circle. W. VI. 5. O. —Pole. [adj. South pole.] Antecedent, [Preceding.] Sp. I. 2. E. Antedate, [before- a. date.] Sp. I. 5. Anthem. RE. IV. 2. A. St. Anthony's fire, [Erysipelas.] S. II. 7. A. Antic, [Old] Sp. I. 3. O. Corrupt.] Manner.] Antichrist, G. 2. O. Anticipate. [Prevent] TA. III. 9. [v. Soon] Sp. I. 4. E. Antidote, [adj. against-poyson (thing.] Antilope, [goat (kind) having straight wreathed horns.] Antimony, Met. III. 2. Antipathy, [natural Aversation.] AS. V. 5. O. Antiperistasis, [Resistance of con∣trary quality.] Antipodes, [Over against- sited in the remotest parts of the Globe diametrically opposite] Antiquary, [Learned (Artist) in Old (things.] Antiquated, [Annull'd by being un-custom'd.] Antique, vid. Antic. Antiquity. [Oldness] Sp. I. 3. O. [Old-age] Me. VI. 4. Antithesis, [Opposition.] T. VI. 8. O. Antitype, [typed. T. II. 3. A. (thing] Anvil, [the Iron supporting (Instr.) of the hammered (thing.] Anxiety, HA. I. 3. O. Apace, [adv. Swift.] NP. V. 9. Apart. [adv. Segregate] TM. III. 6. Transc. (Segreg.) Ape. Be. III. 1. A. Aper. Fi. IV. 9. A. Aphorism. [brief Rule] D. IV. 5. [Authentic sentence] D. III. 1. A. Aphua gobites. Fi. III. 9. Apocryphal, [doubtfully autho∣riz'd.] Apologue. [Fictitious example] [Instructive Fiction] Apology, [Plea.] RJ. II. 3. A. Apophthegm, [wise Sentence.] Apoplexy. S. IV. 3. A. Aporrhais. EX. VII. 3. A. Apostasie. RE. III. 6. O. Apostem. S. I. 6. A. Apostle. RE. II. 3. Apothecary. O. VI. A. Appale. a. Pale. AC. IV. 9. O.] a. Fear. AS. V. 6. O.] Apparel. Pr. IV. Apparence. [seeming] TA. I. 9. A. —at Law. RJ. II. 2. A. [ens apparens] T. I. 2. O. Apparent. [adj. Seeming] TA. I. 9. A. [adj. Manifest.] TA. I. 9. Apparition, [p. See] of Spirits.. Apparitor, [adj. a. Citation. RJ. II. 1. (Officer.] Appartment. Po. III. 2. A. Appeal. RJ. II. 8. A. Appear. [v. as Thing] T. I. 2. O. [v. Manifest] TA. I. 9. [v. Seeming] TA. I. 9. O. [—Iudicially] RJ. II. 2. A. Appearing Meteor. El. V. Appease, [un—a. Anger] AS. V. 9. Appendage, [adj. Accessary. (thing.] TM. IV. 4. O. Appertein, [v. Pertinence.] TM. IV. 5. Appetite. NP. II. 4. Applaud. Commend. RO. V. 7. (sign.] Praise. RO. V. 8. (augm.] Apple. Tree, Tr. I. 1. Fruit, PP. III. 1. Thorn.— HS. VII. 7. A. —of Love. HS. IX. 2. Adams,— Tr. I. 7. A. Mad— HS. IX. 2. A. —of the Eye [Black (part) of the Eye.] Apply. TA. II. 3. [Together-joyn] TA. I. 1. Appoint. [Intend] AS. IV. 3. [Design] TA. HI. 1. [a. Command] RO. V. 1. Apposite [Congruous. T. V. 5. [Pertinent. TM. IV. 5. Apprehend. [understand] NP. I. 1. [a. common Sense] NP. II. 1. [a. Opinion] AS. II. 6. O. [arrest] R J. II. 1. A. Apprentice. [Learner. RO. III. 3. O (Merchant.] (Mechanic.] Approch, [v. Near.] Sp. II. 3. Approbation▪ AS. III. 3. Appropriate. TA. I. 2. [a. Proper, T M. IV. 6. (make] Approve. AS. III. 3. Appurtenance. [Pertinent] TM. IV. 5. [Accessory] TM. IV. 4. O. Apricock. Tr. II. 2. April, [the fourth Month.] Apron, [hanging (Vest) before the Belly.] Apt. Transc. (abstr.) [adj. Congruous] T. V. 5. [adj p. Disposition] HA. O. Aptitude. [Congruity] T. III. 5. [Sagacity] Ha. III. . [Alacrity] [Disciple (abstr.] Aquarius, [11th. of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.] Aqueduct. Po. II. 8. A. Aquila, Fi. II. 1. A, Aquosity, [Water (abstr.] Arable, Po I. 4. Aray.
[Cloath] Pr. IV. [Order] TM. V.. 2. Arbalist, [adj. a. Crosbow. RM. V. 4. A. (person] Arbitrary, [adj. Liberty.] AS. IV. 8. Arbitrator. RJ. I. 2. Arbitrement, v. RJ. I. 2. Arbor [Room of Trees.] Arbutus, [Strawberry Tree] Sh. III. 4. Arch [Principal.] an Arch, Po. III. 6. A. —of Circle, [part of adj. Cir∣cle-line.] Archangel, [Principal Angel.] dead Nettle, HF. VIII. 10. Archbishop, [Primat.] RE. II. 4. Archdeacon, [Bishops Substitute.] Archer, [adj. a. Bow. RM. V. 4. (person.] Architecture, [a. Buildings. (Art.] Architrave, [Chief beam.] Archives, [Store (place) of old Writings.] Arctic, [adj. North.] —Circle, W. VI. 5. —Pole, [adj. North pole.] Ardent. [adj. Fire] El. I. [adj. Heat, Q. V. 1. E. (aug.] [adj. Zeal] AS. VI. 1. Area, [Surface.] Mag. I. 3. Argent, [of Silver Colour.] Argu. v. D. IV. 6. Argument. [Matter] T. II. 7. [Object] T. VI. 2. [adj. a. Argumentation, D. IV. 6. (thing.] Arid, [Dry.] Q. V. 2. D. Aries, [first of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.] Aright. Transc. (Perf.) [adv. Good] T. III. 2. Arise. AC. VI. 1. as Sun [above- adj. Horizon (incept.] as Hill [upward- Oblique.] Mag. II. 8. Aristocracy, [Government by the Nobles.] Aristolochy, [Birth-wort.] Arithmetic, [Numbring (art] Ark, (Box.] Pr. V. 2. Arm. —of Man. PG. V. 1. —of the Sea. [Bay.] —of a Tree, [Branch.] PP. I. 3. to— [Arms.] Armada, [Army of Ships.] Armadillo, Be. V. 5. A. Armament. Pr. IV. a. Army, RM. IV. 1. Armor, Arms defensive, RM. V. 1. A. Armorer, [Arms (mechanic.] Armory, [Arms (place.] Arms. offensive [Weapons] RM. V. I. defensive. RM. V. 1. A. man at— [armed (pft) Horse-man.] as in a Scutcheon [adj. De∣gree RC. I. (sign) picture.] Aromatic. [adj. Spice.] Pr. II. 4. Arquebus, [RM. V. 6. (augm.] Array, vid. Aray. Arraign, [a. Bill.] RJ. II. 3. Arrant, [Genuin.] T. III. 4. Arras, [Room (vest) weaved pi∣cture (like.] Arrear, [Residue Debt.] Arrest. RJ. II. 1. A. Arrive, [to- come.] TA. VI. 1, Arrogance. [Pride] Man. V. 2. O. [Magisterialness] Man. IV. 8. D. [Supercisiousness] Man. VI. 3. O. Arrogate, [Claim.] TA. I. 3. Arrow. RM. V. 5. A. —head. HS. VI. 1. A. Arse, [Buttock.] PG. IV. 6. Arsenal, [Ammunition (place.] Arsenick. St. VI. 4. A. Arsmart. HF. VIII. 6. codded— HS. VIII. 9. Art. Ha VI. 3. Artemisia, [Mugwort.] HF. II. 2. A. Artery. PG. II. 4. A. rough— [Wind-pipe.] PG. VI. 1. A. Artichoke. HF. III. 1. A. Article. [Section] D. III. 2. A. [Pact] RC. VI. A. [adj. Accusation, RJ. I. 3. (thing] as, A. The D. II. 8. A. Articulate. Q. III. 3. A. Artificer. RC. II. 5. A. Artificial. [adj. Art] Ha. VI. 3. [Factitious] T. III. 7. O. Artillery, [Ordnance. RM. V. 6. A. (aggreg.] Artist, [adj. Art. Ha. VI. 3. (per∣son.] Artizan. RC. II. 5. A. As. opp. to So, Adv. I. 3. —Ear— —Long— —Much— -So far how far long how long much how much —for, [concerning] Prep. I. 3. O. —for example, [ex. gr.] Con. IV. 3. O. —if Adv. III. 2. O. —it were Adv. III. 2. O. —though Adv. III. 2. O. where— Conj. IV. 1. for—much Conj. IV. 1. [whilst] adv. III. 1. Asarabacca HL. VI. 6. Ascarides. Ex. I. 3. Ascend, [upward. Prep. V. 1. Ition▪ TA. 6.] Ascertain, [v. Certain. AS. II. 6. A. (make] Ascribe. [a. Predicate] D. II. 8. O. [Claim] TA. I. 3. Ash. Tr. VI. 5. —colour, [adj. ashes. El. IV. 3. (colour.] Ashamed, [adj. Shame.] AS. VI. 2. A. Ashes. El. IV. 3. Ashore, [on- shore] Aside. [adv. Separation] TA. II. 1. O Solitary] RO. IV. 2. O.. Lay— or cast— Rejection] AS. IV. 5. O. Desist] AS. IV. 6. O. Intermit] Asilus. Ex. I. 4. A. Ask. (Enquire [a. Question.] D. VI. 1 Require Necessary Expedient make] Entreat] RO. V. 3. Beg. [a. Begger.] RC. I. 8. A. Demand. as price, RC. VI. 2. O. as due, TA. IV 2. A, [Command] RO. V. 1. Askew, [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. Asleep, [adj. Sleep,] AC. II. 3. O. numb'd, [adj. p. Stupor] NP. II. 1. O. Aslope, [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. Asp. Serpent, [Viper] Be. VI. 7. A. Tree, [White poplar] Tr. VI. 7. A. Asparagus. HL. IX. 6. Aspect, [Face, PG. III. 1. (manner] Asperity. [roughness] Q. VI. 2. D. [austereness] Man. VI. 8. O. Aspersion, [Calumny] RJ. IV. 7. Asphodel, [Kings-spear] HL. V. 1. Aspiration, [Respiration. Mo. III. 2. (Impetus.] Aspire [a. Ambition.] Man. III. 9. E. Asquint, [Oblique (corrupt) Vi∣sion (manner] Ass▪ e. I. 2. Assa foetida, [the gum of Lazar∣wort.] Assay. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. [Endeavour] TA. III. 4. Assail, [Assault.] RM. I. 3. Assassin, [a. Murther, RI. III. 4. sp. under pretence of Religion.] Assault, RM. I. 3. Assemble, [a. Convention.] RC. III. Assent. AS. II. 3. Assentation, [Fawning] Man. IV. 8. E. Assertion, [Affirmation.] D. VI 2. Assess. [a. Tax] RC. V. 9. O. [Impose, adv. Proportion.]
Assessor. —in Iudgment, RJ. I. 1. A. —of Taxes, [v. Assess (Officer] Asseveration, [Affirmation. D. VI. 2. (augm.] Assiduity, [Diligence.] Ha. IV. 5. Assign. Transfer right. RC. V. 1. [Design] TA. III. 1. Assimilate, [a. Likeness. TM. V. 1. (make] Assist. [v Adjuvant] T. II. 5. [v. Assessor] RJ. I. 1. A. Assize. Judgment [adj. Shire, Judici∣al Convention.] [adj. Law Authority Measure] Associate, [a. Companion. RO. IV. 2. (make] Assoil, [Absolve.] RJ. II. 7. Assume. to—take] TA. I. 4. together-take] TA. I. 4. Assure. [v. Certain] AS. II. 6. [v. Assurance] AS. III. 6. Asswage, [v. Remission.] TM. I. 8. D. Asterisk. Mag. IV. 6. A. Asthma. S. V. 2. Astonish. [a. Wonder, (augm.) AS. V. 1. (make] [a. Extasie. AS. VI. 8. A. (make] [Stupifie with Wonder.] Fear.] Astray. [adj. Err] TA. III. 8. Wander] TA. VI. 3. A. Astride, [adj. Stride.] Mo. II. 3. O. Astringent. —in Virtue, [Binding.] Mo. IV. O. in Tast, [Austere] Q. IV. 3. Astrolabe, [Star-measuring (Instr.] Astology, [Conjecturing (Art) by the stars.] Astronomy, Measuring (Art) of Heavenly (things] Asunder. [adv. Segregate] TM. III. 6. [adv. Separate] TA. II. 1. O. At. [Nar, augm.] Prep. III. 1. O. [In] Prep. IV. 1. O. —all. [in any Thing. Manner. —last Adv. III. 3. O. —length Adv. III. 3. O. —last adv. last. —least adv. least. —most adv. most. —once adv. One.] in one (time] with one blow, &c. Atchieve. [a. Action] T. I. 7. [Perform] TA. III. 6. [a. Perfect. T. III. 9. (make] Atheism. RE. I. O. Atmosphere. El. II. 1. A. [Sphere of Vapors.] Atom, [Indivisible body (dim.] Atone. [un—Enemy RO. IV. 1. O. (make] [a. Friend, RO. IV. 1. (make] Attac. [Besiege] RM. I. 4. [Assault] RM. I. 3. A. Attach, [Arrest] RJ. II. 2. Attagen. Bi. II. 3. A. Attein: [Obtein] TA. V. 1. Atteint. [a. Accuser] RJ. I. 3. [un-a. Noble, RC. I. 3. (make] Attempt, [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Attend. [Continue expecting] [Wait] AC. V. 1. A. Hearken [Hear (endeavor] —unto, [a. Observe.] AS. III. 1. A. Attention, vid. Attend. Heedfulness▪] Ha. IV. 2. Diligence] Ha. IV. 5. Attenuate [a. Rarity. Q. V. 3. D. (make] Attest. [a. witness] RJ. I. 7. A. [a. Protestation] Attire, [Clothing.] Pr. 4. Attourney, [for—businessing (person] sp. Lawyer.] Attract, [to—draw.] Attribute, [Predicate.] D. II. 8. O. Attrition. [Rubbing] O. V. 8. [Grinding] upon a body, O. IV. 2. between bodies, O. VI. 1. [Decay, NP. V. 4. O. by use.] Avail. [a. Adjuvant] T. II. 5. [a. Profit] T. IV. 1. Avant, [from—Imperat. Ition.] TA. VI. Avarice, [Covetousness] Man. III. 1. D. Audacity, [Boldness.] AS. V. 8. Audible, [adj. p. Hear (apt.] —Quality. Q. III. Audience. [Hearing] [Convention for Hearing.] [Hearers (Aggreg.] Audit, [Convention for reckon∣ing.] to— [a. reckon.] TA. IV. 2. Auditor. Hearer [hearing (person] Accountant [reckoning. TA. IV. 6. (Officer] Auditory, vid. Audience. Avenge, [Revenge.] AS. V. 9. A. Avens. HF. IX. 1. A. Avenue, [to—way.] Averr, [Affirm D. VI. 2. (augm.] Aversation. AS. V. 5. O. Aversion. AS. IV. 1. O. Avert, [from-turn.] TA. VI. 2. O. Auger, [great Boring. O. IV. 3. (instr.] Augment. [increase] Great (make] Intense (make] more Great (make] more Intense (make] Augury, [Divination by Birds.] August, [eighth Month.] Aunt, [Uncle.] RO. I. 3. (fem.] Avocetta, [long reversed bill-gull (kind] Avoid. TA. VI. 7. O. [a. Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. Avouch, [Affirm solemnly.] Avow, [Affirm solemnly.] Avrelia [Chrysolite.] PP. V. 6. A. Auricular, [adj. Ear.] Auspicious, [Prosperous.] Ha. I. 2. Austerity. Tast. Q. IV. 3. Vice, Man. VI. 8. O. Authentic, [adj. Authority.] RC. IV. 6. Author. [Efficient] T. II. 1. [adj. a. preter. Invention.] AS. III. 2. O. Authority. [Right] RC. IV. 6. [Testimony] sp. Credible.] Autumn. Me. V. 3. Auxiliary, [Adjuvant.] T. II. 5. Aw. [Fear] AS. V. 6. O. [Reverence] Man. V. 3. —full, [adj. Fearing (apt.] Away. [From] Prep. III. 2. [Off] Prep. III. 2. A. [Absent] Sp. II. 1. O. [From—Imper. Go.] TA. VI. 1. O. —with, [Off] Prep. III. 2. O. sp. with an Imperative.] Fling— [From—go Hastily.] Angrily.] Stand— [Be more distant.] Awake, [adj. AC. II. 4. to— [un-sleep.] Award, [Sentence.] RJ. II. 5. A. sp. of Arbitrators.] Aware. [Before-knowing] [adj. Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2. Awkward. [not Skilful.] Agil.] [Perverse] NP. IV. 1. O. Awle, [adj. Iron (dim.) boring (Instr.] Awry. [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. [Crooked] Mag. III. 1. O. [adj. Err] TA. III. 8. Ax, [Carpenters (Instr.) for to cut strikingly.]
Battle- Cutting Club.] RM. V. 2.] Hammer. Pole— Cutting Club.] RM. V. 2.] Hammer. Pick— [hammer for pecking.] Axiom. [adj. p. Authority Sentence] D. III. 1. A. [Rule] D. IV. 5. Axis   Axle-tree. —of Globe. Mag. II. 5. A. —of Cart. Po. V. 6. A. Ay, [Sloth] Be. III. 2. A. Azimuth. W. VI. 4. A. Azure. [Blew.] Q. II. 3. A. —Stone. St. II. 3. A. B BAbble, [a. Loquacity.] Man IV. 5. D. Babe, [adj. Infancy (per∣son.] Me. VI. 1. Baby, [Factitious Man. (dim.] Bable, [adj. Vanity. T. IV. 5. (thing] Baboon, Be. III. 1. Bachelor, [adj. Coelibat. RO. II. 1. (person] —of Arts, [having the first A∣cademical degree.] —s Button, [Campion.] HS. V. 2. Back. Noun. —of Body. [Hinder part] Sp. III. 8. O. —of Animal. PG. IV. 3. Adverb. [Un] Adv. IV. 3. [Re] Adv. IV. 3. O. —to the same Place Person Condition again Preposition. [From] Prep. III. 2. [to—one. [a. Accessory] TM. IV. 4. O. [Incourage] RO. VI. 2. [a. Adjuvant] T. II. 5. give— [Retire] RM. II. 2. D. Keep— Abstein] TA. V. 6. O. Detein] Keep one— Abstein] Abstein] TA. V. 6. O. Detein] [a. Cohibit] T. II. 2. O. [a. Hinder] T. II. 5. O. —door. [adj. hinder-part door] [door of the hinder part of the house.] —friend, [Conceal'd Enemy.] Backbite. RJ. IV. 7. A. Back-slide, [a. Apostate.] RE. III. 6. O. Backward. [adj. Backwardness] toward- the hinder part] to— the hinder part] Backwardness. [Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. [Nolleity] AS. IV. 1. O. (dim.) Bacon, [Condited Hogs-flesh.] Bad, [Evil.] T. III. 2. O. Badge, [Sign] T. VI. 5. Badger. Beast, Be. V. 2. A. [Merchant] (corr.) of Corn] Bag, Pr. V. 1. cloak— [behind-riding bag.] —pipe, Musical (Instr.) of Pipes and Bag.] Baggage, [Carried (things) adj. a. hinder (apt] [utensils of the Army.] RM. V. A. Bay. —tree, Tr. III. 5. Rose— [Oleander] Sh. VI. 1. A. Wild— Sh. III. 9. —colour, [Chesnut colour.] brown— [black. Q. II. 1. O. (dim) adj. Chesnut co∣lour.] —in Water, [Transverse bank.] —of Sea. W. IV. 4. —of Building. Po. III. A. —windows, [Prominent win∣dows.] to—at [against-a. Dog (voice] Bail. RJ. II. 2. Baily,   Bailiff. Magistrate [adj. Town (offi∣cer.] Serjeant [adj. Citation (Officer.] Arresting (Officer.] Servant. [adj. Agriculture (Officer.] Bain, [Bath.] Po. II. 5. A. Bait, [Sustenance.] Pr. I. sp. adj. Hunting.] to— [Refresh] TA. V. 8. sp. with Sustenance in journey.] [Allure] RO. V. 5 sp. with Sustenance. as Hook or Trap, [make adj. allure (apt.] [Provoke] RM. I. 2. Bake. Pr. III. 5. A. —er, [Baking (Officer.] (Mechanic.] Balad, [Plebeian Song.] Balance, [adj. librating O. I. 2. (jug.] to— [Librating] O. I. 2. [Equal the weight] [a. Equal (make) Even Accounts. TA. IV. 2. A. Balast, [Weight, un- adj. a. roll (apt] Balcony, [Prominent doored win∣dow.] Bald. [Un-hair'd] [not-ornate] [not-congruous] Bale. [Heap. together-bound.] [Aggregate together-bound.] Balk. —of Earth, [Area not ploughed.] to— [Omit] TA. III. 8. A. [Discourage] RO. VI. 2. A. Ball. [Balling. Mo. V. 4. A. (Instr.] [Sphere] Mag. III. 5. sp. (dim.] [Convention for dancing] Balloting, [a. Suffrage (sign) with Balls.] Balm. Herb. HF. VII. 2. Assyrian— HF. VII. 3. Iuice. PP. I. 7. A. Balsam. Plant. Male— HS VII. 5. True— SH. III. 1. Juice. PP. I. 7. A. Balsamum. Peruvianum. Tr. VIII. 9. A. Ban. [Curse] AS. I. 3. O. —role, [Flag.] Mag. IV. 7. A. Band. [adj. a. Binde (thing) [Obligation] RC. VI. [writing Obligatory] RC. VI. 5. [Company] RM. IV. 3. Bandy, [Cast alternly.] sp. various waies] Bandito. Proscribed (person.] Military robbing (person.] Bandog, [Dog tied for Guard.] Bane. [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O. ratts— [Arsenic] St, VI. 4. A. Banes. [Promulgation of fut. Marri∣age] Bang, [Strike.] Mo. VI. 4. Banish▪ [a Exile.] RJ. VI. 5. Bank. [Oblong, more-high (part] [Ridge] Mag. V. 7. [Shore] W. IV. 6. [Shelf] W. III. 5. A. [Series] TM. III. 7. —of Mony, [Mony (Aggr.) sp. to be lett (segreg.)] Banker, [adj demising (person (Merchant of Mo∣ney.] Banket. Pr. II. 1. A. Bankrout, [adj. failing (person] [Debtor Declared sentenced not-so∣lutive] Banner. [adj. Ensign. RM. III. 2. Cornet. RM. III. 2. A. (thing] Banquet. Pr. II. 1. A. Banstickle. Fi. IX. 13. A. Baptism. RE. VI. 5. Bar. [Bolt] Po. IV. 5. —of, &c. Cylinder, Mag. III. 6. of &c. Prism. Mag. III. 6. A. of &c.
[adj. Impedient (thing) [adj. Pleading] RJ. I. 7. (place] to— [a. Impedient] T. II. 5. O. [a. Forbid] RO. V. 1. O. Barb. [Back-diverging Cuspis] to— the Hair. [a. Figure (Perf.) by cut∣ting.] sp. the Beard.] Barbarism Man. IV. O. Barbarous. [adj. Barbarism] Man. IV. O. [adj. Rusticity] Man. IV. 9. D. [adj. Fierceness] NP. IV. 4. O. [adj. Cruelty] Man. I. 5. O. Barber, [Hair cutting (Mechanic.] Barbery. Sh. I. 4. A. Barbil. Fi. IX. 8. Bard, [Old (manner) Poet.] Bare. [not-clothed] [Lean] NP. V. . O. [Scarce] TM. I. 2. D. to— [un-clothe] Bargain. Contract.] RC. V. Thing dealt for, RC. V. 8. Barge. RN. I. 2. Bark. [Rinde] PP. I. 5. [Ship] RN. I. 2. A. to— Peel [un-rinde.] Yelp, as Dog. Fox. to a. Dog (voice] to a. Fox (voice] Barly. HL. II. 3. wild— HL. III. 4. A. Barm. [adj. a. ferment (thing) of Beer. Barn, [House for Straw.] Barnacle. Fish. Ex. VIII. 9. Instrument [Nose Compres∣sing (instr.] Baron. [Noble (person.] sp. of the fifth degree down∣ward] —of Exchequer, [Judge of Court for King's Revenue.] Baronet, [Gentleman of the first Degree.] Barrel. Vessel, Pr. V. 3. Measure. Me. II. 4. Barrenness. NP. VI. 3. O. Barren-wort. HS. VI. 7. Barreter, [Contentious (person) adj. a. Suit. RJ. II. A. (apt] Barricado, [Transvers shutting (sepiment] Barriers, [Sepimented end of Race (place] Barrister, [Pleading Lawyer.] Barrow, [un-testicled Hog] Jugament. Po. V. 3. A. Barter, [Exchange.] RC. V. A. Base. Subst. —of Column, [Bottom.] Sp. III. 7. O. —in Song, [Grave] Q. III. 1. D. Adj. [Low] TM. II. 4. O. [Ignoble] [Rabble] RC. I. 7. [Villain] RC. I. 8. [Spurious▪] T. III. 4. O. [Vitious] Man. I. O. [Pusillanimous] Man. III. 8. D. [Sordid] Man. III. 4. D. Bashfull. adj. Shame (habit)] AS. VI. 2. A. Abjectness] Man. III. 9. E. Basil. HF. VII. 5. Stone— HF. VII. 5. A. Cow— HS. V. 6. Basilisk. [Serpent killing by seeing] [Great Ordnance] Basket. Pr. V. 2. A. Bason, [Dish. Pr. V. 4. deep.] Bass. [Bed. Po. VI. 7. A. of rushes.] Bastard. [Spurious] T. III. 4. O. [begot of Parents not toge∣ther-married.] Baste, a. [Whip] RJ. VI. 2. [Cudgel] RJ. VI. 2. A. Moisten. Pr. III. 7. Baston. Staff.] PP. I. 4. Club.] RM. V. 2. Bastonade, [Cudgelling.] RJ. VI. 2. A. Bat. [Club] RM. V. 2. Bird flying-Mouse (kind.) —fowling, [Hunting Birds by Night.] Batch, [Bread. (Aggreg.] sp. in one (time) baking.] Bath Po. II. 5. A. —ing, [Soking▪] O. III. 5. O. Battaglia, [ordered Army.] Battel. Part of Army. Action. RM. I. 8. A. —ax. [Cutting Club] Hammer] Batter, [Bruise by Striking.] Knocking.] a—y, [Assault with Cannon.] Battle, [adj. Fat.] NP. V. 5. to— [Score for Diet (segreg.] Battle-door, [Lamin (Instr.) for striking.] Battlements. Figure. Mag. IV. 9. A. [Margin (sepiment) of the Roof.] Bavin▪ [together bound (aggreg) of Twigs.] Bawd, [adj. Fornication (Mer∣chant.] Bawdy, [adj. Unchast.] Man. II. 7. O. Bawl, [Exclaim.] AC. III. 3. O. Bdellium. Tr. VIII. 7. Beach. Sh. IV. 2. A. Beacon, [adj. Fire (sign) of p. invaded.] Bead. [Sphere (dim) perforated.] [Cube (dim) perforated.] —s-man. [for praying (person] [adj. p. Almes (person] Bede-tree. Tr. III. 9. A. Beadle. [Before-walking (Officer] [adj. a. Citation (Officer] [Arresting RJ. II. 1. A. (Offi∣cer.] [Whipping (Officer] Beagle. [Dog (dim) hunting Beasts by smell.] Beak. —of a Bird. PP. V. 4. —of a Ship. Beaker, [Cylinder (manner) Cup.] Beam. —of an house. Po. III. 5. A. —of a Cart. [Pole] Pr. V. 5. A. —of Balance, [Transverse (part, of B.] Weavers— Transverse line of Wood.] —of the Sun, [Line of Light.] Meteor. El. I. 4. Beam-tree. White— Sh. II. 3. A. Bean. HS. III. 3. French— HS. II. 1. Ginny— HS. II. 1. Kidney— HS. II. 1. —of the Ancients. HS. II. 2. binding—tree. Sh. IV. 6. —trefoile. Sh. II. 7. A. Bear. v. Be. IV. 1. A. —s foot. Sea— Ex. VI. 2. —s breech [brank ursin] HS. VIII. 8. —s-ear. HS. VIII. 2. —Sanicle. HS. VIII. 3. Bear. v. Support. Mo. VI. 1. A. [Carry] Mo. VI. 1. [Parturition] AC. I. 3. Suffer. [a Passion] T. I. 7. O. [a. Patience] Man. I. 8. —down. [Fall (make)] [Compel to grant] —off. [adj. a. distant (endeavour] [Suffer (endeavour]
—out. [adj. a. Safety (make] —up against. [Continue Suffering] [Continue Resisting] —with. [a. Patience] Man. I. 8. [a. Condescention] Man. VI. 2. — Company Companion — Respect v. Respect — Sway Sway — Witness Witness. —ones self, [a. Demeanour.] Beard. —of Animal. PP. VI. 4. —of Corn. PP. II. 3. A. Bearded Creeper. HF. III. 5. Beast Be. Beastly, [adj. Beast. (Metaph.] Beat. [Knock] Mo. VI. 4. A. [Strike] Mo. VI. 4. [Overcome] —back. [back- Drive. Put. by Striking.] Fighting.] —the Price. RC. VI. 1. A. Beatitude. [Happiness] Ha. I. 1. sp. Blessing] AS. I. 3. Beaver. (Castor] Be. IV. 8. Beauty. NP. V. 6. Becalm, [Quiet.] TA. V. 9. Because. Conj. III. 2. O. Beccafigo. Bi. V. 6. Beckon [v. Head (sign] Becometh. Transc. (Inceptive) is done [is, adj. p. Action.] is made. [is, adj. p. Efficient] [is Effect] T. II. O. [is Event] TA. V. [is decent] T. V. 2. Bed. Houshold-stuff. Po. V. 7. A. —sted. Po. V. 7. —rid, [not-adj. rise (pot) out of—] —of Earth, [Superficies.] Mag. I. 3. Ladies Bedstraw. HL. IX. 6. A. Bedaub, [a. Defilement.] TM. V. 6. O. Bedding, [adj. Bed. (things] Bedewed, [adj. p. Dew. (make] Bedlam, [Prison of mad (per∣sons.] Bee. Ex. IV. 1. humble. Ex. IV. 1. A. —like fly. Ex. IV. 3. —eater. Bi. III. 9. —flower. [orchis] HL. IV. 8. to— [v. Being] T. I. 1. Copula. Beech. Tr. IV. 4. A. Beef, [Beev's flesh.] Beeing. T. I. 1. as— [as] Adv. I. 3. Beer. [Drink] Pr. I. 7. A. [adj. Carrying (jug.) for dead bodies.] Beestings. [Milk of adv. new adj. preter. parturition.] Beet. HF. I. 10. Beetle. [Insect] Ex. V. Common— Ex. V. 4. Dung— Ex. V. 4. A. Knobbed horned— Ex. V. 3. A. Instrument [wooden Mallet (augm.] Befal [v. Event.] TA▪ V. Befool, [a. Fool. (make] Before. —in place. Prep. V. 3. —in comparison, [more then.] —in time, [adv, Preceding] Sp. I. 2. E. —hand. [Ha∣ving Gained] TA. V. 2. Prepared] TA. III. 2. Prevented] TA. III. 9. Beg. [a. Begger] RC. I. 8. A. [Entreat. RO. V. 3. (augm.] —ger. RC. I. 8. A. Beget. [a. Generation] AC. I. 1. [a. Efficient] T. II. 1. Begin. TA. III. 3. Transc. (Incep.) Beginning. Sp. III. 3. D. Beguile, [a. Fraud.] RJ. IV. 4. Behave. [a. Conversation] Man. A. [a. Demeanour] AC. V. [a. Gesture] AC. VI. Behead. RJ. V. 1. Behind. Prep. V. 3. O. [Hinder part] Sp. III. 8. O. left— [Staying] TA. VI. O. [Remaining] [Residue] TM. VI. 7. O. —in Arrears, [Debtor.] TA. IV. 7. O. [Inferior] TM. I. 5. D. —hand, [having Lost] TA. V. 2. O. not-prepared.] been Prevented.] Behold. [a. Eye] See] Observe] Beholding. [Beneficiary] RO. III. 8. D. [Owing thanks] Behve. [v. Expedient] T. V. 6. it—ed, &c. [&c ought] Mood II. 2. —full, [Expedient.] T. V. 6. Bel, [adj. Ringing. Q. III. 2. (Instr.] —fry, [adj. Convention (place) for adj. a. Ringing (persons.] —flower. HF. VII. 9. A. Belching. Mo. IV. 2. Beldame, [Old (corr.) man. (foem.] Beleaguer, [Besiege] RM. I. 4. Bely, [a. Calumny.] RJ, IV. 7. Believe. AS. II. 4. Easiness to— [Credulity.] Ha. III. 2. E. Belly. PG. IV. 6. —Worm. Ex. I. 1. A. Bellis, [Daisie] HF. II. 3. A. Bellow, [a. Bull (voice] Bellows, [adj. a. Wind (Instr.] Belluine, [adj. Beast (Metaph.] Belong, [v. Pertinent.] TM. IV. 5. Beloved, [adj. p. Love.] AS. V. 2. Below. [Beneath] Prep. V. 2. O. [Inferior] TM. I. 5. D. Belt, [to-binding (Armament) Sword] Bemoning. with sorrow (sign] for sorrow (sign] sp. With Voice.] Bench. [long fixed Seat] [adj. Judg. (place)] RJ. I. 1. [Assessors, (aggr.] RJ. I. 1. A. Bencher, [Assessor in College of Relation Judicial (per∣son.] Bend. O. I. 7. A. [adj. a. Crooked] Mag. III. 1. O. [Shrink] AC. VI. 3. [be crumpled] AC. VI. 3. A. [p. Oblique] Mag. II. 8. —ones fist, [together-fold.] O. V. 5. Beneath. [Inferior] TM. I. 5. D. [Below] Prep. V. 2. O. Benediction, [Blessing.] AS. I. 3. Benefactor. RO. III. 8. Benefice, [Presbyter's (place] Beneficence. Vertue, [Goodness] Man. I. 4. Action, [a. Benefactor.] Beneficial, [a. Benefactor.] Beneficiary. RO. III. 8. O. Benefit, [adj. a. Benefactor (thing] Benevolence, [Favour] AS. V. 9. Benjamin. Tr. VIII. 5. A. Benighted.   Benignity. [Favour] AS. V. 9. [Courtesie] Man. IV. 7. [Gratiousness] Man. VI. 1. Bent. [adj p. bend.] [adj. pret. purposing] AS. IV. 3. —of Grass, [Ear] PP. II. 4. A. Benum, [a. Stupor.] NP. II. 1. O. Bequath. RC. V. 2. Beray, [a. Defile.] TM. V. 6. O. Berbery. Sh. III. 4. Bereave, [a. Privative.] T. III. 3. O. Berry. PP. III. 2. A.
one— [Herb true love] HS. IX. 5. A. Beseech. [Entreat. RO. V. 3. humbly.] Beseeging. RM. I. 4. Beseem, [adj. Decency.] Beset. [About-gard] [Besiege] RM. I. 4. Beshrew. [a. remorse.] [a. Velleity Miscarrying.] Event (corr.] Beside. [Near] Prep. IV. 3. O. [not to at &c. —the mark, Erring from] Wandring from] —himself, [Mad.] [Also] Conj. IV. 2. Redundant. Besmear, [Defile.] TM. V. 6. O. Besom, [adj. sweeping (instr.] Besot. [a. Dotage. NP. II. 2. O. (make] [sp. with Love, (Excess] Drunkenness.] Bespawl. [Defile with upon-spitting.] Bespeak. RC. VI. 1. Besprinkle, [Wet (make) with Drops.] Bespue. [Defile with upon-spuing] Best, [most-good.] T. III. 2. —part. TM. VI. 1. doe ones— [most-endeavour.] TA. III. 4. Bestiality. RJ. III. 6. Bestir. [Move (aug.] Mo. [Endeavour] TA. III. 4. [Diligence] Ha. IV. 5. Bestow. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Disburse] TA. IV. 5. [Spend] Bet. RC. VI. 8. A. Betake. [to-Ition] TA. VI. sp. for Safety.] Bethink. Cogitation, AS. II. 1. [Consider] AS. III. 2. Betide, [v. Event.] TA. V. Betime. [adv. Soon] Sp. I. 4. [adv. Morn] Me. V. 7. Betoken, [before-sign] T. VI. 5. Betony. AF. VII. 15. Betraying. Evil. [a. Treachery] Man. V. 2. D. [a. Perfidiousness] Man. V. 6. O. [a. Treason] RJ. III. 2. Indiff. [Shewing] TA. I. 8. [Manifesting] TA. I. 9. Betrothed,] RO. II. 3. Better, [more-good.] TM. I. 6. E. [Victory.] RM. II. 1. [Superiority] TM. I. 5. E. Ones—s. RO. III. Between. Prep. VI. 3. —themselves. [Privately] adv. TM. V. 4. —Both. [Middle.] SP. III. 3. [Indifferent.] Bever. [Refection] Pr. I. 1. A. Beast, [Castor] Hat, [Head (vest) of Fur of Bever.] Armour, [For-head (Armor] Beverage. Pr. II. 6. A. Bevy. [Aggreg.] Bewail. [for-grief (sign] sp. with Exclaiming.] Beware. [adj. a Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2. [a. Aversation] AS. V. 4. O. Bewitch. RJ. III. 1. Bewray. [Shew] TA. I. 8. [Manifest] TA. I. 9. Beyond. Prep. VI 2. O. [Superior] TM. I. 5. E. Bezoar. [Contra-poison] sp. Stone of the Persian Goat.] By. the—[Digression] D. V. 9. A. Adjective. [adj. Digression] D. V. 9. A. [adj. Accessory.] TM. IV. 9. O. —word, [accessary (thing) of common discourse] sp. with contempt.] [not. adj. Principal.] Pertinent.] Public.] Ordinary.] Preposition. Efficient. Pre. I. 2. Instrument. Pre. I. 1. A. End. —reason of. Pre. I. 2. A. Local Temporal [before] —God. [at] come— [obtein] TA. V. 1. [in] —day. [through] [beside] [Adverb] Local [nigh.] Temporal [nigh.] —and— Nearly after.] adv. future (dim.] Manner. — the by Adverb [by the by (1) [Digression] — great Adverb [by g. (1.) [Ag∣gregate.] — retail Adverb [by r. (1) [Se∣gregate.] — it self Adverb [by it s. (1) [So∣litary.] Segregation. — course [c (Segr.] — the day [d (Segr.] — degrees [d (Segr.] — turns [ (Segr.] Day — day [d. (Segr.] House — house [h. (Segr.] Year — year [y. (Segr.] Bib. a— [Child's breast (vest] to— [Drink, AC. II. 2. A. (freq.] Bible, [Book of Scripture.] Bicker. [a. Fight, RM▪ I. 7. (dim.] [a. Contention. Man. IV. 3. D. Bid. [Command] RO. V. 1. Invite [Intreat to come.] —Banes publish b. fut.] —Festival publish f. fut.] —Battel [Offer b.] —Defiance [Offer d.] —Money [Offer m.] —Prayer, [Exhort to together-pray.] —Price. RC. VI. 2. Biennial. During 2 years] Returning 2 years] Big. [Great] TM. I. 1. E. —with Child, [adj. p. Great through having been im∣pregnated.] to look— [to look angrily.] AS. V. 8. proudly.] Man. V. 2. O. Bigamy, [Having together-two Marrieds.] Biggin, [adj. Linnen Head (vest.] Bilberry. Sh. II. 2. Bile. S. III. 3. A. Bill. —of Bird, [Beak.] PP. V. 4 Hook, [Cutting-hook.] Scroll, [Lamin of Paper.] [Catalogue] TM. III. 7. A. [Accusation, &c.] RJ. II. 3. [Obligation.] RC. VI. 5. —of Exchange, [Bill for Exch.] RC. V. A. Billet. —of Paper, [adj. Paper (La∣min.] Appointment for Lodging] —of Wood, [Stick (aug.) sp. for Fuel.] Billow, [Wave.] W. IV. 1. E. Bin. [Box, Pr. V. 2.
sp. for Bread.] Binde. [Ty] O. II. 1. [a. Bonds] RJ. VI. 4. A. make Costive [a. binding] Mo. IV. O, [Oblige] v. RC. VI. —by Script. RC. VI. 5. —a Book, [a. Mechanic—] Bindweed. HS. VII. 6. Sea— HL. VI. 13. A. black— HF. I. 3. A. prickly— HS. IX. 7. Biographer, [a. History (person) of Lives.] Bipartite, [divided into two parts.] Birch. Tr. VI. 7. Bird. Bi. —lime, [Viscous (thing) for taking Birds.] —'s-Cherry. Sh. II. 8. —'s-Ey. HS. VIII. 2. A. —'s-Foot. HS. III. 9. —'s-nest. HL. V. 7. HF. V. 6. A. Birt, [Turbut.] Fi. V. 2. Birth. Extraction, [p. Progenitor.] RO. I. 1. Nativity, [p. Parturition.] AC. I. 3. Bearing, [a. Parturition.] that is born, [adj. p. Parturiti∣on.] AC. I. 3. after— [Secundine] PP. VI. 7. A. —wort. AS. VIII. 5. Bishop. RE. II. 4. A. —'s-weed. HF. V. 4. A. Bisket. [Bread bak'd for duration] [dried, Bread (Lamin) Bismute. Met. III. 3. Bisons, [Bull (kind) having a bunch on the back] Bissextile, [Excedent fourth year.] Bistort. [Snakeweed] HL. VII. 3. Bit. [piece] from-broken (part)] —of Bridle, [Horse-restrein∣ing (Armament)] Bitch, [Dog. Be. III. 1. (em.] Biting. as with Teeth, [a. Tooth.] —in, [un-speak (endea∣vour.] as in Tast or Smell [a. Acri∣monious] Bitter. —in Taste. Q. IV. 3. O. [Austere] Man. VI. 8 O. Doleful, [adj. a. Grief, AS. V. 3. O. (cause] Bittour. Bi. VIII. 5. Brasileen— Bi. VIII. 5. A. Bitumen. St. V. 8. Blab. [adj. a. Loquacity] Man. IV. 5. O. Black. Q. II. 1. D. —art, [Witchcraft.] RJ. III. 1. —berry, [Berry of Bramble.] —bird. Bi. III. 6. —and blew, [Blew Black.] as Bruise (sign) Bladder. PG. VI. 7. A. swimming— PP. IV. 5. —nut. Tr. IV. 7. A. Blade, [Lamin.) Mag. V. 4. —of Plant, [Leaf] PP. II. 5. A. One— HM. VI. 22. Twy— HM. VI. 22. A. —of Shoulder, [Flat bone of Shoulder.] to—it [a. Riotousness.] Blain [Boil] S. III. 3. A. —worm Blame, [Impute fault.] —less, [Innocent.] RJ. II. 6. Blanch, [a. White.] Q. II. 1. E. Blandishment, [a. Fawning.] Man. IV. 7. E. Blank. [White.] Q. II. 1. E. [not upon-written] AC. III. 7. a— to— [a. Mute.] AC. III. 1. O. Blanket. [woollen Covering (thing.] Bed (vest.] Blaspheme. [Speak Evil of God.] Injury of Prin∣ces.] Blast. [Decay. NP. IV. 4. O. (make.] Vapor. El. VI. 5. [Blowing. Mo. III. 3. (impe∣tus.] [Wind. El. II. 4. (impe∣tus.] Blatta foetida. In. III. 4. A. Blaze. [a. Flame.] El. I. 1. [adj. a. Public.] TM. V. 4. Blazing-star, [Comet] El. I. 2. Blazon. [adj. a. Public (make] [a. Description adj. Degree (sign] Blea, [Bleak] Fi. IX. 10. A. Bleach, [open to the Wind. Sun. sp. for white (make] Bleak. [Piercing Cold] Fish. F. IX. 10. A. Bleared, [Diseased by Inflamma∣tion of the Membranes.] Bleat. a. Sheep (voice.] Goat (voice.] Bleed. [a. Bloud] PG. I. 5. Phlebotomy. Mo. IV. 6. Blemish, [a. Spotted.] Q. I. 5. O. Blend, [Mix] T. III. 8. O. Blenn. Fi. III. 14. Blessedness, [Happiness.] Ha. I. 1. Blessing. AS. I. 3. Blew. Q. II. 3. A. —bottle. HF. III. 2. Blight. Vapor, El. VI. 5. Decay, NP. V. 4. O. Blind. NP. I. 1. O. a— [False pretence] Blink. [Dim] Q. I. 3. O. [Tremble with the Eye-lids] Bliss, [Happiness.] Ha. I. 1. Blissom, [a. Lust.] sp. of Sheep.] Blister. Mo. IV. 7. Blite. HF. I. 15. Blitheness, [Mirth.] AS. V. 3. Block. [Stock] PP. I. 2. —of Wood, [Thick piece—] —head, [Dull] Ha. III. 1. O. —house, RM. VI. 2. A. to—up, [Besiege. RM. I. 4. re∣motely.] Blood, vide Bloud. Bloom, [Flower.] PP. II. 1. Blossom, [Flower.] PP. II. 1. Blot, [adj. a. Spot. Q I. 5, O. (thing.] —out. Destroy Writing.] Null Writing.] Blote. a. Swell with Smoke] a. Condite (dim.) with Smoke] Bloud. Proper. Red juice of perfect Animals. PG. I. 5. One of the four humors. PG. I. 6. —bound, [Dog. adj. hunt (apt) men by sent.] —shot, [Spotted with Bloud within the Tunicle.] —stone, [Cornelian.] —thirsty [adj. a. Mur∣ther. Kill. (apt] —wort. HA. II. 10. let— a. Mo. IV. 6. [Descendent (kinde] [Consanguinity] RO. I. of the whole [adj. Con∣sang. by both Parents.] of the half- [adj. Con∣sang. by one Parent.] [Murther] RJ. III. 4. Bloudy Flix. [Dysentery] S. VI. 6. A. Blow a— [Stroke] Mo. VI. 4. [Knock] Mo. VI. 4. A. to— [a. Breath] Mo. III. 3. [a. Winde] —an Horn, [a. Sound.] Q. III (make] —one's Nose. Mo. IV. 4. A. [a. Flower] PP. II. 1. Blubber. Fish. Ex. IX. 5. [Fat of Whale.] to— [wet with weeping] Blunder.
[adj. Unskilful] Ha. VI. 3. [adj. Stumble. Mo. II. 3. A, (freq.] [Confused (make] Blunt. [Dull] NP. IV. 2. O. [Rustic.] Man. IV. 9. D. [not-adj. a. Cutt (apt.) [Obtuse.] Blur. [a. Spot. Q. I. 5. O. (freq.] Blush. AC. IV. 9. at first- appearance.] p. See.] Bluster, [a. Winde violently.] Boar, vid. Bore. Boord. Plank, [adj. Wood (Lamin.] Entertainment, [v. Hoste.] RO IV. 5. —er, [Guest.] RO. IV. 5. O. to—a Ship, [into-goe.] sp. by Storm. Boast. [Glorying] AS. VI. 1. O. [Oversaying] Man. IV. 1. E. Boat. RN. I. 1. —Swain, RN. V. 6. Bob. [Strike (dim.) with hand. [Mock (dim.) Bode [before Shew] Sign] Body. Op. to Spirit. W. I. O. [Solid] Mag. I. 4. Op. to Head. PG. III. O. [Trunk.] PG. IV. —of Tree, [Stock] PP. I. 2. —of Army, [adj. Middle (part] Bodkin, [adj Boring (Instr.) Cone] Bog. Po. I. 9. A. Boy, [adj. Childhood (male] Boil. Pr. III. 2. a— S. III. 3. A. Boisterous, [adj. Tempest] W. VI. 7. A Fierceness] Stoutness, (corr.] Boldness. Temper, [Stoutness.] NP. IV. 6. Affection, AS. V. 8. Virtue, [Fortitude] Man. I. 7. Bole, [Lump.] TM. VI. 4. —armoniac. Bolled, [adj. Husk.] Bolster, [Bed (dim.] sp. for the Head] —up. [Bear] Mo. VI. 1. A. [Encourage] RO. VI. 2. Bolt, Bar. Po. IV. 5. prisoners— [Pin of fetters] [obtuse Arrow.] to shoot ones— [Declare ones Opinion.] thunder,— [pibble (kind] —upright, [adj. Direct.] to—Meal. [Sift, m.—through Bag.] Linnen Sive.] Bond. [Obligation] RC. VI. 5. —s. RJ. VI. 4. A. Bondage, [Slave. (abstr.] Bondman, [Slave.] RO. III. 6. O. Bone. PG. II. 1. Bone-fire, [Fire built for Joy.] adj. Festival.] Bon-grace, [Shadowing (Vest) for the Forehead.] Bonnet Low Head (vest.] Flat Head (vest.] —of Sail. RN. III. 6. A. Book. aggr. of Leaves. Pr. VI. 7. O. without— [adv. Memory] —binder, [adj. Book (Me∣chanic] —seller, [adj. Book (Mer∣chant] agg. of Chapters. D. III. 3. A. Boom. [Stick] [Pole] [Beam] [Tree] —of Sail. RN. III. 2. —on Shore, [Direct beam for flat (signe] Boon, [adj. p. Petition. (thing] Boope. Fi. V. 12. A. Boot. [adj. Leather. (vest) for Leg and Foot] [Vantage] TM. VI 2. A. what boots it? Profit?] Help?] [what doth it Profit?] Help?] Fire— Materials per∣mitted for f.] Gate— Materials per∣mitted for g.] Plough. Materials per∣mitted for p.] Booth, [Tent.] Po. II. 1. A. Booty. RM. II. 5. E. make—of, [Take for—] Borage. HA. II. 9. Borax, [Chrysocolla.] St. V. 6. A. Bord, vid. Board. Bordell, [adj. Fornication (house] Border, [Margin.] Sp. III. 4. A. Bore, [Hog. Be. II. 4. (male] to— O. IV. 3. Born, [adj. p. Parturition.] Borne, [adj. p. Bear] Borough, [Town] RC. III. 2. A. [City] RC. III. 3. A. Borrow. RC. V. 4. O. Bosom. Space betwixt Clothes and Breast.] [Space between the Dugs. Boss, [Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. Botanic, [adj. Herb (Science.] Botargo, [Condited Spawn of Mullet.] Botch. [Swoln Ulcer] [Piece unskilful∣ly joined to Mend] Fill] to— [v. Unskilfulness] Ha. VI. 3. O. Both. —this and that, [and—] —waies, [All—] Botrys. HP. VI. 12. Bots, Ex. I. 3. A. Bottle. [Pot with narrow mouth] Figure. Mag. VI. 2. —nose, [adj. Protuberance (augm.)—] —flower. HP. I. 7. blew— —of hay, [about-tied (aggr.)-] Bottom. Lowest part. Sp. III. 7. O. —of the Heart, [Inmost (part)-] [Foundation] Po. III. 4. —of Thread. Mag. VI. 7. [Ship.] Bouget, [Bag (dim.] sp. adj. Leather.] Bough [Branch] PP. I. 3: Bought, [adj. p. Buy.] Boule. Figure. Mag. VI. 6. A. [adj. Bouling (Instr.] Mo. V. 4. Bounce. Knock (Impetus) Sound (Impetus) Bound. [adj. p. Bind] [Beholding] [Beneficiary] RO. III. 8. O. [Owing thanks] [Limit] [Common, Margin] Sp. III. 4. A. [adj. End (Place.] (Thing.] (Sign.] [Motion, adj. Reflexion.] Bounty, [Liberality.] Man. III. 1. Bourn, [River (dim.) Bout, [Course.] Boutefew, [a. Contention Sedition (make.] Bow. [Bend] O. I. 7. A. [a. Crooked. Mag. III. 1. O. (make.] —outward, [a. Convex (make] —inward, [a. Concave (make] Bowe. Weapon RM. V. 4. Cross— RM. V. 4. A. Figure. Mag. V. 3. rain— El. V. 1, saddle— [Convex (part) of the Saddle.] Bowell, [Gutt.] PG. VI. 4. A. Bower. [adj. a. Shadow (thing)] [Tent of Leaves and Bran∣ches.] Ladies— Sh. II. 2. A. Virgins— HM. I. 7. A. Bowl. Mag. VI. 6. A.
to— Mo. V. 4. Bowle, [Wide Cup.] Bowline. RN. IV. 7. A. Bowsprit. RN. III. 4. Bowyer, [adj. Bow (Mechanic.] Box. Tree. Tr. III. 7. Chest. Pr. V. 2. Stroke, [Striking with flat hand.] Brabble, [Contention in words.] sp. about Contracts.] Brace. Buckle, [Together-ty.] Couple, [Together-two.] —s of a Ship. RN. IV. 4. Bracelet, [Ornament of the Wrist.] Brach, [Dog (fem.] Brachygraphy, [short-Writing (art] Bracket, [Up-bearing piece.] Brackishness. Q IV. 5. Brag. AS. VI. 1. O. Bragget, [Ale made with Spice.] Bray. [Pound] Mo. VI. 5. Voice. [a Ass Elephant &c. (voice.] Braid, [Weave with fingers.] Brail. RN. IV. 6. Brain. PG. I. 8. —pan, [Bone that conteins the Brain.] —sick. [adj. a. fancy (Excess) (Disease) [Mad, (dim) hair— [adj. Ha. IV. 1. D.] Brake. [Aggr. of Fern] HL. I. 4. [Breaking (Juga∣ment) for Flax] Hemp] Bramble. Sh. I. 1. A. Brambling. Bi. VI. 7. A. Bran, [Courser (Part) of ground Corn.] Branch. PP. I. 3. Brand. fire— [Fire wood.] Mark [Stigmatization (sign] to— [Stigmatize] RJ. VI. 6. A Brandy. Pr. II. 7. A. Brandish, [Swing.] Mo. VI. 3. Brangle, [a. Contention (voice] Brank, [Buck-wheat] HF. I. 3. Brank Vrsin. HS. VIII. 8. Brant goose, [black headed goose (kind.] Brasil. Tr. VII. 5. Brass, Met. II. 1. Bravado, [Glorying (impet.) of his a. fut. Action.] Brave. Heroic. [adj. Virtue. (aug.] Noble. [adj. Generosity.] Gawdy. [adj. Ornate, (aug.] Brawl, [a. Contention (voice.] Brawn. [hard Muscle] Fleshy (part)] [Bore's flesh soused.] Braze, [adj. p. Superficies (make) with Brass.] Brazier, [Brass (Mechanic.] Breach. vid. Break. Bread. white— [fine—] brown— [course—] sweet— [principal Glandule.] Breadth. TM. II. 2. Break, discontinue the parts, adv. impetus. Break. Proper. Mo. VI. 6. —ones neck. RJ. V. 3. A. —on the Wheel. RJ. V. 9. A. [Tear] Mo. VI. 6. A. —one's belly, [-one's peri∣tonaeum.] —one's winde [-one's dia∣phragm.] [adj. p. Asthma. (make] [Violate] TA. III. 6. O. —Covenant violate c.] —Law violate l.] —Oath violate o.] —Promise violate p.] Discontinue, [adj. p. TM. III. (make.] —Company discont. c.] —Course discont. c.] —Custom. [Reclaim] —an Horse, [un-adj. fierce (make.] [Cease] —fast, [Cease to—] —up, as Convention Ill weather &c. [Cease confusedly.] [Fail] TA. IV. 8. O. —State [Decay] —with Age Sorrow [decay with Age.] Sorrow] [Ruine] —one's heart. —one's winde, [a. Perish.] —Superficies. —out in botches. [Discont. the skin with, &c. [Wound] —one's head. [Wound the skin of—] [Plow] [Dig.] &c. —up land. [Open] —one's minde. —up a letter. [Appear] —out as Fire. Light. Sickness. [a. Impetus] —a Iest [a. Jest. (imp.] —in, [In-ition. (imp.] —open, [a. Open. (imp.] —out, [Out-ition. (imp.] —winde, [a. Wind. (imp.] —upward. Mo. IV. 2. —downward. Mo. IV. 2. A. Breakfast, [adj. Morning refe∣ction.] Bream. Fi. IX. 9. Sea— [Gilt-head] Fi. V. 1. Breast, vid. Brest. Breath. [adj. p. Respiration. Mo. III. 2. (thing.] Sucking up the— AC. IV. 6. A. [Air] [Fume] [Vapor] —ing. [Respiration.] Mo. III. 2. —sweat, [Sweat (remiss.] Breech. PG. IV. 6. —es, [Vest for the lower (part) of Trunk.] Bear's— HM. IV. 2. A. Breed. Ingender, [a. Generation.] [p. Impregnate] [Educate] RO. VI. a— [Kind] [Race] [descendent (aggreg.) (kind) Breef. Adj. [Shortness] TM. II. 1. O. [p. Epitome] D. V. 7. Subst. [Edict] [Commission] RC. IV. 4. A. Breez. Insect Gentle Wind, El. VI. 6. Brest. PG IV. 2. [Dugg] PG. IV. 2. A. —plate, [adj. Brest (armor] Bret. Fi. VII. 3. A. Breviary, [Epitome.] D. V. 7. Breviature. [Shortning] [Shrinking] Brevity, [Shortness.] TM. II. 1. O. Brew. Beer (make) Ale (make) [Mingle] T. III. 8. O. Brewes, [Lamins of Bread steep∣ed.] sp. in Fat of boiled meat.] Bribe. RJ. IV. 6. Brick. St. I. 1. A. Bride, [adj. present Marriage (fem.] —groom, [adj. pres. Marriage (male.] —maid, [Companion (fem.) of the Bridegroom.] —man, [Companion (male) of the Bride.] Bridal, [adj. Marriage Solemnity.] Bridewell, [Public. adj. Correcti∣on (house.]
Bridge. Po. II. 6. —of Lute, [Ridge supporting the Strings.] —of Nose, [Prominent Gri∣stle.] Bridle. Po. V. 9. to— [a. Cohibit.] T. II. 2. O. Brier. Sh. I. 2. A. Brigade. RM. IV. 2. Brigandine. [Coat of Male.] [Ship adj. a. Booty (apt.] Brightness. Q. I. 3. Brim [Margin.] Sp. III. 4. O. Brimstone. St. V. 4. Brine, [Salt dissolv'd.] —y taste, [Saltishness.] Q. IV. 5. Bring, [Cause to with- go. come. Bring, [with- go. (make.] come. (make.] [to- carry.] drive.] lead.] go to— [fetch.] TA. VI. 4. A. [Cause,] [Cause to be. go. come. —down. [adj. a. Low Inferior Under (make] [diminish] TM. I. 7. O. [weaken] NP. V. 7. O. —forth. [a. Parturition.] AC. I. 3. —low. [diminish] TM. I. 7. D. [decay] —to nought. [adj. p. ruine (make.] [a. destroy] AS. I. 4. O. [annihilate.] AS. I. 1. O. —to pass. [a. Cause] T. II. [a. Efficient.] T. II. 1. —under. [overcome] RM. II. 1. E. [conquer] RM. II. 7. E. —up. [begin] TA. III. 3. [educate] RO. VI. [with- go. come. —on the way. [accompany in Travel (in∣cept.] —to bed. [assist in parturition.] —word, [—Narration.] Brink, [Margin.] SP. III. 4. O. Briony. white— HS. IX. 6. black— HS. IX. 6. A. Brisk, [Sprightly.] NP. IV. 2. Bristle. PP. VI. 2. to— [a. direct (make) one's Bri∣stles.] Bristow Non-such. HS. V. 4. A. Brittleness. Q. VI. 5. D. Broach, [adj. Rosting (instr.] to— [a. un-barrel (incept.] Broad, [adj. Breadth.] speak— [Plain corr.] [pronounce Rurally] sp. opening (augm.) one's mouth.] [a. openness.] —awake, [Perfectly—] Brock, [Badger.] Be. V. 2. A. Brocket, [Hart (male) of the se∣cond year.] Broil. Pr. III. 4. A. Broils. [Contentions] Man. IV. 3. D. [Troubles] TA. V. 9. O. Broken-winded, [adj. p. Asthma.] Broker. [Substitute (Merc.] [Merchant of old things] Brooch, [Gemmed Ornament.] Brood. [Children (aggr.) [Aggregate (young) to— [a. Fotion by over-sitting] Brook, [River (dim.) —lime. HS. VI. 10. garden— HL. VIII. 3. A. to— [adj. a. Patience.] Man. I. 8. Broom. Sh. IV. 8. butchers— Sh. III. 8. thorny— Sh. IV. 2. A. —Rape. HL. V. 8. a— [Brushing (instr.] —ing. RN. VI. 2. Broth. Pr. I. 5. Brothel [Fornication (house.] Brother. RO. I. 4. half— RO. I. 4. A. —in Law, [Brother by Affi∣nity.] —hood. [Brother (abstr.] [Corporation] RC. III. 7. Brow, [Forehead.] PG. III. 6. Moving the— AC. IV. 1. O. —of an Hill. [Protuberance.] Mag. IV. 3.— Brown [Dark (dim.] [Black (dim.] Browzing. [Mastication] Mo. III. 5. sp. of Boughs.] Bruise. [Contusion] O. IV. 1. A. Hurt. S. I. 1. A. Brunt, [Impetus.] T. VI. 6. A. Brush. [Branch. PP. I. 3. (dim.] instrument. [Brushing (instr.) clothes.] [Painting (instr.] to— O. V. 9. Brute. [Animal] W. V. 3. [Rumor] D. V. 3. Brutish. [adj. Beast (like] [adj. Irrational] Bubble. El. III. 1. A. Buccinum. Ex. VII. 5. Buck. [Deer] Be. II. 4. sp. adult (Male.] —of Clothes. [Clothes (aggr.) for wash∣ing by Lixiviation.] —for fishing, [adj. take (mach.] of Fish.] —s horne. HL. VIII. 2. A. —s thorne. Sh. I. 7. —mast, [Mast of Beech.] —weed. —wheat. HA. V. 5. A. Bucket. [Tub, adj. p. carry (apt) by handle.] Buckle. Pr. IV. . A. Buckler. RM. V. 9. Buckram, [Canvas stiffened.] Bucksom, [adj. Vigor face (man∣ner.] Bud, [Sprout.] PP. II. 5. Budge. to— [Move (dim.] Budget [Bag (dim] sp. adj Leather] Buff, [adj. Leather (Arms.] sp. of Buffals Skin limber.] Buffal, [Bull. (kind) having flat rugged horns.] Buffet, [Strike with hand toge∣ther-folded.] Buffoon, [adj. Scurrility (person.] Bug. In. II. 1. A. Bugbear, [adj. a. Fear, (apt.) adj. Fiction (thing.] Buggery. RJ. III. 5. A. Bugle. [adj. Glass-bead] [Horn (dim.) for sounding] Herb. HF. VII. 16. A. Bugloss. HL. IX. 1. A. Vipers— HL. IX. 2. A. Wall— Buying. RC. V. 3. O. Build. —ing. Po. II. Greater parts of— Po. III. Lesser parts of— Po IV. —upon, [Be confident of.] Bul, vid. Bull. Bulbocastanon.   Bulbonach. HS. VI. 2. Bulbous, HL. IV. Bulfinch. Bi. IV. 3. Bulge, [Mar. by in-crushing.] Bulk [Massiness] [Solid] Mag. I. 4. [Total] TM. VI. [Aggregate] TM. III. 6. O. Bull. [Beast, Be. II. 1. (male▪] Writing, [Edict.] RC. IV. 3. O. sp. of Pope.] —Beetle. Ex. V. 2. A. —finch. Bi. IV. 5. —head▪ [Miller's thumb.] Fi▪ IX. 12.
—rush, [Great (kind) rush.] Bullace, [Plum of Black-thorn.] Bullet. RM. V. 8. Bullion Gold not-coin'd] Silver not-coin'd] Bullock, [Bull, Be. II. 1. (dim.] Bulwark, [Rampier] RM. VI. 3. Bumbast. [adj. Cotton stuffing (thing] [not-necessary (thing) in∣thrusted.] [affected words] Bunch. [Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. [Cluster] PP. II. 4. [Aggregate] adj. TM. III. 6. O. (thing.] sp. together-tied.] Bundle, [adj. aggregate. TM. III. 6. O. (thing.] sp. together-tied.] Bung. [Upper Orifice of the Barrel] sp. for Infusion.] Bungling, [Unskilfulness.] Ha. VI. 3. O. Bunting. Bi. IV. 1. Bunt-line. RN. IV. 6. A. Buoy. Figure. Mag. VI. 5. [Anchor, (sign) Bur. [Principal Gandule] —of the Ear, [Lower Protube∣rance—] —of Dock, [Ear] PP. II. 4. A. Butter— HL. VI. 1. A. —reed. HL. III. 15. A. Great— HL. VI. 2. Little— HL. VI. 2. A. Burden. —of a Song, [Repeated verse] Load, Po. V. A. to— [adj. a. Heavy (make) upon, &c.] Burgeon, [Sprout] PP. II. 5. Burgess Magistrate of a Town.] Free-man of a Town.] Burglary. RJ. III. 8. A. Bury. RE. IV. 8. —alive. RJ. V. 6. A. Burl, [Pick the knots and motes out of Cloth.] Burlesque. [Facetious imitation (corr.] [Mocking imitation of Poem.] Burly. [adj. Ample.] Sp. II. 5. [adj. Fat. (augm.] Burnet. HF. VIII 4. Thorny— Sh. III. 1. A. Burning. Proper, [adj. a. Fire.] El. 1. house— RJ. III. 7. —alive. RJ. V. 7. A. —in the hand, [Stigmat.] RJ. VI. 6.— —Lance, [Dart] El. I. 4. A. [Improper] [Rosting (Exc.] —Fever. S. II. 1. Sun— [adj. p. Colouring (corr.) by the Sun.] Burnish Smooth by rubbing] Brighten by rubbing] Burrage. HL. IX. 1. Burrow, [Hole in the Earth.] Cony— [Cony's (house.] Burser, (adj. disbursing (off.] Burst, vid. Break. —Cow, [Blain-worm.] Burstenness, [hernia.] Burt. [Turbut.] Fi. V. 2. Bush Shrubs (aggr.] Hairs (aggr.] Silver— Sh. VI. 6. A. Bushel [8 Gallons.] Busie. [adj. a. Business] [adj. a. Double diligence] Ha. IV. 5. E. —body, [adj. a. Diligence (corr.] Business. Employment, TA. III. [adj. a. Troubling (thing] Busk, Lamin for Woman's breast (vest.] Buskin, [Vest until middle of Leg.] Bustard. Bi. II. 4. But. Conjunction. but. Conj. II. 1. O. —[indeed] Conj. II. 1. as, but lately, &c. —[onely] Adv. IV. 1. O. —that, [unless.] Conj. I. 3. O. —yet. [notwithstanding] Conj. II. 2. O. Preposition. [beside] Prep. IV. 3. O. a— [thick extremity] sp. of Stock.] [Barrel (augm.] [measure] [Mark] [Bank at-adj. p. shoot (apt.] [Sign, adj. p. aim (apt.] to— [knock thrusting] sp. with Forehead.] Butcher, [Butchering (Mecha∣nic.] —ing. Pr. III. 1. —bird. Bi. I. 3. A. —'s broom. Sh. IV. 5. A. Butler, [adj. Provisions (Officer] for adj. p. drink (thing.] Butter. Pr. I. 3. —milk, [Milk after Butter (make.] —fly. Ex. IV. 9. Hawke— Ex. IV. 10. —bur. HL. VI. 1. A. —wort. HL. VI. Buttery, [adj. Drinking (room.] Buttock. PG. IV. 8. Button. Mag. VI. 2. —hole. Mag. V. 2. A. —Fish. Ex. VIII, 2. Batchelour's— [Campion] HS. V. 2. Buttress. Po, III. 7. A. Butwin.   Buz, [a. Bee (voice.] Buzzard, [ite] Bi. I. 2. A. bald— [White-headed—] C CAbala, [Tradition.] RE. VI. 1. A. Cabbage. HS. IV. 6. —Tree. Tr. VII. 8. Cabbin, [Chamber (dim.] sp. in a Ship.] Cabinet. [Box for precious most esteem∣ed things] Cable. RN. IV. 8. Cacao. [Chocolate] Tr. IV. 7. Cackle, [a. Hen (voice.] Cacochymia. S. I. 3. A. Cade. [Lamb educated in house.] Cadence, [adj. Concluding Sound.] Cadet, [Dependent.] Cadew. Ex. III. 4. A. Cage. [Imprisonment (room.] sp. for Birds.] Cayman [Crocodile] Be. VI. 3. Cajole. [perswade by Craft.] Flattering.] Caitiff. Wicked (augm.) Miserable (augm.) Cake, [Flat bread.] Calaminaris. St. II. 7. A. Calamint. HF. VII. 2. A. Calamity, [Misery.] Calcine. O. VI. 8. Calculate, [Reckon.] TA. IV. 6. Calendar, [adj. Year-book of Series of daies of every month.] Calender, [a. smoothness] sp. of Cloth. a— [adj. calendring (mech.] Calends, [First day of the month.] Calenture, [Feaver (augm.] Calf, Beast. [Bull, Be. II. 1. (young.] —'s snout [Snap-dragon.] HS. VIII. 6. [Hart (male) of the first year.] Sea— [Seal.] Be. V. 3. A. —of the Leg. [Protuberance behind the Leg.] [Hinder Muscles of the Leg.] Calif. [Successor of Mahomet.] Calk. RN. VI. 1.
Call. [a. Voice] [a. Name] [Summon] —to mind, [re-a. memory.] —to witness, [a. Witness (make.] —in, [un-public] [a. annihilation] —upon, [Invocate.] —ing,] Profession.] Callous. [Hard skin.] Muscle.] Callow. [Downy] [not-feathered] Calm. El. VI. 6. A. [adj. Peaceableness] [adj. Meekness] Calo. RM. III. 8. A. Caltrops. Iron (instr.) having four points most distant from each other. land— HS. III. 9 A. water— HL. VII. 8. A. Calumny. RJ. IV. 7. Cambuge, [Concrete juice pur∣gative.] Camel. Be. I. 3. —'s Hay. HL. III. 11. A. Camelopard, [Giraffa.] Be. II. 7. Camerade. [adj. Chamber Companion] Cammock, [Rest-harrow.] HS. III. 14. Camomil. HF. II. 8. Camp. RM. VI. 1. —master, [adj. Camp. (Of∣ficer.] Campania, [Plain.] [Summers war.] Camphire, Tree. Tr. VIII. 6. Gum. [Gum of Camphire tree. Campion. HS. III. 2. Can. Active. [adj. Potentialness] [adj. Natural Power] [adj. Power.] Pass. [adj. Possibility.] [May] Mod. I. 1. a— [Footless Cup] Canary. —bird. Bi. IV. 6. A. —grass. HL III. 1. —wine, [Wine of the Cana∣ries.] Cancel. [a. Annihilation] [a. Spoil] [un—] Cancer. Ulcer. S. III. 4. Constellation, [Star (aggr.) call'd the Crab.] Sign [the fourth of the twelve parts of the Zodiac.] tropic of— W▪ VI. 5. Cancer Majus. Ex. VI. 7. Candy, [Condite with Sugar.] —Alexander. HF. IV. 13. Candid. [adj. Candor.] Candidate. RC. I. 4. A. Candle. Pr. VI. 3. —stick, [Supporting (vess.) for Candle.] Candor. Man. I. 3. Cane. HL. III. 13. Canel. —bone, [Bone next to the Weasand.] —tree, [Cinamon] Tr. VIII. 8. Canibal, [adj. Eating (person) of men.] Canis. —major, [Stars (aggr) called Greater Dog.] —minor, [Stars (aggr.) called Lesser Dog.] Canker. [Vlcer,] sp. within the mouth.] [Rust] Met. IV. 5. sp. of Brass.] Worm, [Caterpiller.] Cankered, [adj. p Canker.] —stomach. [Old Wrath] Hatred.] Cannibal, [adj. Eating (person) of men.] Canons. —of breeches, &c. [Hollow Cylinders—] —of a Cathedral, [Assessors of the Bishop.] Rules, [adj. RE. Laws.] [Ordnance] RM. VI. 5. A. Canonize. Make one a Saint] Sentence one a Saint] Declare one a Saint] Canoo, [Boat of one Tree.] Canopy, [over-adj. Head.] adj. Shadowing Covering (thing.] Canorous, [adj. a. Sing. (apt.] Cantharides. Ex. V. 9. Cantharus. Fi. V. 2. Canticle, [adj. p. Sing (thing.] sp. Little, &c. Cantle, [Fragment.] TM. VI. 5. A. Canto, [Treble (part) of a Song.] Cantonize, [Divide into little Governments.] Canvas, [Linnen of Hemp.] —ing. a. Suter for suffrages.] Contend for suffrages.] [Examin (augm.] Cap. [adj Head (vest] sp. Congruous to the Head] —case, [Box (dim] to— [un-vest the Head.] [Wooden (jug.) fastning Top-mast to the Mast] Flag-staff to the Mast] —a pe, [from head to foot.] —Verses, [Play at repeating Verses.] Capable. [adj. a. Receive (pot.] [adj. Subject (pot] [adj. Passion (pot] Capacity. Subject (pot.] Receive (pot.] Passion (pot.] Caparison, [adj. Ornat. (armam.) of Saddle.] Cape. —of Cloke, [adj. p. fold (Lamin.] [Promontory] W. III. 4. —Merchant. RN. V. 5. Caer. [Leap] sp. with trembling (like) of the Leggs.] Fruit. Sh. IV. 2. Ship. [Private man of War] [Ship praedatory.] Capital. [adj. Head.] [adj. a. Dy (apt.] crime, [cr. punishable with dying (make] [Cheef] TM. IV. 4. Capitulate, [Treat about Condi∣tions.] Capon., [un-testicled Cock.] Capra saltans. El. I. 5 Caprichious, [Fantastic] (corr. Capricorn, [Tenth of the 12 parts of the Zodiac▪] tropic of— W. VI. 5. Capriscus. Fi. IV. 9. Capstain. RN. II. 3. Captain. —of Foot, [adj. Company (Officer.] —of Horse, [adj. Troop (Offi.] —of a Ship. RN. V. 1. Captious. [Censorious] [prone to be displeased dispute quarrel Captivate. RM. II. 6. E. Captive, [adj. p. Captivate (person.] Caput Mort [Sediment remaining of distilled (thing] Car, [Cart.] Caract, [Eighteenth part of a Dram.] Caraguia. Be. V. 6. Caramosel. RN. I. 4. Caranna. Tr. VIII. 5. Caravan, [Travelling (aggr.) of Merchants.] Caravel, [Ship (augm.] Caraway. HF. V. 7. Carbine, [Gun (augm.) of Horseman.] Carbonado, [Broil'd adj. p. flash∣ing] Pr. III. 5. Carbuncle. Sore. S. III. 4. A.
Gem, [Ruby (augm.] Card playing— [adj. Card. Mo. V. 2. (Instr.] playing at—s [Mo. V. 2. Geographic— [Description by picture.] to—wool. [Un-intangle by Comb] O. V. 9. A. [Prepare for Spinning by Combing] Cardamom.   Cardialgia. S. VI. 1. Cardinal, [Principal.] Chief, [Clergy of Rome] —points, [East, West, North, and South.] Care, [Thinking (augm.] Carefulness. [Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2. sp. with Trouble.] Affliction.] [Diligence] Carelesness. [Heedlesness] Ha. IV. 2. D. [Sloth] Caressing, [a. Seem. (sign) love (augm] Cargo, [Catalogue of Ships mer∣chandize.] Carine. RN. VI. 4. Cark. Ha. IV. 2. E. Carkanet, [Jewel (aggr.) Carkass, [Dead body.] of a Fowl, [Trunk.] Carnal. [adj. Flesh] [Natural] [Worldly] [adj. Lust] [Ungracious] Carnation, [adj. Flesh-colour.] Carnosity, [Flesh abstr.] a— [Excrescence, adj. Flesh.] Carob. Tr. VI. 1. Caroll, [Joyful Song.] Carowse [Drink (aug.] Carp. Fi. IX. 7. to— [Calumniate words] [Except contentiously.] Carpenter. [adj. House faber] [adj. Wood (Mechanic.] Carpet. [Wool∣en Ornament Vest for Table.] Carract, [Eighteenth part of a Dram.] Carraway. HF. V. 7. Carreer, [Running (imp.] Carrot. HF. V. 6. wilde. HF. V. 6. A. Carry. Go supporting. Mo. VI. 1. er.— RC. II. 8. A. Instruments for—ing. Po. V. [a. Demeanour] [a. Converse] [Support] Mo. VI. 1. A. Carriage. [adj. p. Carry (thing) [adj. a. Carry (manner) [Demeanour] AC. V. [Converse] Man. A. Carrick. RN. I. 4. Carrion. [Dead body] sp. putrid.] [Lean (augm.] Cart. Po. V. II. A. welsh— Po. V. 4. A. Cartilage, [Gristle.] PG. II. 1. A. Carve. O. IV. 6. —meat. Unjoint the Limbs.] Segregate the Limbs.] Distribute the Limbs.] Carvel.   Case. Condition of dubitable Event [Condition] T. II. 4. [State.] T. VI. 4. [Doubtful (thing] [Question] [adj. p. Doubt Question (thing] [State▪ sp. of Question.] —of Conscience, [Moral Que∣stion] in Law. [Questionable Action (kinde.] [Cause of Suit] [Supposition] D. VI. 3. in— [If] in no— [Not redupl.] put— [imp. Suppose.] [Event] TA. V. [sp. Doubtful Supposed Vessel. Pr. V. 1. A. —of a word. Obliquity of termina∣tion.] Change of termina∣tion.] Casement, [Door of Window.] Cash, [Present Mony.] —keeper, [Private Mony (Of∣ficer.] Cashire. [un-a. Souldier (make) pe∣nally.] [a. Incapacitating] sp. a. Souldier.] Cask, [Vessel] Pr. V. sp. Barrel.] Pr. V. 3. Casket. [Vessel (dim.] [Box for precious (things.] Cassaware. Bi. II. 9. A. Cassia. Tr. VI. 2. Shrub— Sh. II. 11. A. Cassidony. HF. VI. 5. A. Cassock, [Upper close (vest.] Cast. adj. p. Motion (make.) sp. Impetuously. & sp. from the Contiguity p. Support Capacity. of its mo∣ver. throwing, Mo. VI. 2. as Metal. O. IV. 5. A. as Guilty, [Condemn.] as Nauseous, [Vomit] —about. Think AS. II. 1. Consider AS. III. 1. Contrive AS. III. 7. —away. vid.—off. —down, [down-cast.] Sorrowful (make.] Despondent (make.] —in ones mind, vid.—about. —in ones teeth, [Upraid.] RJ. IV. 8. A. —into form a. Form sp. by casting.] a. Figure sp. by casting.] —into Sleep, [adj. a. Sleeping (make.] —off. [a. Reject] AS. .V. 5. O. [a. Abdicate] TA. I. 3. O. [a. Abandon] TA. II. 2. O. [a. Dereliction] AS. I 5. O. —up. —into heap, [a. Heap,] —into sum, [a. Sum.] —clothes, [not-fut. used cl.] —dice, [a. Dice] —lots, [a. Lots] —skin. [adj. a. Let go. Ta. I. 6. O—] [adj. a. Change. TA. II. 6. O—] —water. [a. Inquisition. RJ. II, 2.—] [a. Try. RJ. II. 4. A.—] —Young, [a. Abortion.] Castle. Po. II. 2. A. Castor. Be. IV. 8. Castrate, [Un- adj. a. testicle (make.] Castrel, vid. Kestrel. Casual, [adj. Fortune. AS. I. 2. D.] Casuist. [Teacher of moral Doctrine.] [Solver of moral Doubts] Cat. Be. IV. 4. Civet— Be. IV. 4. A. —mint, —s-tail. HL. II. 3. A.. Catalogue. TM. III. 7. A. Catamite, [adj. p. Sodomy (per∣son.] Cataplasm [Plaster.] Pro. VI. 4. A. Cataract, [Direct fall of River.] —in the eye, [Opacous (thing) in the water of the Eye.] Catarrh. S. IV. 4. Catastrophe, [adj. a. Altering Conclusion.] sp. Altering to worse.] Catch. [adj. p. Rest (make) sp. Impetuously. & sp. in its Comprehension. Catch, Mo. VI. 2. O. [Arrest] RJ. II. 1. A. —poll, [Arresting (Officer] [Pursevant] RJ. I. 6. [Obtain] as Fire, [a. Fire (imp.] as Infection, [p. Contagi∣on.] [Take] TA. I. 4.
—at. desire to get] endeavour to take] offer to Catch] [Overtake] TA. VI. 6. A. —fly. HS. V. 2. A. Cate. [Pr. II. (thing] Catechizing. RE. IV. 3. A. Category, [Predicament.] TA. Categorical, [absolute.] Cater, [Buy provisions.] Caterpiller. Ex. III. 6. Flower, HS. III. 12. A. Cathedral, [Temple of Bishop's (place.] Catholic. RE. III. 2. Catmint. HF. VII. 1. A. Cattel, [Beasts] sp. Cloven footed.] Cavalry. [Horsemen (kind (aggreg. Candle, [Broth of Egg, Wine, &c.] Cave, [Cavity in the Earth.) [Under-ground Room] House] Hole (aug.] Caveare, [Condited spawn of Sturgeons.] Caveat, [Caution (sign.] Cavern, vid. Cave. Caught, [adj. p. Catch.] Cavill. Objection Contentious] (corr.] Dispute Contentious] (corr.] Cavity, [Hollowness.] Mag. VI. 1. E. Caul. PG. VI. 6. A. —for the head, [adj. Net (fi∣gure) head (vest.] Cauldron, [Kettle (aug.] Cause. Proper. T. II. [Efficient] T. II. 1. [Impulsive] T. II. 2. [Occasion] T. II. 4. [End] T. II. 6. In discourse. [Reason] [adj a. Argumentation (thing] In Law. [Cause of Suit] [Suit] RJ. II. A. [Proceeding] RJ. II. Causey. [Factitious way] [Way pav'd with Stones] Causti a. Burning Medi∣cine.] a. Corroding Medi∣cine.] Cautelousness, [Heedfulness.] Ha. IV. 2. Cauterizing, [Stigmatize.] RJ. VI. 6. A. Caution [a Heedfulness.] —money, [Stipulatory-money before-paid.] Cautiousness, [Heedfulness.] Ha. IV. 2. Ceas Discontinue.] Desist.] Cecily, vid. Ciceley. Cedar. Tr. V. 4. Cell, [Room (dim.] [Regular's (oom] Celandine. HS IV. 10. A. Celebrate, [a. Solemnity] Celebs. RO. II. 1. Celerity. [Swiftness] NP. V. 9. [Dispatch] TA. III. 5. Celestial, [adj. Heaven.] W. II. Celibate, [Celebs (abstr.] Cellar, [adj. Store (room) for adj. p. Drink (thing.] Cement, [Glue of Stones.] Censer, [adj. Burning (vessel) of Incense.] Censor, [Judge] sp. of man∣ners.] Censorious. Man. I. 3. O. Censure, [a.— Judge.] Sentence.] —ecclesiastic. RE. V. 3. Centaur, [adj. Fiction Horse∣man.] Center. Mag. II. 1. Center-fish. Ex. VIII. 1. A. Centon. [adj. aggregate (thing) of divers fragments] Centry. Greater— HF. III. 3 A. Lesser— HS. V. 5. Century. 100. Centurion, [adj. Company (Of∣ficer.] Cerecloth, [Plaster'd cloth.] Ceremony, [Circumstance] sp. solemn.] Certain. [Sure] adj. AS. II. 6. —ly. Adv. I. 2. O. [Manifest] [Some] Pron. II. 3. Certainty. AS. II. 6. Certifie. [adj. Certainty (make] [adj. a. Know (make] Ceruse. Met. IV. 5. A. Cess [tax] sp. according to-his propor∣tion] Cessation Discontinue. Desist. Chas Recrement of winnow∣ed Grain Husks of winnow∣ed Grain Chafe. [Heat by rubbing.] [Ruo] O. V. 8. [Heat] Q. V. 1. E. —ing-dish, [adj. Table (ves∣sel) for Fire.] Stomach, [adj. Angry (aug.] Chafer. [Bay Scarab] Goat— Ex. V. 3. Green— Ex. V. 5. A. Chaffer. [Treat concerning the Price] [Exchange] Chaffinch. Bi. IV. 7. Chain, [Cord of Loops for Binding.] Ornament.] Chair. Po. VI. 6. Chalcedony. St. V. 6. Chalcis. Fi. III. 12. A. Chaldron, [36. Bushels.] Chalenge. [Claim] [Provoke] [Accuse] Chalice, [Footed drinking (ves∣sel.] Chalk. St. VI. 1. Chama. Ex. VIII. 6. Chamaecyparissus.   Chamber, [Room] sp. Sleeping (room] Chamberlein. [adj. Chamber (Off.] [adj. City mony (Off.] Chameleon. Be. VI. 4. A. Chamfer, [Gutter (freq.) Chamomil. HF. II. 8. Champ, [Mastication] Champain, [Plain.] W. III. 1. E. Champion, [Instead-fighting (person.] Chance, [Fortune.] Chancel, [Chief adj. Temple (Room.] Chancellor, [Judge of Equity.] Chancery, [Court of Equity.] Chandler, [Candle (Mech. (Merch. Chanel. W. IV. 5. A. Change. [Alter] TA. I. 1. O. Mutation, TA. II. 6. A. —of the Moon. [Time when the Moon ends one Course, and begins ano∣ther] [Exchange] Changeable. Mutable, [adj. Change (apt.] Of divers Colours. Q. II. 5. A. Changeling. [Instead-put] [Idiot] Channa. Fi. V. 11. A. Chant, [Sing.] Chanter, [Chief Singer.] Chantry, [Ecclesiastical singing (place.] Chaos, [Unformed matter.] Chap. [Chink] Mag. V. 4. O. —of mouth. [Jaw] sp. Bone of it.] Chape, [End (arm.) of the Swords case.] Chaplain Domestic Presby∣ter.] Private Presby∣ter.] Chaplet, [Wreath of Flowers for the head.] Chapman, [adj. a. Buying (per∣son.] Chappel, [Temple (dim. accessory. Chapter. —of book. D. III. 3. —of Cathedral. [Bishop's Assessors (aggr.] [Their Convention]
[And Convention-house.] —of Pillar, [Top of Co∣lumn.] Character. D. I. 1. A. [Description] Charcole, [Cole made by chark∣ing.] Chare, [Business (dim.] [Instead-business] Charge, Proper [Load] Po. V. A. —a Gun. [adj. p. Ammunition (make] In Oeconomic. [Command] In Civil sense. [Trust] have—of, Be intrusted with. [Office] Cost, [Expence] In Judicial. [Accuse] Lay to one's— [a. Accu∣ser.] In Military. [Assault] Charger, [Dish (aug.) for Escu∣lents.] Chary. [adj. Indulgence] [Heedful for] [Loth that it should suffer] Chariot. Po. V. 2. Charity. Ha. V. 6. Chark. O. VI. 7. Charleswain, [Stars (aggr.) cal∣led, &c.] Charlock. HS. IV. 9. A. Charm Witch with words. Wizard with words. Charnel, [Room for dead bo∣dies.] Charr. Fi. IX. 3. A. Charring. O. VI. 7. Charter, [Patent] sp. For grant of Privilege] Chase. [Treey Country] sp. for Deer. [Forrest] Po. I. 2. A. to— [Hunt] [Drive] [Persue] Chasm, [Emptiness.] —in the Skie. El. V. 5. Chast, [adj. Chastity.] —ree▪ Sh. V. 1. Chastise, [Correct.] Chatt, [Loquacity.] Chattels, [Goods not inherita∣ble.] Chatter. with ones Tongue. as Birds. a. Swallow voice] a. Pie voice] [Prate] with ones Teeth. [Tremble—] sp. with Sound (aug.] Cheap. [adj. Price Value (dim.] [Sorry] TM. I. 4. D. Cheapen, [Treat concerning the price.] Cheat, [Fraud.] Check. [Interrupt Motion] [Hinder] [Cohibit] [Reprove] Checker, vid. Exchequer. —'d with Colours. Q. II. 7. Cheef, [Principal.] Cheek. PG. III. 7. [Side] Sp. III. 4. Cheer. Diet, [Quantity of Food.] [Face (manner] to— [Encourage] [Merry (make.] [Cheerful (make.] Cheerfulness, [Alacrity.] Ha. IV. 3. Cheese. Pro. I. 3. A. Cheeslip, [Sow.] Ex. II. 9. Cheesrunning [Ladies bedstraw] HL. IX. 6. A. Cherish. [a. Fotion] AC. I. 4. [Preserve indulgently] Cherry. Tr. II. 3. Birds— Sh. II. 5. Winter— HS. IX. 8. Wildrock— of Austria. Sh. II. 5. A. Cherub. [Angel] [Image of Angel] Chervil. HF. V. 8. A. Chesil. [Prism. for Cutting Carving Chess-playing. Mo. V. 3. Chest. [Box] Pr. V. 2. of the Body. [Trunk] sp. the Cavity of it.] Chestnut. Tr. IV. 4. Cheverel, [Leather of Gote's skin.] Cheveron, [Tooth (like) lines.] Chevin, [Chub.] Fi. IX. 8. A. Chew, [Mastication.] —the Cud, [Re-masticate.] Chibbol, [Young Onion.] Chickling. HS. II. 5. under-ground— HS. II. 7. Chick, [Hen (young.] —weed. HS. V. 9. A. Bastard— HS. V. 10. berry bearing— HS. IX. 8. A. Chide, [Reprove angrily.] Chill, [Cold (dim] Chilblain. S. III. 7. Child. By Relation. Natural. RO. I. 2. O. to be with— [to have con∣ceived.] —in the womb, [Embryo.] —birth, [Parturition] —bed, [the Bed in which adj. a. pret. Partition lies.] in— [adj. a. pret. Parturi∣tion.] Adventitious. Foster— RO. III 2. O. God— RO. III. 1. O. Ward— RO. III. 4. O. By Age. [Infant] Boy. Childhood. [Infancy] Mea. VI. 1. Boy's age, Mea. VI. 1. A. Childish, [adj. Child (like.] Childless, [Not-parent.] Chime. [Tune with the Bells] [Ring melodiously] Chimaera, [adj. Fiction (thing.] Chimist. [O. VI. (mech.] Chimny. Po. III. 9. A. Chin. PG. III. 8. A. China, [root of an Indian climb∣ing plant.] Chine, [Bone of the Back.] Chin-cough, [adj. a. pret. Dura∣tion (aug.) Cough.] Chink, Chap. Mag. V. 4. O. Chip. TM. VI. 5. to— [Cut into Chips.] [From-cut the outside.] Chiromancy, [Wizarding by the sight of hand.] Chirp. dim. Singing. AC. III. 5. A. Voice of Birds, [a. Sparrow (voice] Chirurgeon. [adj. RC. III. 2. (person] Chit, [Cat (young] Chitterling, [Smallest gus.] Chivalry, [War (art.] sp. adj. Horseman.] Chives, vid. Cive. Chocolate. Tr. IV. 7. Choice. Subst. [Election] RC. IV. 2. [Diversity] [Many of divers Kinds.] Valors.] Adject. [Excellent] Choke, [Strangle.] RC. V. 8. Choler. PG. I. 6. A. —adust, [melancholy] Choleric. [adj. Choler] [adj. Anger (apt.] Choose, [a. Election.] As to do. AS. IV. 5. As to Office. RC. IV. 2. may— [is adj. Liberty.] cannot—but, [is adj. p. Deter∣mination.] Chop.
[Mince] Pr. III. 6. A. —ing knife, [Mincing (inst.] —ing block. [Supporting (inst.) for the chopped (thing.] [Cut by striking] —of mutton. [From cut (part)—] sp. adj. Proportion.] —in, [Come sudden.] [Exchange] Chord. Mag. II. 6. A. Chorister, [adj. Singing (Off.] Chorus. [together-Singers (Aggr.] [Players together-speaking (aggr.] Chough. Bi. I. 6. A. Chrism, [Anointing.] Christ. G. II. Christen, [Baptize.] Christendom, [World of Christi∣ans.] Christianity. RE. I. 4. Christmas, [Festival (time) of Christ's birth.] —day, [Festival day of Christ's birth.] Chromis. Fi. V. 7. Chronicle. [Relation of things done according to the Series of times.] Chronology. [History of times.] [Computing (art) of times] Chrysocoll, [Borax] Chrysolite. PP. V. 6. A. Chub. Fi. IX. 8. A. Chuckle, [Laugh (augm.] sp. Inwardly.] Church. Society, [RE. (aggr.] Temple. Po. II. 4. —warden, [adj. Temple (Off.] —yard, [Court of Temple] Churching. RE. IV. 6. Churl, [adj. Churlishness (per∣son.] Churlishness. [Rusticity] Man. IV. 9. D. [Moroseness] Man. IV. 7. D. op. to Alms. Man. III. 5. D. [Roughness] Churn, [Motion (freq.) vicissitu∣dinary.] Chur-worm. [Fen-Cricket.] Ex. II. 2. A. Chyle. PG. I. 3. Chymic Operation. O. VI. Cicada. Ex. IV. 6. —aquatica. EX. II. 4. A. Cicely. Sweet— HF. IV. 3. wid— HF. IV. 3. A. Cicutaria.   Cider, [Wine of Apples.] Cimex, [Punice] Ex. II. 6. A. —sylvestris. Ex. II. 3. Cinders, [Fiery ashes] —of Sea-cole, [Charred remainders—] Cinnabar. Met. III. 5. Cinnaion, Tr. VII. 8. Cinqfoil. HF. IX. 2. Cipher. [adj. Number (sign) Chara∣cter.] [Character] [Secret Character] [Number] to— [adj. a. Number (art.] [Nothing (sign) Character.] Cypres, [Transparent Linnen.] —Tr. V. 6. Circle. Mag. III. 2. By which the World is divi∣ded. W. VI. Circuit. [Region] [Margin of Circle] Circular, [adj. Circle.] Circulate, [About-going] Circumcision. RE. VI. 5. Circumference, [Circle about- adj. Margin.] Circumflex, [Long sounding.] Circumlocution, [Express by ma∣ny words.] [Paraphrase] D. V. 5. A. Circumscribe, [About—a. com∣pass.] Circumspect, [Cautious.] Circumstance. T. VI. 3. Circumvent, [a. Fraud.] Cistern, [a. Keeping (vessel) for Water.] Citadel, [Castle.] Po. II. 2. Citation. Summons RJ. II. 1. [Quotation] D. IV. 9. Citerior. Sp. II. 2. E. City. RC. III. 3. A. Citizen. RC. I. 6. Citrine, [adj. Citron colour.] Citrinella. Bi. VI. 2. Citron. Tr. I. 8. Citrull. HS. VII. 2. A. Cittern, [Little musical (instr.) having brass strings.] Citysus. Sh. II. 6. A. Cive, HL. IV. 10. A. Civet, [Sweat of the Civet Cat.] —Cat. Be. IV. 4. A. Civil. [adj. Civility] [adj. City] [adj. Civil relation] —Relation. RC. —Lawyer. RC. II. 2. —War. [War between men of the same Nation.] Common∣wealth.] Civility. [Courtesie] Man. IV. 7. [Complaisance] Man. IV. 8. Clack, [Knock (freq.) sound.] a— [adj. Knock (machin.] Clad, [Clothed] Clay. El. IV. 4. Claim. TA. I. 3. Clamber, [Climbe adv. Difficult.] (corr.] Clamminess. Q. VI. 4. E. Clamor, [Exclaim] AC. III. 3. O. Clancular, [Secret.] Clandestine, [Secret.] Clap. AC. V. 5. —up. [Finish adv. sudden] [Imprison] sp. suddenly. —of thunder, [sound (imp.) of th.] Clapboard, [Oaken (lamins) for lining Rooms.] Clapper. [Box] Pr. V. 2. Instrument, [Striking (part) of ringing (instr.] Claret, [Red French Wine] Clary. HF. VII. 10. Wild—HF. VII. 10. A. Clarifie. [Separating the course (parts.] [a. Clear (make.] Clash. [against-Strike] sp. reciprocally.] [a. Contention] Clasp. [Hook] [Embrace] Clasper, [Tendril.] PP. II. 7. A. Class, [Series.] Classic, [Authentic.] Clatter, [Jarring.] Clause. D. III. 1. Claw. as of man, [Nail.] a—back, [Fawner.] as of Beast. PP. VI. 5. A. as of Bird. PP. V. 3. as of Shell-fish. PP. IV. 7. to— [Scratch.] Clean. [Pure] TM. V. 6. Quite and— perfectly] Totally] Cleanliness. Man. II. 6. Cleanse. [Clean (make.] [a. Innocent (make.] [Vndefiled (make.] [Un a. guilty (make.] Clear. Entire of it self. —ly. [Wholly.] Not mingled with other. [Simple.] sp. not with worse. [Pure] [Not hinder'd from being doing Receiving (perf.] E.g. in any genus, as of Quality or Relation NP.
—understanding, [Und. (perf.] —sight, [Sight (perf.] as to Mind. [Ingenuous] [Sprightly] as to the Body. [Sound] [Indolent] [Beautiful] Ha. —repute, [Rep. (perf.] sp. [Sagacious] [Sincere] Man. [Candid] [Frank] Quality. Visible. [Lightsom] —weather. El. VI. 1. [Bright] [Transparent] Unspotted. Q I. 5. Audible. —sound. Q. III. 7. RC. [Not in Debt] TA. IV. 9. RJ. [Not in Guilt] RJ. II. RM. [Not in War] RM. II. 7. RE [Not under Censure] RE. V. 5. O. S. [Not Infected.] Diseased.] Not hinder'd from being done. [Easie] Not hinder'd from being known. [Plain] [Manifest] Not hinderd from being Come to. Pass'd through. [Accessible] [Empty] [Passable] Cleaver. [Cleaving (instr.] [Knife (augm.) to strike with] Cleavers. [goose-grass] HL. IX. 9. A. Cleaving. Sticking. [a. Clammy] [Adhering] Chapping, [apj. p. Chink.] as with a Wedge. O. I. 3. Cloven-footed. Cleer, vid. Clear. Cleft. [Chink] Mag. V. 4. O. [adj. p. Cleave] Clematis. Sh. V. 7. Clemency. Man. VI. 8. Clergy. RE. II. Clerk. [adj. Church- Writing (Offi∣cer.] [adj. Clergy (person] [adj Church (off.] —of Church, [Minister's subor∣dinate (officer.] [adj. Writing (offic] —of Exchequer. —of Rolls. Gentleman's— —of Market. [adj. Market (off.] Clew, [Bottom.] Click, [a. Sound as Watch.] Clicket, [Lust.] sp. of Rabbets.] Client. [Dependent] [adj. p. Advocate (person] Cliff. W. III. 3. A. Climacteric, [adj. a. Altering (apt.) seventh year.] Climate, [adj. p. Latitude (place) of 13 hours, 13 and a half, &c] Climbe. Mo. II. 5. Climber of Virginia. Sh. V. 8. Clinch. —a Nail, [Fix it by re-knocking folding the point of it.] —ones Fist, [Fold the hand.] a— [Urbanity (endeavor) by similitude of words.] Cling. AC. VI. 9. Clink, [a. Sound as Chains.] Clip. [Cut] O. V. 4. A. [Embrace] Clock. Po. VI. 6. A. what is it of— [what hour is it according to the—] Clod, [Lump.] Clog, [Hinder.] Cloy. [adj. p. Excess (make] [adj. a. Nauseate with abun∣dance.] Cloister. [House of Monks] [Roofed walking (place] Cloke, [Wide outer (Vest] to— [Cover] [Pretence] [Conceal] Cloke-bag, [Sack to be tied be∣hind the Saddle.] Closeness, Nearness impeditive of Penetration. Nearness of thing to thing. [Nearness] [Contiguity] [Continuity] of the parts of a thing. The Extremes. [Narrowness] The Middle parts. Closeness, Q. V. 3. [Densness] Q. V. 3. E. Impeditive as to the Surface. to close. [adj. Hide.] [adj. Conceal] Periphery. to close. [adj. a. Sepiment] a Close. [adj. p. Sepiment (place] Top. to close. with its own. [adj. Shut] [adj. p. Whole] as a Wound. with anothers. [adj. Cover] Side. to close. [Together-join] [Together-fold] as a Let∣ter. End. to close, [adj. a. Finish.] Of Penetration; by Ey, [Darkness] as of wea∣ther. Ear, [Silence.] Reservedness.] Hand, &c. [Fastness] [Penuriousness] Closet, Room (dim.) for pri∣vacy] Clot. —bird. —burr. Cloth. Stuff for Clothing [adj. Clo∣thing thing] Cotton— Pr. IV. 4. A. Hair— Pr. IV. 1. A. Linnn— Pr. IV. 4. Woollen— Pro. IV. 1. —worker, [adj. cloth (Me∣chanic.] Clothe. [make Cloth] put on [adj. p. Clothing (make] Clothing. Pr. IV. Clottered, [Coagulated] Cloud. El. III. 2. Clove. —of Garlick, [Bulb of the root] —tree. Tr. III. 9. Cloun, vid. Clown. Clout. [Fragment of Cloth] [adj. Mending (thing] to— [Mend by addition.] [Strengthen by addition.] Clown. [adj Country (corr.] [adj. Rusticity (person] —ishness, [Rusticity.] Clu, [Bottom.] Mag. VI. 7. Club. Weapon, RM. V. 2. [Society.] Cluck, as a Hen. [Calling (voice] Clung. [adj. a. preter. Cling] [together-adhering] Cluster. PP. II. 4. [adj. aggregate (thing] Clutch. [Talon. PP. V. 3. (Aggreg.] [Hand] PG. V. 3. Holding. TA. V. 5. (augm.]
to— [Shrink] AC. V. 5. O. [Together-fold] O. III. 5. [Hold (corr.] Clutter. [Confused Motion] Sound] Clyster, [Medicinal drink for fundament.] Coach. Po. V. 1. —man, [Coach (Officer.] —box, [Seat of Coach (Offi∣cer.] Coaction. AS. IV. 9. O. Cadjutor, [With-helper.] Coagulating. O. VI. 2. A. Coalition [a. Uniting. [p. Uniting. Coarctation. [together-joyning (augm.] [Shrinking] Coast. Quarter, [Country near.] Sea-coast, [nigh- adj. Sea Country.] to— [Travail (end.) by conje∣cture.] Coat. Garment, [Outward close (vest.] —of Male, [Woven (like) armour.] —of Arms, [Nobility [Gentility (sign. Cottage, [Rustic house (dim.] Cobble. [Mend, (corr.] [a. Unskilful] Ha. VI. 3. O. Cob-iron, [Supporting (instr.) for Spit.] Cobler, [Mending (mech.) of Leather (vest) for foot.] Cobweb, [Spider's woven (thing] Cock [Male] sp. bird] [Bird, Bi. II. 1. (male] —'s comb. HS. VIII. 7. —'s head. HS. III. 5. A. heath— Bi. II. 5. A. —of the wood. Bi. II. 5. Exanguious. Sea— Ex. VI. 6. A. —Roches. Ex. I. 7. A. winged— Ex. II. 3. A. Instrument. —of Dial, [Pin—] —of Gun-lock. [adj. a. Fire (machin.] —for Water, [Lock of Pipe.] Weather— [Winde (sign) instrument.] —of Hay, [Heap—] —boat, [Boat (dim.] —swain. RN. V. 6. A. Cockall, [Dicing with heel∣bones.] Cockatrice, [Serpent killing by Sight.] Cocker, [adj. a. Fondness.] Man. VI. 7. D. Cocket, [Writing of Tribute (off.) for impor export of wares] Cockle. Fish. Ex. VIII. 5 A. Herb. HS. V. 6. A. Cockrel, [Hen (male) (young.] Coco. Tr. IV. 6. Cocothraustes. Bi. IV. 4. —Cristatus. Bi. IV. 4. A. Cod. Fish. Fi. III. 1. —of Plant. PP. III. 5. A. —of Animal, [Testicles (ves∣sel.] —piece, [adj. Privities (vest.] Codicil, [Added writing.] Coequal, [Equal.] Coerce, [Cohibit.] Coessential, [Of the same Es∣sence.] Coetaneous, [Together in Age.] Coeternal, [Together-eternal.] Coexistent, [Together-existent.] Coffee. Tr. IV. 7. A. Coffer, [Chest.] —er, [Keeping (off.) of Trea∣sure.] Coffi. Tr. IV. 7. A. Coffin. [Receiving (vessel] [Box for dead body] Cog. —of Mill, [Tooth of wheel.] to— [Fawn.] [a. Fraud.] Cogitation, [Thinking] Cognation of things. T. VI. 8. Cognisance. [Acknowledging] of Cause. RJ. II. 4. Badge, [Service (sign.] Coheir, [Together-heir.] Coherent. [Together Sticking.] Joining.] [adj. Congruity] Cohibitive cause T. II. 2. O. Cohobation, [Repeated Distilla∣tion.] Cohort, [Troop.] Coy, [adj. Aversation (apt.] Ooif, [Close adj. head (vest.] Coil, [Confused Motion.] Sound.] to—a rope, [a. Spiral.] Coin▪ —of a Wall., [Corner—] [Mony] to— [a. Mony (make] [a. Print] sp. in Metal] [a. Fiction] [a. Forgery] Coincident, [Together-adj. Event] Coistrel, [adj. Adolescence (male.] Coit. [Lamin. adj. p. cast (apt.] Coition. AC. II. 5. A. Colander, [adj. Streining (vess.] Cold. —to sense. Q. V. 1. D. [Remiss] a— [Disease from cold] Cole. Live— [Fired fuel (Part] Dead— [un-fired fuel (part] Sea— St. VI. 3. A. —black, [Black (augm.] Cole-rake, Instr. Cole-mouse. Bi. VI. 7. A. Cole-wort, [Cabbage.] HS. IV. 6. Colet, Concave (place of Ring. Gem (place of Ring. Colic S. VI. 5. Coll, [Embrace.] Collar, [Environing (armam.] for neck.] Collateral. [of the same Series] [Accessary] Collation. [Giving] [Right of giving] [Refection. Pr. I. 1. A.] [Comparing. TA. II. 5.] Collect, [adj. Epitome prayer.] Collection. [a. Gathering] [adj. p. Gathering (thing.] Collective. [Together-gathering] [adj. Aggregate] Collector, [adj. a. Gathering Person.] Officer.] College. RC. III. 7▪ A. sp. of Schollars.] Collegue. [Companion.] [Together adj. p. Leag.] adj. p. Colledg.] Officer.] Collier, [Fuel (mech.] (merc.] Colli-flower, [Cabbage] Collision. [Together striking.] [Reciprocal striking.] Collogue, [Fawn.] Collop. [Chip] [Slice] Colloquy, [Together-discourse.] Collusion, [Agreeing to cheat.] Colon. [adj. Fundament Gut.] Period. D. I. 6. Colonel, [Regiment (Off.] Colony. RC. III. 1. A. Coloquintida. HS. VII. 4. Color. Q. II. [Pretext] —s [adj. Ensign Cornet (thing] Coloss, [Image (augm.] Colt Horse (young] Ass (young] —s-foot. HL. VI. 1. mountain -[Horse foot] HL. VI. 3. Columbine. HS. I. 2. A. Column, [Pillar Poss. III. 5.] Colure, [Meridian through Tro∣pics.]
Comb. [Combing (instr.] to— O. V. 9. A. Crest. PP. V. 7. Cox— Herb. [adj. Folly (person] [adj. Formalness, Man. IV. 6. E. (person] Hony— [Bees Chambers (aggr.] Combat, [Fighting.] Comber. [Burthen] [Trouble] [Hinder.] Combine. [Together-a, join.] league.] faction.] Combustion. [Burning.] [Contention] [Sedition.] Come. Motion toward to TA. VI. 1. sp. from a remoter term to a nearer. —about, [Turn.] —after, [Follow.] —again, [Return.] —at a thing, [Obtain.] a person, [Assault.] —back▪ [Return.] —by, [Obtain.] —forth. [become visible.] known.] [be manifested] —forward Proceed.] p. Increase.] —in, [Submit.] —off, [p. Event.] —upon equal terms. RM. II. 1. —Victor. RM. II. 1. E. —Loser. RM. II. 1. D. —on, [Proceed.] —over, [P. Convert.] —a person, a. Craft.] a▪ Fraud.] —out. [become visible.] known.] [be manifested.] —to v. Event.] p. Sum.] —to good, [v. Event. (perf.] —to hand, [v. Event—] —to light▪ p. Manifest.] p. Public.] —to Minde, [adj. p. Memory.] —to nought, [v. Event] (corr.] nothing.] —to pass, [v. Event.] —to self, [Return to former Condition.] —up, Become visible.] Grow visible.] —upon, [Assault.] —with, [Bring.] Being. [future.] to— [adj. future.] [near.] [present.] (inc.) [adv. End.] —short. [v. Defect adv. End.] —to, [p. Sum adv. End.] [adv. Total.] —to, [p. Total.] Being the Effect. —of it, [Be the Effect—] Being the Event. Vide supra. Appearing. Forth—ing, [adj. fut. Ap∣pear.] Parturition. Comedy, [Play with merry Con∣clusion.] Comely. [Decent] [Handsom] Comet. W. II. 3. A. Meteor. El. I. 2. Comfet, [adj. p. Confection (thing) with Sugar.] Comfort. RO. VI. 3. Comfrey. HL. IX. 4. Comical, [adj. Comedy] [adj. Mirth] Comity, [Courtesie.] Man. IV. 7. Comma. D. I. 5. Command. v. Precept. RO. V. 1. [a. Master] [a. Magistrate] at ones— [adj. p. Command Govern by one.] a commanded Party. RM. IV. 6. Commander. [Commanding (Person. (Off. [adj. Wood (instr.) for in∣driving Columns] Commemorate [Re- a. memory (make.] [a. Memory solemnly.] Commence. [Begin] [Take a Degree] [Be made— Doctor.] Master.] —an Action, [a. Action.] RJ. II. O. Commend. [Praise.] —to self. RO. V. 7. —to others. RO. V. 8. Entrust, [Deposit] [Speak ones Salutations to remembrance (another.] Commendations. To do ones— Speak ones Love.] Be Messenger of ones Salutation.] Instead-salute.] Letters o- Praise. a. Trust (make. Commensurate, [Together-pro∣portioned.] Comment. D. V. 6. —ary. D. V. 6. Commerce. TA. IV. Commination, [Threat.] RO. V. 6. O. Commiserate, [a. Pity.] AS. VI. 7. O. Commissary, [Officer.] Ecclesiastic, [Instead-Judge Eccles.] Military, [adj. Provisions (off.] Commission. RC. IV. 4. A. —er, [Commission'd (per∣son.] Commit. [Doe] fp. as Fault.] [Entrust] as Prisoner, [a. Imprison∣ment.] Committee, [Authorized per∣sons (aggr.] [Council (dim.] Commixtion. [Mixture] [Together-mixture] Commodious. [Congruous] [Convenient] [Profitable] Commodity. [Convenience] [Profit] [Ware] Common. [adj. All Every Many Op. to Proper. TM. IV. 6. O [Public.] TM. V. 4. [adj. People] —wealth. [adj. RC. (thing] [Common Prosperity.] [Government by the Peo∣ple.] [Obvious] [Frequent] [Usual] [Not-consecrated] Commonalty, [People (kind] Commons, [not-Lords.] —of Victual. [Proportioned Food. Provisi∣ons —for Catel. [Common Pasture] [Peoples Pasture] Commotion. [Motion] [Sedition] [Trouble] Commune, [Confer.] AC. V. 7. A. Communicate. [Common (make] [Partnership (make] [Known (make] Communication. [Conversation] [Conference] AC. V. 7. A.
[Discourse] Communion. [Together— Union.] Partnership.] [Lord's Supper.] RE. VI. 6. A. Community, [Common (kinde] Commutation. [Commerce] [Exchange] Compact. [Together-join (augm.] [Close (augm.] [Agreement] [Together-league] [Covenant] Company. [Together Being Going Travelling [Companion (abst.] [adj. aggregate (thing] [adj. Multitude (aggr.] [Society] [Convention] [Corporation] of Souldiers. RM. IV. 2. To— [Together- Be Go Travel Companion. Fellow. RO. IV. 2. [Accessary (person] [Urbane (person] [Sorry (person] Compare. TA. II. 5. In Comparison of, [Being compared with] Compass. [About-goe] [Goe about the out-side] fetch— [Go, adv. Curve] [About-sepiment] [v. Circle] Mariners— [Box to direct Navigati∣on] [adj. Magnet (Jug.) (Vess.) Pair of— [Writing (instr.) of Circles.] [Comprehend] [Obtain] —of a year, &c. [Space—&c.] Compassion, [Pity] TA. VI. 7. O. Compatible [Together- agreeing. adj. Congruous. Compeer. [Like] [Companion] Compell, [a. Coaction] Compellation, [a. Name.] Compendious. [adj. Shortness] [adj. p. Epitome] Compendium. [Epitome] [Short method] Compensate. TA. II. 7. A. Competent, [Sufficient.] Competitor, [Rival.] Compile. [Compound] [a. Book (make] Complacence. [Delight] AS. IV. 7. Vertue. Man. IV. 8. Complain. [Grief (sign] [a. Accuser] Complaisance. Man. IV. 8. Complementing. AC. V. 7. Complete. [Perfect] [adj. p. Finishing] Complexion. [Aggregate] [Composition] [Temper] [Colour of Face] Complie. [v. Congruity] [Follow] [Imitate] [Please by v. Congruity.] Complicated, [Together aggregated intangled Mingled. Complices. [Together-leagued (persons] [Companions] [Accessories] Comportment. [Gesture] [Demeanor] [Conversation (manner] Compose. [Together-put] —a Book, [a. Book Verse, [a. Verse (make [a. Order (perf.] [Un-confused (make] [adj. a. Agree (make] [a. Quiet] Compound. [Together put join [Make of many parts] [a. Mixture] [Covenant to pay Less than ones debt.] Comprehend. a. Capacity. TA. II. 4. [Understand All Perfectly Totally Compression. O. I. 3. O. Comprize, vid. Comprehend. Compromise, [together-submit to Arbitration] Compulsion, [Coaction] Compunction. [Remorse] [Repentance (inc.] Compurgation. [a. Innocent by witness] Computation. [Account] [Numbring] Con-over, [again-say (freq.) for remembring.] Concatenation, [Together-chain∣ing.] Concave. Mag. III. 4. D. Conceal. TA. I. 8. O. Conceit. [Fancy] [Opinion] [Witty saying] Conceitedness, Ha. III. 3. D▪ Conceiving. [a. Common sense] [a. Fancy] [a. Understanding] [a. Thought] —with young. AC. I. 2. A. Concentre, together— centre] adv. Same centre] Conception. AC. I. 2. A. Concern, [v. Pertinent.] Proper.] Profitable.] Concerning. [Pertinent] [Of] Concession. D. VI. 3. A. Concillator, [Reconciler.] Concise, [adj. Shortness.] Concitation, [Impulsion.] Conclave [Chamber sp. Se∣cret.] [Council sp. Se∣cret.] Conclude. [End] [Finish] [Determine] [v. Inference] Concoct, [a. Digestion.] Concomitant. [adj. Simultaneity] [Together-being] Concord. [Agreeing] Symphony. Q. III. 8. Concordance, [Catalog. for finding of words] things] Concorporate, [Together- a. Body a. Corporation Concourse. [Together-coming (augm.] [Convention (augm.] Concrete. [Coagulate] op. to Abstract. D. II. 2. O. Concubine. Appropriated Whore] instead-Wife] Concupiscence. [Appetite.] [Desire] [Lust] [Nature (corr.] [Original Sin] Concur. [Meet] [Together— be agree come Concussion, [Shaking] Condemn. Sentence. RJ. II. 7. O. [Blame] [Disapprove] Condense, [dense.] Condescend. [a. Man. VI. 2.] [Permit]
Condescension. Man. VI. 2. Condign [Worthy] Conditing. Pr. III. 9. A. Condition. T. II. 4. [Quality] [Disposition] Capacity. TA. II. 4. [State] [Supposition] [Covenant] Condole, [Together-grieve] Conduce, [a. Help.] Conduct. [Leading] TA. VI. . [a. Officer] Safe— [Licence of safe go∣ing] Conduit, [Aqueduct] Po. II. 8. A. Cone. Mag. III. 7. Fruit. PP. III. 5. Confection. Pr. II. 2. A. Confederacy, [League] RC. III. 8. Confer. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Compare.] TA. II. 5. Discourse together. AC. V. 7. A. Confess. [Acknowledge] anothers praise. our own. Sin. RE. IV. 2. Error. D. VI. 9. Confessor. adj. Hear∣ing (Person (Officer for confession of Sins] Sufferer for Religion. RE. III. 3. Confidence. Affection. AS. V. 7. [Assuredness] AS. III. 6. Confident, [adj. Confidence.] ones— [ones adj. a. counsel adj. p. trust friend] Confine. [a. Finite] [a. Cohibit] TA. II. 2. O. [a. Imprisonment] Confines, [Margining Countries] Confirm. [Strengthen] sp. More strengthen.] [More-assure] [a. Witness.] —ation. D. VI. 6. A. —Ecclesiastic. RE. IV. 8. Confiscation. RJ. VI. 7. A. Conflict. [Fight] RM. I. 7. [a. Contention] Confluence [Together- Coming (aug. Convention Conform. [adv. Congruous-do] [So-do] [a. Obedience] Confound. [adj. p. Confused (make] [Mingle] [adj. p. Shame (make] [Posing] D. VI. 8. [Destroy] AS. I. 4. O. Confraternity. [Colledge] [Corporation] [Penitents, (aggr.] RE. II. 6. A. Confront, [a. Opposite present] Confused, [adj. Confusion.] Confusion. Disorder, TM. V. 2. O. [Shame (augm.] [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O. Confutation. D. VI. 7. Confute, [a. Confutation.] Congeal. [a. Coagulate] [a. Gelly Ice (make] Congee. AC. V. 4. Conger. Fi. VI. 1. Conglutinate, [together- glue] join] Congratulate, [a. Joy for good of others.] AS. VI. 6 Congregation, [Convention] Congruous, [adj. T. V. 5.] Conic [adj. Cone.] Conie. Be. III. 4. Conjecture. —ing. AS. II. 7. A. Conjugal, [adj. Marriage] Conjugate. [Together-derived] Conjugation, [Forming (manner) of endings of Verbs] Conjunction. [Joining] Particle. D. II. 9. A. —of Planets [neerness] Conjure. [a. Witchcraft] [a. Entreat (augm.] Conjurer, [a. Witchcraft (per∣son.] Connexion, [Joyning (manner] Connive. [Tolerate secretly] [Not hinder] [Not-punish] Conquer. RM. II. 7. E. Consanguinity. RO. I. Conscience. NP. I. 3. Stupidity of— NP. I. 3. O. Consciencious, [adj. Conscience (perf.] Conscionable. [According to Conscience] [adj. Equity] Conscious. [Knowing] [Together-knowing] [Accessory] Consecration. RE. V. I. —of Bishop, [a. Bishop (make] Consectary [Inference Additional] Accessory] Consent. AS. II 3. with one— [Together-Adv. IV. 1. consenting] Consequence. [Illation] [Importance] sp. Future] Consequent, [Inference] Conserve. [Confection] Pr. II. 2. A. to— [Preserve] [Confect] —ation. AS. I. 4. Consider. Think. AS. III. 2. [Compensate] TA. II. 7. A. —ing. AS. III. 2. —that, [Whereas] Con. IV. 1. Considerable, [Important.] Considerateness. Ha. IV. 1. Consideration. [Impulsive] [Respect] [Compensation] Consign, [Assign] RC. V. 1. Consist. [adj. p. Simultaneous] [Agree] —ence. Tactil Quality. Q. V. 5. Consistory. Council Council (place sp. Ecclesiastic.] sp. Of Bishops.] Consolation, [Comfort] Consolidate. [a. Wholeness] [a. Closeness] Consonant. [Congruous] Letter. D. I. 2. A. Consort. [Companion] [Harmony] —of Music. Q. III. 6. A. Conspicuous. [adj. p. See (apt.] [adj. Manifest (augm.] Conspire, [a. Faction] Constable, [Subordinate adj. a. peace (Off.] Constancy. Ha. IV. 7. Constellation, [Stars (aggr.] Consternation. [Fear (augm.] [Extasie] sp. through Fear.] Constipation. [Together-thrusting] [a. Close] Constitute. [a▪ Cause] [a. Efficient] Constitution. [a. Efficient] [Appointment] [Law] [Edict] [Mixture] [Disposition] [Temper of mind] NP. IV. [Temper of body] NP. V. Constrain, [a. Coaction] Construction.
[a. Efficient] [a.Interpret] Consul, [Magistrate of City.] Consult. [Together- Consider] Counsel▪] [Ask advice] [Take advice] Consume, vid. Consumption. Consummate. [a. Perfect] [a Finish] Consumption. [a. Decay (make] [Diminish] [Spoil] [Destroy] [Corruption] Disease. S. II. 2. A. —of the Lungs. S. V. 3. Contact. [Touch] [Contiguity] Contagion. S. I. 1. Contaminate, [Defile.] Contein. [Comprehend] TA. II. 4. [Keep chast] Contemn. AS. II. 8. O. Contemplate, [Meditate.] AS. II. 1. A. Contemporary, [adj. Simulta∣neity.] Contemptible, [adj. p. Contemn (apt.] Contend, [a. Contention.] Content. [Capacity] [Contentation] Ha. I. 3. [Satisfaction] AS. III. 5. Contentation. Ha. I. 3. Contentiousness. Man IV. 3 D. Contest, [Contention in words] Contexture, [Together— Weaving] Joining] Contignation, [Together joining of Floors.] Contiguity. Sp. II. 2. Continence, [Chastity] Continent. [adj. Chastity] Land. W. III. 2. Contingent. T. V. 7. O. Continue. [a. Permanence] [a. Duration] [Stay] —ed —Quantity. TM. II. Continual. [Permanent] [Perpetual] Continuance. —of Place. Sp. II. 7. —of Time, [Permanence.] In—of Time. [After much Time] [At length] Contrabanded, [Forbidden to be imported.) Contract. [Together-draw] [Bargain] RC. V. [Betroth] [Obtain] —a disease, [adj. p. Dis∣ease.] Contradiction. D. VI. 4. A. Contradictory, [adj. Contradi∣ction] Contrary. T. V. 5. O. Contribution. [Giving] sp. Proportionable] sp. Free.] [Tax] Contrition, [Remorse] Contrive. AS. III. 7. Controle. [Observe Faults] [Censure Faults] [Reprehend] [Cohibit] —er, [adj. Cohibiting (Off.] Controversie. [Dispute] [Suit] Contumacy. Constancy (Exc.) Ha. IV. 7. E. op to Obedience Man. V. 8. D. Contumely, [Affront.] Contusion O. IV. 1. A. [Bruise] S. I. 1. A. Convey. [v. Way] [Lead] [Carry] [Send] —ance. [Carriage] [Sending] [Contrivement] [Alienating Writing] Convene. [a. Citation] [v. Convention] Convenience. Agreeableness. T. IV. O. [Congruity] [Expedience] Convenient. [Congruous] [Expedient] Conventicle, [Secret Convention (corr.] Convention. RC. III. Converging. Mag. II. 7. D. Conversant. [adj. Conversation] [Accustomed] [Expert] Conversation. Man. A. Qualification for— Man. IV. Convert. [Turn (make] [Apply] [Proselyte] RE. III. 6. [Penitent] RE. II. 6. A. [Reform] RO. VI. 7. Convex. Mag. III. 4. E. Conviction. D. VI. 8. A. —by Law, [Prove Guilty.] Convocation, [Convention Eccle∣siastic.] Convoy, [Travelling Guard.] Convulsion, S. IV. 7. Cook, [Cookery (mech.] —ery. Pr. III. 1. A. Cool, [Cold (dim.] [a. Cold] Coop, [Prison of Parallel Sticks] to— [Imprison] [Environ] Cooper, [adj. Barrel (mec.] Cooperate, [Together-operate] Coordinate, [Of equal Height] Degree] Coo. Bi. VIII. 8. Copal. Tr. VIII. 4 A. Copartner. [Partner] [Accessary] Cope. [Change] [Fight] [Prune] Priest's— Copy. Original. T. II. 3 Set a— [a. T. II. 3.] Transcript. T. II. 3. O. —out. [a. T. II. 3. O.] —hold [Estate for life] [Tenement for life] Copious, [Abundant] Copped. [Sharp topped] [adj. p. Point] Copper. Metal. Met. I. 4. [Kettle] Copperas, [Vitriol.] St. V. 2. A. Coppis, [Place of Trees (dim.] Copula. D. II. 6. Copulation, [Coition.] Copulative, [Joining.] Coracinus. Fi. IV. 2. Coral. St. II. 6. Cord Pr. IV. 7. A. Cordage, [Cord (kind] Cordial. [adj. Heart] [Heart-strengthning Medicin] [adj. Sincerity.] Cordylus [Lizard (kind) having a tail annulated with scales.] Core. [Heart (like) part] [Middle (part] sp. Hardest part] Coriander. HF. IV. 1. A. Cork. Tree. Tr. V. 2. A. [Wood of Cork Tree] [Stopple of Cork-wood] Cormorant. Bi. IX. 5. Corn. [Plant for adj. Bread] Standing— [Not-reaped] —field, [Field of—] —flagg. HL. IV. 6. A. [Seed for Bread] [Grain] PP. III. . —on the Toe. S. III. 6. A.
[Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. To— [a. Powder] Pr. III. 7. A. sp. with Salt.] Cornel-tree. Tr. II. 3. A. Cornelian, [Sardius] St. III. . Corner. [Angle] Mag. III. 2. A. [Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. [Notch] Mag. IV. 2. O. —of the eye, [Dent—] [adj. Hiding (place] Corner. Ensign. RM. III. 2. A. Music, [Bass pipe.] Corollary, [Inference additional.] Coronation, [Solemnity of a King (make.] Coroner, [Enquiring (Off.) of Murther.] Coronet, [Head-environing, No∣bility-sign, Ornament.] Corporal, [adj. Body.] —of Souldiers, [Subordinate, adj. Watch (Off.] —of a Ship RN. V. 2. A. Corporation. RC. III. 7. Corporeal [adj. W. I. Op.] Corps, [Body.] —dugard, [Gard (aggr.] Corpulent. [Having great Body] [Fat (augm.] Correct. End or Effect. General. [Repair] TA. II. 9. [a. Right] [Mend] TM. I. 9. E. Moral. [Reform] RO. VI. 7. Means or Instrument. Words. [Reprehend] RO. V. 7. O. Deeds. [Punish] Ha. I. O. Chastise. RO. VI. 6. Correlative, [Together-relative.] Correspond. [a. Congruity] [a. Reciprocation] [adv. Re∣ciprocal Congruity] Friendship] Known (make] Corrival, [Rival] Corroborate. [Strengthen] [Confirm] Corrode. O. VI. 3. Corrosive, [adj. a. Corroding (apt.] Corruption. General, [a. Evil] T. III. 2. O. [a. Worse] TM. I. 9. D. By Admition. [Defiling] TM. V. 6. O. By Privation. Of its Being. [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O. Of its Usefulness. [Spoiling] TA. II. 9. O. Natural. [Infection] S. I. 1. [Decay] NP. V. 4. O. [Putrefaction] NP. V. . O. Moral. General. [Unholiness] Ha. V. . O. [Vice] Man. I. 1. O. Special. [Unchastness] Man. II. 7. O. [Bribery] RJ. IV. 6. Corslet. [adj. Trunk (armour] [Pike-man] Cortex. —febrifugus Pervinus. Tr. VII. 9. —Winterianus. Tr. VII. 9. . Coruscation. [Flame (imp.] [Brightness] sp. Trembling (like.] Cosmography, [Science of the World.] Cost. [Expence] [Price] Costard, [Apple.] Costive, [adj. p. Binding.] Costly, [adj. Cost (augm.] Costmary, [Ale-cost.] HF. II. 4. Cottage, [House (dim.] Cotton. —tree. Tr. IV. 8.. —cloth. Pr. IV. 4. A. —weed [Cudweed] HF. II. 5. A Couch. [Contrive together] [adj. a. Prostrate.] sp. Shrinking] [a— Po. VI. 6. A. —weed, [Dogs grass] HL. III. 3. A Covenant, [Paction.] Covent, [House of Monks.] Coventry Bell. HS. VII. 7. Cover. [un-seen (make.] Put over. O. II. 3. [a. Clothing] Pr. IV. —a book, [a. Book (mech.] [a. Coition] AC. II. 5. A. [Un-seen (make] [Conceal] Coverlet, [Upper Vest Covering of Bed.] Covert, Hiding (place.] Protection (place.] Defence (place.] Coverture, [Protection.] Covet, [a. Desire.] Covetousness. Man. III. 1. D. Cough. Mo. IV. 5. Covie, [Birds (aggr.] Coul. [Tub] Monk's— [—head (vest.] Could, [Mood. II. 1.] Coulter, [a. Ploughing iron (inst.] Council. RC. III. . A. Counsel, [Advise.] RO. V. 4. keep— [a. Taciturnity.] Count. Earl, [Third degree of Nobili∣ty.] to— [Esteem] [Reckon] TA. IV. 6. [a. Sum] Countenance [Face (Habit.] (Manner.] out of— [not knowing which way to look.] [Posed] [Ashamed] to— [Encourage] [adj. p. Reputation (mak] Counter. [Mony (like) of base Metal] [Prison for Offenders (dim.] Debtors (dim.] [adv. Contrary.] —bnd, [Bond for indemnify∣ing-Surety.] —charge, [Accuse adv. Reci∣procation.] Counterfeit. [a. Likeness] [Imitate] sp. Fraudulently.] [a. eem (make] [a. Feign] [a. Forge] [a. Hypocrisie] Countermand, [Command contra∣ry.] Countermine. RM. I. 5. O. Countermre, [Opposite wall.] Counterpane, [Upper (vest) for bed] Counterpart, [Other Example.] Copy.] Counterpoint, [Congruous part in Music,] Counterpoise, [Oppositely weigh] Counterpoison, [Medicin against poison.] Counter-scarf, [Opposite Ram∣pier.] Counter-tenor, [High Mean] Countervail, [Compensate equal∣ly.] Countess, [Earl (em.] County, [Shire,] Country. op. to Town. RC. III. 2. [Region] W. III. A. ones own— [Ones Nation (place] Country-man, vid. Country. Couple. [Together-two] sp. Join'd.] [Necks—join∣ing Bonds.] Armam.] [Unite] [Join-two] [a. Coition] Courage, [Fortitude.] Courier, [Messenger for dis∣patch.] Course. Subst. [Way] Water— [Stream] [Journey] [Running]
[Hunting] [Persuit] [Order] [Series] first— [—dishes (aggr.] [Turn] [Sail] [Custom] words of— [adj. Custome words] [Manner] —of life Doing Living (man∣ner. Adj. [Profession] Gross. Q. VI. 3. D. [Sorry.] TM. I. 4. D. Courser. [adj. p. ride (apt) horse] [Horse for running] Courses, [Menstruum.] PG. I. 4. A. Court. —yard. Po. III. 3. [King's Family] C. III. 5. [King's House] [Judgment (place] [Judicial Convention] —daies, [Daies of judicial Convention.] to— [a. Suito] Courteous, [adj. Courtesie.] Courtesan. [Common Whore] Courtesie. Vertue. [Civility] Man. IV. 7. [Affability] Man. VI. . Thing, [adj. a. Benefactor (thing] Salutation. AC. V. 4. A. Courtier. [King's domestic.] [adj. Courtesie (augm.] Complement (per∣son] Courtliness, [Complement (abtr.] Courtship, [Converse adj. Com∣plement (augm.] Cousen. RO. I. 5. A. first— RO. I. 5. to— [a. Fraud] Cow, [ull. e. II. 1. (fem.] —with Caf, [Pregnant Cow.] —heard, [adj. Cow (Off.] to— [a. Coward (make.] Cowardise. Man. I. 7. D. Cowcumber. HS. VII. 3. wild— HS. VII. . A. Cowing, [Stooping] Cowslip. HS. VIII. 1. A. Cow wheat. HS. VIII. 8. A. Ccob, [adj. Man. IV. 6. E. (person.] Crab. —fish. Ex. VI. 6. Molca— Ex. VI. 7. A. Little— Ex. VI. 4. —louse, [Crab (like)—] —tree, [Sour Apple-tree.] Fruit, [Sour Apple.] Crabbed. [Austere face (manner] [orose] [Difficult] Crack. [Break] sp Incept.] [Chink] [Sound as of Breaking] [rag] —brain'd, [Mad (dim.] Crackle, [Sound (freq.) of break∣ing (inc.] Cradle. [Bedead (dim.) adj. p. Vo∣lutation (apt.] Crafish. Ex. VI. 3. Craft. Cunning. Ha. VI. 2. E. [Mechanic (art.] Crag, [Rough augm. Rock.] Rocky hill.] Cram, [Fill (augm.] sp. by thrusting.] Cramp. S. IV. 7. A. —fish, [Torpedo.] Fi. II. 4. —iron, [Iron hooks for join∣ing.] Crane. Bird. Bi. VIII. 1. —fly. Ex. IV. . —'s bill. HS. I. 5. Machin, [Great listing (ma∣chin.] Crank. [Vigorous] [adj. Mirth] Cranny, [Chink.] Crash, [Break.] [Sound of breaking] [Fit] Crassitude. [Thickness] TM. II. 5. [Density] Q. V. 3. E. [Courseness] Cratch, [Vessel in which  feeds.] Crave. [a. Desire] [Entreat] [Petition] Craven, [Coward.] Cravingness, Covetousness] Scrapingness] Craw, [Stomach] sp. of Bird.] Crawling, Creeping] Mo. I. 6. Wriggling] Craze, [Bruise.] sp. the Superficies.] Crazy, [adj. Sickness (apt.] Creak, [Acute sound of solid bo∣dies mutually rubbing.] Cream, [Best Part.] sp. of Milk.] Create. Proper. AS. I. 1. [a. Efficient] Creature, [adj. p. Create (hing] Credence, [Belief] Credible, [adj. p. Believe (pot.] Credit. [Believe] AS. II. 4. [Esteem] AS. II. 8. [Repuation] a. II. 4. [Trust.] AS. III. 4. Creditor. TA. IV. 7. Credulity. Ha. III. 2. E. —in Religion. Ha. V. 4. E. Creed, [Epitome of adj. p. ought-believe (things.] sp. in Christianity.] Creek, [Bay (dim.] Creep. Crawl. Mo. I. 6. [Wriggle] Mo. I. 6. A. as Ivy, [Grow contiguous.] [a. Fawning] —in, [Get in Secretly.] Gradually.] Crescent, [Increasing.] sp. Moon.] Cresses. garden.— HS. VI. 5. Indian— HL. VI. 12. Sciatica— HS. VI. 5. A. Swes— HS. VI. 6. A. Water— HS. IV. 15. Winter— HS. IV. 7. A. Crescet. Supporting (jg.) for boiling vess.] —light, [Not-cover'd Lan∣tern.] Crest. [Comb] PP. V. 7. —fallen, [Discouraged (augm.] —of Helmet, [Comb (like)—] —of Arms, [The Gen∣try (sign) upon the head (armour.] [Mane] PP. VI. 4. A. Crevit [Chink] [Crafish] Crew, [Companions (aggr.] Crewet, [adj. Glass-pot (dim.] Cry. [Grief] [Weep] AC. IV. 3. O. Vocal. [Exclaim] AC. III. 3. —out, [a. Partrition (inc.] —out upon [Accuse public∣ly. [Blame public∣ly. —mercy, [Entreat for par∣don.] —quittance, [compensate] Proclaim, [a. Cryer.] Crib. Pinch] [Penurious (person] [Oxe's Eating (place] Crick, [Pricking] A. II. 7. sp. through Cold] Cricket. Ex. II. 2. Fen— [Eve-.] Ex. II. 2. A. Crier. RJ. I. 5. A. Crime. RJ. III. —not-capital. RJ. IV. Crimson, [Red adj. blood (like.] Cringe, Congee (augm.] (freq]
Cripple, [adj. p. Impotence in Limbs.] Crisis, [adj. Judgment (time] (sign] Crisping, [Curling.] O. V. 5. A. Critic. [Judger of words] Critical, [adj. Judge (apt.] Crochet, vid. Crotchet. Crocodile. Be. VI. 3. Crocus. HL. IV. 7. A. Croft, [Field (dim.] Croke. [a. Toad Raven (voice] As the Bowels, [Sound through wind enclosed.] Crone, [adj. Decrepit person.] Crook. a— [adj. Crookedness (thing] Mag. III. 1. O. [Hook] [Saddle of sticks curved up∣ward.] to— [adj. a. Bend] [adj. p. crooked (make] [Hook (make] Crookedness. Mag. III. 1. O. Crop. —of Bird, [first Stomach—] —of Corn, [adj. p. Heap (aggr.)—] to— [Off- pluck▪] tear.] break.] Crosier, [adj. Bishop's Staff.] Cross. Figure or Site. [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. [Transverse] Mag. II. 8. D. —cloth, [adj. Transverse fore∣head (vest.] to— a River, [To go over a River.] Decussated. Mag. IV. 4. A. —of wood, &c. [adj. Crucifying (jug) —&c.] sp. adj. Cross (fig.] [Image of adj. Crucifying (jug.] to—himself, [To a. Cross (sign) upon—] —bow. RM. V. 4. A. —way, [adj. Cross-way] Quality. transcendent. [Contrary] [Opposite] moral. [Perverse] [Contentious] [Morose] [Disobedient] Event (corr.) [adversity] of action. to— [Frustrate.] of instrument. to— [Spoil] sp. with transverse line.] Crossbill. Bi. IV. 5. A. Crosswort. HL. IX. 8. A. Crotchet. [Hook (dim.] [adj. Music Letter] [Invention (corr.] [a. Craft (dim.] Crouch. [Stoop] AC. VI. 4. sp. Adoration (sign.] [Fawn] Croud. Throng, [Togethr-thrusted (aggr.] Fiddle, [Music (instr.) adj.] p. strike sound with Bow] Crow. Bird. Bi. I. 5. A. —'s foot. HF. IX. 4. Instrument, [adj. iron adj. lift∣ing (instr.] to— [a. Cock (voice] [a. Triumph (voice] [a. Boast (corr.] Crown. Diadem, [Head-environing Kingship (sign) Ornament] —of the head, [Top—] —imperial. HL. IV. 1. Mony, [5 shillings (aggr.] Crucible, [Vessel for melting of metals by Fire.] Crucifie. RJ. V. 8. Crucifix, [Image of Christ cruci∣fied.] Crude, [not boil'd prepared digested Pr. III. O. Cruelty. Man. I. 5.. D. Cruet, [Small Glass (vess.) for oil, &c.] Crum, [Powder] —of bread, [adj. Inside (part)—] Crumble, [Crums (make] Crump, [Sinew-contracted.] —foot, [Shrunk—] —shoulder, [Prominent—] Crumpled. HC. VI. 3. A. Crupper. [Rump] [Hinder stay of Saddle] [adj. Rump (armam.] Cruse. [Bottle (dim.) of Glass.] to— [a. Scout.] sp. for Booty.] Crushing, [Bruising.] sp. by Compression.] Crust. —of Shel-fish. PP. IV. 2. A. —of Bread, [Out-side—] sp. Hard.] Crustaceous [adj. PP. IV. 2. A.] Crutch. [fig. T] Mag. IV. 4. Staff of lame (person] Cryptography, [Secret writing art.] Crystal. St. II. 4. Cu. [Sign] [Beginning (sign] [Foot (armam.) for Ox] Cub Bear (young.] Fox (dim.] Cube. Mag. III. 5. O. Cubeb.   Cubit. Limb. PG. V. 2. Measure, [Length from El∣bow to fingers top.] Cucking-stool, [adj. a. Diving (jug.) of Scolds.] Cuckld, [Husband of Adulteress] Cucko. Bi. I. 3. —flower. HS. IV. 15. A. Cuckquean, [Wife of Adulterer] Cucumber. HS. VII. 3. Cud, [Upper Stomach.] chew the— [Again-masticate, adj. p. pret. Swallowed (thing.] Cudgel. [Staff] [Club (dim.] [Cudgelling (instr.] —ing. RJ. VI. 2. A. Cudwort. HF. II. 5. A. Cuff, [Ornament for Hand∣wrist.] to— [Strike with folded hand.] Cuirase. [adj. Trunk (armor.] Cull, [Elect] sp. to have.] Cullis, [Broth of Poultry.] Culpable, [adj. p. Blame Reprehend (apt.] Cultivate, [Manure.] Culture, [Manure.] Culver, [Pigeon] Culverin, [Great Ordnance (kind] Cumber. [a. Burthen] [a. Trouble] [a. Hinder] Cummin. HF. V. 7. A. Cunctation. Ha. IV. 1. E. Cunny. Be. III. 4. Cunning. [Art] [Craft] Cup. Pr. V. 9. A. —bearer. [adj. Cup (Off.] —of a flower. PP. II. 8. to— Mo. IV. 7. A. Cupboard [Table [Box sp. for Cups] Cur, [Dog of ignoble breed, good only to accompany.] Curasier, [Armed (perf.) Horse∣man.] Curate, adj. Parish Priest] Subordinate Priest] Instead- Priest] Curb. [Cohibiting (part) of Bridle] [Cohibiting (augm.) Bridle] to— [Cohibit] Curdle, [Coagulate.] Cure, [Re-health] —of Souls, [Officership for Souls.] Curiosity.
[Perfection] [Excellence] [Beauty (augm.] [Diligence (augm.] op. to Science. Ha. VI. 1. E. [Niceness] Man. II. 6. E. [Intemperance. Man. II. O. as to Ornaments] Dainties] Curlew. Bi. VIII. 9. Curling. O. V. 5. A. Curr, vid. Cur. Currants. Sh. I. 1. A. Current. Subst. [Stream] Adj. [Genuine] [Perfect] [Approved] [Adj. Custom] RC. IV. 1. A. [Common] TM. IV. 6. A. [Ordinary] TM. V. 3. Year— [—present] Curry. [Comb] O. V. 9. O. sp. Horse.] —combe, [adj. Combing (inst.) for Horse.] [Prepare Leather.] —favour. [Fawn for—] [Endeavour (corr.] for—] Currish [Dog (like.] Curse. Action of God. AS. I. 3. O. Action of man. [Excommunicate] [Imprecate] Cursy. AC. V. 4. A. Cursory. [Swift] [Rash] [Slight] Curst. [Execrable] [Fierce] NP. IV. 4. O. [Angry] Man. I. 9. D. [Morose] Curtain. [Shadowing (vest) before- adj. hang (apt] sp. about Bed.] Curtal. [Off-cut Tail] [adj. a. Brevity] Curtesan, [Common adj. Forni∣cator (fem.] Curtle-ax, [Short Sword.] Curve. [Crooked.] Mag. III. 1. O. Curvet. [Go leaping.] Cushion. Po. VI. 5. A. Cusp, [Point.] Mag. IV. 2. Custard, [Pie of Milk and Eggs, &c.] Custody. [Keeping] [Garding] [Imprisonment] Custom. Use. RC. IV. 1. A. [Habit] [Manners] [Tribute upon Merchandize.] —er. In buying or selling. RO. IV. 6. Cut. Discontinue. sp. by edged (thing) inter∣pos'd. Body, sp. Consistent. Mo. VI. 7. Earth. [Dig] water— [Furrow for—] [Plough] Stone, &c. [Carve] [Grave] Plant. [Fell] [Prune] Animal. [Wound] horse—s [-wounds him∣self.] [Un—a. Testicle] Parts excrementitious. [Pare] [Shave] [Clip] Flesh, &c. [Mince] [Chip] [Slice] [Slash] Plain or Line, [a. Interse∣ction.] Room, [a. Partition] —a caper, [Leap with Leggs trembling (like.] Hurt. Sense. —ing, [Acrimonious.] [Intense] Minde. [a. Grief (augm] [a. Anger (augm] Estate, [a. Fraud.] Diminish. [a. Short] [Dispatch] Separate. —off, [a. Separate.] [Excommunicate.] [Destroy.] —purse, [Thief] —throat, [Murtherer.] [Lot] Cuticle, [Skin. PG. II. 3. outer∣most] Cutler. [Sword (mech.] [Fabrile (mech) of cutting (instr] Cutter, [Robber.] [Swaggerer] Cuttle-fish Ex. IX. 2. Lesser— Ex. IX. 2. A. Cycle. —of Sun, [Revolution of 28 years, in which the Do∣minical Letter returns to be the same.] —of Moon, [Revolution of 19 years, in which the same Lunations return.] Cygnet, [Swan (young.] Cylinder. Mag. III. 6. Cylindroides. Ex. VII. 3. Cymbal, [Round brazen Music (instr.] Cynical. [adj. Dog (like.] [Morose] Cypress. Tr. V. 6. D. DAbble, [Move (freq.) in wet (thing.] Dabchick [Dydapper] Bi. VIII. 7. Dace. Fi. IX. 10. Daffadil. HL. IV. 4. Dag, [Gun (dim.] Dagger, [Short Sword (dim.] Daggle, [adj. a. Durt (dim.] sp. the Margin.] Day. 24 hours. Mea. V. 5. holy— [adj. Festivity.] to— [In this—] Time of Light. Mea. V. 6. —break, [Day (inc.] —time, [Day (time.] broad— [adj. Perfect Manifest —] far— [Late in the—] [Victory] RM. II. 1. E. Days-man, [Arbitrator.] Daily, [adj. daies (segr.] Dainty, [Nice] —s, [Sustenance extraordina∣ry.] Pr. II. Dairy. [adj. Milk (kind.] [adj. Milk (room.] Dale, [Valley.] Dally. [Playing] O. O. [a. Fondness] Man. VI. 7. O. [a. Wanton] NP. IV. 3. O. [Protract] TA. III. 5. O. Dam. [Parent (fem.] Impedient ridge] adj. Stay (make ridge] to— up adj. a. Impedi∣ent a. Stay with ridge] Dame, adj. Noble fem.] adj Gentle fem.] Mistris, [Master (em.] Dammage. [Loss] [Hurt] Dammask, [Fine Linnen of Da∣mascus] to— [a. Damascus (manner.] Damn. as God—Ha. I. 4. O. as man—[Condemn.] Damnifie, ]a. Dammage.] Damosel, [Young Celebs (fem.] Damp. Subst.
—fiery. El. I. 7. —watery. El. II. 5. A. Adj. [Moist] Q. V. 2. (dim.) Damsin, [Plum adj. Damascus] Dancing. Mo. V. 5. Dandelion. HF. III. 12. A. Dandiprat, [Little (dim.) man.] Dandle, [Shaking (dim.) in ones arms.] Dandraf, [Scurf of the head.] Daneswort. HS. IX. 9. Danger. T. V. 3. O. Dangle, [Hang swinging.] Dank, [Moist] Q. V. 2. Dapper, [Little nimble] Dapple. Q. II. 7. A. Dare. Fish [Dase] Fi. IX. 10. Venture. [adj. Fortitude] [adj. Bold] AS. V. 8. —not, [Fear▪] [Challenge] RM. I. 2. —larks, [a. Fear (make.] Darkness. to the Sight. Q. I. 1. D. to the Understanding. D. III. 9. O. Darling, [Most beloved] Darn, [Sow knitting (like.] Darnel. HL. III. 5. Dart. RM. V. 5. Meteor. El. I. 4. A. Dase. Fi. IX. 10. Dash. Action. [Motion (imp.] sp. Fluid against hard.] or Hard against fluid.] [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. [Strike] Mo. VI. 4. [Write (imp.] [Mixture] sp. with worse.] Effect. [a. Fall] [a. Hurt] [Break] [Scatter parts (dim.] [Spoil] [Destroy] [adj. Shame Despair (make] Dastard, [Coward.] Date. Fruit. Tr. II. 4. A. Time. Sp. I. 5. out of- [Old [Late (exc.] Daub, vid. Dawb. Daucus, [Wild Carret] Daughter, [Child (fem.] —in Law. [Child (fem.) by Affinity.] Husband's Daughter] Wife's Daughter] [Sons Wife] Daunt. [Fear (make] [Discourage] Daw. Bi. I. 6. Dawb. [Plastering] [Smearing] [Defiling by Smearing] [Bribing] Dawl, [Dull with weariness.] Dawning, [Morning (incept.] Dazy. HF. II. 3. A. great— HF. III. 3. blew— HF.II. 14. Dazle, [a. Dull with Light (exc.] Deacon. RE. II. 5. A. Dead deprived Being. Power. Action. Wanting Being. Power. Action. —Being. [adj. pret. Dying] —pay, [pay of the Dead.] —place, [place of the Dead.] [Not-adj. living] —Power. Natural [Impotent] Sense. [num'd] [extasied] sp. with fear.] —asleep [Dead (like) through —drunk [Dead (like) through Sleep] Drunkenness] Vigor, [Dull] Strength, [Weak.] Transcendent, [Remiss.] —Action. Motion. —water, [adj. Pool—] Affecting the Sense. Sight. —Colour, [Remiss.—] Hearing. —of the night, [Quiet (time)—] Taste Q. IV. 6. O· Smell Q. IV. 6. O· Feeling. —cole, [Unfired—] —wall, [adj. Yielding Q. VI. 1.—] —nettle, [Archangel] Deadly. (adj. Dying (make] [Not-adj. p. end (pot.) until death] Deafness. NP. III. 2. O. Deal. do [adj. Action] [a. Conversation] [a. Business] sp. (merc.] —between, [a. Mediator.] distribute, [Give (segr.] a— [Quantity] [Fir board] Dean. [Chief of Bishop's Assessors] [College (Off.] Dear. [adj. p. Love (augm.] [adj. Price (augm.] Dearn, [Sow knitting (like.] Dearth, [Scarcity.] TM. I. 2. D. Death. Proper. AC. I. 7. O. Put to— [adj. a. Die (make] [a. Punishment capital] [Cessation] [Decay] Death-watch. Ex. V. 6. Debarr, [a: Impedient.] Debase, [a. lowness meanness (make] Debate. [a. Contention] [a, Dispute] Debauch, [adj. Vice Sensuality Riotousness (make] Debilitate, [a. Weakness.] Deboist, adj. Vice Sensuality Riotousness Debonair. [adj. Temper. NP. II. (perf.] [Sprightly] [Merry] Debt. TA. IV. 7. O. Decad, [Ten] Decalogue, [the Ten Commands of God.] Decaying. NP. V. 4. O. Decease. AC. I. 7. O. Deceive. [a. Fraud] [a. Error (make] [Frustrating] sp. ones Expectation] [doe Beside- Contra- expecta∣tion.] December, [Twelfth month.] Decent. T. V. 2. Deception, vid. Deceive. Decide. [a. Sentence] [Finish] sp. Suit] Decimation, [Tenthing] Decipher. interpret obscure Chara∣cters.] Explain obscure Chara∣cters.] read obscure Chara∣cters.] [Un-conceal] Deck, [Floor of Ship.] to— [a. Ornate (make.] Declaim, [a. Oration for.] against.] Delare. [Interpret] [Shewing] [a. Manifest] [a. Public] —for, [Own publicly.] Declension, [Changing (manner of the ends of Nouns] Decline. [a. Diverge] —ing Dial, [Erect Plain whose Surface is not situa∣ted toward North or South.] [Avoid] [Decay] —ing age. Mea. VI. 3. A. —a Noune, [a. Declension.]
Declivity. [Obliqueness] sp. Downward verging] Decoction. [Boiling] [Boil'd (thing] sp. Infusion] Decoy. Po. I. 6. A. Decorum, [Decency] Decrease, [Diminish] Decree▪ [Purpose▪] [Sentence▪] [Edict] Decrement. [Diminution] [Loss] Decrepit, [adj. p. Stooping.] sp. with Age.] —age. Mea. VI. 4. A. Decretal, [adj. Decree.] Decuple, [Ten-fold] Decussation, [Crossing] Mag. IV. 4. A. Dedicate. As to God, [Consecrate.] RE, V. 1. As to Man, [Give to the Honour Patronage of—] Deduce, [a. Illation.] Deduct, [a. Ablatum.] Deed. [Action.] T. I. 7. in very— [Truly] [Writing] RC. VI. 5. Deem. [a. Opinion] [a. Thought] Deep, whose bottom is far from its top. Natural as the whole. deep. [adj. TM. II. 3.] the— [Sea] thick. [adj. TM. II. 5.] Six— [Six in file] as a part. [adj. Inward] —colour, [Dark (dim.)—] —Sound. Q. III. 1. D. —Notion [hidden] [obscure] [adj. under] [adj. bottom] Transcendental, [adj. Intense] —sleep, [Sleep (int.] Deer. fallow— Be. II. 4. red— Be. II. 3. Deface. [Un-a▪ Figure] [Spoil] [a. Deform] [Destroy] Defalk, [a. Ablatum] Defame. [adj. Infamy (make] [a. Calumny] Default, [Defect] —of appearance, [Not appear∣ance.] Defeat. [Frustration] [Overthrow] Defecation.. [a. Pure (make] [Un-worst part.] Defect. TM. I. 3. D. Defection. [Apostasie] [Rebellion] Defence, vid. Defend. Defend. Oppose. RM. I. 1. O. Protection. RO. VI. 5. [a. Prisoner] RJ. I. 3. O.- [a. Defendent] RJ I. 4. O. [a. Advocate] RJ. I. 7. Defendent. RJ. I. 4. O. Defensive, [adj. Defend.] —arms. RM. V. 1. A. Defer. [a. Late (make] —before Action, [Respite] —in Action, [Protract.] Deferenoe, [Respect.] Defy. RM. I. 2. O. Deficient. TM. I. 3. D. Defile. TM. V. 6. O. [a. Vice.] [adj. Vice (make] [a. Unchast] Define. [a. Definition] [a. Sentence] Definite. [Finite] [Express] Definition. D. IV. 3. Definitive. [Express] [adj. a. Sentence] [adj. Finishing] Deflour. [a. Fornication] Defluxion [Distilling] [Catarrh] Deformity. NP. V. 6. O. Defray. [Disburse] [Pay] Defraud, [a. Fraud] Defunct, [adj. a. pret. Dying.] Degenerate. [Not-ancestor (like] [Spurious] Degrade. RJ VI. 8. Degree. T. VI. 6. —of person. RC. I. —in University, [Graduate (thing] Measure. Mea. I. 9. Dehort. [Dissuade] Deject. [Down-cast] [a. Sorrow] [a. Despair] Deify, [a. God (make] Deign, [a. Condescension.] Deity, [God (abstr.] Delay. [a. Late Slow (make] disposition, [Cunctation] —before Action, [Respite] —in Action [Protract] Delectation. AS. IV. 7. Delegate▪ [adj. p. Substitute (person] [Instead— Put Sent Judging (per∣son.] Deliberate. AS. III. 1. —ness. [Considerateness] Ha. IV. 1. [Slowness] NP. V. 9. O. Deliberation, vid. Deliberate. with— [Considerately] [Slowly] Delicate. [adj. a. Delight (apt.] [adj. Pr. II.] Tender, [adj. NP. IV. 7. O.] [Over-neat] Man. II. 6. E. —s, [adj. Pr. II. (thing] Delicious, [adj. Delectation Pleasure (aug.] Delight. AS. IV. 7. Delineate. [a. Line] [a. Description. D. IV. 3.] sp. by Lines] Delinquent. [Guilty] [Prisoner] Delirium. [Dotage] NP. II. 2. O. [Frenzy] S. IV. 1. Deliver, [Motion (met.) of the Possession of Power over a thing] from one person to ano∣ther.] —things. TA. IV. 13. as Intrusting, [Deposite] as Paying, [Pay] as Disclaiming, [Resign] —words of Fact, [Narration] Doctrin, [a. Teacher] —immediately. —by Mouth, [Speak] —by Pen [Write.] —mediately, [Tradition] RE. VI. 1. A. —from better to worse] Passively. [Dereliction] AS. I. 5. O. Actively. Involuntary, [Yielding] Voluntary, [Betraying] —from worse to better] Temporal. [AS I. 5.] Preventing. [Preserve] [a. Escape] Remedying. [Un-captivate] [Un-slave] [Un-imprison] [a. Parturition] to be—ed, [Parturition] Eternal, [Redemption.] AS. I. 7. Delve, [Dig.] Delude, [Deceive] Deluge, [Over-flowing.]
Delusion, vid. Delude. Demand. —to know, [a. Question.] —to have. TA. IV. 2. O. —as Price. RC. VI. 2. A. Demean. [Land which the Lord of the Mannor uses.] [a. Demeanour] Demeanour. AC. V. Demerit. [Worthy (abstr.] [Earning] Demi, [Half] Demi-cannon.   Demi-god, [God (dim.] Demi-lance.   Demise. RC. V. 5. Demiss. [Low] [Humble] [Abject] Democracy, [Government by the People.] Demolish. [a. Ruin.] Demon, [Spirit] sp. Devil] Demoniac, [Inhabited by De∣vils.] Demonstrate. [Shew] [a. Certain by Argument] Demur. Hesitate. AS. IV. 3. O. [Ask more time for considering] before answer∣ing.] Demure. [Grave] [Formal] Den, [Cavity under- adj. ground] Lion's &c.— [Lion's &c. (house] Deny, D. VI. 2. O. self— Ha. V. 3. Denison, [Admit∣ted member of Nation.] Corporati∣on] Denominate, [adj. p. Name (make.] Denote, [a. Meaning.] Denounce. [Publish] [Threaten] Density. Q. V. 3. E. Dent. Mag. IV. 3. O. Dentex. Fi. V. 5. A. Dentifrice, [Teeth-cleansing (thing.] sp. Powder.] Deodand, [adj. p. ought Almsgi∣ving (thing] Depart. [Go] TA. VI. 1. O. [From-go] [Die] Dependent. Op. to Absolute. TM. IV. 3. O. Op. to Patron. RO. III. 5. O. Deplorable. [adj. a. Grief (apt] [adj. Misery (augm.] Deplorate, [adj. p. Despair.] Deplore. [Sorrow (aug.) for] [Shew sorrow (aug.] for] Depopulate, [Un-people.] Deportation, [Carrying into Ex∣ile] Deportment, [Demeanour] Depose. [Down Put Lay [a. Privative] —from Dignity, [Degrade] —from Office, [Incapacitate] —from Orders, [Deprive] [Swear] sp. before Magistrate] Deposite. RC. V. 1. A. Deprave, [a. Evil make.] Deprecate. RO. V. 3. A. Depreciate. [Un-a. valor] [Diminish the worth] Depression. Down-forcing. O. I. 1. O. [Shallowness] TM. II. 3. O. Deprive. [a. Privative] —of Possession, [Un-pos∣sess.] —of orders. RE. V. 2. O. Depth, vid. Deep. TM. II. 3. Depuration. [a. Pureness] [Un— a. Scum] a. Sediment] Deputy, [adj. Substitute (person] Dereliction. [Abandoning] TA. II. 2. O. —to Evil. AS. I. 5. O. Deride, [Mock.] RJ. IV. 9. A. Derision, [Mocking.] RJ. IV. 9. A. Derive, [a. Derivative] Derivative. TM. IV. 1. O. Derogate. [From-take] [Diminish] sp. Praise.] Reputation] Descant, [a. Paraphrase.] Descend, [Down-ition.] Descendent. RO. I. 1. O. Descent. [Down-ition.] as of Ground, [Down-obli∣quity.] [Descendent. RO. I. 1. O (abstr.] [Extraction] Descry. [See (inc.] [Finde by Sight] sp. From far.] Describe, [a. Description.] Description. D. IV. 3. A. Desert. Merit. [adj. Worthy (thing] (abstr.] [adj. p. Earn (thing.] Wilderness. [Not-inhabited] [Not-inhabitable country] [Banket] Pr. II. 1. A. to— [Forsake] Desertion [Forsaking] Deserve. [a. Worthy] [a. Earn] Designing. Internal. TA. III. 1. External [Appoint] Desire. In Affection. AS. V. 5. In Words. [Intreat] RO. V. 3. Desist. AS. IV. 6. O. Desk. [Supporting (jug.) for Book] [Box to write upon] Desolate. [Solitary (augm.] [Not-inhabited] [adj. Grief (augm.] Despair. Affection. AS. V. 8. O. Sin. Ha. V. 5. O. Desperate. [adj. p. Despair.] [Rash (augm.] Desperation. Affection. AS. V. 8. O. Sin. Ha. V. 5. O. Despicable. [adj. p. Contempt (apt] [Sorry] Despise, [Contemn] Despite. [Contempt] [Malignity] [Done (thing) for to anger one.] [Affront] Despondency, [Despair,] (inc.] (dim.] Destine. [a. Purpose] [a. Fate.] Destiny, [Fate] Destitute. [adj. Defect] [adj. p. Forsake] Destroy, [a. Destruction] Destruction. Action of God. AS. I. 4. A. [Spoiling] Desuetude, [Un- a. custom.] Detect. [Discover] [Un-conceal] [Manifest] Detein. [Hold] —unjustly. RJ. IV. 3. A. [Stay (make] Determine. [Finish] [a. Desist] —the Liberty of the Will. AS. IV. 8. O. —by ones own [a. Purpose] AS. IV. 3. —by anothers [Sentence] RJ. II. 5. A. Deterre. RO. V. 5. O. Detest.
[Loath (augm.] [Hate (augm.] Detract. [a. Ablatum] sp. From Reputation.] [Under-say] Man. IV. 1. D. [Calumny] Detriment. [Loss] [Diminishing] Devastation. [Destruction] [Spoiling] Devest, un-a. clothe] a. privativeness] Deviate, un-a. clothe] a. privativeness] [Wander] [Err] Devil. W. I. 2. O. —'s bit. HF. II. 13. A. —'s dirt, [adj. Vitriol earth] —'s milk, [Spurge.] HS. V. 2. Devilish, [adj. Devil.] Devise. [Invent] [Contrive] By Will, [Bequeath] [Feign] [Forge] a—, [adj. Craft (thing] [Stratagem] [Posy] Devoir. [Endeavour] [Duty] Devolve. [Successive to— Putting] [Final to— Ition] Devoted. [adj. p. Vow] [Consecrated] [adj. Zeal] Devotion. [Worship (hab.] [Zeal] Devour. [a. Ravenous. NP. IV. 5. O.] [a. Glutton] [Eat up all] greedily] Devout, [adj. Devotion.] Dew. El. III. 3. A. —claw, [adj. Heel-claw.] —grass, [Grass (kinde) a. Seed (apt) millet (like] —lap, [Loose skin of the neck.] Dexterity. [Agility] [Art. (perf.] Die. [v. Death▪] vid. Death. a. Colour. O. V. 3. A. a— [adj. Dicing▪ (instr.] Diabetes, [Disease of Pissing (exc.] Diabolical, [adj. Devil. W. I. 2. O.] Diadem, [Head-environing King (sign) Ornament.] Diagonal. Ma. II. 3. Diagram, [Lined figure.] picture.] Dial. [Time-shewing (instr.] sp. By shadow.] Dialect, [Language (manner.] Dialogue, Discourse al∣tern.] Conference al∣tern.] Diameter. Ma. II. 5. Diamond. Stone. St. IV. 1. Figure, [Square] sp. of not-right Angles.] Diaper, [Linen] Diaphanous, [Transparent] Diaphoretic, [adj. a. Sweet (make]. Diaphragm. PG. VI. 3. Diary, [Narration of days (segr.] Diarrhaea. S. VI. 6. Dibble, [adj. Setting (instr.] Dicacity, [Loquacity.] Dice, [adj. Mo. V. 1. A. (instr.] to play at— Mo. V. 1. A. —ore. Dichotomy, [Division into two.] Dicker, [Ten skins of Leather.] Dictate, AC. III. 6. Dictator, [Chief adj. Authority (Off.] Dictionary, [Book for words.] Didapper, [Dabchick] Bi. VIII. 7. Dier. [adj. Dying [art.] —'s weed. HF. I. 11. Diet. [Regulated victual (manner] [Council] RJ. III. 5. A. Differ, [v. Difference.] Difference. Proper. T. IV. [Diversity] T. III. [Dissent] [a. Contention] making a— [Distinction] [Partiality] Difficult. T. V. 4. O. Diffident. AS. V. 7. O. Diffuse. [Spread] [Infect] Dig. O. III. 1. Digest. Natural. AC. I. 5. A. Chymic. O. VI. 5. [a. Order] Dight. [Clothing] [Adorning] Digit. [Inch] [Inch (like] Dignifie, [a. Dignity.] Dignity. [Worthiness] T. IV. 6. High degree. Ha. II. 5. Digression. D. V. 9. A. Dike. [Ditch] [Gutter] [Furrow] Dil. HF. V. 1. A. Dilacerate, [Tear] Dilapidate. [Ruin] [Suffer to decay▪] Dilate. [a. Breadth] [a. Ampliation] Dilatory, [adj. Delay] Dilemma, [Argument adj. a. re∣tort (apt.) against both answers] Diligence. Ha. IV. 5. Double— Ha. IV. 5. E. Dilling, [adj. p. Favour (aug.] Dilucidate, [Interpret.] Dilute, [Remiss.] Dim. [Blind (dim.] [Dark (dim.] —ness. [Sight (Corr.] (Dim.] op. to brightness. Q. I. 3. O Dimension. Ma. I. [a. Measure.] Diminishing. [a. Little▪ TM. I. 1. D.] [v. Remission. TM. I. 8. D.] [a. Few. TM. III. 1. D.] [More- a. little. T. I. 7. D.] [More- a. remiss] [More- a. few] Diminutive, [adj. Littleness.] Dimple. [Furrow (dim.] [Dent (dim.] Din, [Sound (augm.] Dine, [adj. Noon-meal.] Ding, [Cast.] Dinner, [Dine.] Dint, [Impetus.] Diocess, [Bishop's Precinct] (Place] Dip [into- adj. a. Water.] [under- adj. a. Water.] Dipthong. D. I. 3. A. Dire. [Fierce] [Cruel] Direct. [Straight] Ma. III. 1. Upright. Ma. II. 8. E. to— RO. VI. 1. Dirge, [Prayer for the Dead] Dirt. El. IV. 2. Disable. [Un-a. able (make.] [a. Impotence] [a. Weakness] [Incapacitate] Disabuse. [Un- a. wrong (make] Disadvantage. [Hindrance] [Loss] [Hurt] Disagree. [Dissent] [Unpeaceable] Disallow, [Disapprove.] AS. III. 3. O. Disanimate, [Discourage.]
Disannul. [Annihilate] [Spoil] Disappoint. [Un-appoint] [Frustrate] Disapprove. AS. III. 3. O. Disarm. [Un-armour] [Take away Arms] Disaster, [Adversity] Disavow. [Disapprove] [Deny] [abdicate] Disband, [Un—RM IV.] Disbelieve. AS. II. 4. O. Disburse. TA. IV. 5. Disburthen, [Unlode] Discamp, [Un- a. camp.] Discard. [Out-put Cards] [Incapacitate] Discern See the dif∣ference] Seen (make the dif∣ference] [See] [a. Common sense] [a. Difference] Discharge. [Unlode] —a Gun, [Un- adj. p. ammu∣nition (make)—] [Un-oblige] From Duty. [Perform] [a. Immunity] From Debt. [Pay] [Acquit] From Guilt. [a. Innocent] [Acquit] [Absolve] Disciple, [Learner.] RO. III. 3. Discipline. [a. Teacher] [Good Government] Man. VI. 5. Church— RE. V. [Correction] Disclaim, [Abdicate] Disclose. [Un-conceal] [Reveal] AS. I. 6. [Un-cover] O. II. 3. O. [Shew] TA. I. 8. [Open] O. II. 4. O. Discolour, [a. Colour (corr.] Discomfit, [Overthrow.] Discomfort. RO. VI. 3. O. Discommend, [Dispraise.] Discommodity. [Inconvenience] [Hurt] Disconsolate. [adj. Discomfort] [adj. Grief (augm.] Discontent. [Not-content] [adj. Anxiety] Discontinue, [a. Discontinu∣ed.] [Leave for some while.] [Absent for some while.] [Un- a. custom] —ed. —Quantity. TM. III. —in Place, Here and there. Sp. II. 7. O. —in Time, Now and then. Sp. I. 7. O. Disconvenient, [Inconvenient] Discord. [Not-congruity] —in Music. Q III. 8. O. [Dissent] [a. Unpeaceableness] [a. Contention] Discover. AS. II. 2. A. [Un-conceal] [Reveal] [Perceive (inc.] [Uncover] [Shew] Discountenance, [Un- a. reputa∣tion.] Discourage. RO. VI. 2. O. Discourse. Elements of— D. I. Words— D. II. Complex parts of— Grammatical. D. III. Logical. D. IV. Mixed. D. V. Modes of —D. VI. Discourtesie. [a. Courtesie. Man. IV. 7. O.] [a. Malignity. AS. V. 2. O.] Discredit. [Disbelieve] [Infamy] Discreet. [Prudent] Ha. VI. 2. [Grave] Man. IV. 6. [Sober] Ha. III. 3. Discrepant, [Different] Discretion, vid. Discreet. at the—of, [To be disposed according to the will of] Discriminate. [a. Difference] [a. Distinction] Discuss. [Off— shake] [Apart— shake] [Scatter] [Inquisition] sp. by Disputing.] Disdein. AS. VI. 5. A. Disease. S. to— [a. Disease] [a. Pain] [Trouble] Disengage. [Un-oblige] [Un-entangle] Disentangle, [Un-entangle] Disesteem, [Esteem (corr.] Disfavour, [Un-favour.] Disfigure. [a. Figure (corr.] [a. Deformity] Disfranchise, [Un-privilege] Disfurnish, [Un-furnish.] Disgorge, [Vomit.] Disgrace, [Infamy.] Disguise, [Un- a. seem (make] Disgust, [Displicence.] Dish. Vessel. Pr. V. 4. Chafing— [adj. Table (vess.) for Fire.] —Clout, Linen for cleansing Dishes.] —washer, [Wagtail.] Bi. III. 8. A. —of meat, (Meat (aggr.] sp. dished] Dishearten, [Discourage] Dishevel'd, [adj. p. Confusion.] sp. Hairs.] Dishonest. [adj. Vice] [Unchast] Dishonour. [Infamy] [Disrespect] Disimbarque Go out of Ship.] Take out of Ship.] Disinchant, [Un- a. Witchcraft.] Disingenuity, NP. IV. 1. O. Disinherit, [Un-inherit (make] Disjoin, ]Un-join] Disjoint, [Un-joint] Disjunctive, [adj. Separate] Dislike. [Disapprove] [Displicence] Dislocate. [Un-place] [Place (corr.] Dislodge, [Remove out of his Lodging.] Disloyal. Man. V. 6. O. Dismay, [a. Fear (make] Dismal, [adj. Adversity (augm.] Dismantle, [Un-fortifie.] Dismember. [Separate Member from Mem∣ber.] [Tear] Dismiss. [Send away] [Permit to depart] Dismount. [Un-a. ride] [Un-a. jugament] Disobedience. Man. V. 7. D. Disobey, [a. Man. V. 7. D. Disoblige. [Un-a. oblige] [Un-a. friend] Disorder. [Confusion] [Un-a. Series] [Irregularity] Disown, [Abdicate] Disparage. [a. Infamy] [a. Calumny] Disparity, [Unequality] Dispark, [Un- a. Park (make] Dispatch, [Doe soon and perfect∣ly.] [Doe]
[Perform] —soon. Hasten. TA. III. 5. —perfectly. Finish Send away Deliver a. Free (make Destroy Kill Dispend. TA. V. 3. Dispense. Give [a. Segregate a. Proportion [Give adv. Pro∣portion▪] [a. Segregate adv. Pro∣portion▪] Relax from Law. RC. IV. 8. Licence. RC. IV. 8. A. Dispensatory, [Book of Pharma∣ceutical Compositions (man∣ner.] Dispeople, [a. empty of Dwellers] Disperse, [Scatter] Displace, [Un-place] Display. [Un-fold] [Open] Displant. [Un-plant] [Remove] Displease. AS. IV. 7. O. Displeasure, [Displeasing] to doe one a— doe adj. displicent (thing] adj. hurt (thing] Dispose, [a. Disposition.] Disposition. [Quality] T. I. 6. A. Natural. [Temperament] —of the Mind. NP. IV. —of the Body. resp. Individ. NP. V. resp. Species. NP. VI. Actual. [Inclination] AS. IV. 1. [Habit] (inc.) Ha. A. Habit] Ha. Action.] T. I. 7. Cause] T. II. a. Authority] Appoint] Prepare] a. Efficient] Give] [a. Segregate] [a. Order] [a. Series] [a. Place] Dispossess, [Un- adj. a. possess (make.] Dispraise. RO. V. 8. O. Disprofit. [adj. Hurtful (thing] [Loss] Disproportion. [Proportion (corr.] [Unequality] Disprove. [Against-prove] [Confute] Dispute, [a. Argumentation.] Disquiet. [Anxiety] [Trouble] Disquisition, [Inquisition] sp. by Argument.] Disrank. [Un-a. rank] [Un-a. Series] [Un-a. Order] Disregard, [Not-esteeming] Disrespect. Man. V. 4. D. Dissatisfie, [Not- Satisfie] [Un- Satisfie] Dissect. [Separate by cutting] [Cut (segr.] Disseize, [Un-a. possess (make] Dissemble. [Conceal] [a. Hypocrisie] Dissention, [a. Contention] Dissenting. AS. II. 3. O. Dissertation, [Book argumenta∣tive.] Disservice. [Service (corr.] [Impedient (thing] Dissever. [Separate] [a. Segregate] Dissimular, [Unlike.] Dissimulation, [Hypocrisie.] Dissipate, [Scatter.] Dissolve. a. Loose] Q. VI. 6. D. [a. Fluid] Q. V. 5. D. Melt. O. VI. 2. [Separate] [Un-convention] [Destroy] [Corruption] [a. Ruine] Dissolute. [Careless] [Sensual] Dissolution, vid. Dissolve. Dissonant, [Different] sp. in sound.] Dissuade. RO. V. 2. O. Dissyllable, [Of a Syllables] Distaff, [Staff of spinning (ma∣chin.] —thistle. Distance. —of time. Sp. I. 2. O. —of place. Sp. II. 2. O. Distast. [Tast (corr.] [Aversation] [Displicence] Distemper. S. I. 4. [Temper (corr.] Sickliness. S. I. 4. Distention, [Stretching.] Distich, [Two Verses.] Distillation. Rheum, [Disease of dropping (dim.] Chymic. O. VI. 6. Distinct. [adj. p. distinction (perf.] [Differenced] [Separated] [Ordered (perf.] [Plain] Distinction. D. IV. 1. Distinguish. [a. Distinction] [a. Difference] [Separate] [a. Period] [a. Order (perf.] [a. Plain.] [a. Judge] sp. (segr.] Distortion, [Twisting] [a. Place (corr.] [a. Deformity] Distract. [Pull several waies] [Separate] [Divide] [a. Waver (make] [Mad] Distrein, [Arrest] sp. Goods] Distress. [Adversity] [Trouble (aug.] [Arresting] sp. of Goods. [Goods arrested] Distribute. [Give (segr.] [Deliver (segr.] [a. Division] [a. Partition. [a. Kind (segr.] [a. Part (segr.] [a. Segregate] District. [Region] [Government (place] Distrust In the Judgment. AS. III. 4. O. In the Affection, [Diffidence] Disturb. [Molest] TA. V. 9. O. [a. Impedient] T. II. 5. O. Disunite. [Un-unite] [Separate] Disuse. [Un- a. custom] [Discontinue Use] Custom] Ditch. [Furrow] [Gutter] Dittander. HF. VII. 6. Dittany. HF. VII. 6. bastard— [Fraxinella] HS. I. 1. A. Ditty, [Words adj. p. sing. (apt.] Divaricate. [Straddle (make] [Separate] Dive. Mo. I. 3. A. Divel, vid. Devil.
Diver. Bi. IX. 8. dunn— Bi. IX. 8. A. Diverging. Ma. II. 7. E. Diverse. Various. T. III. Manifold, [Many (kind] [Unlike]. TM. V. 1. O. [Light] adj. Ha. IV. 7. D. [Morose] adj. Man. IV. 7. D. Diversifie, [a. Diversity] Diversion, [Beside-turn] [Digression] [Recreation] Diversity. T. III. Divide, vid. Division. Dividend, [adj. p. Divisor (thing] Divine, [adj. God] a— [adj. RC. II. 1. person] —'s profession. RC. II. 1. to— [Wizarding,] RJ. III. 1. A. [Conjecturing] AS. II. 7. Divinity [God. (abst.] [RC. II. 1. (Science] Division. Into kinds. Exactly. D. IV. 4. Not exactly. D. IV. 4. A. Into parts.] [a. Part] [a. Segregate] Into Parties. [Un-a. Society] [a. Contention] Into Places. [a. Separation] [a. Distance] In Arithmetic, [a. Divisor.] In Music, [a. Paraphrase tune] Divisor. TM. VI. 9. Divorce. RE. IV. 5. Diuretic, [adj. a. Urining (make] Diurnal, [adj. Day] a— [adj. Narration (thing) of News] Divulge, [a. Public (make] Dizzard, [adj. Doting (person] Dizzy, [adj. Giddy. S. IV. 5.] Do, vid. Doe. Do, [Buck. Be. II. 4. (fem.] Docil. [adj. Learn (apt.] [adj. Sagacity] Dock. [Dent] Man. IV. 3. O. For Shipping. [Haven (dim.] [adj. Building (place) for Ships.] In the posteriors, [Dent—] [Tail] PP. VI. 6. A. to— [Off-cut the Tail] [a. Short] Herb. HF. I. 1. A. bur— great.— HL. VI. 2. little— HL. VI. 2. A. Docket, [Accessory writing.] Doctor, [Highest Graduate] Doctrine, [Taught (thing] Document [Thing to be Learn'd.] Observ'd.] Dodder. HF. VII. 17. Dodge, [a. Lightness.] Ha. IV 7. D. Dodkin, [Least Mony.] Doe. [a. pres.] How—you? [How are you?] sp. in Health.] [a. Action] Business] Have to—with, [a. Business with] [a. Commerce with] a— [Deer (fem.] Doings Action Preparation Dog. Beast. Be. V. 1. —'s bane. HS. IV. 14. upright— HS. IV. 8. —berrry. Sh. II. 4. —'s grass. HL. III. 5. A. —'s tongue. HL. IX. 4. A. —'s tooth. HL. V. 2. [Andiron] [Supporting (jug.) for fuel] to— [Follow privately] —Fish. Greater. Fi. I. 6. Lesser. Fi. I. 6. A. Star. [Star call'd the—] [Star (aggr.] call'd, &c.] —daies, [Daies in which the Sun rises with the Dog-star.] Dogged. [Perverse] [Morose] Doggrel, [Sorry.] Dogmatical [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. D. Dole, [adj. p. Alms (thing] —full, adj. Grief] Dolor. [Grief] [Pain] Dolphin. Fi. I. 1. A. Dolt, [Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. (per∣son] Domestic. [adj. House] [adj. RO.] adj. Family. RO. III. 5. O. Domineer, [a. Insolence.] Dominion. [Power] [Authority] Donation, [Giving] Donative, [adj. p. Give.] Done, [adj. p. Action.] I have— [I am adj. pret. Action.] Finishing.] Donor, [adj. a. Give (person] Doom. [a. Judge] [a. Sentence] Door. Po. IV. 2. —keeper, [Guard at door] within—s [Within the house] without—s. [Without the house] Dor, [Beetle] Ex. V. 5. Doree. Fi. IV. 12. Dormant. [Sleeping] [Not- acting] shewn] a— [Beam] Dormouse. [Mouse (kind) adj. sleeping (int.] (apt.] Dorser, [Basket.] sp. to be carri∣ed on the back.] Dorter, [adj. Sleeping (room] Dorychnium. Sh. IV. 9. A. Dose, [Proportion] sp. of Medicine] Dotage, NP. II. 2. O. Dotal, [adj. Dowry.] Dotard, [adj. Doting (person] Tree. Dote, [a. Dotage.] —on, [a. Love (exc.] Dotterel. Bi. VII. 3. Double. [Two (kind.] —diligence. Ha. IV. 5. E. —leaf, [Twy-blade.] —tongue, [Horse tongue.] —tongue, Hypocrisie.] —heart Hypocrisie.] to— [a. Double] as Hare, [Back-goe in the same way.] Doublet. [Close (vest) for upper part of the trunk.] [Counterfeit gem] Doublings of vest, [Foldings—] Doubt. AS. II. 5. O. —full, [adj. p. Doubt (apt.] —less, [adv. Certain] Doucet. —of Deer. Dove, [Pidgeon] Bi. III. 1. Ring— Bi. III. 1. A. Stock— Bi. III. 2. Doughty, [Valiant] Douzen, [Twelve.] Dowager, [Widow] Dowe. [Bread not baked] —baked, [Scarce baked] [adj. p. Future bread] Dower, [Wife's revenue.] Down. [Downward vergent] [Toward- Underside.] Bottom.] Prep. V. 2. Bear— [Down b.] Break— [Down b.] Go— [Down g.] Pull— [Down p.] Sit— [Sit] —look [Downward [Guilty look]
—right. [adj. Perpendicular] [adj. Sincere] —Stream [With the Stream.] [Decay] [Hill] [Sheep pasture] Moss of Hair. PP. VI. 2. A. Dowry, [Wife's estate] Doxy, [adj. a. Fornication (fem.] Doxology, [Sentence of praise] Drab, [Wicked Woman.] [Unchast Woman.] Draco volans. El. I. 4. Dracunculus. Fi. III. 8. A. Draffe. [Meat for Swine] [Worst part] [adj. a. Defilement (thing] Drag, [Pull.] O. I. 4. sp. Behinde After it. —net. [Net (instr.) for fishing, adj. p. draw (apt.] Draggle-tail, [Slut.] Dragon. Fish. Insect. —fly, Ex. IV. 7. Plant. —tree. Tr. III. 8. A. —wort. HL. V. 9. —'s bloud. [Juice of—Tree] biting— [Tarragon.] Snap— HS. VIII. 6. Fire— El. I. 4. —'s head, [Intersection point of Ecliptic by Planet toward adj. a. North.] —'s tail, [Intersection point of Ecliptic by Planet toward adj. a. South.] Dray, [Cart.] Drain, [Trench for water.] to— [Un- a. water] Drake. Bird, [Duck (male.] Gun, [Least Ordnance.] Fire— El. I. 4. Dram. Mea. III. 3. Draper, [adj. Cloth (merch.] Draught. [Drawing] [Drawn (thing] [Exemplar] [Picture] Ships— [Depth of Ship un∣der water.] Jakes, [Dunging (room] game of—s. Mo. V. 3. A. Draw, a. Move a. Move (end toward it self. to it self. Corporeal. Pull] O. I. 4. Pull (end] —cart [Lead pulling—] —net [Lead pulling—] [Lift] —bridge, [Lift by pulling.] —plants, [Un a. root, &c.] —water, [Lift, &c.] Ship—s, [—is deep in the water.] Take into it self. [Breathe] Mo. III. 2. [Suck up breath] AS. IV. 6. D. [Snuf] —after, [Hunt by Smell.] [Suck] Mo. III. 3. O. [Drink] AS. II. 2. O. Take out of another it's place. —blood, [a. Bleed] —lots, [a. Lot.] —mony. out-take—] —purse out-take—] —sword, [Un-sheath.] —tooth, [Out-pull.] —wine. Virtual. [a. Exhalation] Metonym. Effect by Motion. —of the Fingers. —mony [Tell—] —of the Needle. —cloth —of Pen or Pencil. —a Copy. —a Picture. — writing, [a. Wri∣ting.] —up writing, [a. Wri∣ting.] —dry, [Empt. (perf.] —fowl, [Un-a. gutt] —out. [Extend] [Protract] Transcendental. Cause. —bloud, [a. Bleed.] [Occasion] [Impulsive] [Persuade] [Entice] [Lead] [Seduce] [Obtein] Beginning. —back. [Retreat (inc.] [Apostasie (inc.] —near [near (inc.] —on [near (inc.] —to an issue, [Finish (inc.] Drawer. [adj. Drawing (person] [Box (dim.) to be out-pull'd and in-thrust] Drawers, [Inner thigh (vest.] Dread, [Fear] sp. (augm.) Dream, [adj. p. AC. II. 4. A. (thing] mdash;ing. AC. II. 4. A. —ness, [Dulness] [Sloth] Dregs. [Worst part] TM. VI. 1. O. [Sediment] TM. VI. 3. O. Drench. [Medicinal drink] to— [Drink (make) by pouring into the mouth] [Bathe] Dress. [Prepare] —meat, a. Butchery a. Cookery [Cleanse] —a Horse. a. Clothe a. Ornate Prune a. Surgery Dresser, [Cook's table.] Dry. Aid. adj. Q. V. 2. D. [Thirsty] adj. AC. II. 2. [Penurious] adj. Man. III. 3. E. [Reserv'd] adj. Man. IV. 4. D· —jest. [adv. concealed . Urbani∣ty.] Driblet. [Sum (dim.] [Part (dim.] Drift. [Driving] —of Snow [Heap of —toge∣ther blown] go a— [Be driven] [End] Drill. to— [bore] [Entice] a— [Boaring (instr.] [Baboon] Be. III. 1. Drink, [adj. p. drinking (thing] —ing. AC. II. 2. A. a— [Refection] Drip. [a. Drop] [Baste] —ing. [adj. basting (thing] Drive, move from before it self. Contiguous, [Thrust.] sp. with knocking] Not contiguous. TA. VI. 5. A· —away, [From—] —back, [a. Retire (make] —bees, [a Move B.] —out, [Out—] The Ship—s, [The Ship is driven.] sp. when the Anchor lets —go.] Metaphor. [Coaction] AS. IV. 9. O. —off, [Protract.] Metonym. [Scatter] Drivel, [Dropping Spittle.] to— Let go the Spittle out of ones mouth.] Drizzle, [Rain drops (dim.] Droil. [a. Operation (augm.] [Servant, adj. a. operation (aug.]
Droll, [a. Urbanity.] Dromedary, [Camel.] Be. I. 3. Drone. [Bee (male] [Idle (person] Droop. [a. Decay] [p. Discouragement (inc.] Drop. El. II. 1. Dropsie. S. VI. 3. Dropwort. HF. V. 10. A. water— HF. V. 14. Dross. [worst part.] sp. of Metal] Drove, [adj. p. drive (aggr.] sp. of Cattel.] Drover, [Cattel-driving (per∣son] Drought, vid. Dry. Drown. Kill. RJ. V. 7. [Cover with water] Drowzy. AC. II. 3. Drudge, [a. Operation (augm.] sp. Servant.] Drug. [adj. O. VI. A. (thing] [adj. Sorry (thing.] Druggist, [Merchant of unprepa∣red medicinal (things] Drum, [adj. Drummer (instr.] —of the Ear, [Drum (like.] —mer. RM. III. 3. Drunk, [adj. a. Drunkenness] —ard, [adj. Drunkenness (person.] —enness. Man. II. 3. D. Due. T. IV. 3. [adj. Debtor (thing] Dub. [Knock] sp. with Fist.] Dubious, [adj. Doubt.] Duchess, [Duke (fem.] Duchy. [Duke's (place.] Duck. Bi. IX. 2. A. —'s meat. HL. I. 10. to— [Bow the head] as Duck. [Congee (augm.] [Dive] —and Drake [Reflect (freq) from the Water.] Ductil. [adj. p. figure (apt.) by ham∣mering.] [adj. p. Persuade (apt.] Dudgeon. [Indignation] [Root of Box.] —dagger, [Short Sword whose handle is of the root of Box.] Duel. RM. I. 7. A. Dug. PG. IV. 2. A. Duke, [Noble-man of highest de∣gree.] Dull, [Obtuse.] Op. to Sprightly. NP. IV. 2. O. Strenuous [Lazy] Nimble [Lumpish] Swift [Slow] Op. to Sagacity. Ha. III. 1. O, Blunt, [Not adj. a. Cut (apt.] [Remiss] Duscimer, Musical (instr.) Dumb [Mute] AC. III. 1. O. [Not-speaking] Dump▪ [Meditation (int.] [Anxiety (imp.] [Grief (imp.] Dun, [Colour of Mouse.] &c. to— [Come and demand (freq.] Dunce, [Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. (person.] —down, [Cat's tail.] Dung, [adj. p. Dung (thing.] —fly. Ex. IV. 4. A. to— Mo. IV. 9. A. —land, [Manure with Dung] Dungeon [Dark prison] Duplicate, [Correspondent type] Durable, [Permanent] Durance, [Imprisonment] Duration. Mea. V. A. Dure, [v. Duration] —ing my stay, [While I stay] Duress, [Affliction of body] Durt. El. IV. 2. Durty. [adj. Durt.] [Rustic] Dusk, [Dark (dim.] Dust. Earth. El. IV. 1. [Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. Pin— [Powder of filed pins] Saw— [Powder of sawed (thing] Duty, [Due (thing.] Dutifulness. Man. V. I. Dwarf, [adj. Little.] sp. (person.] —elder, [Danes-wort.] Dwell. Po. I. A. Dynasty, [Series of Governours of one Kinde.] Nation.] Family.] Dysentery. S. VI. 6. A. Dysury, [Disease of pissing (def.] E. EAch, [Every (segr.] —other, [Every one recipro∣cally.] Eager. [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. D. [Desirous (int.] [Hungry] AC. II. 1. [Acid] Q. IV. 4. [Intense] Eagle. Bi. I. 1. Eaglet, [Eagle (young] Ean, [a. Parturition.] sp. as Sheep] Ear. —of Animal. PG. III. 2. A. give— [Hear (end.] [Observe (end.] —of Pot, [adj. Hand (part.] —of Plant. PP. II. 4. A. to— as Corn, [To grow up to an Ear.] —land, [a. Arable.] Sea— Ex. VII. 8. Earewig. Ex. V. 7. A. Earl, [Noble man of third De∣gree.] Early. [Soon] [adj. Morning Mea. V. 7.] Earn. RC. V. 6. Earnest. Adj. [Serious] [Intense] [Diligent] [Zealous] Subst. Pledge. RC. V. 7. A. in— [Truly.] Earth. Globe of—W. II. 7. Element of—El. IV. —nut. HF. V. 10. —quake. El. II. 5. —worm. Ex. I. 1. to— [into-a. Earth] Earthen Vessel, [adj. O. IV. A. (vess.] Ease. [Indolence] —the Belly. [a. Dung] [Rest] [Leisure] Easement. [a. Indolence] [Dunging] [adj. Dunging (place] Easie. [adj. Easiness] —to &c. [adj. &c. (apt.] Easiness. Facility. T. V. 4. [Plainness] D. III. 9. [Credulity] —to, &c. [&c. (apt.] East. Sp. III. 1. Easter, [Passover (time.] Eat. Feed. AC. II. 1. A. [Corrde] O. VI. 3. Eaves, [Margin of Roof.] —dropper, [Concealed (per∣son) hearing (end] Eb. [Down-tide] [a. Low] Ebony. Tr. VIII. 6. Ebullition, [Bubbling] Eccentric.   Ecclesiastic, [adj. RE.] —Relation. RE. —Officers. RE. II. —Discipline. RE. V. —Institutions. RE. VI.
Echo, [Reflex sound.] Eclipse, [Obscuring by interposi∣tion.] sp. of Sun.] Moon.] Ecliptick. W. VI. 3. Eclog, [pastoral dialog. Song.] Edacity, [Gluttony.] Eddy, [Re-flow.] Edge. [Margin] Sp. III. 4. O. [Ridge] Mag. V. 6. [Cutting (apt.] Set ones teeth on — [Stu∣pifie—] —wise, [adv. Side.] Edible, [adj. p. Eat (abstr.] Edict, RC. IV. 3. A. Edifie. [a. Building] [a. Bettering] Edifice, [Building,] Po. II. Edition, [a. Public. (make.] Education, [a. Nurse.] —words. RO. V. —deeds. RO. VI. Eel. Fi. VI. 7. sand— Fi. VI. 4. A. —pout Fi. VI. 6. A. Effable, [adj. p. Speak (abstr.] Effect. T. II. O. to this— [—end] of no— [adj. Frustrate] to— [Efficient.] to take— [Event (perf.] Effectual, [adj. a. Efficient (apt.] Effeminate, [Woman (like.] [Tender] NP. IV. 7. O. [Nice] Man. II. 6. E. Efficacy, [a. Efficient (abstr.] Efficient, T. II. 1. Effigies, [Picture.] Effluvium, [adj. p. Exhalation (thing.] Effort, [Endeavour (imp.] Effusion, [Out — pouring] [Forth— pouring] Eftsoon, (At times.] Sp. I. 8. O. Egge, DP. V. 6. with Egge, [Impregnated with Egge.] to— [a. Impulsive] Eglantine, [Rose (kind.] Egregious, [Excellent.] Egress. [Going out] [Way out] Egret, [Eagle (kind.] Egyptian, [Wandring wizard.] Eie, vid. Ey. Ejaculation, [Prayer (dim.] sp. Sudden.] Eject [Out-cast] [Un-&c.] Eight. Mea. II. 8. —teen. —ty. —hundred, &c. Either. [Any of the two] [Or] Eke, [Also] Eke out, [Lengthen by Ad∣dition.] Enlarge by Ad∣dition.] Elaborate, [adj. p. Diligence.] Elate, [adj. Insolence.] Elaterium, [concrete juyce of the wild Cowcumber.] Elbow. PG. V. 2. A. [Angle] Elder. [More-old] [Priest] [Fore-father] Tree. Tr. III. 2. water— Sh. II. 12. A. Elecampane, HF. III. 6. A. Elect. —to do. AS. IV. 5. —to Office, &c. RC. IV. 2. Electuary, [Moist consistent me∣dicinal mixture.] Eleemosynary, [adj. Alms.] Elegancy. [Beauty] [Ornateness] Elegy, [adj. Grief verse (aggr.] Element. El. [Principles] —of Discourse. D. I. Elephant. Be. I. 4. Elevate, [Lift.] —ion of the Pole. Eleven.   Elf, [Little sorry (thing.] Eligible, [adj. p. Elect. (t.] Elixir, [Best part.] sp. adj. Chymic.] Elk. Be. II. 3. Ell, [Three foot and 9 inches] Ellipsis. Mag. III. 8. D. Elm. Tr. VI. 4. Elocution, [Speaking Man∣ner.] [Articulation Man∣ner.] sp. Artificial.] Eloquence, [Speaking (art) Ornately.] Perswasive∣ly.] Else. [adv. Other] [Beside] —where, [In other place.] Elucidate, [Interpret.] Elude, avoid] frustrate] Elucubrate, [Diligent study.] Ematiate, [adj. Lean (make.] Emanation, [Out-flowing.] Emancipate, [Un-slave.] Embalm, [Preserve by Condi∣ting.] Embark, [Into-go.] sp. Into Ship.] Embassador, [adj. RC. sent (Of∣ficer.] Embellish, [a. Ornate (make.] Ember-week, [Fasting week for Ordination.] [adj. Ordination (time.] Embers, [Fired ashes.] Embezil, [a. Prodigality.] Emblem, [Signifying picture.] sp. Moral.] Embody, [a. Body.] Embolden, [a. Bold (make.] Emboss, [Adorn with protuberan∣ces.] Embowed, [Arched.] Embowel, [Un-bowel.] Embrace. AC. V. 6. Embrew, [Soke.] Embroider, [Variegate by sow∣ing.] Embryon. PP. VI. 7. Emendation. [Mending] [Repairing] Emergent. [adj. Event] [adj. p. Occasion] Emerod. Stone. St. IV. 4. [Vein in the Fundament] —s [Tumors about those veins.—] Emew, [Cassaware.] Bi. II. 9. A Eminence, [Excellence.] Emissary. [Sent (person] [Spy] Emission, [Out-sending.] Emmet, [Ant.] Ex. IV. 5. Emolument, [Profit.] Empair. [a. Worse] [Marring] Empale. RJ. V. 4. A. Empannel, [a. Catalog.] Empeach, [a. Accuser.] Emperor, [King (augm.] Emphasis. D. I. 8. Empire. [King (place] [King (abstr.] Empiric, [Physitian (corr.] Employ. [a. Business TA. III.] [Use. TA. V. 6.] Empoverish, [a. Poverty (make.] Empress, [Emperor (fem.] Emptying. O. II. 7. O. Empyema. S. V. 3. A. Emry. St. I. 7. A. Emulation. AS. VI. 3. Emulgent, [adj. Sucking.] Emulsion, [Milk (like) Medi∣cine.] Emunctory, [Glandule] PG. II 7 A. Enable, [a. Able (make.] Enact, [a. Law (make.] Enamel, [Paint with melted Co∣lours.] Enamored, [adj. a. Love.] Encamp, [a. Camp.] Enchant, [a. Witch with words.] Encircle, [About-a. circle.] Encline. [a. Oblique] [a. Vergency] [adj. p Disposition] AS. IV. 1. Enclose. [Shut] [Contein] Enclosure. [a. Enclosing]
[Fence] Encomium, [Praise.] [adj. a. Praise Oration.] Encompass, [about- Ition.] Putting.] Encounter. [Assault mutual] [Meeting] Encourage. RO. VI. 2. Encrease. TM. I. 7. Encroach [Usurpation (inc.] (dim.] Encumber. [Hinder sp. with confused multitude.] [Trouble sp. with confused multitude.] End. Part. [Extreme] [Top] [Bottom] —less. [Eternal] [Infinite] Cause. T. II. 6. to the—that. Conj. III. 1. Action. [Desist] [Finish] [Event] Endamage. [a. Loss (make] [a. Hurt] Endanger, [a. Dangerous] Endeavour. TA. III. 4. Endite. [a. Word] sp. Writing.] AC. III. 6. A. [Accuse] sp. by Writing] RJ. II. 3. A. Endive. HF. II. 16. Endorse, [Write on the back∣side.] Endowment. [Quality] sp. NP. [Habit] [Revenue.] Endue, [v. Quality.] Endure. Suffer. [v. Passion] [v. Patience] cannot— [a. Aversation] Last, [a. Duration.] Enemy. RO. IV. 1. O. Energy. [Efficient Faculty] Act] Enervate, [a. Weakness. NP. V. 7. O.] Enfeeble, [a. Weakness. NP. V. 7. O. Enfeof. [a. Right] [Deposit] RC. V. 1. A. Enflame. [a. Flame] [a. Heat (exc.] Enforce, [Coaction.] Enfranchise, [a. Privilege.] Engage. [a. Obligation] [a. Sponsion] [a. Pawn] [a. Morgage] [a. Debtor (make] [p. Business (make] Engender, [Generation] Engine, [Machin] English.   Engraft, [Graft] Engrave, [Grave] O. IV. 6. A. Engross. —writing, [Write (perf.] —commodities. [Buy all] [Appropriate] TA. I. 2. Enhaunce. [a. Intension] sp. the price.] Enigmatical, [Obscured with Figures] Enjoying. Fruition. TA. V. 7. [Possession] Enjoyn, [Command] Enlarge, [Large (make] [Ampliation] D. IV. 2. O. [More-a. large (make] [Increase] TM. I. 7. E. Enlighten, [a. Light.] Enmity, [Enemy (abstr.] Ennoble, [a. Noble (make.] Enormity. [Wrong (int.] [Vice (abstr.] [Crime (augm.] Enough, [Sufficiency.] —and to spare, [Abundance.] Enquiring, [a. Inquisition.] Enrage, [adj. a. Anger (make.] Enrich, [adj. a. Rich (make.] Enroll. [a. Catalog.] [a. Register.] Ensign. [Sign] Colours. RM. III. 2. Ensnare. [Intangle by craft] [Take by Stratagem] Enstall. [a. Seizin solemnly] sp. in Seat.] Ensue. [Follow] [Event] Entail, [a. Inherit (make) adv. Series.] Entangle. O. II. 2. A. Enter. [Into- go] Put] [Direct] [Begin] TA. III. 3. [a. Teacher (inc.] —in a book, [Write—] —into bond, [adj. p. bond.] —upon. [Possession (inc.] [Seizing] Enterchangeable, [adj. Recipro∣cation.] Entercourse. [Reciprocal Passage] Converse] Business] Enterfeir, [Strike reciprocal∣ly.] sp. with Heels or Ankles.] Enterlace. [Between-put] [Stratifie] Enterline, [Write between the lines.] Enterlude, [Player (thing.] Entermeddle, [a. Business.] Entermingle, [adj. a. Mixt (make.] Enterprize, [Essay.] Enterr, [Bury.] Entertain. [Receive] [a. Host] Treat. AC. V. 2. A. Enthrall, [a. Slave (make.] Enthrone, [a. Seizin solemnly.] sp. in King (place.] Enthusiasm, [Counterfeited In∣spiration.] Enthymem. D. IV. 7. A. Entice, [Allure.] Entire. [Total] TM. VI. [Whole] NP. V. 1. [adj. Integrity. Ha. IV.6.] Entity, [Being (abst.] Entitle, [p. Right (make] [a. Name.] Entomb. RE. IV. 9. Entrals, [Gutts.] PG. VI. 4. A. Entrance, [a. Enter.] Entrap, [Take.] sp. in Machin.] Entreat. Pray. RO. V. 3. [Entertain] AC. V. 2. A. Entrench. [a. Ditch (make] [Usurp] Entry. [Entring (place] —into house, &c. Po. III. 3. A. Entrust. [Deposit] [Instead-p-right (make] Envenom, [Poisoned (make.] Envy. AS. VI. 6. O. Environ. [About be] put] Enumerate, [a. Number] Enunciation, [Proposition.] Enure, [a. Custom.] Enwrap, [In-wrap.] Eolipyle, [adj. a. Winde (vessel) by Rarefaction.] Epact, [Difference between So∣lar and Lunar year.] Ephemerides, [Book of adj. daies (thing.] Ephialtes. S. IV. 2. A. Epicen, [Of both Sexes.] Epicure, [adj. Sensuality (per∣son.]
Epicycle, [Accessory Circle.] sp. Whose Center is within the Circumference of a∣nother Circle.. Epidemical, [adj. Nation.] Epigram, [Short Poem.] Epilepsie. S. IV. 5. A. Epilog. D. V. 8. O. Epiphany, [Festival of the Star's apparition] Episcopal, [adj. Bishop.] Epistle. D. V. 2. A. Epitaph, [Writing on Tomb.] Epithalamium, [adj. Marriage-song.] Epithet, [Adjunct word] Epitomy. D. V. 7. Epoch. Sp. I. 5. A. Equal. adj. TM. I. 5. Relation of—s. RO. IV. Coming off upon—terms. RM. II. 1. Equality. TM. I. 5. [Equity] Equanimity. [Equity] [Content] Ha. I. 3. Equator. W. VI. 2. Equilateral, [Having its sides e∣qual.] Equinoctial. —time, [Time of equal night and day] —Circle, [Equator] Equipollent. [Of equal Power] Efficacy] Equippage, [Furniture (man∣ner.] Equitable, [adj. Equity.] Equity. Man. I. 2. Equivalent TM. I. 6. Equivocation. D. IV. 1. O. Equor. W IV. 1. Er, vid. Err. Eradicate, [Un-root] Ere. [Before] —long, [Future (dim.] —while. [At some time] Sp. I. 8. Lately, [adv. past (dim.] Rather then] Erect. [a. Direct. Ma. II. 8. E.] [a. Build. Po. II.] Eringo. HF. VIII. 1. A. Vmbelliferous— HF. IV. 12. A. Ermin. Beast, [Stoate] Be. IV. 7. Fur, [Fur of Ermin] Err. TA III. 8. Errant. [Genuine] [Wandring] [Sent (thing) sp. entrusted.] Erroneous. [adj. Err] [False] Eruption, [Out-breaking.] Erysipelas. S. VII. A. Escape. Avoid being taken. RM. II.6. [Pass not observed] Escheat. [To- event] confiscation] Eschew. [Avoid] [Aversation] Especial, [Principal] Espy, Spy] See] Espouse, [a. Spouse] Esquire, [Gentleman of the mid∣dle rank] Essay. TA. III. 4. A. Essence. [Being (abstr.] [Best part extracted by Di∣stillation.] Essential. [adj. Being] [adj. Importance] Essoin. [Excuse for not appearing.] Establish. [adj. Steddy make] [Confirm] Estate. [State] [Condition] [Age] [Degree] sp. of Nobleness] Gentility] [Dignity] [Revenues (aggr.] [Right] [Possession.] Esteem. [Think] [Jugde] Value. AS. II. 8. [Respect] Estimation, [Esteem] Estival, [adj. Summer.] Estrange, [Alienate.] Estreat.   Estridge. Bi. II. 9. Estuate. [Move vehemently.] Etching, [Graving with corro∣ding moist (thing.] Eternal, [adj. Everness] Eternity, [Everness] Ether. El. II. 1. Ethic, [adj. Manners (art.] Ethiopian, [adj. Black (person.] Ethnic, [Pagan] Etymology. [Derivation of words] [Derivation (art.] Evacuate. [a. Empty] [a. Purge] Evade. [Avoid] [Escape] Evangelist. RE. II. 3. Evaporate, [Out-vapor] Evasion, [Evading] Eucharist. RE. VI. 6. A. Eve. [Before-day] sp. before Festival] Evechurr. Ex. II. 2. A. Even. Adj. [Equal] [Of the same Quantity] Number] Strength] Quitts; [Having compensa∣ted] op. to Od. TM. III. 5. [Plain] Q. VI. 2. [Self.] Adv. [Yea] Expletive. —as, [As.] adv. I. 3. —now [Now] [Adv. past (dim.] Evening. Mea. V. 7. O. Even-song, [adj. Evening wor∣ship.] Event. End. TA. V. [Effect] T. II. O. —of War. RM. II. Ever. All times. Sp. I. 9. for— [adj. sp. I. 9.] —since, [From that (time.] —lasting, [adj. Sp. I. 9.] Life—lasting, [Gnaphali∣um.] Some times. —and anon. [Frequently] [At times.] Sp. II. 8. O. or— [Before that] Every. —one, Pron. III. 2. —where, [In every Place.] —whit, [adv. Total.] Evet, [Salamander] Be. VI. 5. Evict. [Prove] [Convince] Evidence, Adj. Manifest. [Plainness] [Certainty] sp. manifest] [Probation] D. VI. 6. [Testimony] [Writing.] RC. VI. 5. Evil. T. III. 2. O. —at ease, [Not-indolent] King's— S. III. 3. Evince, [Prove] sp. Plainly.] Eunuch, [Un-testicled (person] Euphony, [Sound (perf.] Euphorbium, [Concrete juice of a (plant] Ew. —tree. Tr. III. 6. —sheep [Sheep (fem.] Ewer, [Vessel for pouring water on hands] Exact. Adj. [adj. Rigor.]
[adj. Perfect] to— [a. Rigor] [Demand Unmercifully] The utmost] [a. Oppression] Exaggerate. [a. Great] [a. Intension] [add Provocation] [More-angry (make] Exagitate. [Swing] [Vex (endeavour] Exat. [Lift] [Praise (augm.] [adj, a. Dignity (make] Examine. [Inquisition] AS. II. 2. [a. Question] [Trial] TA. II. 5. A. Judicially. RJ. II. 4. A. Example. [Exemplar] Instance. D. IV. 8. A. as for— [e. g.] Conj. IV. 3. O. Exanguious Animal. Ex. Exanimate. [Discourage (augm.] Exasperate. [a. Intension] [More-angry (make] Exauthorize, [a. Un-authority.] Exceed. [Excell] [Abound] [Augment] [Intense] [v. Excess] Excel. [v. Excellent] [v. Superior] [v. Victory] —lent. TM. I. 4. E. Except. Adv. [Beside] [Unless] —ion. [Exemption] —to rule. D. IV. 5. O. take— [Be displeased] Excess. Too-much. TM. I. 3. E. Vitious. Man. II. E. [Gluttony] [Drunkenness] Exchange. Bartering. RC. V. A. [Merchant's Convention (place.] Exchequer, [Court of Chief Ma∣gistrate's revenue.] Excise, [Tax upon vendibles.] Excite, [Impulse.] Exclaim. AC. III. 3. O. Exclude. [Out-shut] [Exempt] TA. II. 4. [Except] Exclusive, [Excluding the ex∣treams] Excogitate, [Invent] Excommunicate. RE. V. 5. Excoriate, [Un-skin.] Excreation. Mo. IV. 5. A. Excrement. [Out-purged (thing.] [adj. dunged (thing.] Excrescence. [Out-growing gibbous (thing] Fruit-like. PP. III. A. Excruciate, [Torture.] Excursion. [Out-running] [Digression] Excuse, [Defendent (thing.] Execrable, [adj. p. Ought aversa∣tion (augm.] Execration. [Cursing] [Renounce with Cursing] Execution, [Performing.] —of Sentence in Law. RJ. II. 9. —Capital. RJ. V. —not Capital. RJ. VI. —er, [adj. Execution (Off.] Executor, [Itrusted (person) with Will.] Exemplar. T. II. 3. Exemplifie. [Give Copy] Instance] Exempt. TA. II. 4. O. [a. Immunity] Exercise. [Practise] [Doe] [Custom to doe] [a. Experience] [Use] [a. Motion] [a. Recreation] Exercitation, vid. Exercise. Exhalation. Met. II. 2. [Vapor] Met. II. 2. A. [Fume] Met. II. 3. Exhaust. [Out-draw] [Empty] Exhibit. [Represent] [Offer] [Give] Exhibition, [adj. p. Stipend (thing.] Exhilerate, [a. Mirth.] AS. V.4. Exhort, [Persuade] RO. V. 2. Exhortation, [a. Persuade.] Exiccation, [a. Driness.] Q. V. 2. D. Exigent. [Occasion] T. II. 4. A. [Expediency] T. V. 6. [Need] Exile. RJ. VI. 5. Eximious, [adj. Excellent.] T. I.4. E. Existence, [Being. T. I. 1. (abstr.] sp. Actual.] Exonerate, [Un-lode.] Exorable, [adj. p. Entreat (abstr.] Exorbitance. TM. V. 4. O. Exorcist, [Un-adj. a. Devil (Off.] Exotic, [adj. Forein] RO. IV.3. Expansion. [Stretching] [Spreading] [Opening] Expatiate, [Walk abroad.] Expect. AS. III. 7. A. Expedient. T. V. 6. an— [Means] T. II. 6. A. Expedition. [Dispatching] TA. III. 5. [Travel] TA. VI. 3. sp. Military,] Expel, [Out-drive.] TA. VI. 5. A. Expence, [adj. p. Spend (thing.] Expend. [Spend] [Disburse] Experience. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Habit. Ha. VI. 4. Experiment. [a. Experience (end] [adj. p. Essay (thing.] Expert, [adj. Experience.] Expiate. [Satisfie for Guilt.] [Un- a. Guilty (make] sp. by Sacrifice.] Expire. [Die] [End] time—d, [Time ended.] past.] Explain, [Plain (make.] Explicate, [Plain (make.] Explicit, [Express,] D. III. 8. Explode. [Disapprove (augm.] [Reject disgracefully] Exploit. [Action (augm.] [adj. p. Perform (thing.] Exploration. [Inquisition] AS. II. 2. sp. by Essay.] Expose. [Out-put] [Un-cover] [adj. p. Danger (make] Exposition. [a. Plain] [Interpretation] Expostulate. [Ask accusingly] [Complain] Expound. [a. Plain] [Interpretation] Express. D. III. 8. —ion, [Speech (manner.] Exprobrate, [Upbraid.] RJ. IV. 8. A.
Expulsion, vid. Expel. Expunge, [Un-write.] Exquisite, [adj. Perfectness.] Extant. [adj. Being] [Actual] [Adj. p. See (abstr.] [Public.] Extasie. AS. VI. 8. A. Extempore, [Without premedi∣tation.] Extend, [Stretch.] Extension. Ma. A. Posture, [Stretch] Extent. Ma. A. Extenuate. [adj. a. Little.] [adj. a. Thin] [Excuse in part] Exterior, [adj. Out-side.] Exterminate, [Exile.] External, [adj. Out-side.] Sp. III. 6. O. Extinguish. [Un-fire] [Annihilate] Extirpate. [Un-root] [Destroy] Extoll. [Praise (augm] Extort, [From-gain violently] —ion. RJ. IV. 5. A. Extract. [Out-bring] [From-proceed (make] sp. by Chymic operation.] an— [Copy] [Epitome] —ion [adj. Descendent (kind) RO. I. 1. O.] Extrajudicial, [Not-judicial] Extraneous, [adj. Foreiner] Extraordinary. adj. TM. V. 3. O. Extravagant. [Exorbitant] [Impertinent] [adj▪ Digression] Extream. op. to Middle. Sp. III. 3. O. op. to Mediocrity. T. I. 2. O. [Excessive] Utmost. [Most-adj. great∣ness.] [Rigid] Man. I. 1. E. [Defective] Extremity. [End] Sp. III. 3. O. [Misery] [Trouble (aug.] Extricate, [Un-tangle.] Extrinsecal, [adj. Out-side.] Extrusion, [Out-thrusting.] Exuberant, [Abundance.] TM. I. 2. E. Exudation, [Out-sweating.] Exulcerate, [adj. p. Ulcer (make] Exultation, [Triumph.] Ey. Member. PG. III. 2. blear-ed sore —ed goggle-ed prominent —ed pink-ed little (dim. —ed Apple of the— [adj. Black (thing) of the Ey.] —brow. PG. III. 6. A. —lid, [adj. a. Cover (thing) of the Ey.] —service, [Seeming (end.) to serve] —bright. HS. VIII. 7. A. [Loop.] Mag. V. 2. A. F. FAble. [adj. p. Fiction narration] [Lie] Fabric, [Building.] Fabrile Operation. O. IV. Fabulous, [adj. Fiction.] Face. Subst. Member. PG. III. 1. make—s, [Change Face (manner] [Presence] to— —as Person, &c. [Over against stand] —as Garment, Pr. IV. 9. —about, [Turn.] —out a ly. [a Ly impudently.] pertinaciously.] Facetiousness, [Urbanity.] Facil. [Easie] [Credulous] [Affable] Facilitate, [a. Easiness.] Facinorous, [Crime (augm.] Fact. [Done (thing.] Faction. C. III. 8. A. Factious, [adj. Faction Sedition (apt.] Factitious. T. III. 7. O. Factor, [Instead-Merchant] Faculty. [Natural Power] [Licence] Fade. [p. Transitoriness] [v. Decay] Fag, [End (corr.] Fagot, [Sticks (aggr.) together-bound.] Fail. [p. Frustrate] TA. V. 1. O. [Miscarry] TA. III. 7. O. [Omit] TA. III. 8. A. [Defect] [Faint] Insolvent. TA. IV. 8. O. Fain. [Fiction] [a. Seem] [a. Hypocrisie] I would—have it, [I desire (augm.] Faint. —ing. S. V. 5. [Weary] [Weak] [Remiss] [Slight] —hearted. [Coward] [Diffident] Fair. Adj. [Beautiful] [Clean] [Clear] —dealing. [Equity] [Candor] —demeanour. [Courtesie] [Affability] —way, [Not-durty—] —Weather, [Wea∣ther not rainy.] —Weather, [Wea∣ther not cloudy.] —wind, [Prosperous—] Subst. Mart, [Convention for Com∣merce.] —ing, [Given (thing) at Fair.] Fairy, [Feign'd man (like) De∣vil.] Faith. [Belief] —rational. Ha. III. 2. —religious. Ha. V. 4. —full. [adj. Fidelity.] [adj. Ha. V. 4.] —less. [Perfidious] [Not-adj. Faith] Falchion, [Short crooked Sword] Falcon, Hawk (kind.) Falconer, [adj. Hawk (Off.] Falling. Motion proper. —down, Down-fall.] Navigate with the Stream.] —in, [Come (imp.] —with, [Together-come (imp.] sp. in Fight.] —off, [Go (imp.] —on, [Assault.] —to —Leeward. RN. VI. 6. D. Motion metaph. Begin. —in hand with, [Begin.] —to ones meat, [Eat (inc.] Event. sp. adj. Fortune. —in love with. —out, [Event.] —with one, [Un-friend.] —from higher to lower. —ing. —on knees. AC. VI. 6. —all along. AC. VI. 7.
—en. —on knees. AC. VI. 6. A. —all along. AC. VI. 7. A. —ing Star. El. I. 2. A. water—s, [a. More-low (inc.] wood—s, [w. adj. p. Felling] —from greater to less, [Di∣minish.] Flesh—s. —Hair—s. —Leaf—s. —of the Leaf, [Autumn.] Price—s. Water—s, [p. Shallow.] Wind—s, [p. Diminish.] —from better to worse. Sin.] Apostasie] [Adversity] [Sickness] —ing Sickness, [Epilepsie] S. IV. 5. A. —ing back. [Again sick∣ning.] [Destruction] Fallacy, [adj. a. Erring (apt.) Argument.] Fallible, [adj. Err. (pot.] Fallow, [Not-plow'd.] to— [First plowing] —deer. Be. II. 4. False. Untrue. [adj. T. III. 1. O.] [ly] [Wrong] [Spurious] [Forged] [Trecherous] Falshood. T. III. 1. O. Falsifie, [a. False.] Falter, vid. Faulter. Fame. [Common Narration] Rumor.] [Common Praise (augm.] Reputation] Family. [oeconomic relation] RO. [Kin] RO. I. [Houshold][House (aggr.] Familiar. [adj. Acquaintance] [adj. Custom] —Spirit, [—devil.] Famin. [Food (def.] [Want of food] [Hunger] Famish, [Starve.] Famous, [adj. p. Fame.] Fan, [adj. a. Winde (jug.] —for Corn. [adj. winnowing (jug.] Fanaticalness. [Pretending Enthusiasms] [Fierceness in Religion (cor.] Fancy. Faculty. NP. II. 2. [adj. Fancy representation] [Irrational (imp.] [Disposition (imp.] (corr.] [Opinion] sp. (corr.] Approbation] Delectation] Love] Fane, [Index (instr.) of winde.] Fang, [Long tooth.] Fantasie. NP. II. 2. Fantasm, [Fancied (thing.] Fantastic. [adj. Fancy (corr.] Indulging fancy.] Following fancy.] [Conceitedness] Far. [adj. Distance] [Remote] —into [Deep into] [Averse] [Much] —day [Much day being past] [Late] as—as, [Until.] so—as, [So much as] Farce, vid. Farse. [Mixture of into—thrusted (things.] [Pudding of mixt (things] [Scurril Comedy (corr.] Farcy, Disease. Fard. [Paint] Fardle, [Aggregated (thing] sp. by p. tied.] Fare. Diet. Pr. I. [Event] —well [I. valediction.] [Carriage] sp. by Water.] [Carried (aggr.] (persons] [Wages for Carriage] [Tower for direction of Navi∣gators.] Farm. Po. I. 1. take to— [Hiring] let to— [Demising] Farra. Fi. IX. 5. Farrier, [Physitian for horses.] Farrow, [a. Parturition.] sp. of Swine.] Farse, [Fill. By into-thrusting] (Corr.] Fart. Mo. IV. 2. A. Farther, vid. Further. [More-far] —most. Sp. II. 2. D. [More] [Also] Farthest, vid. Furthest. [Most-far] [Last] [Most] Farthing. Mea. IV. 1. Fascinate, [a. Witchcraft.] sp. By look.] Fashion. [Figure] [Manner] [Custom] sp. Common] —of Clothes, [Figure of Clothes.] sp. Commonly accustom∣ed.] Fashions, Disease of Horse. Fast. Adj. Fixed. Q. VI. 6. E. —and loose, Light. [adj. Ha. IV. 7. D.] —asleep hold— [asleep (int.] [hold (int.] [tie (int.] ty— Firm. Q. VI. 5. [Swift] NP. V. 9. Subst. [Absteining from feed∣ing.] Religious. RE. IV. 5. O. Fasten. [Fast (make] [Tie] [Bite] Fastness, [Place inaccessible.] sp. through bogs.] Fastidious. [adj. a. nauseate contemn scorn (apt.] Fat. —of Animal. PG. II. 7. —Constitution. NP. V. 5. —Tast or Smell. Q. IV. 2. [Vessel] vid. Vat. Fate. AS. I. 2. E. Fatal. [adj. Fate (abstr.] [adj. a. Death.] Father. Parent. RO. I. 2. (male.] —monk. RE. II. 7. —ly▪ [adj. Father.] —less, [Un-fathered.] —in law, [Father by Affini∣ty.] fore— [Progenitor.] RO. I. 1. Foster— RO. III. 2. God— RO. III. 1. God the— G. I. Fathom [6. Foot.] Fatigue, [a. Weariness (thing.] Faucet. Pr. V. 7. A. Fauchion, [Broad short (sword.] Faucon, vid. Falcon.] Fault. [Defect (corr.] [Evil action] —capital. RJ. III. —not capital. RJ. IV. finde— [a. Censoriousness] [Reprehend] [Blame] Faulter. [Stammer] [Stumble] [Err] [Fail]
Desist timorously.] unfaithful∣ly.] Omit timorously.] unfaithful∣ly.] Forsake timorously.] unfaithful∣ly.] Faulty. [adj. Fault] [adj. Wrong] Faun, vid. Fawn. Favor. Affection. AS. V. 2. [Favor (sign] sp. Ornament.] sp. Riband.] Countenance. [Face (manner] (fig.] Favorite, [adj. p. Favor (per∣son.] Fautor, [adj. a. Favor (person.] Fawn. [Assentation] Man. IV. 7. E. sp. By gesture.] [Buck. Be. II. 4. (young] Fealty. [Fidelity] [Fidelity (sign] Fear. AS. V. 6. O. for— [Left that] Fearfulness. Timidity, [Fear apt.] Terribleness, [a. Fear (apt.] Fearn. HL. I. 4. Oake— HL. I. 4. A. Feast. Thing. Pr. II. 1. Time, [Festival] Feat. [Fact [Done (thing] [Handsome (dim.] Feather. Single. PP. V. 1. Plume [Feathers (aggr.) for Ornament.] Feature, [Figure (man.] sp. Of face.] February, [Second month.] Fecible. [adj. p. doe (pot.] [Possible] Feculent, [adj. Sediment.] Fecundity, [Fruitfulness.] Fee. [Revenue] sp. of Office.] [Wages] [Stipend] —simple. Hereditary right] Absolute right] —farm. [Inheritance obnoxious to Rent.] Feebleness, [Weakness.] Feed. AC. I. 5. —upon, [Be fed with.] Feeling. Sense. NP. III. 5. —for, [For-search by—] [Suffering] fellow— [Compassion] —Feelers. PP.. IV. 4. Fein, vid. Fain Fel. [Feirce] NP. IV. 4. O. to— [a. Fall] sp. With striking.] —trees, &c. O. III. 8. A. a— [Skin] sp. With fleece.] —monger. [Skin (Mech.] (Mer.] —wort, [Gentian] HL. VII. 6. Fellow. Like] Equal] [adj. RO. IV. (person] [Companion.] The—of it, [The other con∣gruous to it.] —worker, [Together—] —of Colledge, [Assessor of adj. Colledge (off.] [Sorry (person.] [Spoke.] Po. V. 7. A. Fellowship. [Fellow (abstr.] [Society] [Communion] Felon. [adj. Felony (person] [Apostem at the root of the nail] Felony. RJ. III. 4. Felt. [adj. p. Feel] [Head (vest) woollen with broad margin] to— [a. Cloth (make) by kneading] Felter, [Entangle.] Female NP. VI. 2. O. Feminine NP. VI. 2. O. Fen. Po. I. 8. Fence, [Enclosure] [Fortifie] [Defend] Exercise. Mo. V. 6. A. Fenegreek. HS. III. 13. A. Fennel. HF. V. 1. Hogs— HF. V. 2. Gyant— HF. V. 3. Scorching— HF. V. 11. A. —flower. HS. V. 13. A. Feodary.   Feoff, vid. Enfeoff. Fermenting. O. VI. 5. A. Fern, vid. Fearn. Ferret. Be. IV. 5. to— [Search (int.] —out, [Out-drive (int.] —silk. Ferry. [Boat for travelling over Ri∣ver] [Boating (place) over River.] Fertility, [Fruitfulness.] Fervent. [Hot (augm.] [Zealous▪] Ferule. Stone, [Together-coagulated Gravel.] Metalline, [Ring (fig.) la∣min.] Wood, [adj. Cudgelling (in∣strum.) for hand] Fescu, [Pin (instr.) for shewing the Letters.] Fess, [Transverse lamin (fig.) in the middle of the Scutche∣on.] Fester, Putrefie.] Festival, [adj. Festivity (time.] Festivity. RE. IV. 5. Fetch. to— TA. VI. 4. A. —breath, [In-take—] —out, [Cause to come out.] —up, [Overtake.] a— [Invention] [Craftied (thing] Fetid, [Stinking.] Fetter, [Bonds for Legs.] Feud, [Old enmity.] Fever. S. II. 2. malignant— S. II. 3. Feverfew. HF. II. 9. Fewel, vid. Fuel. Fewness. TM. III. 1. O. Fy. Interj. II. 3. O. Fib, [Lie (dim.] Fibre. PG. II. 5. A. Fickleness, [Lightness.] Ha. IV. 7. D. Fiction. T. I. 3. A. Fiddle, [Music (instr.) stringed] —stick, [Bow for Music (instr.] —ing. [a. Music with instrument.] [a. Vanity] Fidelity. Man. IV. 2. Fidge, [Vain ition (freq.] Fiduciary, [adj. Deposit (per∣son.] Field. [Grounds.] Po. I. 2. Keep the— RM. II. 3. Win the— RM. II. 1. E. Quit the— RM. II. 3. D. Fieldfare. Bi. III. 5. Fiend. W. I. 2. O. Fierce. NP. IV. 4. O. Wilde, [adj. NP. IV. 4. O.] op. to Moderate, [adj. Ha. III. 4. D.] op. to Meek, [adj. Man. I. 9. D.] Fife, [Musical Pipe.] Fifteen.   Fifty.   Fig. Tr. I. 5. Indian— Tr. I. 9▪ A. —wort. HS. VIII. 5. A. Fight. RM. I. 7. Figment, [adj. Fiction (thing.] Figulation. O. IV. A. Figure. Shape. Mag III. A. Scheme line pictur'd fig.] Rhetorical. D. III. 7. A. Fil. O. II. 7. Filament, [Fibre.]
Filberd. Tr. IV. 3. Filch, [Theft (dim.] File. —ing. O. IV. 2. A. a— Instrument, [adj. filing (instr.] As of Souldiers. RM. IV. 4. A. Filial, (adj. Son.] Filipendula, [Dropwort.] Fill. O. II. 7. Fillet. [Riband] sp. adj. Linen.] —of Beast. —of Pillar, [Square (part.] Filly, [young horse (sem.] Fillip, [Strike with the nail of the finger springingly.] Film, [Thin Membrane.] PG. II. 3. A. Filthy. [adj. a. Defile (abstr.] [adj. Slovenliness (augm.] a—deal, [Much (corr.] Filtring. O. VI. 4. A. Fin. PP. IV. 6. Final, [adj. End.] Finch. Chaff— Bi. IV. 7. Bul— Bi. IV. 5. Gold— Bi. Green— Bi. IV. 6. Finde. —by Seeking. TA. I. 7. O. Perceive, [a. Common sense.] Discover.] AS. II. 2. A. Invent.] AS. III. 2. A. Contrive.] AS. III. 7. —by Experience. [Discover by Essaying.] [a, Experience] Ha. VI. 4. —the Bill, [Approve the Bill.] —Fault. [a▪ Censoriousness] [Blame] [Reprehend] —without seeking. [a. Fortune to see.] have.] &c. [Obtein] TA. V. 1. [Maintein] RO. VI. 4. Fine. Adj. [Simple.] —force, [Simple. f.] [Pure] [adj. TM. V. 6.] [Refined] [Un-adj. p. Worst part.] Sediment.] [Thin.] [adj. TM. II. 5. O.] —linen, [Thin (augm.)—] [Soft] [adj. Man. I. 8. D.] [Tender] [adj. NP. IV. 7. O.] [Nice] [adj. Man. II. 6. E.] [adj. a. Dainties (apt.] [adj. Ornateness] [Crafry.] Subst. [Mulct] RJ. VI. 7, in— [In the End.] Finger. PG. V. 7. Fore— [Second—] Middle— [Third—] Ring— [Fourth—] Little— [Fifth—] at ones—'s end, [adv. Memory (perf.] light—'d, [adj. Theft (apt.] —fern. Ladies— HS. III. 4. Finical. Nice, [adj. Man. II. 6. E.] [Conceited. adj. Ha. III. O.] Finish. TA. III. 7. Finite. T. III. 6. Fir. male— Tr. V. 5. female— Tr. V. 5. A. Fire. Proper. El. I. bone— [Fire built for Joy.] Triumph.] light— [adj. Flame—] wild— [Confection of Pow∣der, adj. a. Fire (apt.] —works. —brand. — Fork F. Shovel Sh. for—] —lock. Meteor. —drake. El. I. 4. licking— El. I. 6. A. Disease. St. Anthonie's—[Erysipe∣las.] Firestone, [Marchasite] St. I. 3. A. Firing, [Fuell.] Firkin. [Barrel (dim.] Measure. Firm. Fast, [adj. Q. VI. 5.] —land, [Continent.] W. III. 2. Constant, [adj. Ha. IV. 7.] Firmament. [Starry heaven] W. II. [Ether] El. II. 1. First. In Number, [adj. Mea. II. 1.] In Dignity. [Principal.] Fiscal, [adj. Exchequer.] Fisgig.   Fish. Fi. —hook, [Hook for—] —monger, [adj. Fish (merc.] —pond. Po. I. 6. to— [Hunt Fish] [a. Confess (end] Fisherman, [Hunting (artist) of Fish.] Fisk. [Mo. II. (corr.] Fist, [Hand Folded.] Contracted.] Fistic, [Pistach.] Fistula. S. I. 7. A. Fit. [adj. Congruity. T. V. 5.] [Congru∣ously proportion'd] disposed] prepared] furnished] Opportune [adj. Time (perf.] [Decent] [Expedient] a— T. VI. 6. A. —of sickness, [a. Sickness.] —of the mother. S. VI. 7. to— [a. Fit.] —with the like, [Compen∣sate.] Fitch, vid. Vetch. Fitcher. Mo. II. (freq.) cross— Fitchow, [Polecat.] Be. IV. 5. A. Fitting, vid. Fit. adj. Five. Mea. II. 5. —hundred, &c. Fixed. Fast, [adj. Q. VI. 6. E.] [Not adj. p. move (apt.] [Observing (int.] Flag. Figure. Mag. IV. 7. A. —of a Ship. RN. III. 7. —Ship. [Sedge.] —flower, [Iris.] to— [Be weak] [Decay] [Be limber] sp. Through Weakness.] Decay.] [Hang adv. limber] Flagitious, [Vitious (augm.] Flagon, [Cylindrical pot.] Flagrant. [Intense] [Manifest] Flay, [Un-skin.] Flail, [adj. a. Threshing (instr.] Flake, [Lamin.] Flam, [Ly,] Flame. El. I. 1. Flank. Side. —of Animal. PG. IV. 5. A. to— [a. Side.] Flanker. RM. VI. 6. A. Flap. vid. Flag. [Strike] sp. with Lamin.] a— [adj. Limber (lam.] sp. Hanging.] flie— [Flap to drive away Flies.] Throat— Cover (thing) of the rough Artery.] Flash. [Impetus.] —of fire, [Flame (imp.] —of water, [Stream (imp.] —y. Taste. Waterish, [adj. Water (like.]
[Fresh] Q. IV. 5. O. Discourse, [Light.] Man. IV. 6. D. Flask. [Box for Gunpowder.] [Carriage for Ordnance] Flasket, [Long Basket without Lid.] Flat. Corpor. [Plain] W. III. 1. [adj. Lamin] [Shallow] TM. II. 3. O. [Low] TM. II.4. O. [adj. Lying] AC. VI. 7. O. —foot. PP. V. 3. A. Transcendent [Manifest] Absolute, [adj. T. I. 8. O.] [Sorry. TM. I. 4. D.] a— —in the Sea, [Shallow (place) in the Sea.] —in Music. Q. III. 5. D. Flattery. [Fawning] [Assentation] Flatulent, [adj. a. Wind Inflation make] Flaunt, [adj p. Ornate (exc.] Flaw. [Break (dim. Outside. [Notch] [Bruise] [Spot] —of wind, [Wind (imp.] Flawn, [Py of Milk and Eggs.] Flax. HS. V. 12. Toad's— Flea, Ex. I. 8. A. —bane. HF. III. 9. A. —wort. HL. VII. 4▪ A. Sea— Ex. II. 2. A. to— [Un-skin.] Fleam. Vid. Phlegm. [adj. Phlebotomy (instr.] Fled, [adj. pret. Flie.] Fledge, [Feathered▪] Flee, vid. Fly. Fleece. PP. VI. 3. to—[Un-fleece.] Fleet, [Swift] to— vid. Flit. a— Navy, [Ships (aggr.] Flegmatic, adj. Phlegm.] Flesh. PG. II. 6. —ly. vid. Carnal. Natural] Worldly] [adj. Lust] AC. II. 5. —y [adj. Flesh] [Having much Flesh] to—one, [Encourage.] Fletcher, [adj. Bow (mech.] Flew. [adj. pret. Flie] Vid. Flu. Flexible. [adj. Q. V. 6.] [adj. p Persuade (apt.] Fly. As Bird. Mo. I. 2. As routed. RM. II. 3. D. —out. [a Excess] [a. Squander] Let— [Shoot] [Strike at] a— [Flying Insect] Crane— Ex. IV. 8. Dung— Ex. IV. 4. A. Flesh— Ex. IV. 4. Shepherd's— [Crane-fly.] Spanish— [Cantharides] Ex. V. 9. Catch— HS. V. 2. A. —boat. Flicker, vid. Flutter. Flight, vid. Fly. Flinch. [Start] AC. IV. 5. intermit timorously forsake unfaithfully abandon cowardly Fling. [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. —away, [Away-goe sudden∣ly.] Kick, [Strike with the heel.] Flint. St. I. 3. Flirt. [Impetus] [Woman (corr.] Flit. [Remove] [Depart] [Transitory] Flitch, [Half the Trunk and Limms.] sp. of a Hogg.] Flitter, [Torn fragment.] —mouse, [Bat.] Flittern.   Flix, [Disease of Dunging (exc.] bloody— [Disentery] —weed. HS. IV. 11. Flock. Aggregate. —together, [a. Convention] —of Wool. [Course part of—] [Curls of Fleece.] Flook, [Barb of Anchor.] Floor. Po. III. 4. A. Florentine.   Florid. [adj. Beauty] Vigor] [adj. Flourishing] Ornament] Flosculous. [adj. Flower] [adj. Ornateness] Flote. Mo. I. 3. a— [Boat (like) of together tied timber.] Floud. [River] [Water (exc.] [Inundation] —gate. [oor for floud] [ate to in-shut water] Flounder. Fi. VII. 4. A. Flour. [Best part] TM. VI. . sp. of ground com.] Blossom. PP. II. 1. —gentle. our Ladie's— —de luce, [Iris] —bulbous. HL. IV. 6. —tuberous. HL. V. 3. A. to— [a. Powder] Pr. III. 7. A. a. Blossom. PP. II. 1. Flourish. [a. Flour] [a. Vigor.] a. Prosper] Discourse ornately] Boast] Prelude, [Preparatory Music.] [Vibrate] Flout, [Mock.] —cream. Flow. [a. River] —ing tide, [Upward-tide.] [Abound] Flower, vid Flour. Flu, [Not-adj. p. fat (pot.] the—of a rabbet, [-Fleece—] Fluctuate. [a. Wave] [Waver] AS. IV. 4. O. Fluellin. HS. VIII. 9. A. Fluent. [abounding] [adj. Discourse (apt.] Fluidness. Q. V. 5. D. Fluke. Ex. I. 4. Flung. [adj. pret. Fling.] Flurt, vid. Flirt. Flush. [Abundance] [Mellow] [Blush (like] [Wholly of the same colour] Flute, [pipe] sp. Musical.] Flutter, [Fly (end.] [Shake (freq.) the wings.] Flux. vid. Flix. [Streaming] to— [Melt] [Purge] sp. by Salivation.] Fluxion. [Flowing] [Fluxing] Foe, [Enemy] Fodder Hay Straw Eatable.] Fog, [Thick mist.] —gy, [Fat (exc.] Foil.
[Overthrow (dim.] [Accessory beauty] sp. by Worse Contrary com∣par'd with it.] Play at—s, [Fence with blunt Weapons.] Foin, [Prick (end) by thrusting (imp.] Foist. to— [adv. Silent. Mo. IV. 2. A.] [Forge] —in [Add secretly.] fraudulently.] forgingly.] Gally— [Predatory Ship (dim.] Fold. Pleit. O. V. 5. [Shut] Sheep— [Sepiment for Sh.] Fole, [Horse (young.] to— [Parturition·] sp. of Mare.] Foliage, [Leaf (aggr.] sp. Factitious.] Folio, [Biggest book (figure.] Folk. [Person (kinde] [Man (aggr.] Folly. Ha. VI. 2. D. Follow. Go after. TA. VI. 6. As Enemy. Persue] Hunt] As dependent. RO. III. 5. O. [Wait] AC. V. 1. A. Obey Imitate Practise] Be diligent about] As consequent [p. Inference.] As Successor, [Succeed.] Fome, [Bubbles (aggr.] Foment, [a. Fotion] [Supple by soking] sp. In hot (remiss.] Fondness. Indulgence. Man. VI. 7. D. Vainness] Man. IV. 6. O. [Folly] Ha. VI 2. D. Font, [adj. Baptism (vessel] Food. [Feeding (thing] [Nourishing (thing] Fool. [adj. Folly (person] —hardy, [Rash.] Man. I. 7. E. natural— [adj. NP. I. 1. O. (person.] to—one, [a. Fraud.] to—with one, [a. Wanton∣ness.] Foolishness, [Folly.] Foord. [Shallow (part) of River] sp. over-adj. p. travel (pot.) Foot. —of Animal. PG. V. 6. —ball, [Play of Striking Ball with Foot.] [Ball for play by, & —cloth. —man, [adj. Running (apt) Servant] —souldier. RM. III. 1. —stall, [adj. Foot (armam.] —step, [Foot (sign.] —stool, [Foot-supporting (armam.] by— [By Foot (sign.] Crump—ed, [Shrunk—ed.] Flat—ed. PP. V. 3. A. Splay—ed, [Divergingly—· ed.] to—it, [Travel on his Feet.] —of Cup [Foot like—] —of Pillar [Foot like—] Measure. —of Length. Mea. I. 3. —of Verse [Verse part.] Footing. [a. Foot (place] Foppery. [Vanity] T. IV. 5. O. M. IV. 6. O. [Folly] Ha. VI. 2. D. For. Prep. [Because of] Prep. I. 2. A. if it had not been— [Unless it had been—] [Concerning] Prep. I. 3. O. as—me [—me] let him—me, [Let him— me.] [Instead of] Prep. II. 1. A. op. to Against.] Adv. —a time, [adv. Transitory.] —ever, [adv. Ever.] Conj. [Because] Conj. III. 2. —all that, [Notwithstanding] Conj. II.2. A. —fear, [Lest that.] Conj. III. 1. O. —as much as, [Whereas.] Conj. IV. 1. —Example, [e. g.] Conj. IV. 3. O. Forage. [Provisions] sp. for Horses.] [Booty] to— [Goe forth to bring in Provisi∣ons.] [a. Booty] Forbear. [Abstein] Omit] Desist] Spare] a. Patience] Forbid. RO. V. 1. O. God— [Let God Prevent] Hinder] [Be it not that] Force. Coaction] iolence] Strength] Ability] Efficientness] Importance] of— [adv. Necessity] —s. RM. IV. Forcer. [adj. a. Force (Person (Instr. Fore. [Before] [adv. Preventing] Fore-appoint, [Before-appoint.] Fore-arm, [Before-arm.] Fore-cast. [Before. Consider] Contrive] [Providence] Man. III. 2. Fore-castle. RN. II. 4. Fore-conceiv'd, [Before-conceived] [Meditated] Fore-deem. Before judge.] Preventingly judge.] Fore-door, [adj. Forepart-door.] Fore-father▪ RO. I. 1. Fore-foot, [adj. Forepart-foot.] Fore-front, [Fore-part] Fore-going, [Preceding] Fore-hand. [Fore-part] [Prevent] Fore-head. PG. III. 6. Fore-judge. Before— judge] Preventingly— judge] Fore-know, [Before-know.] Fore-land. W. III. 4. Fore-man, [First (per∣son.] [Principal (per∣son.] Fore-mast. RN. III. 4. A Fore-noon, [Preceding part of the day.] Fore-ordein, [Before-ordein.] Fore-part. Sp. III. 8. Fore-run. [Before- Go] Run] [a. Van-currier] Fore-sail, [Mizzen-sail.] Fore-see, [Before- See] Know] Fore-shew, [Before-shew.] Fore-sight. [Fore-seeing] [Providence] Fore-skin, [adj. Forepart-skin.] Fore-sleeve, [Sleeve from the elbow to the wrist.] [adj. cubit (vest] Fore-slow. [a. Slow] [Protract] [Hinder] Fore-speak. [Before-speak of] [Witch with words] Fore-stall.
Before— buy] Preventingly— buy] Fore-teeth, [adj. Forepart-teeth.] Fore-tell, [Before-tell.] [a. Prophet] Fore-think, [Before- Think] Meditate] Fore-thought, adj. a. pret. adj. p. Fore-think.] Fore-token, [Before a. Sign.] Fore-top, [adj. Forepart-hair.] sp. Above the Fore-head.] Fore-warn, [Before-warm.] Forfeit. [un-adj. p. right] [Lose right] sp. Penally.] [Lose by confiscation] Forge. to— Fabricate. O. IV. 5. Falsifie. RJ. IV. 4. A. Feign, [adj. a. Fiction.] a—[Fabri∣cating (room) (place) of adj. Iron (mech.] Forget, [a. NP. II. 3. O] —fulness. NP. II. 3. O. Forgive. As Crime. RJ. II. 2. O. As Debt. TA. IV. 9 O. Forgo, [Be un-adj. p. Possession of] Voluntarily, [Let go.] TA. I. 6. O. Begin to be so, [p. Dereliction.] Continue so, [Abandon.] Unvoluntarily, [Lose.] Fork. Figure. Mag. IV. 8. A. Instrument, [adj. Fork (instr.] pitch— [Preparing (instr.) of Hay.] Forlorn. [adj. p. Destruction] [adj. p. Despair.] [adj. p. Dereliction.] —hope. RM. IV. 6. A. Form. Cause. T. II. 7. A. [Manner] set— [Determined expressi∣on (manner.] [Figure] [Hare's (Bed] (Place] Seat. Mag. V.8. Formal. —cse. T. II. 7. A. [adj. Formality] Formality. [Form, (manner.] Vice. Man. IV. 6. E. Former. [Preceding] —ly, [adv. Preceding (time.] [Past] Formidable, [adj p. Fear (abstr.] Formost, [First.] Formulary. [Set-form] [Epitome] Fornication. RJ. IV.2. Forrage, vid. Forage. Forrain, [adj. RO. IV. 3. O.] —er. RO. IV. 3. O. Forrest. Po. I. 2. A. —er, [adj. Forrest (Off.] Forsake. As God, [Dereliction.] As Man. [Desertion.] — the Right, [Abdicate.] —the Possession, [Forgo.] —his Religion, [Apostasie.] Forsooth. Truly. Adv. I. 2. O. Ironic. Int. I. 3. Forswear. Abjure. Against-swear] [Deny] with Oath.] [Renounce] with Oath.] [Swear false] Fort, [Sconse.] RM. VI. 2. Forth. Out of] Prep. IV. 2. [Without] Prep. IV. 2. A. [Public] —coming. [Forth-adj. p. bring (pot.] [Ready to be brought forth] —with, [Soon] Fortie.   Fortifie. Strengthen] [adj. a. RM. VI.] Fortitude. Man. I. 7. Fortress, [Sconse.] Fortuitous, vid. Casual. Fortunateness. adj. Fortune (perf.] [adj. Prosperity] Fortune. AS. I. 2. D. —teller, [Before-telling (per∣son) of events] to— [adj. p. Event] Forward. adj. Forepart] adj. Alacrity] adj. Incline (augm.] adj. p. Prepared Begin (perf. adj. pret. Proceed] to— adj. a. Adjuvant] Proceed make] Dispatch] egg— [a. Impulsive.] going— Ition adj. a. fore∣part] Proceed] Foss. Furrow] [Ditch] Fosset. Pr. V. 7. A. Foster. [Nurse] —father. RO. III. 2. —child. RO. III. 2. O. —brother, [Together-foster-child.] [Fotion] [Educate] Fotion. AC. I. 4. Fought, vid. Fight. Foul. [adj. p. Defilement] [Deformed] [Vitious] [Slovenly] [Sordid] a—deal, [Much (corr.] [Birds] to— [a. Foul (make] [Hunt Birds] Found. adj. p. find] pret. find] to— [a. Foundation] [Cast] O. IV. 5. Foundation. Po. III. 4. Founder. [adj. a. Found (person] (Mech.] to— [a. Impotent in going (apt.] [Un-make adj. going (apt.] Foundling, [adj. p. find (per∣son.] Fountain. W. IV. 3. A. Four. Mea. II. 4. —fold, [four] —score, [Eighty.] —square, [Square.] Mag. V. 1. A. Fourm, vid. Form. Fowl, vid. Foul. Fox. Beast. Be. V. 2. —Fish. Fi. I. 7. A. —glove. HS. VII. 10. —tail. HL. III. 2. [a. Drunkenness] Fraction, [Breaking] Fracture, [Breaking] Fragment. TM. VI. 5. A. Fragrant, [Sweet] Q. IV.1. Fray. [Skirmish] [Fight (dim.] to— adj. a. Fear (make.] Fraight. [Burthen] sp. for Ship]1 [Wages for Carriage] Frail. [Brittle] Q. VI. 5. D. [Transitory] a— [Spherical Basket] sp. of Rushes.] Frame. —of Building. Po. III.1. Figure. in— [adj. p. Order▪ (perf.] out of— [adj. p. Confusion] Machin.] Jugament.] to— [a. Efficient] [Feign] [Contrive] [a. Build] [v. Congruity] Franchise, [privilege.]
Frank. Man. IV. 4. Frankincense. Tree. Tr. VIII. 3. [Resin of Frankincense-tree] Frantic, [Mad.] S. IV. 1. Fraternity, [Corporation.] Fraud. RJ. IV. 4. Fraudulent, [ad. Fraud.] Fraught. [Loaded] [Full] Fraxinella. HS. I. 1. A. Freak. dj. Conceitedness (thing] [adj. Lightness (thing] , [Spot (dim.) yellow.] Free. [adj. Liberty Ha. II. 1. AS. IV. 8. [not- Prisoner] Slave] [adj. p. Deliver] AS. I. 5. —from, [Without.] [adj. Spontaneity] AS. IV. 9. [adj. Alacrity] [Not-recompensed] [Liberal] Frank [adj. Man. IV. 4.] —booter, [adj. a. Booty (per∣son.] —hold, [Right not-rented.] —man. [Not-villain] [Citizen] [adj. Immunity Privilege per∣son.] Freedom. [Liberty] [Ingenuity] [Immunity] [Privilege] Fre-Mason, [adj. Free-stone (mech.] Free-stone. S. I. 1. Freez. Colour, [Gray.] loth, [Napt (augm.] to— [a. Frost] Ice] Freight, vid. Fraught. Frenzy. S. IV. 1. Frequent. Sp. I. 7. to— [To come (freq.] Fresh. [New] —air, [Breez.] —man. [New-comer] [Unexpert (person] [adj. Vigor] —taste. Q. IV. 6. Un-salted. Q. IV. 5. O. a— [adv. Repeating] Adv. IV. 2. Fresh water souldier. HS. VI. 1. Fret. [Rub] O. V. 8. —of musical instrument. [Under-touching (apt.) transverse (thing.] [Corrode] O. VI. 3. Wine—s. Un-skin by rubbing] Pain by corrosion] —Work, Spirally, &c. [Graving Spirally, &c. Vex, [a. Anger.] Fretum. W. IV. 5. Fry. [Children (aggr.] sp. Of Fish.] to— Pr. III. 4. Fricass, [adj. p. Fry (thing.] Frication, Rubbing.] Friction, Rubbing.] Friday, [The sixth day of the Week.] Friend. RO. IV. 1. a—ship, [adj. Benefactor (thing.] Frier, [Monk] RE. II. 7. Friars cowl▪ Broad leaved— HL. V. 10. Narrow leaved— HL. V. 10. A. Frigat [Man of War.] Fright, [adj. a. Fear (make.] Frigid. [Cold] [Slight] Frigot, [Man of War.] Fringe, [Tufted line.] Frippery, [adj. Sorry (thing.] Frisk, [Leap Nimble.] (freq.] Fritter, [Fried pudding (like.] Frittillary. HL. IV. 3. A. Frivolousness, [Vanity.] T. IV. 5. O. Frize, vid. Freez: Frizle, [Curl(augm.] Fro. Prep. vid. From. to and— [Forward and Backward.] a— [Man (fem.] Frock, [Upper vest of Horse (Off.] Frog. BE. VI. 2. Frolic, [adj. Mirth.] From. Prep. III. 2. —henceforth. [From this time] [At all times after this] Front. [Forehead] [Forepart] Frontier, [Margin.] Frontispice, [Forepart] Frontlet, [Forehead (vest.] Frost. El. III. 4. —nail, [Nail un-adj. a. slide (apt.] Froth, [Bubble (aggr.] Frowardness. [Disingeniousness] [Moroseness] Frown. AC. IV. 2. O. Frozen, [adj. p. Freez.] Fructifie, [adj. a. Fruitful.] Frugality. Man. III. 3. Fruit. PP. III. Effect] Event] Profit] —fulness NP. VI. 3. —less, Unprofitable.] Vain.] Fruiterer, [Fruit (merch.] Fruition, [Enjoying.] TA. V. . Frumenty, [Pottage of Wheat.]▪ Frump, [Mock (dim.] Frustrate. TA. V. 1. O. Fucus, [Paint] sp. for the Face.] Fuddle, [a. Drunkenness.] Fuel. Pr. VI. 2. Fugitive. [Flying] [Apostate] Ful. [adj. p. Fill] [Whole] [Sufficient] [Perfect] —moon, [Moon in the midst of her month] to—Cloth. O. V. 3. Fulfil. [Perform] [Finish] Fuliginous, [adj. Soot.] El. IV. 3. A. Fuller, [Fulling (mech.] Fulsom. [Sweet, exc.] [Nauseative] NP. II. 4. O. Fumaria, [Hollow-root.] Fumble, [a. Hand (corr.] Fume. [Smoak] [Exhalation] [Indignation] Fumigation, [Smoking.] Fumitory. HS. III. 4. A. Function. [Calling] [Action in ones Calling] Fundament. PG. IV. 8. A. Fundamental. [adj. Foundation] [Chief] Funeral, [adj. Burial.] sp. the Solemnity.] Fungous, [Porous.] Funnel, Cone (vessel) for through-pouring.] [adj. Fur. PP. VI. 3. to— RN. VI. 3. A. Furbish, [a. Bright (make] Fury, [Anger (augm.] the—es, [Devils (fem.] Furious. [adj. Anger (augm.] [Fierce (augm.] Furling, [Tying loose.] Furlong. Mea. I. 6. Furnace. [Concave (place) to build Fire (in.] [Kettle (aug.] —hole in Fortification. RM. VI. 7. A. Furnish TA. III. 2. A. Furniture, [adj. Furnishing (thing] [Provisions] [Tackle.]
[Utensils] Furrier, [adj. Fur (mech.] (merch.] Furrow. Mag. V. 7. O. Further, vid. Farther. —more, [Also.] to— [adj. a▪ Adjuvant] Furthest, vid. Farthest. Furz, [Sh. IV. 8. A. Fuse, [Cone notched spirally.] Fusil. [Notched] [adj. p. Cast] [Meltable] Fusty, [Musty.] Q. IV. 7. Fustian. [Course Cotton-cloth] [Sorry mixt (thing] Fustick.   Future. Sp. L. 1. D. Fuzbal. HL. I. 2. A. G. GAbardin, [Sorry (garment.] Gabble, [a. Loquacity not in∣telligible.] Gabel, [Tribute.] Gabion. RM. VI. 9. A. Gable-end, [End of roof.] Gad. [Pin] —bee. to— [Wander] Gag, [a. Gaping (instr.] Gage. [Pledge] to— Essay Depth] Essay Capacity] Gaggle [Goose (voice.] Gay, [adj. p. Ornateness (exc.] Gain. Lucre. TA. V. 2. [Obtain] [Increase] Gain-say. [Against-say] Deny] Contradict] Galades. Ex. VIII. 3. A. Galangal. HL. III. 12. Galaxy.   Galbanum, [Concrete juice of Gyant Fennel.] Galbula. Bi. III. 8. Gale. gentle— El. VI. 6. stiff— El. VI. 7. Galeass.   Galcot. RN. I. 4. Galingale. HL. III. 12. Gall. [Choler] [Bladder of—] Excrescence of Oke. PP. III. O. to— Un-skin] Hurt] Anger] sp. by Rubbing] Wearing.] Gallant. [Ornate (augm.] [Excellent] Galley. RN. I. 3. —foist. —pot Gallery, [adj. p. walking (room.] Gallimaufry, [Confused mix∣ture.] Gallinula serica. Bi. VIII. 9. A. Gallion.   Galliot. RN. I. 4. Galloche, [Outermost foot (vest.] Gallon.   Galloon. Lace. Gallop, [Run.] Gallows, [Jugament for hang∣ing.] Galls. Sh. V. 5. Gambado, [Leg (arm.) for ri∣ding.] Gambol. [a. Activity] sp. with Legs.] Wanton Vain (thing] Game. Play. Mo. V. A. —ster, [Game (mech.] [Hunting.] —some, [Wanton.] Gammon, [Leg of Hog.] sp. Smok'd.] Ganch, [Precipitating on hooks.] Gander, [Goose (male.] Gang. [Society] [Faction] Ganglion. S. III. 9. Gangrel, [Long (corr.] Gangrene. S. I. 8. Gantlet, [Armor for the and.] Gantlope.   Gap, [Notch.] Gape. [Open (augm.] sp. the mouth.] —after, (augm.] [Expect (earnestly.] [Yawning] [Chasm] Garb, [Manner.] sp. of Garments.] Demeanor.] Garbage, [Entrails] [Worst part] Garble, [Un- a. worst-part.] sp. Spice.] Garboil. [Contention] [Trouble] Gard. —of Souldiers. RM. III. 6. to— Defend] Protect] Safe (make.] Princes- Servants for safe∣ty.] Officers for safe∣ty.] —of vestment, [Margin strengthned.] sp. with Lace.] Garden. Po. I. 3. Gardian. RO. III. 4. [Monks (off.] Gargane, [White headed Teale (kind.] Gargarism, [Gargling.] Gargle, [Gullet to — [Wash the top of the Gullet.] Wind-pipe.] Garish, [adj. p. Ornate (exe.] Garland, [Head-environing, Joy-sign ornament.] Garlick. HL. IV. 11. Garment, [adj. Clothing (thing.] Garner, [adj. a. Keeping (room) for Corn.] Garnish, [adj. a. Ornate.] Garret, [Highest (room.] Garrison. RM. VI. 1. A. Garrulity, [Loquacity.] Garter. [Ribband for Leg] [Binding (vest.] Gash, [Slash.] Pr. III. 5. A. Gasp, [Gape for breath.] Gastly, [adj. a. Fear (make.] [Pale] AC. IV. 9. O. (exe.] Gate. [Dore] Poss. IV. 2. [Going (manner] Mo. I. 1. Gather. [a. Aggregate] [a. Convention] Collect. O. II. 5. —as Curd, [Coagulate.] —as Fruits, [Take F.] —as Wind, [adj. p. wind.] [Contract] —up his Gown, &c. [Lift contracted,] Calv's— [Cal'vs PG. VI.] Gaud. [Mock] Vain, [adj. T. IV. 5. O. (thing.] —y. [Ornate (exc.] [Feast] Gavelkind, [Distribution of In∣heritance equally.] Gaul, vid. Gall. Gaunch, [Precipitate on hooks.] Gaunt, [Lean (augm.] Gauntlet, [adj. Hand (arm.] Gaze, [Look intently.] —hound, [Dog hunting by Sight.] Gazel, [Antilope.] Gazet, [adj. Narration (thing) of News.] Gear, [Thing (corr.] Geese, [Goose plural.] Geld, vid. Gueld. Gelder rose, [Sh. II. 12.] Gelly. Pr. I. 5. A. Gem. St. III. Gemini [Third Constellation [Third Twelfth part of the Zodi∣ac.] Gender, [Sex.]
to— [a. Generation.] Genealogy, [Catalogue of Ance∣stors.] General. Op. to▪ Special. TM. III. 4. [adj. Genus] [All] [Common] [Total.] [Universal] a— [Army▪ (Off.] [Monks chief (Off.] Generation. Begetting AC. I. 1. [Descendent (aggr.] RO. I. 1. O. [Age] Mea. VI. O. Generative facuty. NP. VI. Generousness. Man. III. 4. Genesis, [Generation.] Genet, [Spanish Horse.] [Martin] Genial, [Festival.] Genitals, [Privities.] PG. VI. 8. Genius. [Temper of mind] [Disposition] good— [Proper Angel] evil— [Proper Devil] Gentian. HL. VII. 6. Dwarfe— HL. VII. 6. A. Gentil. [Pagan] [Maggot] Ex. I. 5. A. Gentile, [adj. Gentleman] Gentle. T. V. 5. [Tame] NP. IV. 4. Courteous] Clement] Gracious] Affable] [Easie] [Remiss] —man. RC. I. 3. A. —woman. RC. I. 3. A. (fem. [Maggot] Gentry. RC. I. 3. A. (kind.] Gentry. RC. I. 3. A. (aggr.] Genuflexion. [Bending knee] AC. VI. 6. [Kneeling] AC. VI. 6. A. Genuin. T. III. 4. Genus, [Kind.] T. I. Geography, [Science of the World.] Geomancy, [Wizarding by the Earth.] Geometra. Ex. III. 7. Geometry. [Science of Magni∣tude.] Georgic, [adj. Agriculture.] German. Cosin— RO. I. 5. Germander. HF. VI. 2. Tree— HF. VI. 2. A. water— HF. VII. 9. wild— HS. VI. 11. A. Germinate, [v. Sprout.] PP. II. 5. Gerund, [Case of Participle Substantive.] Gesses, [Foot-bonds for Hawk.] Gesticulation, [Gesturing (augm.] (exc.] Gesture. AC. VI. Get. [Gain] TA. V. 2. [Obtain] TA. V. 1. [Obtain to be] doe] —before Obtain to be be∣fore.] Prevent.] —by Heart, [Obtain to re∣member] —out. —from person, [Obtain to be out, &c.] —a nail, [Pull out a nail.] —with childe, [Impregnate] —Children, [Generate ch.] —clear, Obtain to be free∣ed.] Escape] —gone, [From-goe.] TA. VI. 1. O. —rid of, [Obtain to be freed from.] [Mineral.] St. VI. 3. Gewgaw, [adj. Vanity. T. IV. 5. O. (thing.] Ghess, [Conjecture.] Ghost, [Spirit.] give up the— [Dy.] holy— G. III. —root. Giant, [Great (augm.) person.] Gib, [Cat (male.] Gibberish, [Speech not-intelligi∣ble.] Gibbet, [adj. hanging (jug.) with one stem.] Gibbous, [adj. Protuberance.] Gibe, [Mock.] Giblets, [Entrals.] PG. VI. sp. Edible.] Giddy. [adj. Vertigo] [adj. Fancy (corr.] [Wanton] [Conceited] [adj. Light] Ha. IV. 7. O. Giddiness, [Vertigo.] Gift. [adj. Give (thing] —of God. spiritual. Ha. V. Gig. [Cone adj. horn to be vertigi∣nated with whipping.] [Whimzy] [adj. Conceitedness (thing.] Gigantic, [Great (augm.] (exc.] Giggle, [Laugh (augm.] (freq.] (exc.] Gigglet, [adj. Laugh (apt.] Gild, [Colour with Gold.] Gilden-pole.   Gill. —of Bird. PP. V. 7. A. —of Fish. PP. IV. 3. Gilliflower. HS. V. 1. Sea— HF. II. 14. A. Stock— HS. IV. 1. Wall— HS. IV. 1. A. Gilt-head. Fi. V. 1. Gimlet, [Little-boring (instr.] Gimmal, [Factitious joynt.] Gimp, [Shamois.] Gin. [Machin] [Trap] Ginger, [Root of an Indian Iris of a hot biting tast.] —ly Gently Slowly without noise.] Gingle. [Ringing (dim.] [Affect sound of Words] Ginny. —hen, [adj. Ginny-hen.] —pig, Be. III. 6. A. Gipsie.   Giraffa. Be. II. 7. Gird, vid. Guird. Girdle, vid. Guirdle. Girl, [Child (fem.] Girn, vid. Grin. Girt, uid. Guirt. Gith, [Nigella] Gittern, vid. Guittern. Give. —back, [Retire] —over. [Desist] [Abandon] Correct no more. RO. VI. 6. O. —up. [Yield] [Submit] —alms, [a. Alms.] —ear. [Hear (end.] [Observe with Ear] —law, [a. Law.] —name, [a. Name.] —ones mind self to, adj. p. Di∣sposition (augm.] —oath. [Swear (make] [Oblige by oath] —place. —way. —to understand, [a. Know (make.] mind—'s me. [I conjecture] [I expect] table—s. weather—s. Gives, [Bonds for legs] Gizzard, [Second musculous stomach of Bird.] Glad. [adj. Mirth] [adj. Alacrity] [adj. Delectation] Gladden.   Glade, [Open (place) through a Wood.] Gladiator, [adj. Fencing (per∣son.]
Gladiolus, [Corn-flagg] Glaive, [Long Sword.] Glance. [Oblique (imp.] a. Ey (imp.] a. Object (imp.] sp. adv. Accessory.] Digression.] [Allusion (dim.] witty— [Urbane (dim.] Glandule. PG. II. 7. A. Glans. [Mast.] PP. III. 4. Glass. St. II. 4. A. drinking— [adj. Glass-cup.] looking— [Face-shewing (instr.) by reflexion.] —wort. HL. VIII. 7. [Splendor] Glaucus. Fi. I. 3. A. Fi. IV. 1. A. Glave, [Long Sword.] Glavering, [Fawning] Glaze. [a. Glass.] [To Shut Wall with Glass.] [a. brightness] Glazier, [adj. a. Glass (mech.] Glean, [Ga∣ther the left things.] scattered Ears.] Glebe, [Land.] sp. Priest's.] Glede, [Kite.] Bi. I. 2. A. Glee. [Mirth] [adj. Mirth Song] Gleek. [Three] [Play] Glib. [Smooth] Q. VI. 2. E. [Slippery] Glide, [Kite.] Bi. I. 2. A. to— [Slide] Mo. II. 4. Glimmer, [Trembling light (imp.] Glimps, [Sud∣den Light Sight (dim.] Glistering, [Trembling (like) brightness.] Glitter, [Bright] Globe, [Sphere] Mag. III. 5. —fish. Fi. VIII. 1. Gloomy. [Cloudy] [Dark (dim.] [Dim] Q I. 3. A. Glory, Public Praise. Universal Reputati∣on. to— AS. VI. 1. A. Glorifie, [a. Glory.] Gloss. [Comment (dim.] [Brightness (dim.] Glote, [Look obliquely.] Glove, [adj. Hand (vest,] Fox— HS. VII. 10. Glow. [Be hot] [Shine white] [Shine fire-like] —worm▪ Ex. I. 5. —fly. Ex. V. 9. A. Gloze, [Assentation] Glue, [adj. Gluing (thing.] —ing. O. IV. 4. A. —y, [Clammy (augm.] Glut. [Fill (augm.] (exc.] [Loathe (make) with abun∣dance] Glutinous. [adj. Glue] [Clammy] Gluttony. Man. II. 2. E. Glyster, [Medicinal drink for the Fundament.] Gnash. [Together-strike teeth.] [noise (make) with teeth.] Gnat. Ex. IV. 5. A. —snapper. Gnaw. [Mastication] [Bite (end] [Corrode] Gnomon, [Hour-shewing pin.] Go. Proper. [Ition] TA. VI. —of Animal. Mo. I. sp. On legs. Mo. II. —on toes, [Stalk.] Mo. II. 3. [Walk] Mo. II. 1. Depart. TA. VI. 1. O. Figurate. [Move] [Event] —about, [Endeavour (inc.] —about [Begin] —in hand with [Begin] —after, [v. Succeed.] —against me. [I a. Nolleity] [I grudge it] [I loath it] [I nauseate it] —astray, [Err] —back, [Retire] —ward [v. Worse] —before, [v. Precede] —beyond one. [Superior] [Defraud] —down, [a. Downward.] —forward, [Proceed.] —on, [Proceed] —out, [Cease.] [quick, [a. Quick,] —through with it, [Finish.] —to. Int. —up, [a. Upward.] Goad, [Long pricking (instr.) to drive with.] Goal. [adj. p. Object (place] sp. of Race.] [End] T. II. 6. Goat. Be. II. 2. A. —'s beard. HF. III. 13. —Chafer. Ex. V. 3. —sucker, [Owle of a short small Bill, and wide mouth.] —'s thorn. skipping— El. I. 5. Gobbet. [Lump] [Fragment] Gobble, [Swallow greedily.] Gobius marinus. Fi. III. 7. Goblet, [Cup (augm.] Goblin, [Devil (like) fiction] God. G. —head, [God (abstr.] Action of— AS. . —the Father. G. I. —the Son. G. II. —the Holy Ghost. G. III. God-child. RO. III. 1. O. God-father. RO. III. 1. God-mother. RO. III. 1. (fem.) Godless, [Ungodly.] Godliness. [Holiness] [Religion (perf.] [Worship (perf.] Godwit. Bi. VII. 8. A. Goggle-eyed, [Protuberantly eyed.] Gold. Met. I. 1. —mine. [—(place] —oar Crude g. not-prepared g. —smith, [g. (mech.] (merch.] —of Pleasure. HS. VI. 8. A. —en locks. —rod. HF. III. 8. A. Gome, [Grease black'd by agita∣tion.] Gone. [adj. p. a. pret. go] [adj. Excess] [Spoil'd] [Destroy'd] Good. Proper. T. III. 2. Profitable Sufficient Convenient [Perfect] [Happy] —against, [Medicinal against] —at, [adj. Art in.] —for, [Profitable to.] —face. [Face (perf.] [Handsom] —fellow. —luck, [Prosperity.] —man of the House, [Master of the Family.] —success, [Event (perf.] —turn, [adj. Benefactor (thing.] —will, [Favor.] make.— [Perform] [Repair] [Compensate] find —[Approve] think —[Approve] Goodly, [Handsom.] Goodness. Man. I. 4.
Goods. [Possessions] [Houshold-stuff] Googe.   Goose. Bi. IX. 1. A. green— [young—] stubble— [autumnal—] Soland— Bi. IX. 4. —berry. Sh. I. 3. —foot. HF. I. 9. A. —grass. HL. IX. 9. A. —nest. Gorbeied, [Protuberantly belli∣ed.] Gore, Congealed blood] Coagulated blood] Gellied blood] to— [Prick (augm.] sp. with Horn.] Gorge. [Gullet] [Stomach] sp. of Bird.] to— [Feed] [Fill] Gorgeous, [Or∣namented (augm.] (exc.] Gorget. [adj. Neck (armor] [Linen (vest) for shoulder] Gors, [Furz.] Gosling, [Goose (young.] Gospel, [adj. Evangelist (thing.] Gosshawk, [Biggest long winged Hawk.] Gossip. [Child's Godfather] [Companion for mirth] —ing, [Women's Conven∣tion for mirth.] Govern. [v. Magistrate] [Authority] [Direction] good—ance. Man. VI. 5. ill—ance. Man. VI. 5. O. Governor, [adj. Govern (person.] Gougeon. Fi. IX. 11. Gourd. HS. VII. 2. Gourmandize [v. Gluttony] [Eat gluttonously] Gournet Red— Fi. IV. 4. Grey— Fi. IV. 4. A. Gout. S. II. 7. Gown, [Loose long (vest] Gozling, [Goose (young.] Grace. Favour] Respect] a. Graciousness] Privilege] Elegance] Ornament] Infused habit. Ha. V. —less, [Ungracious] — Before meat. — After meat. [Thanksgiving] RE. IV. Gracious. [adj. p. Favour] —ness. Man. VI. 1. Gradation, [Degree (segr.] Gradual, [adj. Degree.] Graduate. RC. I. 4. Graffing. O. III. 7. Gray. Q. II. 1. Hoary, [White (inc.) with age.] a— [Badger] Be. V. 2. A. Grayhound, [Dog-hunting beast by swiftness.] Grayling. Fi. IX. 4. Grain. Corn. PP. III. 6▪ —s, [Infused Corns of Malt.] Weight. Mea. III. 1. [Berry] sp. of Spice.] —s of Paradise, [Carda∣moms.] in— [Died with Alkermes] [Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. —of Leather, [Crenated Su∣perficies] —of wood, [Fibres—] Gramercy, [Thanks (augm.] Grammar, [Art of speaking pro∣perly] —parts of discourse. D. III. Grammarian, [adj. Grammar (artist.] Granado. RM. V. 8. Granary, [adj. Grain (room.] Granat-pome. Tr. I. 6. Grand, [Great] Grandame, [Grandmother] Grandchild, [Child's Child] Grandeur. [Solemnity (augm.] Generosity] Magnanimity] Grandfather, [Parent's Parent (male] Grandmother, [Parent's Parent (fem.] Grandsire, [Parent's Parent (male.] Grange, [Farm] Grant. [Concession] [Yield] [Give.] Grape, [Berry of Vine.] Shrub. Sh. II. 1. Sea—Sh. II. 14. Graphical, [figured (perf.] Plain] Express] Grapple. RN. III. 9. A. to— [Catch with hands] [Wrestle] Grasp. [About-hand] [Embrace] Grass. W. V. 3. A. Cotton— HL. III. 14. A. Crested— HL. III. 6. Dogs— HL. III. 5. A. Feather— HL. III. 14. Finger— HL. III. 8. A. Goose— HL. IX. 9. A. Hairy— HL. III. 9. A Knot— HF. I. 4. Medow— HL. III. 10. Oate— HL. III. 8. Pearle — HL. III. 9. Quaking — HL. III. 9. Scorpion— HS. III. 12. Scurvy— HL. VI. 13 Silk— HS. IV. 3. A. —of Parnassus. HL. VI. 7. A. —hopper, [Locust] Ex. II. 1. Grate. a— [Squares (plain] [Fewel (jug.) of parallel pins (augm.) Net (like] to— [Rub] Powder with rubbing.] Un-skin with rubbing.] [a. Displeasing] Grateful, [adj. Gratitude.] Gratifie. [Merit thanks] [a. Benefactor] [a. Complaisance] Gratings, [adj. Net (fig.) Scuttle.] Gratis. [Not-hired] [Without wages] Gratitude, Man. I. 6. Gratuity, [Gift] Gratulate, AS. VI. 6. Grave. —Disposition. NP. IV. 3. —Converse. Man. IV. 6. [Old (like] —Sound. Q. III. 1. D. —ing O. IV. 6. A. RN. VI. 2. A. a— [Burial (room] Gravel. St. I. 8. A. to— [make not adj. a. travel (abstr.] Gravy, Pr. I. 6. A. Gravity, Weight. Q V. 4. E. [Seriousness] NP. IV. 3. Discreet carriage. Man. IV. 6. Graze. [Eat Grass] —ier, [Merchant of fat Cattel.] [Touch with reflecting.] Greas. [Soft fat] [Worst parts of fat] Great. adj. Magnitude. TM. I. 1. E. —with Child, [adj. p. im∣pregnate.] —with one, [Familiar (aug.] how— [Of what magnitude] the— [Total-work to be done] [adj. Dignity] Power] [Transc augm. Intense
—many, [Many (augm.] Greave, [Leg-armor.] Greaze, [Smear with fat.] Greazy, [Fatty] Greedy. Hungry (corr.] Ravenous] Desire (augm.] Scraping] Man. III. 2. E. Greef. Sorrow. AS. V. 4. O. op, to Pleasure. Ha. II. 3. op. to Ease. NP. V. 3. Green. —color'd. Q. II. 3. —Chafer. Ex. V. 5. A. —finch. Bi. IV. 6. —sickness. S. VI. 2. Unripe] New] —cheese, [New cheese.] —wound, [New w.] [adj. Childe] —goose, [Young—] —fish. Grees. [Hog (young] [Step] Greet. [Salute] [Gravel] Greeve. [a. Grief] [a. isplicence] Greevance. [adj. Displicence] [Injury] Greevous. [adj a. Grieve (abstr.] [Unpleasant] Grice. [Hog (young] Gridiron, [adj. Broiling (jug.] Griffon, [Fiction] Grig, [Marsh-eele.] Grilliade, [Broil'd (thing] Grim. Fierce Face Frighting (manner] [Austere] —the Collier, [Hieracium.] Grin, [Snare.] to— [Lowr dog (like] [Shew the teeth angrily] Grind. —ing. —Fabrile. O. IV. 2. —Chymic. O. VI. 1. —ers, [Inmost teeth] Griping. [Grasping] Distention] Compression] [Pain by-, &c.] Scraping. Man. III. 2. E. —of a Ship. RN. VI. 6. E. Grist, [adj. p. Grinde (thing] Gristle. PG. II. 1. A. Grit, [Sand] Grizly. [Gray] [Grim] Groat, [Four pence] Groats, [Oatmeal] Grocer, [Spice (merc.] Grograin, [Stuff of grain (augm.] Groin. PG. IV. 7. Gromel. HL. IX. 5. Groning. Voice. AC. IV. 8. [Parturition] Groom, [Horse (Off.] -of the Chamber, [Chamber (Off.] Grope, [Search by feeling] Gross. Thick] Great] Course] Lumpish] Fat] Dull] Unskilfull] a— [12 dozen] the — [Total] Grot, [Subterrane Cavity] Room] Grotes, [Course Oatmeal] Grove, [Trees (aggr.] (place] Groveling, [Lying] AC. VI. 7. A. Ground. Earth] Field. Po. I. 2. stand ones— RM. II. 2. get— RM. II. 2. E. loose— RM. II. 2. D. —Ivy —work, [Foundation] [Foundation] [Cause] sp. Impulsive] [Element] [Sediment] Ground, [adj. p. Grinde] Groundling, [Loach] Fi. IX. 11. A. Ground-pine. HF. VII. 7. stinking— HF. I. 17. A. Groundsil. [Threshold] Herb. HF. III. 7. Grous. Bi. II. 5. A. Grout. Thick. broth] Consistent broth] [Millet.] HL. II. 6. A. Grout-head, [Having a great head.] Grow. adj. Accretion. AC. I. 6. A. —forth, [—into being visi∣ble.] —to the ribs— or, &c. [Be continued by growth to, &c.] [adj. Vegetation] Become, [Be Effect] Event] sp. (incept.] [Begin to be] be made] —in years [Old (inc.] —old [Old (inc.] —out of kind, [Unkind (inc.] —out of use, [Un-custom (inc.] [Increase] sp. adv. degree.] —upon Usurp Get Increase Gradually.] Growth, [Growing.] Grub. [Maggot] [Worm of a Flie] to— [Un-root] Grudge. [Nolleity] op. to Alacrity. Ha. IV. 3. D. [Malignity] an old—[Old hatred] —of a disease, [Impetus (dim.] Gruel. [Broth of Corn.] Grumble. AC. IV. . A. Grummel. HL. IX. 5. Grumous. [adj. Lump] [Coagulated] Grunsil. HF. III. 7. Grunt, [a. Hog (voice] Grus Balearica. Bi. VIII. 2. A. Gryffin.   Guaiacum. Tr. VII. 2. Guaperua. Fi. III. 17. A. Guara Brasileana. Bi. VII. 9. A. Guard, vid. Gard. Gubbins.   Gudgeon. Fish. Fi. IX. 11. Figure. Mag. VI. 4. Gueld, [Un-testicle.] Guelding, [Untesticled horse] Guerdon, [Reward] Guess, [Conjecture] Guest. RO. III. 9. O. Gugaw, [adj. Vanity (thing] Guggle, [Pouring (like) sound] Guide. [Direct] [Lead] [Govern] Guidon, [Commander's Staff] Guild. [Corporation] —hall, [Convention (place] of Corporation.] to— [Colour with Gold] Guile, [Fraud] Guillam. Bi. IX. 7. A. Guilt. [Guilty (abstr.] [Guilded] —head. Fi. V. 1. Guilty, [adj. RJ. II. 6. O.] Guinny. —hen, [Hen of Guinny▪] —pig. Be. III. 6. A. Guird. [Bind about] [Twinge] [Mock] Guirdle, [About-binding (arm.] Guirl, [Child (fem.]
Guirt. [Guirded] [Compass] Horse—[—Girdle] Guise. Manner] Custom] [adj. Custom (manner] Guittar.   Guittern.   Gulch, [Short fat (augm.] Gules, [Red] Gulf. [Bay] [Whirl-pool] Gull. Fish, [Miller's-thumb] Fi. IX. 12. Bird. Bi. IX. 9. [Goose (young] [Young (person) adj. p. fraud (apt.] to— [a. Fraud] Gulle. Wëasand. PG. VI. 1. [Stream (dim.] Guligut, [Glutton] Gulp. [Swallow (imp.] Gum. —of tree. PP. I. 6. —Ammoniac, [Concrete juice of Giant Fennel] —Animae. Tr. VIII. 4. —Arabic. Tr. VIII. 2. —Dragon, [Gum of Goat's thorn.] —Elemi. Tr. VIII. 3. the—s, [Parenchyma of the Teeth.] Gummy, [Stiff] sp. with p. Gumming.] Gun▪ RM. V. 6. —ner. RN. V. 3. —powder. RM. V. 7. A. Gurgions, [Worst part of Meal.] Gurnard, vid. Gournet. Gush, [a. River▪ (imp.] Gusset, [Quadrangular (thing) to be between-sow'd] Gust. Sense. NP. III. 4. Quality. Q. III. —of wind [Wind (imp.] Gutt. PG. VI. 4. A. —wort. Sh. VI. 2. A. Gutter. Mag. V. 6. O. Guttural, [adj. Throat] Guzzle, [Drink (augm.] Gypsie, [Wandring wizard] Gyrfalcon, [Hawk for Herons] H. HAak. Fi. III. 3. A. Haberdasher. —of Hats, [Merchant of head (vest.] —of small wares. Haberdin.   Habergeon, [Armor for trunk] Habiliment, [Armament] Habit, Quality adj. cu∣stom.] Condition adj. cu∣stom.] Quality. Ha. of the mind. Infused. Ha. V. Acqui∣red. Intellectual. Ha. VI. Moral. Man. I. of the body, [Temperament of the body.] of Clothes, [Clothes (manner] [Condition] [Custom] Habitable, [adj. p. Dwelling. (abstr.] Habitation, [Dwelling.] Habitual, [adj. Habit.] Habitude, [Relation.] Hack, Cut, sp. (corr.] (ruggedly] Hackney, [Hired (freq.] Had. [Was, pret.] [pret. Have] Haddock, Fi. III. 2. Haft, [adj. p. Hand (part.] Hag, [Old deformed woman.] Haggard, [Wilde.] sp. Hawk.] Haggess, [Pudding of Flesh min∣ced.] Haggle, Treat sp. cor.] Commerce sp. cor.] Hay. Pr. VI. 1. [Net] Hail. Meteor. El. III. 5. Sound. NP. V. 2. to— [Salute] Haillard, [Rope for hoising the mizzen Sail.] Hair. PP. VI. 1. —Cloth. Pr. IV. 1. A. —Lace, [Ribband for bind∣ing the hair of the head.] —brain'd, [Conceited.] —y river weed. HL. I. 10. A. Maiden— Haiward, [adj. Pasture (Off.] Hake, [Spit (end) out of the Throte.] Halbard. RM. V. 3. A. Halcyon, [King-fisher.] —daies. [adj. Calm—] [adj. Peace—] Hale, [Pull] Half. go— [Equal partner.] —moon, Fortification. RM. VI. 5. Halibut. Fi. VII. 5. Halimus. Sh. VI. 6. Hall. [First room (augm.] [adj. Convention (room] [Civil convention] —day, [Day of Conventi∣on.] Hallow. [Consecrate] [Exclaim] Halm, [Straw.] sp. of Pease.] Halo. El. V. 2. Halfer, [adj. Ship- adj. drawing (arm.] Halt. Mo. I. 1. A. make a— [Stay] Halter, [Cord with Loop in the end (part] [adj. Hanging (arm.] [adj. Neck-bonds] Ham, [Hollow (part) behind the Knee.] Hamlet, [Houses (agg.] Hammer. Po. VI. 2. A. to— [a. Hammer] [a. Speak (manner) difficult∣ly.] Hammock, [Hanging bed] Hamper, [Basket (augm.] To— [Tangle] Hanch, [Breech.] PG. IV. 6. Hand. PG. V. 3. —basket, [B. adj. p. carry (apt.) in hand.] —breadth, [Measure of h. b.] —full, [Capacity of the hand.] —gun, g. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] —kerchief, k. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] —mill, m (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] —saw, s. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] —vice, v. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] —kerchief, [adj. wiping (li∣nen] —maid, [Servant (fem.] —over head, [adv Careles∣ness.] —to— [adj. Contiguous (pot.] at— Present] Near] at no— [Not, not] before— [adv. Preventing.] by— from—to mouth, [adv. Neces∣sary (segr.] in— Present] Possessed] in—with adj. pret. Begin] Endeavouring] bear in— Seem make] Believe make] go in —with, [Begin.] take in— [Undertake] in the turning of an— [While one could turn his—] out of— [Soon (augm.] come to— To-event] Be tame] get the—of one, [a. Victory] left— l side] right— r side] Set ones—to Sign] Assist] under— Inferior] Secret] under ones— [Signed by one] upper— [Victory] on both—s, parts] Sides] man of his—s, [Nimble]
lay—s on, [Arrest] shake—s, AC. V. 5. A. —of a clock, Pin for shewing the hour.] Finger for shewing the hour.] —at Cards, [adj. p. event adj. a. Card (things] Handy, Nimble. adj. Operation (apt.] —craft, [adj. Mechanic (art.] —gripes, Contiguously fight∣ing.] Wrestling] —work, [Work of hands.] own.] Handle. a— [adj. p. hand (thing] (part] to— [a. Hand] [Feel] [a. Object (make] Speak of.] Discourse of.] Write of.] Entertain] Treat] Use] Handsel, [First selling] using] Handsome. [Decent] [Beautiful] Hang. Posture. AC. VI. 9. A. —by, [Accessory] —down ones head, [a. down∣ward the head] —together, [Together-ad∣here.] —p, [a Hang] —ing of the hill, [Declivi∣ty.] Punishment. RJ. V. 8. —man, [Execution (mec.] Being in sus∣pence. Doubting] Demurring] Wavering] As a room, Clothe the walls] Line the walls] Hanger. [Short crooked Sword] [Loop for tying the Sword] pot— [Iron (instr.) for hang∣ing pot.] Hank. —of thread, [Skein—] [Haunt] Hanker, Vergency] Incline] Hanse, [Corporation] Hap. [Fortune] [Contingence] [Event] Happen, [v. Hap] Happy, [adj. Happiness] —ness. Ha. I. 1. —ly, [adj. Fortune] Harang, [Oration] Harbinger, [Before-going (Off.) for preparing entertainment] Harbour. [adj. Hospitality (place.] [Port] W. II. 5. Hard. op. to Fluid. O. V. 5. E. op. to Yielding. Q. VI. 1. D. op. to Easie, [Difficult] —to be understood, [Ob∣scure] —headed, [Dull] —to be pleased, [Morose] —to give, [Penurious] —to forgive. —to repent. —hearted, Cruel.] Impenitent.] —drink, [Sowr'd.] —ly, [Scarce.] —by, [adj. Near.] to folow— [Follow (augm.] Harden. [Hard (make] Incorrigible. RO. VI. 7. O. Hardy. Disposition. NP. IV. 7. Affection, [Bold.] Vertue, [Valiant.] fool— [Rash.] Hare. Beast. Be. III. 3. —brain'd, [Rash] —lipp'd, [Cloven-lipp'd] —'s foot. HF. VIII. 5. —'s ear. HF. IV. 14. A. Sea— Ex. IX. 4. Harken, [Hear (end.] Harlot, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Harm, [Hurt] —less, Innocent.] Not adj. p. Hurt] Harmony. Q. III. 9. —in sound. Q. III. 9. Harness, [Armament] Harp, [Music (instr.) hollow arch with strings.] —ing iron, [Barbed dart] Harpie, [Ravenous (person] Harpsichord.   Harquebus, [Foot-mans gun (augm.] Harras, Booty] Spoil▪] Harrow, [adj. Harrowing (instr.] —ing. O. III. 2. Harsh. In general, [Unpleasant.] To Sense Austere] Hoarse] Rough] Stiff] To Manners Morose] Man. VI. 1. D. Austere] Hart. Be. II. 3. A. —'s tongue. HL. I. 8. A. —wort HF. V. 5. Sh. VI. 5. Hartichoak. HF. III. 1. A. Hierusalem— HF. II. 1. A. Harvest, [Reaping] —time, [Autumn] Hash, [Sliced flesh] Haslet, [Inwards] Hasp, [Hook] Hassock, [Tuft] sp. of Rushes.] Hast, [Havest] Haste. sp. through Business.] in— [Swiftness] to—en Dispatch (augm.] v. Soon] Hasty. [Sudden] [Rash] [adj. a. Anger (apt.] Hat, [adj. head (vest) with broad margin] Hatch. [Half door] —of a ship. RN. II. 6. to— —eggs. [Ripen eggs by Fotion] [a. Parturition] —flax. —hilt. [Notch (freq.] Hatchet, [adj. a. Cut (instr.) by striking.] Hate. AS. V. 3. O. Have. [Pret.] [TA. I. 6.] —ing, adj. Have] Scraping] Haven, W. II. 5. Haver.   Haughty, [adj. Pride] Haunch, [Breech] PG. IV. 6. Haunt, [adj. Custom (place] Havock. [Spoil] Haut. Be. III. 2. A. Haw, [Berry.] —in the eye, [Spot—] —thorn, [White—] Sh. I. 3. A. Cumberland— [White Bean-tree] Sh. II. 3. A. Hawk. Bi. I. 2. —fish. Haak. —weed. HF. III. 12. Hawker, [Merchant (corr.] Hawser. RN. IV. 8. A. Hazard, [Danger] —at Tennis. Hazy. El. VI. 1. O. Hazle. —hen. Bi. II. 7. —nut, [Small-nut. [Tr. III. 1. —wort. He, Pron. I. 3. Head. PG. III. Proper. shake the— AC. IV. 4. A. give one his— [adj. a. Liber∣ty (make.] take a— [a. Liberty] Top. [Horns] nail— [N. top] Forepart. —of a barrel, [adj. Forepart circle (plain)—]
all a— [All to the fore-part.] Root. —of an onyon, [Bulbous root—] Protuberant (part.) —land, [Promontory.] Fountain. Conduit —[Fountain] River —[Fountain] Chief. [Magistrate] to— [v. Commander.] Summe. draw to a— Heady. [Rash] [Fierce] [adj. a. Drunkenness (apt.] [Fuming (augm.] Headlines.   Headlong. [with Head first] adj. p. precipitate] Direct] [Rash.] Head-piece. [Head] [adj. Head (armor] Headstall, [Head (arm.] Headstrong. [Rash] [Fierce] [Not adj. p. Persuade (apt.] Heal. [a. Sound (make] [Cover] Health. op. to Sickness. S. O. op. to Rottenness. NP. V. 2. [Remembrance in drinking▪] Heap. O. II. 6. Hear. Sense. NP. III. 2. —judicially, Cognizance.] Trial] —say, [Rumor] Heart. Proper. PG. VI. 2. —burning, [Cardialgia.] S. VI. 1. —spoon. next ones- [First doing eating &c. sp. in the Morning.] —'s ease. [Contentment] Herb [Parsly] HL. VI. 5. A. [Middle] [Best (part] Strength] Vigor] in— adj. Vigor] out of— [adj. Weakness] [Courage] in— [adj. Courage.] out of— Cowardly] adj. Diffidence] Discouraged] [Affection] sweet— [Suitor] with all ones— [adv. Alacri∣ty] —burning [Old anger] Hatred] by— [adv. Memory] Hearten, [Encourage] Hearth. Po. III 9. Hearty. [adj. Heart] Sincere] Willing] Courage] Heartless. [Weak] [Diffident] [Formal] Heat. Proper. Q. V. 1. E. [Anger] [Zeal] Heath. Plant. Sh. VI. 7. Place. Po. I. 7. A. Heathcock. Bi. II. 5. A. Heathen, [Pagan] Heave. Lift (end] Protuberant (make] sp by Up-thrusting.] Heaven. W. II. Heavy. [adj. Gravity] [Dull] [Lumpish] [Drowzy] [adj. Grief] Hecatomb, [Sacrifice of 100 Beasts.] Hectic, [adj. Habit.] —fever. S. II. 1. Hedge. [Sepiment of Branches, &c.] —clerk, [Sorry C.] to—in a debt, [Sure (make) d.] Hedgehog. Be. III. 5. A. —trefoile. HS. III. 15. A. Hedge-sparrow. Bi. V. 8. A. Heed. [Observe] [Be cautious]. —fulness. Ha. IV. 2. —lesness. Ha. IV. 2. D. Heel. PG. V. 6. A. —ling of a Ship. RN. VI. 7. Hegira, [Mahometan's Epo∣cha.] Hey-net.   Heifer, [Cow adj. youth] Heigh. Int. I. 1. Height. TM. II. 4. Heinous, Vitious (augm.] adj. Displicence (augm.] Heir,\ [adj. Inheriting (person.] Held, prec. hold] adj. p. hold] Helebore. white.— HL. VII. 1. bastard— [Helleborine] Heleborine. HL. VII. 1. A. Helical figure. Mag. III. 9. A. Heliotrope. HL. IX. 5. A. Hell. W. II. O. Helm, [adj. p. hand (part) of Rudder.] Helmet, [Armor for (head.] Help. [a. Adjuvant] [a. Relieve] [a. Remedy] —one to a thing, [Furnish] Helve, [Staff of Hatchet] Hem. Int. I. 2. to— [Hake] [a. Acclamation] [Margent] —in [About Sepiment] Inviron] Hemicycle, [Half circle] Hemisphere.   Hemlock. HF. V. 9. water— HF. V. 9. A. Hemorrhoid. S. VI. 8. A. Hemp. HF. I. 5. Hen, [Bird (fem.] Henbane. HS. VII. 11. A. Hence. [From this place] [imp. Go] [Away] —forth, From this time] After this time] Hep, vid. Hip. Hepatic, [adj. Liver.] Hepatica.   Herauld, [adj. Degrees (Off.] Herb. W. V. 3. Considered according to their —Leaf. HL. —Flower. HF. —Seed-vessel. HS. —Christopher. HS. IX. 5. —Frankincense of Galen. HF. V. 3. A. —of Theophrastus. HF. IV. 6. A. —of Grace, [Rue] HS. V. 13. —Terrible. Sh. VI. 3. —True love. HS. IX. 5. A. —two pence, [mony-wort] HL. VI. 11. A. [Leaf] Herbage, [Pasture] Herbal, [Book concerning Herbs.] Herbalist, [Herb (artist] Herd, [aggregate (thing] —'s man. RC. II. 6. Here. [In this place] [adj. Present] —and there [In some divers pla∣ces —of, [Of this] Hereafter. [After this time] [adv. Future] Hereditament, [adj. p. Inherit (thing] Hereditary, [adj. Inheriting.]
Heresie. RE. III. 1. O. Heretic, [adj. Heresie (person] Heretofore. [Before this time] [adv. Past] Hericano, [Whirlwind (augm.] Hering, vid. Herring. Heritage, [adj. p. Inherit (thing] Hermaphrodite, [Of all Sexes.] Hermit. RE. II. 7. A. Hermit fish. Ex VI. 5. Hermodactyl, [Root of an exotic Colchicum] Hernia. S. VI. 8. Hero. [Excellent in virtue] [adj. Magnanimity (person] Heroical, [adj. Hero.] Heron. Bi. VIII. 3. Great white— Bi. VIII. 4. Little white— Bi. VIII. 4. A. —'s bill. Herb. Herring. Fi. III. 10. red— [Dry salted smoked h.] white— [Moist salted] Herse, [Box of dead body.] Hesitate, Doubt] Demur] Heteroclite, [Irregular.] Heterdox, [Not-orthodox] Heterogeneous, [Of diverse kinds.] Hew. [Colour] [Cut striking] rough— [Cut rough.] Hy, Hasten.] Dispatch] Hickcough. Mo. III. 4. A. Hickwall, [Woodpecker] Bi. I. 9. Hide. [Skin] —bound. [Disease of skin cleaving to the flesh.] [Penurious] to— Conceal] Cover] Hideous, [adj. a. Fear (apt.] Hierarchy, [Ecclesiastical Magi∣stracy.] Hierogly∣phic, Sacred Sculpture] Secret Paint] High. Tall, [adj. TM. II. 4. O.] [Deep] —shoes, [Shoes to the an∣kle.] —water, [Deep overflow∣ing tide] Much] Transcendent (augm.] —winde, [Winde (augm.] [Ample] —forehead, [Ample f.] [Public] —way, [Public w.] adj. Dignity] Excellent] —day, [Festival d.] [Principal] —priest, [Primate of P.] —minded Proud] Ambitious] [Until] breast— [Until the br.] Hill. W. III. 1. E. Hillock, [Protuberance] Hilt, [adj. hand (part) of Sword.] Him. Pron. I. 3. —self, [Him him.] Hinde. [Hart] Be. II. 3. A. (fem.] [adj. Agriculture servant] Hinder. —part. Sp. III. 8. O. —most. [adj. Hinder part] [Succeeding] to— [a. Impedient] [a. Trouble] [a. Loss] Hinge. Po. IV. 6. [Entrails] Hint, Expression (dim.] Narration (ob∣scure] Hip. [Thigh] PG. V. 4. [Berry of the wild Rose] Hippocampus. Fi. VIII. 5. A. Hippocras, [adj. p. Spice wine.] Hire, [Hiring (thing.] —ing. RC. V. 5. O. His. [adj. Pron. I. 3.] —own, [Pron. redup.] Hiss. Q. III. 4. History, [Narration] Hit. [a. Contiguity] [a. Strike] [a. Fortune] Hither. To this place.] Till this place.] —most, [Nearest] —side, Sp. II. 2. E. —to, To this place.] Till this time] —ward, [Toward this place] Hive, [Bees (house] Hm. Int. I. 2. Ho. Int. III. 1. no— [No cohibition.] not— [For not-a. Providence for.] Hoar-frost, [Rime] El. III. 5. A. Hoary. —with Frost, [White—] —with Age [Gray—] —with ustiness, [Mossie—] Hoarseness. Q. III. 8. O. Hoast, vid. Host. Hob, [adj. Rusticity (person] Hobby. Horse, [Ambling horse (dim] —horse [Horse (like) staff.] Hawk, [Hawk for Larks.] Hobble, [Run lame (like.] Hobgoblin, [adj a. Fear (apt.] adj. p. Fiction (thing] Hoboy.   Hock, [Foot.] Hocus-pocus, [Prestigiator.] Hod, [adj. Po. V. (jug.] Hodge-podge, [Mixture (corr.] Hog. Proper. Be. II. 8. —'s bread. —'s fennel. —fish. Fi. I. 5. A. —louse, [Sow] —'s head Barrel (augm.] Measure [36 gal∣lons.] —Sheep. Hoise, [Lift] Hold. Not let go. TA. I. 6. —fast, [Hold (augm.] [Contain] —water, [c. w.] Have] Possess] Right (manner.] [Esteem] —blameless, [Esteem b.] [Continue] —at a bay, [a. Stay] —back, [Cohibit.] —in, [Cohibit.] —off. —out, [Continue perma∣nent.] —a town. RM. II. 4. —ones peace, [a. Silence.] [together, [Continue lea∣gued.] up, [Support.] [Expletive] [counsel, [Together advise] [Not loose] [Abstain] —ones breath, [Not-breath] —ones hand Abstain] Omit] —ones water. [Not- a. U∣rine] the— —of a Ship, [Lowest room (augm.)—] lay — Catch] take — Arrest] Strong— RM. VI. Holder. [adj. Holding (person] [Longest tooth] Hole. Through. Mag. IV. 1. O. [Not through Dent] Cavity] lurking— [adj. Hiding-place.] Holy, [adj. Holiness.] —day, [adj. Festivity-day] —ghost. G. III. Holiness. Habit. Ha. V. 2.
[p. Consecration] Holly. —oke. HF. IX. 6. A. —tree. Tr. III. 6. A. Sea— [Eringo] Hollow. Empty, [adj. Mag. VI. 1. E.] —hearted, [adj. Hypocri∣sie.] [Concave] —eyed, [Deep-eyed] As Spunge, [adj. Porous∣ness.] Holm, [Holly] —oke. Holosteus. Fi. VIII. 4. Holothyrius. Ex. IX. 4. A. Holpen, [adj. p. Help.] Homage, Duty of Subjection] Acknowledgment of Subjection] Home, [Dwelling (place] Sp. II. 4. —bred, [Rusticly educated] come short— [a. Defect finally.] of home.] hit him Strike (augm.] a. Contiguity (perf.] Homeliness. Not ornate. TM. V. 5. O. [Rusticity] Homicide, [Man-killing] Homiletical, [adj. Conversation] —Vertue. —Common. Man. IV. —Belonging to Superiors. Man. V. —Belonging to Inferiors. Man. VI. Homily, adj. p. preaching (thing] sp. Commanded.] Homogeneal, [Of the same kinde.] Homonymy. D. IV. 1. O. Honesty. [Vertue] [Chastity] [Integrity] Flower, [Bulbonach] HS VI. 1. Hony. —apple, [Sweet apple (kind] —comb, [Bees (rooms] —dew, [adj. Hony dew] —moon, [First month after Marriage] —suckle, [Woodbine] Sh. II. 8. French-suckle. HS. III. 5. Trefoil. HS. III. 10. A. —wort. HL. IX. 3. A. Honour. [Reputation] [Dignity] [Respect (augm.] —able. [adj. Honour (abstr.] [adj. Nobility] Honourary, [adj. Honour (sign] Hood, [adj. Cover (vest] —for head, [Face-covering head (vest.] —wink, [Cover the eyes.] Token of Degree, [Loose adj. shoulder (vest.] Hoof. PP. VI. 5. to— [Un-hoof] Hook. Mag. IV. 8. By—or by crook, [By right or wrong.] —ed, [Curve.] Hoop, [Ring (augm.) of Wood.] Iron, &c.] Bird. Bi. III. 8. A. Hooper, [Wild swan] Bi. IX. 1. Hooping, [Acute exclamation.] Hoord, [Lay up] TA. V. 4. Hooting, vid. Hooping. Hop. Plant. HF. I. 5. A. [Leaping] Mo. I. 5. —on one leg. Mo. I. 5. A. Hope. Affection. AS. 5.6. past- [adj. a. p. Despair.] Grace. Ha. V. 5. Hopeless, [adj. a. p. Despair.] Hopper.   Horary, [adj. Hour.] Horde, [Lay up] Ta. V. 4. Horebound. Base— HF. VII. 2. Black— HF. VII. 11. A. White— HF. VII. 6. A. Horines, [Mould] HL. I. 1. A. Horizon. W. VI. 1. Horn. Proper. PP. VI. 6. [Angle] —owl. Bi. I. 4. —work. RM. VI. 5. A. Horn-beam. Tr. VI. 4. A. Hornet. Ex. IV. 2. A. Horoscope.   Horrible, adj. a. Fear Evil (augm. Horrid, adj. a. Fear Evil (augm. Horror. [Fear (augm. [Rigor through Fear] Horse. Be. I. 1. sp. (male] to— —a man, [Ride (make.] sp. on Horse.] —a Mare, [a. Coition with Mare.] on—back, [On horse] —cloth, [Horse's vest] —courser, [Horse (Merc.] —foal, [Young horse (male] —leach. [Physician for Horse] Insect. Ex. I. 2. —litter, [Sedan adj. p. carried between Horses.] —man. [Rider] Souldier. RM. III. 1. A. —hoof. HL. VI. 3. —tail. HL. IX. 7. —tongue. Sh. III. 7. A. —fly. —mint. —radish. —shooe. HS. III. 6. A. Sea— [Morse] Be. V. 3. Wooden— [Horse (like) juga∣ment.] Hortulane. i. IV. 2. A. Hose. [Leg (vest] [Breeches] Hofier, [adj. Hose (merc.] Hospitable, [adj. Hospitality.] Hospital, Sick men's house.] Poor men's house.] Hospitality. Man. III. 6. Hostage, [adj. Pledge (person] Hoste. [adj. Eucharist bread] [Army] op. to Guest. RO. III. 9. to— [a. Guest] Hostility, [Enemy (abstr.] Hostler, [Horse (Off.] Hostry, [adj. Hoste (house] Hot, [adj. Heat Hot, [adj. Zeal —house, [Stove] Hotchpotch, [Mixture (corr.] Hovel, [House (dim.] sp. not walled.] Hovering. Mo. I. 2. A. Hough, vid. Hoof, [Lower joint of hinder Leg.] Houl▪ [adj. Weeping (voice.] Houlet, [Owl.] Hound, [Dog hunting wild beasts by smell.] —fish. Fi I. 4. spotted— Fi. I. 4. A. —'s tongue. HL. IX. 4. A. Hour. Mea. V. 8. —glass. Mag. VI. 5. A. House. Building. Po. II. 1. —breaking. RJ. III. 8. A. —burning. RJ. III. 8. to— [a. House] —ed, [Possessing houses.] [Family] [Kindred] Houshold, [Together-adj. house (aggr.] —bread, [Course bread] —stuff, [Utensils.] House-keeping, [Family-office.] Housleek, HL. VIII. 1. Hout, [Exclamation.] sp. a. Mocking.] How. [In what manner] —then, [-therefore.] op. to So. Adv. II. 1. Howbeit, [Although] Howsoever, [How, how.] Hu, [Colour.] Hu and cry, [Pursuit successive] Huck, [Treat, (augm.] Huck, [Treat, (corr.] Hucklebone. PG. V. 4. A. Huckster, [Merchant (corr.]
Huddle, Gather (corr.] Heap (confu∣sedly.] Huffing. AC. IV. 6. Hug, [Embrace] Huge, [Great (augm.] Hugger-mugger, [Secret (corr.] Hul. —of a Ship. RN. II. —ing. RN. VI. 5. A. —lying at RN. VI. 5. A. —of Corn, [Husk] Hulch, [Protuberance] Hulk, [Trunk] Hulver, [Holly] Hum. [Indistinct noise] [Bees (voice] [Approve (voice] Humane. [adj. Man] —learn∣ing, Worldly Lay Scien∣ces.] [Courteous] Humble. —ness. Man. V. 2. —bee. Ex. IV. 1. A. —plant. Sh. IV. 7. to— Low Humble Submit (make] Humid, [Moist] Humiliation a. Humility.] Fasting.] Humility. Man. V. 2. Humming bird. Bi. VI. 5. Humor. Liquor, [adj. a. Moistness (thing] Temper of mind. [a. Complacence (end.] [a. Conceitedness] Humorist. Conceited] Seeming of divers dispositi∣ons]. —physician. Humorous, [adj. Humor (corr.] Humorsome, [Morose] Hundred. Weight. Mea. III. 7. —pound in mony. Mea. IV. 6. Hung, pret. hang] Hung, adj. p. hang] Hunger. AC. II. 1. Hunt. [a. Hunts-man] —'s man. RC. II. 7. 's up Hurdle, [adj. p. Weave (thing) of sticks.] Hurl, [Cast] Hurlbat,] Club adj. p. cast (apt.) Hurlyburly, [Confusion] sp. Seditious] Hurry. Swift imp.] Dispatch imp.] sp. with Confusion.] Hurt. [a. Hurtful.] —full. T. IV. 1. O. a. Injury] a. Loss] a. Wound] Hurtleberry, vid. Whittle. Husband. [adj. Married (male.] to— [a. Frugal.] good— [Frugal (person] ill— [adj. Squandring (per∣son] —man. RC. II. 6. A. Husbandry. Profession RC. II. 6. A. Work, [Agriculture] good— [Frugality] ill— [Squandring] Hush, [adj. Silence] Husk. PP. II. 3. Huso. Fi. I. 8. A. Huswife. [Mistress of the house] [Frugal (fem.] Hut, [House (dim.] sp. of Boughs.] Hutch, [Box.] Huzz, (a. Bee (voice.] Hyacinth. HL. IV. 4. A. Indian.— HL. V. 5. Hybernal, [adj. Winter.] Hydra, [adj. Water-serpent.] Hydrography, [Water's science.] Hydropic, [adj. Dropsie.] Hyena.   Hymen, [Marriage.] Hymn. RE. IV. 2. A. Hyperbole. Mathemat. Mag. III. 8. E. Rhetor. [fig. of Expression (exc.] Hyphen. D, I. 4. A. Hypochondriac. S. VI. 4. A. Hypocrisie. Ha. IV. 4. O. Hypotenuse, [Side over against the right Angle.] Hypothesis, [Supposition.] Hypothetic, [adj. Supposition.] Hyssop. HF. VI. 7. Hedge— HF. VII. 14. Hysterical, [adj. Womb.] PG. VI. 9. Disease. S. VI. 9. Hysteron proteron.   I. I. Pron. I. 1. Iabber, [Pronounce Child (like.] Imperfectly] Indistinctly] Iacinth, vid. Hyacinth. Iack. Sorry person] sp. (male.] Man (corr.] —anapes, vid. Ape. —Daw, vid. Daw. Fish. [Pike] Fi. IX. 1. —of the Hedge, [Alliaria.] —with a lantern. El. I. 6. —of a Ship. RN. III. 9. A. [adj. Back (armor] leathern— [leathern Pot] Pr. V. 5. —to turn spit, [Vertiginating (machin) of rosting (instr.] Iackall. Be. V. 4. Iacket, [Short loose (vest) for Trunk.] Iade, [Sorry] sp. Horse.] Iag, Slasht margin.] Torn margin.] Iaguraca. Fi. V. 8. Iay. Bi. I. 8. A. Iail, [adj. Prison (place.] —er. [adj. Prison (Off.] Iakes, [adj. Dunging (room.] —farmer, [Emptying (mech.) of Jakes.] Iamb, [adj. Side column.] St. Iames-wort.   Iangle. Q. III. 9. O. [a. Contention] Iannock, [Flat bread of Oats.] Ianuary, [First month] Iar. [Earthen pot for Oil] Sound. Q. III. 2. A. [a. Contention] Iargon, [a. Fiction Language.] Iasmin. vid. Iessamin. Iasper. St. II. 3. Iavelin, [Dart.] Iaundies. S. VI. 2. A. Iaunt, [Going (augm.] Iaw. PG. III. 9. Ice. El. III. 4. Idea. T. II. 3. Identity. T. III. O. Idiom, [Property of Language.] Idiot. NP. I. 1. O. (corr.] Idle. [adj. Sloth] [Negligent] [Not-busie] [Not-pertinent] Idol, Picture adj. p. Worship (person] Image adj. p. Worship (person] Idolatry, [Worship of Picture Idolatry, [Worship Image] Iealousie. AS. VI. 3. A.] Ieat. St. VI. 3. Ieer, [Mock] Iejune, [adj. Scarcity of.] Ielly. Pr. I. 5. A. Iennet, [Spanish nimble horse.] Ieopardy, [Danger] Ierfalcon.   Ierk. [a. Motion (imp.] [Whip] RM. VI. 2. Ierkin, [Short loose (vest) for Trunk.] Iessamin. Sh. V. 3. Yellow— Sh. II. 13. Iesses, [Foot-bonds for Hawks] Iest. [Not-serious] [adj. Urbanity (thing]
Iesuits powder, [Cortex febrisu∣gus Peruv.] Tr. VII. 9. Iet. St. VI. 3. [adv. proud (like) going (manner] Iew. RE. I. 3. (person] —'s-ear, [Fungus of Elder.] Iewel. [Gem] [Gemms (aggr.] [Precious (thing] Iewry, [Dwelling (place) of Jews.] If. —not, [Unless.] —it had not been for, &c. [Without, &c.] as— Adv. IV. 2. O. Ignis fatuus. El. I. 6. —lambens. El. I. 6. A. Ignoble. [Not-noble] [adj Mean (augm.] Ignominy. [Infamy] [Infamation] Ignorance. Natural. NP. I. 1. O. op. to Science. Ha. VI. 1. D. op. to Art. Ha. VI. 3. D. Iguana, [Senembi] Be. VI. 3. A. Iig, [Walk wantonly] [Trick.] Iill. Sorry (fem.] Woman (corr.] [Half pint] Iingle. [Ringing (dim.] [Affectation of sounds of words.] Iland. W. III. 2. O. Iliac-passion. S. VI. 5. A. Ill. adj. [Evil] [Sick] —at ease, Pained] Not-indolent] —favoured, [Deformed] —man, [Vicious man] —name, [Infamy] —will, [Malignity] with an—will, [adv. Nolle∣ity] adv. [adv. Evil] [adv. Difficult] Illation. D. IV. 6. A. Illegal, Not— adj. Law] Against- adj. Law] Illegitimate, Begotten not adv. Law.] Spurious.] Illiberal, [Not- adj. Reputati∣on.] Illiterate. Ha. VI. 4. D. Illuminate, [a. Light.] Illusion. [Deceit] [Mocking] [Diabolical Apparition] Illustrate, [a. Plain (make] Illustrious. [Bright] [Noble] [adj. Dignity] Image. Pr. VI. 8. A. Whether painted im. graven im. carv'd im. molded im. molten im. Statue, [Solid Image] Imagin. [a. Fansie] [Think] [Invent] Imbargo, [Arrest of Ships.] Wares.] Imbark, [Into- a. Ship.] Imbase, Depreciate by mix∣ture.] Defile.] Imbattel, [a. Order for Bat∣tel.] Imbaulm, [Condite] Imbecillity, [Weakness] Imbellish, [a. Ornate.] Imbezil, Spoil] a.. Prodigal] Imbibe, Drink] Soke] Imbolden, a. Boldness.] Encourage] Imboss, [Adorn with Protube∣rances.] Imbroider, [Variegate by sow∣ing.] Imbrue, [Soke] Imbue, [adj. p. Quality (make] Imburse, [Receive into purse.] Imitate. TA. II. 8. A. Immaculate, [Clear.] Immanent, [adj. Action adv. in∣side.] Immanity, [Cruelty (augm.] Immatureness. NP. VI. 4. D. Immediate. TM. IV. 2. [Next] [Soon] Immense, Infinite.] Great (augm.] Immerse, [Into-ition.] Imminent, Near.] Soon.] Immoderate. [adj. Excess.] [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. E. Immodest, Not— modest Against— modest Immortal. [Not-adj. die (abstr.] [adj. Ever.] Immoueable. [Not moveable.] Immunity. RC. IV. 9. A. Immure, Sepiment with walls.] Shut up with walls.] Immutable. [Not- adj. p. alter (abstr.] Imp, Graft.] Lengthen by Grafting] Impair, [a. Worse.] Impale. RJ. V. 4. A. [Sepiment with Pales] Impannel, [a. Catalogue.] sp. Names.] Imparity. [Inequality] [Odness] Impark, [a. Park (make] Impart. [adj. Partner (make] [a. Narration] Impartial, [Not-partial] Impassible, [Not- adj. suffer (pot.] Impatience. Man. I. 8. O. Impeach, [Accuse.] Impedient. T. II. 5. O. Impediment, [adj. a Impedient (thing.] Impell, [a. Impulsive] Impendent, [Over-hanging] Impenetrable, [Not-adj. p. pierce (abstr.] Impenitence. Ha. V. 1. O. Imperative, [adj. a. Command (manner.] Imperceptible, [Not- adj. p. com∣mon sense (pot.] Imperfect. T. III. 9. O. Imperial, [adj. King] Crown— Imperiousness. [Insolence] [Magisterialness] Impertinency. TM. IV. 5. O. Impetrate, [Obtain] sp. by Entreaty.] Impetuous, [adj. Impetus] Impetus. T. VI. 6. A. Impiety. [Gracelesness] [Atheism] [Prophaneness] Implacable. [Not un- adj. p. anger (abst.] [adv. Pertinaciously angry.] Implant, [In-plant] Implead, [a. Suit.] Implements, [Utensils] Imply, Compre∣hend by conse∣quence] Infer by conse∣quence] Implicit. [Comprehended] TA. II. 4. [Understood] D. III. 8. O. —faith, [a. Belief (abstr.) with ignorance of the things to be believed.] Imploy. [Business] [Use] Implore, [Intreat (augm.] humbly] Import. [In-carry] [Meaning] [Importance] Importance. T. IV. 5. Importune, [Intreat, (augm.] Importunate, [adj. Desire Entreat (aug.] Impose.
[Upon-pat] [Injoin] [a. Fraud] Impossible. T. IV. 4. O. Impost, [Tax of imported (things] Imposthume, [Aposteme] Imposture. [Deceit] [Forgery] [Fraud] Impotence. op. to Natural power. NP. O. op. to Acquired power. Ha. II 6. O. [Not-coition (apt.] Impotent. [adj. Impotence] [adj. p. Passion (exc.] Impoverish, [adj. Poverty (make] Impound, [Imprison in Pound.] Imprecate. RC. VI. 4. A. Impregnable, [Not-takeable.] Impregnation. Getting with Child. AC. I. 2. [Infusion] O. V. 7. A. Impress. [Print] [Appropriate sentence] Impression. Influence] During effect] a. Printing] Sign] Imprimis, [adv. First.] Imprint. [Print] [Leave sign] Imprisonment. RJ. VI. 4. Improbable, [Not- true (like] proveable] opinable] Improove. [Mend] [Increase] [a. Better] [Use (perf.] Improper. [Not-proper] [Spurious] [Figurate] Impropriation, [Inheritance of Priest's revenue.] Improvidence. Man. III. 2. D. Imprudence. Ha. VI. 2. D. Impudence. Man. III. 7. D. Impugn. [Fight] [a. Opposition] [a. Obiection] Impulse, [a. T. II. 2. (abstr.] —ive cause. T. II. 2. Impunity, [Not- p. punish∣ment.] Impure, Defiled] Impute, Claim] Predicate] In. Rest. Prep. IV. 1. O. —to. Prep. IV. 1. —as much as, [Whereas] Conj. IV. 1. [Engd] [Fri] Motion, [Into] Prep. IV. 1. drive— Into— drive] drop— Into— drop] —pieces, [Into pieces.] Inability, [Impotence] Inaccessible, [Not- adj. p. come (abstr.] Inamissable, [Not- adj. p. lose [abstr.] Inamour, [adj. a. Love (make] Inanimate, [Not- adj. life] Inaugurate, [Admission adv. solemnity] Inauspicious, [adj. Adversity (sign] Inbred, [In-natural] Incamp, [a. Camp] Incapacitating. Punishment. RJ. VI. 8. A. Incapacity, [Impotence] Incarnate, [adj. p. Flesh] to— [a. Flesh] As a wound healing, [Again-flesh.] Incendiary. [House-burner] adj. RJ. III. 7. (person] [adj. a. Contention (make] Incense. RE. VI. 3. to— [adj. Anger (make] Incentive, [Impulsive] Inceptor. [adj. Begin (person] [Candidate] Incessant, [Permanent] Incest, [Unchastity with Kin.] Inch. Mea. I. 2. Inchant, [a. Witch by words] Inchoate, [adj. p. begin] Incident. adj. Contingency] adj. p. Event] Incision, [Cutting] Incite, [a. Impulsive] Incivility, [Rusticity] Inclination. [Down-obliquing its superfi∣cies] —towards, [Vergency] Sp. III. A. [Disposition] —of the will. AS. IV. 1. —of the affection. [Favor] AS. V. 2. Inclose. [In-sepiment] [Shut] [Comprehend] Include, [Comprehend] Inclusive, [Comprehending the Extremes.] Incogitancy. [Not-thinking] [Heedlesness] Incombustible, [Not- adj. p. burn (pot.] Income, [Revenue] Incommensu∣rable, [Not with- adj. p. Measure Propor∣tion (pot.] Incommodi∣ous, [Not- profitable] convenient] Incommunicable, [Not-commu∣nicable] Incomparable. [Most excellent] [Not- adj. p. Like adj. p. Equal (pot] Incompatible. [Not— adj. p. Join adj. p. Si∣multaneous. (pot.] Incompetent, [Not-competent] Incomprehensible, [Not- adj. p. know (pot.) totally.] Incongruous, [adj. Contrarie∣ty] Inconsiderate, [Careless] Inconsistent, [Not- adj. p. Simul∣taneity (pot.] Inconstancy. Ha. IV. 7. D. Incontinent, [Unchast] —ly. [Soon (augm.] Inconvenient. T. V. 5. O. Incorporate, [Join into one bo∣dy.] Incorporeal, [Not- adj. body] Incorrigible. [Not-adj. p. better (pot.) by Correction] [adj. p. Harden (apt.] Incorruptible, [Not- adj. p. cor∣ruption (pot.] Incounter. [Meet] [Fight] Incourage. RO. VI. 2. Incrassate, [adj. a. Thick] Increase. TM. I. 7. E. [v. Great] TM. I. 1. E, Intense] TM. I. 8. E. [v. More-Great, &c.] [Many] TM. III. 1. [Abundant] TM. I. 2. E. Incredible, [Not- adj. p. believe (pot.] Incredulous. Ha. III. 2. D. Increment, [Increase] Incroach, [Usurp] Incubus, [Ephialtes] S. IV. 2. A. Inculcate, [Repeat (freq.] Inculpable, [Not- adj. p. blame (pot.] Incumbent. [Church (Off.] sp. Parish Priest] —on, [Pertinent to] Incumber, Hinder sp. with confused multitude] Trouble sp. with confused multitude] Incurable, [Not re- adj. p. sound∣ness (pot.]
Incurr, adj. p. Object] adj. p. Dangerous] Incursion, [Assault] Indammage, [a. Loss] Hurt] Indanger, [a. Dangerous] Indebt, [a. Debt] Indecent. T. V. 2. O. Indeclinable, [Not- adj. p. de∣cline (pot.] Indecorum, [adj. Indecency (thing.] Indeed. [Truly] Adv. I. 2. A. [adv. Thing] Indeer, [adj. p. Love (make] Indefatigable, [Not- adj. p. wea∣ry (pot.] Indefinite. [Not- distinct] [Not-limited] Indeleble, [Not-deleble] Indemnifie, [Preserve from adj. p. hurt] Indemnity, [Not- p. Hurt] Indent. [a. Notch Dent (line] [a. Paction] Indentures, [Bonds of reciprocal Obligation] Independent, [Absolute] TM. IV. 3 Indeterminate, [Infinite] T. III. 6. O. Indevour. TA. III. 4. Index. [Sign] [Catalogue] Indication, [a. Sign] Indiction, [Space of 15 years] Indifferent. Between Great and little. TM. I. 1. Excellent and sorry. TM. I. 4. Intense and re∣miss.] TM. I. 8. [Not-unlawful] T. V. 1. A. [adj. Moderation] [Not- adj. zeal] party] Indigent. [Poor] [Deficient] [Wanting] Indigestion, [Not-digesting] Indign, [Unworthy] Indignation. AS. VI. 5. Indignity, Disgraceful injury] Affront] Indirect. [Not-straight] [Wrong] Indiscretion, [Folly] Indisposition. [Disposition (corr.] [Not-health] Indissoluble, [Not- adj. p. loosing (pot.] Indistinct. [Not-distinct] [Confused] Individual, [Singular.] Indivisible, [Not- adj. p. divide (pot.] Indocil, Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. Not-adj. p. learn (apt.] Indoctrinate a. Teacher] a. Learning] Indolence. NP. V. 3. Indorse, [Write on the hind-part] Indow. [Give] sp. permanently.] [adj. a. Possessions (make] Indue, [adj. a. Quality.] Inducement. [adj. Impulsive (thing] [adj. Persuading (thing] Induction. D. IV. 8. —into a Benefice. Indulgence. [Graciousness] [Fondness] Pope's— [P. Pardon] Indurate, [a. Hard (make] Industry, [Diligence] Inebriate, [adj. p. Drunkenness (make] Ineffable, [Not- adj. p. speak (pot.] Inequality, T. I. 5. O. Inestimable, [Not adj. p. value (pot.] Inevitable, [Not- adj. p. avoid (pot.] Inexcusable, [Not-adj. p. excuse (pot.] Inexhaustible, [Not-adj. p. emp∣tying (pot.] Inexorable. [Not-adj. p. Intreat] Persuade] Inexperience. Ha. VI. 4. D. Inexpiable, [Not Un-adj. p. guilty (pot.] Inexplicable, [Not- adj. p. plain (pot.] Inextricable, [Not Un- adj. p. tangle (pot.] Infallible, [Not- adj. erre (pot.] Infamation. RJ. VI. 6. Infamy. Ha. II. 4. O. Infancy. Mea. VI. 1. Infantry. [Footmen] RM. III. 1. (kind) Infatuate, [adj. a. Folly (make] Infect. S. I. 1. Infeeble, [adj. a. Weakness (make.] Infelicity, [Adversity] Infeoff. [Assign] [Deposite] Infer, [a. Inference.] Inference. D. IV. 6. A. Inferiority. op. to Equality. TM. I. 5. D. Relation of— RO. III. O. Infernal, [adj. Hell] W. II. O. Infertile, [Barren] Infest, [Trouble] Infidel, [adj. Infidelity (person] Infidelity. Ha. V. 4. O. Infinite. T. III. 6. O. Infirm, [Weak] Infix, [In-fix] Inflame. [a. Flame (make] [a. Worse (make] Inflamation. S. I. 4. A. Inflate, [Swell with Wind] Inflation. S. I. 5. A. Inflexibleness. [Not- adj. p. bend (pot.] [Stiffness] Constancy] Pertinacy] Inflict. [a. Action] sp. adv. Punishment] [Execute] Influence. Efficiency] Effectivity] sp. Secret] sp. of Heavenly bodies] Infold, [In-fold] Inforce, [a. Coaction] Inform. [Tell] sp. Privately] [Teach] [Accuse] Infortunate, adj. Fortune (corr.] Adverse] Infringe, [Violate] Infuse. [Steep] O. V. 7. O. [Inspire] —ed habit. Ha. V. Ingage, [Oblige] Ingeminate [Repeat (freq.] Ingender, [a. Generation] Ingenious, adj. Fancy (perf.] Sprightly] Ingenuous. NP. IV. 1. Ingestion, [In-putting] Ingle.   Inglorious, [Not- adj. p. reputa∣tion] Ingot, [Lump (dim.] sp. of Fined metal] Ingraft. O. III. 7. Ingrail, [a. Tooth Mag. IV. 2. (line.] Ingratiate, [adj. p. Favor (make] Ingratitude. Man. I. 6. D. Ingredient. [Simple (part) of Compositi∣on] [adj. a. Compounding (thing] Ingress. [Into-goe] [License of into-going] Ingross. [Write (perf.] [Buy all] Ingulf, [a. Whirl-pool] Ingurgitate, [In-swallow (aug] Inhabit, [Dwell]
Inherent. [In-being] [Adjunct] Inherit. RC. V. 2. A. Inhesion. [In-being] [Adjunct (abstr.] Inhibit. [Forbid] [Cohibit] Inholder, [Common Host] Inhospitable. Man. III. 6. D. Inhumane. Not- adj. Man] Against- adj. Man] Cruel] Inject, [Into-cast.] sp. with Sy∣ringe] Inimitable, [Not-adj. p. imitate (pot.] Injoy. TA. V. 7. Injoyn, [Command] Iniquity. op. to Equity. Man. I. 2. [Unholiness] Initiate, Begin.] Admit.] Injudiciousness. NP. I. 2. O. Injunction, [Command] Injury. RJ. IV. 1. Injustice. Man. I. 1. O. Ink. Pr. VI. 6. A. —horn, [adj. p. carry (apt.) Vessel for Ink.] Inkling. Discovery (dim.] obscure] Narration (dim.] obscure] Expression (dim.] obscure] Inlay, [Variegate the superficies with in-put (things.] Inlarge, vid. Enlarge. Inlighten, [a. Light.] Inmate, [Subordinate dweller.] Inmost. [Most-adj. inside.] Inn, [Common Host (place] —keeper, [Common Host] to—Corn, [Into- a. house Corn.] Innate, [In-natural] Innavigable▪ [Not- adj. p. navi∣gation (pot.] Inner, [adj. Inside] Innocent. op. to Guilty. RJ. II. 6. [Harmless] Idiot] Infant] Innovate. [a. New] [Begin a Custom Innoxious. [Not-hurtful] [Innocent] Innumerable, [Not- adj. p. num∣ber (pot.] Inoculate. O. III. 7. A. Inofficious, [Not- adj. complai∣sance] In-ordinate, Wrong] Irregular] Inquest, [adj. a. Inquisition (Off.] )agg.] Inquination, [Defilement] Inquire, [a. Inquisition] Inquisition. AS. II. 2. [Examine] [Ask] Inrich, [adj. Riches (make] Inrode, [Assault Country] Inroll, [In- a catalogue] Insatiable, [Not-adj. p. suffice (pot.] Inscribe, [On-write] Inscription, [Name] Inscrutable, [Not- adj. p. find (pot.] Insculption, [On- carving.] Insect. [Exang. (dim.] Insensible, [Not-adj. p. sense (pot.] Inseparable, [not- adj. p. separate (pot.] Insert, [In add.] put.] Inside. Sp. III. 6. Insidiate. [a. Ambush] [a. Snare] Insidious. [adj. Ambush] Insight. [Into-seeing] [Science] [Art.] Insinuate. [Into-wriggle] [Flatter.] Insipid, [Not- adj. p. taste (pot.] Insist, [Upon-stay] Insociable. op. to Homiletic Vertue, [adj. Man. IV. O.] Not- adj. Society] Against adj. Society] Insolent. op. to Magnanimity. Man. III. 8. E. op. to Condescension. Man. VI. 2. D. Insoluble, [Not- adj. p. loosing (pot.] Insomuch, [So.] Adv. II. 1. O. Inspection. [Seeing] [Oversight] Inspersion. [On- sprinkling] scattering] Inspiration of God. AS. I. 6. A. Instable, [adj. Lightness.] Hab. IV. 7. D. Install. [Admit solemnly] [Consecrate] Instance. [Example] [Earnest intreaty] Instant. Sp. I. O. [Near] —ly, [adv. Soon Diligently augm.] Instauration, [Re- newing.] mending] Instep, [Convex of foot-joint.] Instigation. [Impulsion] Instill, [In-drop] Instinct, [Na∣tural disposition.] impulsion.] Institute, [a. Institution.] Institutes. [Commands] [Ordinances] Institution. [Instruction] [Ordinance] —religious. RE. VI. Instruction, [Know (make] [a. Teacher] —s. [Directive precepts] Instrument. Cause. T. II. 1. A. —of Vertue, Ha. II. —mechanical. Po. VI. 1. —of Music, [adj. Music, (instr.] —written, [Bond.] [Substitute] [Transc. (instr.] Insufficient. [Not-sufficient] [Defective] Insular, [adj. Island] Insult, [a. Insolence.] Insuperable, [Not-adj. p. over∣come (pot.] Insupportable. [Not-adj. p. support (pot.] Insurrection. [Sedition] [Rebellion (inc.] Intail, vid. Entail. Intangle, [Tangle] Integer, [Whole] sp. Number:] Integral, [Whole] —word. D. II. 1. Integrity. Ha. IV. 6. Intellect. NP. I. 1. Intelligence. [Knowledge] [Narration] sp. Private.] Intemperance. [Sensuality] Man. II. 1. D. [Excess] Intend. [Purpose] [Heed] [a. Intense (make] Intenseness. TM. I. 8. E. Intent. [Purpose] [End] Intentive. [Heedfull] [Seriously dispos'd to] [Earnestly dispos'd to] Intercalation, [Between-putting. Intercede. RC. VI. 6. A, Intercept. [Take in-coming] [Not-seen (make) by between-being] Intercession. RC. VI. 6. A. Interchangeable, [Reciprocal.]
Intercourse, [Commerce] Intercurrent, [Between- adj. iti∣on.] Interdict, [Forbid] Interest. [Concernment] [adj. Pertinent] [Proper profit] [Right] Usury. [Rent of mony] Interfere, [Strike mutually.] sp. Hurt Hinder by strik. m.] Interjacent, [Between-being] Interjection. D. II. 7. A. Interim, [Between-space.] Interior, [adj. Inside] Interlace. [Mingle] [Stratifie] Interlard, [a. Stratifie Interline. [Between a. line.] [a. Stratifie] Interlocution.   Interlope, [a. Prevent] sp. in Buying.] Interlude, [Stage-play] Intermeddle. [With-mingle] [Between a. business.] Intermediate. [Middle] [Mediator] Intermingle, [a. Mixture] Intermit, [adj. p. Discontinue (make] Intermix, [a. Mixture.] Internal, [adj. Inside] Interpellation. [adj. p. Discontinue (make) discourse by between-speak∣ing.] Interpolation. [Between-put] sp. adj. p. Forgery (thing] Interpose. [Between-put] [a. Intercession] Interpretation. D. V. 4. Interpunction. D. I. 4. Interr, [Bury] Interreign, [Between-time of two a. Kings.] Interrogation, [Question] Interrogatory, [adj. p. Question (thing.] Interrupt. [adj. p. Discontinue (make] [Hinder] Intersection. Ma. II. 2. A. Interval, [Between-space] Intervene, [Between- a. event] Intestate, [Not- adj. a. preter. bequeathing.] Intestine, [adj. Inside] Inthrall, [a Slave (make] Inthroning, [On-seating] sp. for Admission (sign] Intice, [Allure] Intimate. [a. Narra∣tion concealedly] obscurely] —friend, [Friend (augm.] Intire. [Total] [Whole] [adj. Integrity] Intitle. [adj. Right (make] [Name] Into. Prep. IV. 1. Intolerable. [Not- adj. p. suffer Permit pot.] Intoxicate. [a. Fume (augm.] [adj. p. Drunkenness (make] Intractable, [Perverse] Intrada, [Revenue] Intralls. PG. VI. Intrap, [a. Trap] Intreat. [Pray] RO. V. 3. [Entertain] Intrench, [a. Trench] Intricate. [Tangle] [a. Difficult (make] Intrigue. [adj. p. Concealed (thing] [adj. Obscure (thing] Intrinsecal, [adj. Inside▪] Introduction. [In-bringing] [Prologue] Intrude, [Into-thrust.] Intrust. [Instead- a. right] [Deposite] Intuition. [Seeing.] sp. distinct.] Invade. [Assault] [Usurp] Invalid. [Impotent] [Weak] [Defective] Invasion.   Inveck, [a. Notch (line] Invective, [adj. Reviling (thing] Inveigh, [a. Revile] Inveigle, [Allure] sp. to Evil.] Invelop, [a. Wrap] Invenomed, [adj. p. Poison] Inventing. AS. III. 2. A. Inventory, [Catalogue] sp. of Possessions.] Invert. [Turn] AC. VI. 8. sp. adv. Contrary.] [Retort] Invest, [a. Admision solemnly.] Investigation, [Inquisition] Inveterate, [Old] Invincible, [Not- adj. p. over∣come (pot.] Inviolable, [Not- adj. p. violate (pot.] Inviron, [About-margin] Invisible, [Not- adj. p. see (pot.] Invite. [Intreat to come] [Provoke] Inundation, [Overflowing] Invocate. [Call] [Pray] Involve, Comprehend] Intangle] Involuntary, [Not- adj. p. will.] Invulnerable, [Not-adj. p. wound (pot.] Inward, [adj. Inside] —s. PG. VI. Iob. [Operation (dim.] [Knock (dim.] Iob's tears. HL. III. 7. A. Iocular, [adj. Urbanity] Iocund. [adj. Mirth] [adj. Urbanity] Iog. a. Motion (imp.] a. Shaking (imp.] be—ing, [From-go] TA. VI. 1. O. St. Iohn's wort, HS. V. 7. St. Iohn's Bread, [Carob] Tr. VI. 1. Poor Iohn, [Haak] Fi. III. 3. A Ioy. [Mirth] AS. V. 3. —for good of others. AS. VI. 6. —for evil of others. AS. VI. 7. to—joy one of, &c. [Congratu∣late one for, &c.] Ioin. Together-put. TA. II. 1. a. Nearness] a. Contiguity] a. Continuity] Associate] a. Partner] a. League] —battel, [a. Battel.] —company, [With- sit. travel, &c.] —er, [adj Fabrile (mech.) of wooden Utensils.] Ioint. [adj. p. Join] —ly, [Together.] Limm. PG. V. [Knitting] out of— [Having its Joint unplaced.] to— [Cut the Joints.] Iointure, [Widow's Revenue.] Iole, [Head.] sp. Cheek.] Iolly, [adj. Mirth.] Iolt, [Shake (imp.] sp. by Leaping (like.] Iot. Point] Little (thing] Iove, vid. Iupiter. Iovial, [adj. Mirth.] Iournal, [Narration of daily [things.]
Iourney, [Travel] —man, [Hired subordinate (mech.] (merc.] Ioros. Fi. III. 8. Irascible, [adj. Angry (apt.] Ire, [Anger] Iris, HL. IV. 6. HL. V. 3. A. Irksome. [adj. Displicence (augm.] [adj. Aversation (augm.] Iron. Met. I. 6. —monger, [adj. Iron (mer.] —wort. HF. VII. 12. A. Irony. D. I. 8. A. Irradiation, [ad Bright (make] Irrational. NP. I. O. Irreconcileable, [Not re- adj. p. Friend (pot.] Irrefragable [Not- adj. p. deny (pot.] adj. p. confute (pot.] Irregularity. TM. V. 4. A. Irreligious. [Atheistical.] Irremissible, [Not- adj. p. for∣give (pot.] Irreparable. [Not-adj. p. compensate amend (pot.] Irresolute, [adj. Wavering] Irreverence. Man. V. 3. D. Irrevocable. [Not again-adj. p. get back-adj. p. call (pot.] Irrision, [Mocking] Irritate, Provoke] a. Impulsive] Irruption, [Violent into-ition] Is, a. Being] Copula] Ischury, [Disease of not-adj. a. Urin (pot.] Ise. El. III. 4. Isicle, [Frozen drop.] Ising-glass, [Selenites] Issue, [Out-goe.] [a. Stream (dim.] [Sally] Off-spring, Children (aggr.) RO. I. 2. O.] Descendents (aggr.) RO. I. 1. O▪] [Event] —at Law. RJ. II. 5. to joyn— [adj. p. Issue (make] Isthmus. W. III. 3. It. Pron. I. 3. Itch. AC. II. 6. Disease. S. III. 2. Item. [adj. p. Reckon Add (thing] Admonition (dim.] Narration (dim.] Iterate, [Repeat] Itinerant, [adj. a. Travel] Itinerary, [adj. Travel] Ition. TA. VI. Iubile. [adj. Festivity-year.] [Mirth (augm.] Iucca. HL. V. 4. A. Iudaism. RE. I. 3. Iudas-tree. Tr. VI. 3. Iudge. RJ. I. 1. Iudgement. Faculty. NP. I. 2. [Opinion] [RJ. (thing] [Sentence] —of God, Punishment from God.] Cursing. AS. I. 3. O. Iudicatory, [adj. RJ.] sp. Place.] Iudicial Relation. RJ. Persons in—R. I. Proceedings in—RJ. II. Iudicious, [adj. Judgment (perf.] Iug, [Narrow-neck'd pot.] sp. of Earth.] Iugament. Po. VI. 3. Iuggle, [a. Prestigiator] Iuggler. RC. III. 9. A. Iugular, [adj. Throat] Ivy. Sh. III. 12. ground—HL. VI. 11. Virginian—Sh. V. 8. Iuice. PP. I. 7. Iujub, Common. Tr. II. 6. white—Tr. II. 6. A. Iulap, [Cooling Potion] Iuly, [Seventh month] Iulis. Fi. V. 9. A. Iulus. Ex. II. 19. A. Iumble, [a. Confused.] Iump, [Leap (imp.] Iuncto, [Faction] Iuncture, [Present state of things.] Iune, [Sixth month] Iuniper. Sh. III. 10. Iunket, [adj. Banquet (thing] Ivory, [Elephant's horn] tooth] Iupiter. W. II. 4. A. Iury, [Equals sworn to judge.] Iurisdiction, Judges (place.] Magi∣strates. (place.] Iust. [adj. Justice] [adj. Perfection] —temper. TM. I. 8. —so, All so.] So so.] to— [Game of mutual assault∣ing with Spears.] Iustice. Man. I. 1. —of Peace, [adj. Justice (Off.] Iustifie. [a. Just] Innocent] Pronounce Just] Declare Innocent] Iustle, [Thrust (imp.] sp. with Shoulders.] Elbows.] &c. Iut out, [a. Protuberant.] Iuvenile, [adj. Youth,] K. KAlend, [First day of the month.] Kalendar, [Book of months] Kank, [Muscovia glass.] Katkin. PP. II. 1. A. Kecks, [Hollow stalk.] Kedger, [Anchor (dim.] Keel. RN. II. 1. Keeling. Fish. Keen. [adj. a. Cut (apt.] [Acrimonious] [Intense] Keep. In Good. [Preserue] [Maintain] Out of Evil. Hurtful, [Deliver.] Dangerous, [Defend.] [a. Permanent] In Quantity. —at a stay. TM. I. 9. In Quality. —dry [a. perma∣nent dr.] —warm, [a. perma∣nent w. In Place, [Stay.] —close, a. Permanent Stay (close.] —one's bed a. Per∣nent Stay in one's bed.] —ones ground. RM. II. 2. —the field. RM. II. 3. —the town. RM. II. 4. In Possession. [Hold] TA. I. 6. Not lose. TA. V. 5. [Not change] —one's course. —a wind. RN. VI. 6. [Not violate] —command, Perform com.] —promise, Perform pro.] —word, Perform word.] —holy-day Perform h.d.] —away from, [Absent be] make] —back, [Cohibit.] —in, [Cohibit.] —off, Be Make distant] —to it, [v. Per∣manent doing,] &c.] —under, [v. Per∣manent restrain∣ing.] subject∣ing.] —company, a. companion.] together-go.] —counsel, [a. Taciturnity] —house, [a. RO. III. 5.]
—a good house, [a. RO. III. 5. liberally.] —silence, [a. Silence.] —watch, [a. Guard.] Keeper. Keeping (Off.] Guarding (Off.] [Park (Off.] Keg. [Barrel (dim.] Measure. Key. —of door. Po. IV. 4. A. —of Music, [Principal note] Fruit. PP. III. 4. A. [Haven] Kell. PG. VI. 6. A. Kemb, vid. Comh. Kemboing the arm. AC. IV. 7. Ken, [See] sp. From remote (place.] Kennel. [Bed] [Room] [Sink] [Receptacle of filth] [Gutter for filth] Kerchief, [adj. Linen (vest) for head.] Kern. [Grain] [adj. Rusticity (person] Kernel. Fruit. PP. III. 6. A. [Glandule] PP. II. 7. A. Kersy.   Kestrel, [Hovering Hawk] Ketch. RN. I. 2. A. Kettle. Pr. V. 6. Kibe, [Chilblane.] S. III. 7. Kick, [Strike with foot] heel] Kid, [Goat] Be. II. 2. A. (young] to— as Pease. [a. PP. III. 5. A.] Kidney. PG. VI. 7. Kil. a— [Arched fire (place] to— [a. dy (make] Kilderkin, [Barrel (dim.] Kin. [Consanguinity] RO. I. [Affinity] RO. II. Kine. Be. II. 1. Kinde. Genus. T. I. [Species] T. I. A. a—of, &c. out of— [worse than its ance∣stors] it hath been.] [Sex] [Manner] [adj. Kindness] —ly, eat— taste (perf.] ripen— ripen (perf.] Kindeness. [Favour] [Courtesie] [Graciousness] Kindle. [a. Fire (inc.] [a. Anger (inc.] Kindred. [Consanguinity] RO. I. [Affinity] RO. II. King. Monarch. RC. I. 2. —dom, [King (place] —'s evil, S. III. 3. —at arms, [Principal He∣rald.] —fisher, Bi. III. 9. A. —spear, [Asphodel] HL. V. 1. Kiss. AC. V. 6. A. Kitchin, [adj. Cookery (room.] Kite Bi. I. 2. A. —fish. Fi. III. 6. Kitlin, [Cat (young] Knack, [adj. Vanity (thing] Knag, [Knurl] PP. I. 1. A. Knap, [Top] sp. tufted.] —sack, [adj. Travel (bag.] —weed. HF. III. 4. Silver— HF. III. 4. A. Knave. adj. Crafty (person] adj. a. Cheat (person] Kneading. O. IV. 7. Knee. PG. V. 5. A. —pan, [Bone defending the Knee-joint.] being on his—s. AC. VI. 6. A. Kneel. AC. VI. 6. Knell, [Ringing for pret. dying (sign.] Knife. Po. VI. 2. Knight, [Gentleman of highest degree.] Knit. —knot, bind.] tie.] —stockings. O. V. 2. A. Knob, [adj. Protuberance (thing] Knock. Mo. VI. 4. A. Knoll. [Hill (dim.] [adj. Protuberance (thing] Knop, [adj. Protuberance (thing] sp. tufted.] Knot. [adj. p. Knit (part] [Ribbands (aggr.) tied for ornament] —in garden, [Area figur'd for ornament] Crew, [adj. aggregate] sp. (corr.) —of a tree. PP. I. 1. A. —in grass, [joint (like—] —grass. HF. I. 4. Bird. Bi. VII. 6. [Difficulty] to— [a. Bud] [a. Coagulate] Know. —mentally. AS. II. 5. —carnally, [Coition.] to be known of, Claim.] Confess.] Knowledge, [Knowing] [Science.] Ha. VI. 1. [Experience.] Ha. VI. 4. Knuckle. PG. V. 7. A. Knurl, [Knot] PP. I. 1. A. L. LAbel, [Lamin.] sp. of skin upon—p. writing (apt.] sp. Acessory.] Labor. [Operation] [Endeavor (augm.] [Diligence] to be in— [a. Parturition] [adj. p. Pain by Parturiti∣on] Laborer, [adj. Operation (per∣son.] Laborious.   Labyrinth, [Build∣ind adj. a. tangle Wander (apt.] Lac, [Wax of Ants.] Lace. Pr. IV. 5. to— [a. Face with Lace.] to—together, [Together-bind. sp. with Lace.] Laceration, [Tearing] Lack. [Not-have] [Scarcity] [Defect] [Want] Lacky, [adj. a. Foot-servant] Laconism, [Brief sentencing (manner.] Lactation. AC. I. 4. A. Lad, [adj. Adolescence (per∣son.] Ladanum, [Concrete exudation of the holy rose] Ladder. Po. IV. 1. A. Lade, [a. Burden.] —ing, [adj. Burden-(thing] Lady. adj. Noble (fem.] adj. Gentle (fem.] —cow. Ex. V. 6. A. —laces, [Striped grass] 's Bedstraw. HF. IX. 6. A. —'s Bower. —'s Glove. HL. IX. . —'s Mantle. HL. VI. 9. A. —'s Milk, [White Thistle] —'s Seal, [Black Briony] —'s Slipper. —'s Smock. HS. IV. 15. A. —'s Thistle. [White Th.] Ladle, [Spoon (augm.] Lag. [Protract] Lagopus. Bi. II. 7. A. Lay. [Pasture, [adj. lying (make.]
Condition (put] Place (put] —about him, (augm.] a. Operation a. Diligence] —aside. [a. Desist] [Un- a. Officer (make] —down, [Defist] —on, [On-put] —out for Take (end] Get (end] Disburse for] —to one's charge, [a. Ac∣cuse.] —to ones Wrist, [Apply] —together, [a. Summe] —up. TA. V. 4. —land, [a. Rest from plow∣ing.] —a cloth, Put Spread on table.] —egg, [a. Parturition▪] foundation, [a. Foundati∣on.] —hands on, Catch] Arrest] —hold on, Catch] Arrest] —level, [a. Level (make] —open, [a. Open (make] —siege to, [Besiege] —wager, [a. Wager] —wait, [a. Ambush] a— —land, [adj. Rest land] —man, [adj. RE. O. (per∣son.] [Song] [Wagering] Rank] Course] Laic, [Temporal] Laire. [Deer's lying (place] [Stratifie] Lake. W. IV. 2. A. Tree. Tr. VIII. 8. Lamb, [Sheep] Be. II. 2. (young) to— [v. Parturition] Lame. [Mutilated] [adj. Halt (apt.] Lament. [Grief, (augm.] (sign] Lamin. Mag. V. 4. Lamm, [adj. Cudgelling] Lamp. Pr. VI. 3. A. Lamprey. Fish. Fi. VI. 5. Disease. Lamprill. Fi. VI. 5. A. Lanar, Woolly feathered Hawk.] Soft feathered Hawk.] —et, [Lanar (male.] Lance. [Short Pike] Burning—[Dart.] El. I. 4. A. to— Scarifie] Cut] Open by cutting] Lancea ardens, [Dart] El. I. 4. A. Lance-knight, [Foot-souldier] Lancepresado, [adj. Military (Off.) over 10.] Lancet, vid. Launcet. Lanch, [a. Navigation (inc.] Land. [Earth] [Field] Po. I. arable— Po I. 4. [Countrey] RC. III. 2. —loper, [adj. Wander (per∣son.] —mark, [adj. Margin (sign.] to— Come Bring on shore.] Landlord adj. pret. Demising (per∣son of House.] Land.] adj. p. Right (per∣son of House.] Land.] [Host] Landress, [adj. Washing (mech.] (fem.] Landskip, [Picture of Coun∣trey.] Lane, [Narrow Street] adj. Travel (place.] by— [Not usual—] Language. D. A. good, g. Discourse (man∣ner.] ill, ill. Discourse (man∣ner.] Languid, [adj. Weakness.] Languish, [Decay] Lank, Lean] Empty] Limber] Lantern, [adj Candle (room.] Lap. —of gar∣ment, Corner Margin of Vest.] [Space upon the knees] —dog, [Little Dog kept one∣ly for delight.] —of ear. to— as a Dog, [Drink by lick∣ing.] —up warm, Fold Clothe for warmth.] Lapidary, [adj. Gem (merc.] Lapse. Stumble (dim.] Fall] [Lose by omission] Lapwing, Bi. VII. 1. Larboord [Left side] Larceny, [Theft.] Larch-tree. Tr. V. 3. A. Lard, [Fat of Swine] to— Pr. III. 8. —er, [adj. Flesh (room.] Large. Ample] Broad] Great] [Abundant] [Liberal] at— [Not— cohibited] imprison'd] [adj. Liberty] Largess, [Gift (augm.] Larix tree. Tr. V. 3. A. Lark. Bi. V. 4. Sea— Bi. VII. 3. A. Tit— Bi. V. 4. A. —'s heel. HS. I. 2. Lasciviousness. [Wantonness] [Unchastness] Lash, [Whip] to—out, [a. Irregularity] Excess] Prodigality] Laserwort. HF. IV. 6. Lask, [adj. Excess dunging (apt.] Lass, [adj. Adolescence (fem.] Lassitude, [p. Weary (abstr.] Last- [Most. New] Late] Remotest] Hindermost] adj. Finishing] End] a— [Exemplar] sp. for Foot vest] ro— v. Duration] v. Permanent] Latch. Po. IV. 5. A. —et, [Thong] sp. for Foot vest.] Late. op. to Old. Sp. I. 3. op. to Soon. Sp. I. 4. O. Latent, Concealed] Hd] Lath, [Lamin] sp. of Wood] Lathe, [adj. Turning (jug.] Latin, [Language of Romans] Latitude. [Breadth] [Distance from the Equa∣tor] Latter, [Succeeding] Lattin, [adj. Iron (Lamin) tinn'd.] Lattis, [Oblique Crosses (plain.] Lavarettus. Fi. IX. 5. A. Laudable, [adj. p. Praise (apt.] Lave, [Empty by out-scoop∣ing.] Lavender. HF. VI. 5. French— [Cassidony] HF. VI. 5. A. Sea— HS. VI. 9. A. —Cotton. HF. II. 10. A. Laver, [adj. Washing (vessel] Laugh. AC. IV. 3. —to scorn, [Laugh Contemn∣ing.] Mock∣ing.] Lavish, [Prodigal] Launce, vid. Lance. Launch, [a. Swim (inc.] sp. Ship.] Laundress, [adj. a. Washing (mech.] Laurel. Tr. III. 5. A. Alexandrian— Sh. III. 7. Law, RC. IV. 3.
—of nature. RC. VI. 2. —positive. RC. VI. 3. Civil— [Roman Law] Father in— [Father by af∣finity.] go to— [a. Suit.] —day, [a. Cause-day.] —full. T. V. 1. —less Licencious.] Without Law.] Lawyer. Civil— RC. II. 2. Common— RC. II. 2. A. Lawn. [Linnen fine (augm.] [Treey pasture.] Lax. [Tied (dim.] [Loose] Laxative, [adj. a. Dung (apt.] Lazer, [adj. Leprosie (person.] Lazerole. Tr. I. 3. A. Lazy. op. to Stout. NP. IV. 6. O. [adj. Sloth] Lazul stone. St. II. 3. A. Leach. [Physitian] Lead. Met. I. 5. Black— Met. III. 6. Red— White— [Ceruse] Met. IV. 6. —s of house, [Leaden roof of—] —wort Leade. Go before. TA. VI. 5. [Begin] [Direct] [Allure] -ing case, [Example] D. IV. 8. -aside, Leade (corr.] Err. (make.] Seduce.] -life, a. Conversation] a. Life] Leaf. —of Plant. PP. II. 5. A. —of Paper, [Lamin.] —of Fat, [Fat next the ribs.] sp. of Hogs.] —of Gold, [Lamin—] League. Confederacy. RC. III. 8. Measure. Mea. I. 8. Leaguer, [Siege.] Leak. [Into-receive water] spring a— [into-receive (inc.) water.] Leam, [Lamin of flame.] Leaning. Posture. AC. VI. 4. A. [Obliquing] —toward, [Ver∣gency] Leanness. NP. V. 5. O. Leap. —ing. AC. I. 5. [a. Coition] —year, [Year of 366 days.] Learn, a. Learner] Know (inc.] —er. RO. III. 3. O. —ing. Ha. VI. 5. Lease. [Obligation of hire] [Pasture] to— let a— [Demise by ligation of hire] Glean, [Gather the left ears.] Ly, [a. Man. IV. 1. Leash. [Three] [Dog-couple] [Whip] Least, [Most-little] at— adv. Most-little] Not less] —that. Conj. III. 1. O. Leasure. TA. III. O. —ly, Slow.] adj. Degrees (segr.] Leather. Pr. IV. 2. Leave. [License] Take ones— [a. Valedicti∣on] to— Not take. TA. I. 4. O. Abandon] [a. Residue] a. Dereliction] a. Desertion] Give over] Omit] Desist] Leaven, [adj. a. Ferment (thing] sp. of Bread.] Leaver, [adj. Lifting (instr.] Lechery, [adj. Lust (apt.] Leccia Salviani. Fi. IV. 1. Lecture, [adj. p. Read (thing] Lecture, [adj. p. Read (thing] Teacher] Ledge, [Transverse protuberant (thing.] Lee. [Sediment] [Cover'd from wind] Fall to Leeward. RN. VI 6. D. Leech. Ex. I. 2. Vid. Leach. Leek. HL. IV. 9. A. House— [Sedum] Leer, [Look obliquely] deceitfully] Leese, [Lose] Leet, [Law-day] Left. pret. Leave. adj. p. Leave. [Residue] TM. VI. 7. O. Sinister. Sp. III. 9. O. Leg, [Shank] PG. V. 5. -of Mutton, [Thigh of sheep.] to make a leg, [a. Congee.] Legacy, [adj. p. Bequeathing (thing.] Legal, [adj. Law] Legate, [Public adj. p. send (per∣son.] Legend, [Fabulous Narration.] Legerdemain, [adj. Prestigiator (thing.] Legible, [adj. p. read (pot.] Legion, [Regiment.] Legislative, [adj. a. Law (make.] Legitimate, adj. Law.] Genuine.] to— [Un-a Bastard.] Legumen, [Pulse.] Leman, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Lemon. Tr. I. 8. A. Lend. RC. V. 4. Length. TM. II. 1. at— [After all this] Adv. III. 3. O. Lengthen, a. Length.] Protract.] Lenity, Clemency.] Meekness.] Lenitive, Un— adj. a. Pain (apt] adj. a. Indolence (apt.] Lent. pret. Lend.] adj. p. Lend.] [adj. Fasting (time.] Lentils. HS. II. 3. A. Lentisk, [Mastic-tree.] Lentitude, [Excess of Meekness] . I. 9, E. Leo, [Fifth of the 12. parts of the Zodiac.] Leopard. Be. IV. 2. A. —s bane. HF. III. 6. Leper, [adj. Leprosie (person.] Leprosie. S. II. 5. Less, [More-little.] Lessee, [adj. a. Hire (person.] Lessen, [Diminish.] Lesson, [adj. p. Read Teacher (thing.] Lessor, [adj. a. Demising (person] Let Licence] Permit] -alone, [Not hinder.] -bloud, [a. Bleeding.] -down, Cause Help. Suffer to descend] -go. TA. I. 6. O. -in, Suffer to in- out- go] -out, Suffer to in- out- go] -pass, [Omit.] -slip, [Omit.] [Impedient.] [Demise.] Lethargy. S. IV. . Letter. [Element.] D. I. 1. [Epistle] [Bond] s patents, [Patent.] Lettice. HF. III. 11. Lambs— Level. [Lying] Plain] Equal] Smooth]
[Plainness-trying (instr.] Aim, Towards Against. direct.] op. to Degrees of persons. RC. I. O. Leven, vid. Leaven. Leveret, [Hare (young.] Leviathan, [Crocodile] Be. IV. 3. Levy, [Gather.] Levite. RE. II. 2. A. Levity. Tactil quality. Q. V. 4. D. Inconstancy. Ha. IV. 7. D. Vainness. Man. IV. 6. D. Lewd. [Evil (augm.] [Vicious (augm.] [Unchast] Lexicon, [Catalogue of interpre∣ted words.] Ly [v. Situation] —near to, [v. Near.] —next to, [v. Near.] v. Prostrate.] AC. VI. 7. A. a. Guest.] RO. III. 6. A. a. Permanent.] Sp. I. 6. —down. AC. VI. 7. A. —from home, Be all the night a Guest (from home.] —in child-bed, [Be Shut up In bed after (parturition.] —in wait, [a. Ambush] —together, [to∣gether- a. a. Coition] a. Bed] —under, Under-ly] adj. p. Subject] —up, [Rise] —with, [With- a. Coition.] a. Bed. —bedrid, [Be un-adj. a. Rise (pot.) by sickness.] —hid, [adj. p. Conceal.] —open, [adj. p. Opening.] —still, [adj. Rest.] [a. Lying] Man. IV. 1. O. tell a— [a. Man. IV. 1. O. a— [a. Lying] Ly [adj. a. Lixiviation [thing] Lyingness. Man. IV. 1. O. Liable, [adj. p. Object (pot.] Lib, [Un- a. Testicle] Libbard, [Leopard.] Libel, [adj. Book (dim.] sp. Backbiting.] Libella worm. Ex. III. 5. Lib-ral. [adj. Free-man] —Science, [Learning] Ha. VI. 4. [adj. Liberality] Liberality. Man. III. 1. Liberty. RC. IV. A. —of converse, [Frankness] —of will, AS. IV. 8. at— adj. Liberty] Un- adj. p. Slave.] Impri∣sonment.] Libertin, [Not-cohibited adj. Vice (person] Libidinous, [adj. a. Lust (apt.] Libra, [Seventh part of the Zo∣diac] Library, [adj. Books (House.] (Room.] (aggr.] Libration. O. I. 2. Lice, [pl. Lowse] —bane. Licence. RC. IV. 8. A. Licentiousness. [Liberty, (exc.] corr.] [Not cohibited Vice (abstr.] Lick. Mo. III. 7. —. El. I. 6. A. Licorice. Sh. IV. 5. wild— HS. III. 3. Licourous, [Intemperate in ban∣quetting] Lid, [adj. Covering (instr.] ey— [Covering (part) of the Ey.] Liege, [adj. Law] —lord [Proper King] —man, [Proper Subject] Lieger. Resident Ordinary Embassador Lieu, [Substitute (abstr.] in—of. Prep. II. 1. A. Lieutenant, [adj. Substitute (person] (Off.] —of a ship. RN. V. 1. A. Life. [Living (abstr.] to the— [Living (like] Tree of— Sh. IV. 6. A.. —everlasting, [Gnaphali∣um] —time. Mea. VI. —of Cicero, [Narration of &c.] Of—and death, [adj. Capi∣tal] [Vigour] Lift. Move upward. O I. 1. [Exalt, a. High.] a. Higher] —up ones voice, [Exclaim.] —of a Ship. RN. IV. 4. A. Ligament. PG. II. 2. Light. Subst. Primary— Q. I. 1. E. Secondary— Q. I. 2. [Brightness] [adj. a. Light (instr.] as Candle, &c. to—a fire, [a. Fire (inc.] [adj. Lightness] —ness. op. to Heaviness. Q V. 4. D. —headed, [Vertiginous] [Agility] —horse, [adj. War∣horse.] op. to Seriousness. NP. IV. 3. O. Constancy. Ha. IV. 7. D. Gravity. Man. IV. 6. D. Chastity. Man. II. 7. D. [Easiness] —of belief, [Credulity] [Frivolousness] [Remisseness] make—of, [Contemn] to— as Bird Descend] Settle on feet] —from horse, [Descend—] Happen [a. Event] —on, [Happen to find] Lighten. [a. Light] [Un- a. Burden] Pain] [a. Lightning] Lightening. El. I. 3. Lighter, [Boat for burden (aug.] Lights, [Lungs] PG. VI. 2. A. Lightsome, [adj. Light.] Lignum Aloes.   Lignum Nephriticum, Tr. VII. 4. Lignum Rhodium.   Ligurious. Bi. VI. 1. Like. [adj. Likeness] —as, [As] —wise, [adv. Like] [adj. Equality] —for— [Compensate] I—it, [I Approve Love it.] Likely, Probable] True (like] Likeness▪ TM. V. 1. Liking. Condition] State] Approbation] Love] Lilach. Sh. IV. 1. Lilly. HL. IV. 2. day— HL. V. 3. water— HL. VI. 4, —of the valley. HL. VII. 7. A. Limb. [Joint] [Part] Limbeck, [Vessel for hot distil∣ling] Limberness. Q. V. 6. E. Limbus, [Margin] Lime. El. IV. 5. Bird— [Glue to catch entangle Birds.] sp. Prepared juice of Misleto] —hound. —tree. Tr. VI. 10. Limit. [Finiting (Sign] (Thing] (Place]
Side] Margin] to— [a. [Limitation] [Determination] [pohibit] [Apoint precisely] Limitation. D. IV. 2. Limn, [Paint with Water-co∣lours.] Limon.   Limp, [Halt] Limpet. E. VIII. 1. Linage, [Descendents (aggr.] RO. I. 1. O. Linchpin.   Linden tree.   Line. Dimension. Mag. I. 1. —of writing. the— [Equator] W. VI. 1. Measure. Mea. I. 1. [Thred] Fishing— [String of hairs for fishing] plumb— [String for measu∣ring.] [Series] to— Pr. IV. 9. A. to—one Fortification with another. RM. VI. 4. A. —a hedge with, [Within garrison with Series of] [a. Coition] sp. of Dog.] Lineal, [adj. Line.] Lineament, [Figure] Ling. Fish. Fi. III. 3. [Heath] Linger, [Protract] [Delay] Linguist, [adj. language (ar∣tist.] Lingwort.   Link. [Candle of pitch'd Tow] [Loop] to—toge¦ther Knit] to—toge¦ther Joyn] [Sausage] Linnen. Pr. IV. 4. —draper, [adj. Linnen (merc.] Linnet. Bi. IV. 8. Red— Bi. IV. 8. A. Linseed, [Seed of Flax] Linsey-woolsey. [Woven (thing) of Linnen and Woollen] [Mixture (corr.] Lint, [Down (like) Shaving Scraping of Lin∣nen] Lintel. Po. IV. 3. A. Lion. Be. IV. 1. —s tooth, [Dandelion] Lip. PG. III. 8. Liquid, [adj. Moistness] Q. V. 2. Liquid amber. Tr. VIII. 9. Liquor, [adj. a. (thing Moistness Wet Lisping. AC. III. 2. A. List. [Catalogue] —of cloth, [Margin] the —s, [Combate (place] as he—eth, [as he willeth] Listen. [Hear (end] [Observe with Ear] Listlesness. NP. I. 4. O. Litany, [Brief vicissitudinary Prayers] Literal, [adj. Letter] Literature, [Learning] Ha. VI. 4. Litharge. Met. IV. 1. Litheness, [Limberness] Q. V. 6. E. Lither. lazy] Idle] [Slow] Litigious, [adj. Contentious] Litter. Birth [Children (aggr.) of one parturition.] Straw [Bed for Horse] horse— [Sedan to be carried between Horses] Little. TM. I 1. D. by—and— [adv. Degrees (dim.] —ones, [Young children] Liturgy, [Pub∣lic Manner Form of Worship] Live. Proper. AC. I. 7. [Be] —in exile [Be banisht] [Feed] —upon, [Feed upon] [a. Conversation] Lively, [adj. Sprightliness] Vigour] —hood, [Maintenance] Live-long. [Total] [Orpine] Liver. [adj. Living (person] Part. PG. VI. 5. —wort. HL. I. 3. A. Noble— [Hepatica] Livery. [adj. Service (sign) gar∣ment] [Delivering] TA. IV. 5. sp. of possession.] —and seisin. RC. V. 8. A. Horse at—[H. at hired guest∣ing] Living. Vid. Live. [Maintenance] Lixiviation. O. VI. 8. Lizard. Be. VI. 4. Lo, [Imp. Look.] Loach. Fi. IX. 11. A. Loaf, [Bread] Loath, [adj. Nolleity] Loathe. op. to Appetite. NP. II. 4. O. [Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. [Being cloy'd] AS. V. 1. O. Loathsom, [Loathed (apt.] Lob, [adj. Lumpish (person] sp. Great.] Lobby, [Outer room (dim.] Lobe, [Protuberant (part] Lobster. Ex. VI. 1. Local, [adj. Place.] Loch. Fish. Fi. IX. 11. A. [adj. p. Lick (apt.) Medicin] Lock. [adj, Shutting (jug.] —on door, &c. Po. IV. 4. —on a River, [Water-course-narrowing (jug.] [Tuft] —of Hair. —of Wool. Locker, [Chest] Locomotion, [Motion from place to place.] Locust. Ex. II. 1. —tree. Sh. IV. 6. A. Lode. [Burden] to— O. VI. 7. [Leading] —star, adj. Pole Directing Star.] —stone. St. II. 7. Lodge. [v. Night] [a. Rest] sp. by night] [a. Guest] a— [House (dim.] Loft, [Upper room] Lofty. [High (augm.] [Proud] Log. Thick wood] Part of trunk] sp. for Fuel.] —line, [Way-measuring line] sp. of Mariners.] Logarithm.   Loggerhead. [Great (corr.) head] [Dull (augm.] Logic, [adj. a. Reason (art.] —parts of Discourse. D. IV. chop— [Dispute (corr.] Logistic, [adj. a. Computation (art.] Logwood. Tr. VII. 5. A. Lohoch, [Medicament to be lick∣ed] Loial. Man. V. 6. Loin. PC. IV. 4. Loiter. [a. Cunctation] [a. Slattering time] Lolling, [a. Lean (corr.] Lome, [Mortar] London tuft. HS. V. 4. Lone, [Lending] Lonesome, [Solitary] Long.
a. Length] . Duration] —suffer∣ing, Meekness] Patience] —time, [Permanent (aug.] to— a. Desire (augm.] a. Appetite (augm.] Long Oyster. Ex. VI. 1. A. Longaevi∣ty, Long life] Permanence (aug.] Longitude. [Length] [Distance from first Merid.] Looby, [Great (corr.) person] Look. [a. Ey] [Face, (State] (Manner] to— [a. Ey] —about, [a. Heedfulness] —for, [Expect] —on, [a. Ey] —to, a. Heedfulness] a. Observing] Looking-glass, [Sight-reflecting (instr.] Loom, [adj. Weaving (jug.] Loop. Mag. V. 2. A. —hole, [Chink] Loose. Not-fixt. Q. VI. 6. D. Not cohibited] Irregular] [Remiss] Negligent] Careless] [Vicious] —in one's body. [Diarrhaea.] S. VI. 6. to— Unty. O. II. 1. O. [Absolve] RE. V. 5. O. Loose strife. codded— HS. IV. 3. hooded— HF. VII. 14. A. purple— HF. VII. 15. A. yellow— HS. V. 12. A. Looverhole, [Open place in the roof.] Lop, Off-cut branches] Un-branch] Loquacity. Man. VI. 5. D. Lord. [Baron] RC. I. 3. [Master] RO. III. 7. Lordan, [Lazy (person] Lorldy. [adj. Lord (like] Proud] Magisterial] Lordship. [Lord (abstr.] Mannour. Po. I. 1. A. Lose. op. to gain. TA. V. 2. O. op. to hold, [Let go] op. to keep. TA. V. 5. O. as Garrison. RM. II. 4. D. Lost. [adj. p. Lose] [adj. p. Destruction] Lot, [adj. a. Mo. V. 1. (thing] to cast—s Mo. V. 1. Lothe, vid. Loathe. Lotion, [Washing] Lottery.   Lotus. HS. III. 13. Lovage. HF. IV. 4. A. Loud, vid. Lowd. Love, Affection. AS. V. 3. in— [adj. Love (augm.] make— [a. Suitour] Apple of— [Charity] Lovely, [adj. p. Love (apt.] Lour. AC. IV. 2. O. Lout, [adj. Rusticity (person] to— AC. IV. 2. O. Low, [a. Cow (voice] Lowbell, [Bell to Extasie Hunt Birds] Lowd, [adj. Sound (augm.] Lowe. [adj. TM. II. 4. O.] [adj. Inferiority] Meanness] [adj. Under-part] [adj. Bottom] —water, Shallow w.] Down-tide] —sound, [Grave s.] Lowermost, [Most-lowe] Lowly, [Humble] Lowre. AC. IV. 2. O. Lowse. Ex. I. 8. —wort. Hog— [Sow] Sea— Ex. II. 11. Wall— [Punice] Lowt, vid. Lout. Lozange, [Quadrat whose op∣posite Angles are equal, but not right.] Lozell, [Great lumpish (per∣son] Lubber,   Lubricity. [Unctuousness] Lucid, [adj. Light] Luck, Fortune] Event] sp. Prosperous.] Good— [Prosperity] Ill— [Adversity] Lucre, [Gain] Lucubration, [adj. night Study] Work] Lug, [Ear (corr.] Sad-worm. to— [Pull] Luggage. [Burden.] Poss. V. O. [Impediment] T. II. 5. O. [Utensils (corr.] [Baggage] RM. V. O. Lugubrious, [adj. Grief] Lukewarm. [Neither hot nor cold] [Temperate] Lull, [Allure to rest] —asleep, [a. Sleep] Lumber, vid. Luggage. Luminary, [adj. a. Light (thing] Lump. TM. VI. 4. —fish. Fi. II. 6. A. Lumpish. NP. V. 8. O. Lunar, [adj. Moon] Lunatic, [Mad] sp. monthly] Lunchion, [Fragment (augm.] Lungs. PG. VI. 2. A. Lungwort.   Lupin. HS. III. 1. A. Everlasting— Lupus. Fi. IV. 3. —marinus Schonfeldii. Fi. III. 16. Lurch, [a. Theft] —er, [Dog hunting lesser beasts by swiftness.] Lure. [adj Alluring (thing] [a. Exclaiming] Lurk. [Lie concealed] [a. Ambush] Luscious, [Sweet (exc] Lust. Appetite] Desire] sp. of Coition. AC. II. 5. Lusty, [adj. Vigor.] Luster, [Space of 5 years] Lustration, [Un-prophane] sp. by Sacrifice.] Lustre, [Brightness] Lute, [Music (instr.) of gut∣strings to be struck with fin∣gers.] to— Shut by sodering] Joyn by sodering] Luxation, [a. Loose] Q. VI. 6. D. Luxury. Man. III. 4. E. Luxuriant, [adj. Excess] Luxuriousness, [Riotousness.] Man. III. 4. E. Lynx, [Ounce] Be. IV. 3. Lyra altera Rondeletii. Fi. IV. 5. A▪ Lyric, [Verse for song.] M MAcarone. [Pudding (like) of Al∣monds, &c.] [Confused Mixture] Mace. Staff, [Magistracy (sign) club. Spice, [Husk of Nutmeg] Reed—HL. III. 15. Maccaph, [Hyphen] D. I. 4. A. Macerate. Infuse] Soke] Pine. Man. II. 2. E. Machin. Po. VI. 8. Machinate. [a. Machin] Design] Contrive] Macilent, [Lean] Mackerel. Fi. III. 5.
Mad. —ness. S. IV. 1. A. [Frenzy] S. IV. 1. [Anger (augm.] —wort. HS. VI. 2. A. Madder. HL. IX. 8. bastard— HL. IX. 9. Made. pret. p. Make] adj. p. Make] —by art, [Factitious] T. III 7. O. Madrigal, [Song adj. Shep∣herd.] Maenas. Fi. V. 12. Magazine, [Ammu∣nition (House] (Room] Maggot. Ex. III. 1. Bee— Ex. III. 2. Wasp fly— Ex. III. 3. A. Magic. [Science of obscure Natural (things] [Witchcraft] Magisterialness. Man. IV. 8. D. Magistrate. RC. I. 1. Magnanimity. Man. III. 8. Magnet. St. II. 7. Magnifie, a. Greatness.] a. Praise (augm.] Magnificence, [Generosity] Man. III. 4. Magnitude. Mag. Magpy. Bi. I. 8. Mahometanism. RE. I. 5. May. [Fissh Month.] —fly. Ex. IV. 7. A. —weed. HF. II. 8. A. [Have Ability] Liberty] Maid. [Virgin] [Servant (fem.] Fish, [Ray] Fi. II. 3. Mer— [Man (like) Fish.] —en hair. black— HL. I. 5. A. English black— HL. I. 7. white— HL. I. 5. Majesty, [King (abstr.] Majestic, [adj. King (like] Mail, [Woven (like) armour] Maim, [a. Mutilation] Main. [Great] —land, [Continent] —sea, [Ocean] —mast. RN. III. 5. [Principal] —battel, [Middle b.] —chance, [Chief Stock] Concernment] [Intense] —strength, [Strength (augm.] Maintain. Keep RO. VI. 4. [Defend] RO. VI. 5. Justifie, [a. Advocate] Major. [Greater] [Un-adj. p. Pupil (apt.] Serjeant— [adj. Regiment (Off.) that gives orders] Maior, [Chief Town (Off.] Maiz, [Indian Bread-corn] HL. II. 2. Make. the— [Figure] to— a. Cause] a. Efficient] Create] Change into] Invent] Feign] [Enrich] [Prepare] —a bed, [Prepare a bed] [Esteem] —account, [Esteem] —way, [Prepare way] —much. [Esteem much] Indulge] Favour (sign] —nothing of, [Contemn] [Sell for] —money of, [Sell for mo∣ney.] —the most, [Sell to the most-bidder.] —better, Better (make] Fire (make] —fire, Better (make] Fire (make] —good. Compensate] Repair] Defend] Hold out] —his ground. RM. II. 2. —hast, [Dispatch] —a league, [League (make] —out, [Plain (make] —ready, Prepare] Clothe] —reckoning, [Expect] —as if, [Seem (make] —sale, [sell] —shew, [Seem (make] —shift, [Obtain difficultly] —a stand, [Stand] —a stir, [Stir] —a verse, [a. Verse] —up, [a. Reconcile] Repair] Perfect] —use of, [Use] Malady, [Disease] Mal-administration. Man. VI. 5. O. Malpert. [Ill-tutor'd] [Irreverent] [Bold (corr.] Male. —sex. NP. VI. 2. [Riding-bag] Coat of— [Woven (like) ar∣mour] Malecontent, [Not-content] Malediction, [Cursing.] AS. I. 3. O. Malefactor. [adj. a. pret. Evil (person.] [adj. Criminal (person] Maleficence, [Mischievousness] Malevolence, [Malignity] AS. V. 2. O. Malice, Malignity sp. old] Hatred sp. old] Malign. [a. Malignity] [a. Envy] Malignant fever. S. II. 3. Malignity. AS. V. 2. O. Mall, [Mallet (augm.] to— [Beat (augm.] Mallard. [Duck (male] Malleable, [adj. p. Knocking (pot.] Mallet, [Wooden hammer] —figure. Mag. VI. 4. A. Mallow. HF. IX. 6. Marsh— HF. IX. 7. Shrub— Sh. V. 4. Tree— HF. IX. 7. A. Vervain— HF. IX. 8. Malmsey, [Wine of Malvasia] Malt, [adj. p. pret. Fermenting Barley] Mammock. [Lump] [Fragment] Man. Kind. W. V. 5. Sex, [Man (male] [Servant (male] If a— [If any one] Chess— [adj. Chess (Instr.] —of war. RN. I. 6. Manacles, [Bonds for the hands.] Manage, [a. Business] Using] Governing] Manchet, [Bread of Flowr.] Manciple, [Buying (Off.) of Vi∣ctual (things.] Mandate, [Command] sp. Sent.] Mandible, [Bone of the jaw.] Mandilion, [Loose upper vest] Mandrake. HS. IX. 4. A. Mane. PP. VI. 4. A. Maner, vid. Manner. Manfull, adj. Manhood] Stout] Mange, [Itch] Manger, [Horses provender (vess.] Mangy, [adj. Itch] Mangle. [Mutilate] [a. Fragment (segr.] Manhood. [Valour] Age. Mea. VI. 3. Many, [adj. Multitude] Manifest. TA. I. 9. Manifesto, [Public Declarati∣on] Manifold, [adj. Multitude (kind] Manly. [Man (like] [Stout]
[adj. Fortitude] Manna. El. III. 6. Manna sold in shops, [Concrete Exudation from the wild Ash.] Manner. [Mode.] T. V. In a— Almost] Thereabout] in some— [adv. some] of what— [What manner] [Quality] [State] [Custom] Mannerly, [adj. Civility] Respect] Manners. [Civility] [Respect] Mannish. [Man (like] [Familiar (apt.) with man] Mansion. Staying (place] Dwelling (place] [House] Manslaughter, [Man-killing] Mantel, [Beam of Chimney] Mantle. [Garment to cast about one] [Upper loose vest] to— [a. Froth] Mantis. Ex. II. 1. A. Manual. [adj. Hand] [Book (dim.] Manucodiota. Py (kind) Manuduction, [Leading] Manufacture, [adj. p. Mechanic (thing] Manumise. [Un-villain] [Un-slave] Manuring. [Agriculture] O. III. Soiling. O. III. 3. Manuscript, [Written Book) Map, [Picture of Country] Maple. Tr. VI. 6. Mar, vid. Marr. Marble. St. II. 1. March. [Third Month] to— [Travel] sp. as Souldi∣er.] —es, [adj. Margin coun∣try] Marchant, vid. Merchant. Marchasite.▪ St. I. 3. A. Marchioness, [Marquess (fem.] Marchpane, [adj. Pr. II. Bread] Mare, [Horse (fem.] Night— [Ephialtes] S. IV. 2. A. Margin. Sp. III. 4. A. Mary, vid. Marry. Marigold. HF. II. 2. African— HF. II. 7. Gorn— HF. II. 6. marsh— HL. VI. 4. A. Marine, [adj. Sea] Mariner. Navigator. RC. II. 8. [Seaman] RN. V. Marjoram. HF. VII. 4. Goates— HF. VI. 3. A. wild— HF. VII. 4. A. Marish. Po. I. 8. A. Maritim, [adj. Sea] Mark. [Sign] Brand, [Stigmatization (sign] Boundary, [Margin (sign] Goal, [adj. p. Object (place] (thing] Weight, [8 Ounces] Money, [13 s.—4 d.] to— [a. Sign] [Stigmatize] [Observe] Market, [a. Merchant] —place, [adj. Merchant (place] Marl, [Chalky clay for manu∣ring] Marlin.   Marmalet. [adj. Pr. II. (thing) of boil'd Quince.] Marmosit, [Monkey (dim.] Marmotto. Be. III. 4. A. Marquess. [adj. Limit (Off.] [Next the highest Noble. man.] Marring. TM. I. 9. D. Marry. RE. IV. 6. —ed. RO. II. 4. Marrow. PG. I. 8. A. Mars. W. II. 5. Marshal. Provost— RC. I. 6. A. to— [a. Order] Mart, [Convention for Merchan∣dise] Letters of— [Licence of naval prepation] Martagon. HL. IV. 2. A. Martern, [Fur of Marten] Martial, [adj. War. RM.] Martin. Be. IV. 6. Bi. V. 2. sand— Bi. V. 2. A. Martingal, [Horse (arm.) down-holding head] Martlet, [Swift] Bi. V. 1. A. Martyr. RE. III. 4. Martyrology, [History of Mar∣tyrs.] Marvel, vid. Mervail. Mascarade, [Antic dance of dis∣guised (persons] Masculine, [adj. Male] Mash, [Mixture] sp. of moist consistence] sp. made by Mastication.] Mask, [Dance of disguised (per∣sons.] —for face, [adj. Conceal vest for face] Mason, [adj. Stone Wall (mech.] Mass. Great Body] Total Body] [Lump] [Eucharist] Massacre, Promiscu∣ous killing General killing] Massy. [adj. Mass] [Weighty] Q. V. 4. [adj. Masiness] —ness. Mag. VI. 1. D. Mast. Fruit. PP. III. 4. —of ship. RN. III. 1. Fore— RN. III. 4. A. Main— RN. III. 5. Middle— RN. III. 5. A. Top— Master. [adj. Authority (person] Power (person] —of servant. RO. III. 7. —of family. RO. III. 5. —of a ship. RN. V. 4. [Teacher] RO. III. 3. —of arts, [Graduate in the arts] [Chief] —beam, Principal b.] —piece, Principal p.] to— [Get the power over] [Conquer] [Cohibit] [Govern] Master∣less, Disobedient] Licencious] Masterly, [Magisterial] Masterwort. HF. IV. 5. A. Mastic, [Gum of the Mastic-tree] —tree. Tr. III. 8. Mastication. Mo. III. 5. Mastive, [Dog kept for watch] Mat, [Woven (thing) of Rushes] Straw] —weed. HL. III. 4. Match. [Equal] [Companion] Contract] Paction] [Marriage] [adj. p. Brimstone (instr.) for a. fire.] —for Gun. RM. V. 7. Mate. [Companion] [Married] [Conquest] Material. [adj. Matter] [Pertinent] [Important] Maternal, [adj. Mother] Mathematic, [Quantity (Sci∣ence] Matriculate. [a. Catalogue] [Admit into University] Matrimony, [Marriage] RE. IV. 6.
Matrix, [Womb] PG. VI. 9. Matron. Married Grave (fem.] [Housholder (fem.] Matter. Material cause. T. II. 7. Subject] Object] Thing] Business] makes no— [Is not impor∣tant] [Bloud rotted in the flesh] Mattins, [Morning worship] Mattock, [adj. Mallet (fig.) pecking (instr.] Mattress, [Bed stiffen'd with sowing (augm.] Maturity, Ripeness] Perfection] Maugre. [In enmity of] [adv. Coaction] Mavis, [Thrush] Bi. III. 3. A. Maukin. [adj. Man (like) engine] [Oven-sweeping (instr.] Maul, vid. Mall. Maund, [Basket] Maunder, [Grudging (voice] Maw, [Stomach] PG. VI. 4. Maxim, [Rule] Maze. [Extasie] Structure full of perplex Wind∣ings] Turn∣ings Place full of perplex Wind∣ings Turn∣ings] Mazer, [Cup (augm] Me, [I accusat.] Mead. [Medow] [Wine of honey] Meagre, [Lean] Meal. [Ground corn] Eating. Pr. I. 1. —worm. Ex. I. 5. A. Mean. [adj. Mediocrity] [Low] adj. Ha. II. 5. O. Plebeian, [adj. People (kinde] a— [Mediator] [Between—space] —among sounds. Q. III. 1. —s. T. II. 6. A. [Riches] —ing. Signification. D. II. A. [Purpose] Measure. Proper. Mea. —of Magnitude. Mea. I. —of Number. Mea. II. —of Gravity. Mea III. —of Valour. Mea. IV. —of Time. Mea. V. [Moderation] Meash, [Hole.] Meat. [Sustentation] [p. Eating (thing] Sweet—s Pr. II. White—s [Meats of milk] Meazles. S. II. 4. A. Mechanic. —work. O. I. —profession. RC. II. 5. A. Mechoacan.   Medal. [Ancient money] [Money (like] Meddle. [Mingle] Action] Business] [a. Diligence (corr.] —with, [a. Object.] Mediastine. PG. V. 3. A. Mediateness. TM. IV. 2. O. Mediator. RJ. I. 2. A. Medicine, [adj. a. Medicating (thing] Mediocrity. TM. I. 2. Meditate. AS. II. 1. A. Medle, vid. Meddle. Medley, [Mixture] Medler. Tr. I. 5. Medow. Po. I. 4. A. —sweet. HF. IV. 8. A. Mee, [I accusat.] Meed, Earning] Reward] Meekness. Man. I. 9. Meer. [Simple] [Lake (augm.] [Limit (sign] Meet. [Congruous] [Expedient] to— Come together. TA. VI. 7. [a. Convention] —with, [Compensate.] Meeter. D. III. 5. Megrim.   Melancholy. Humour. PG. I. 7. A. [Grief] sp. (Habit] Melanurus. Fi. V. 5. Meldew, [Honey-dew] Melilot. HS. III. 10. Mellifluous, [Sweet] Mellow, [Ripe (augm.] Melody, [Harmony] Melon. HS. VII. 1. A. Melt, [Dissolve] O. VI. 2. Member. [Limb] [Part] Membrane. PG. II. 3. A. Memorable, [adj. p. Memory (apt.] Memorandum, [adj. p. ought me∣mory (thing] Memory. NP. II. 3. Memorial, [adj. a. Memory (sign] Menace, [Threaten.] Mend. [Repair] [Better] TM. I. 9. E. Mendacity, [Lyingness] Mendicant, [Begging] Menial, [Domestic] Menstruum. PG I. 4. A. Ment, vid. Mint. Mental, [adj. Mind] Mention. [of-speaking] [a. Express] Mercenary, [adj. p. Hire (per∣son,] Mercer, [adj. Silk Pr. IV. 3. (merc.] Merchandise, [adj. p. Merchant (thing] Merchant. Profession. RC. II. 5. —ship. RN. I. 5. Mercy. Man. I. 5. Mercury. Planet. W. II. 6. Metall. Met. III. 1. Herb. HF. I. 6. childing— HF. I. 6. A. Dogs— HF. I. 7. English— HF. I. 8. Mercurial. [adj. Mercury] Nimble] Sprightly] Meridian. W. VI. 4. Meridional, [adj. South] Merit. [Earning] [Worthy (thing] Merlin, [Hawk for Finches] Mermaid.   Mermaids head. Ex. VIII. 2. A. Merry, [adj. Mirth] Urbanity] Mervail, [a. Admiration] —of Peru. HS. VII. 8. Merula. —montana. Bi. III. 7. A. —saxatilis. Bi. III. 4. —torquata. Bi. III. 7. Mes, vid. Mess. Mesentery. PG. VI. 6. Mesh, [Hole] Meslin, [Mingled corn] Mess, [Proportioned part] sp. of Meat.] Message, [Word sent] Messenger, [Sent (person] (Off.] Messias, [Anointed (person] Messuage. [House] [Farm] Metall. Met. Natural— Met. I. Factitious— Met. II. Imperfect— Met. III. Metamorphosis, [Altering] sp. of kinde] Metaphor.   Metaphysic, [Science of Tran∣scendents.] Mete, [Measure]
Metempsychosis.   Meteor. El. A. Metheglin, [Wine of honey] Method, [Order] Metonymy.   Metrical, [adj. Moeter.] Metropolitan. [adj. Principal] [Primate] Mew. Bi. IX. 9. Mezereon. Sh. II. 10. My.   Mich. [a. Absent] [a. Conceal] [a. Penuriousness] Microcosm, [World (dim.] Microscope, [Glass for seeing lit∣tle (things] Mid. [Middle] Middle. Sp. III. 3. Midif. PG. VI. 3. Midwife, [Partu∣rition (Off.] (mech.] Might, Strength] Power] (Mod. Cond.) —y, [adj. Strength Power (aug.] Milch, [adj. a. Milk] Mildness. [Gentleness] Meekness] Graciousness] Clemency] [Not-austereness] Mile. Mea. I. 7. Mili∣tary Relation. RM. Persons Segregate. RM. III. Aggregate. RM. IV. Action. RM. I. Events. RM. II. Ammunition. RM. V. Places. RM. VI. Militia. [RM. (thing] Milk. PG. I. 3. A. —wort. HS. III. 11. Mill. Po. VI. 9. Millefoil. HF. II. 12. water— HF. V. 13. horned— HL. IX. 7. A. Millers-thumb. Fi. IX. 12. Millet. HL. II. 6. A. Indian— HL. II. 6. Million, [1000000] Milt, [Spleen] PP. IV. 5. A. —wort, [Spleenwort] HL. I 7. A. Sperme of male fishes. PP. IV. 8. Milter, [Fish (male] Mimic. [adj. Player] [adj. a. imitate] sp. with gesture (corr.] Mince. Pr. III. 6. A. —ing Wanton (dim.) gate Conceited gesture (mode] Mind. [Soul] W. I. 6. Rational—NP. I. [Understanding] [Thought] sp. (freq.] [Opinion] [Observing] [a. Heedfulness] cast in one's— [Consider] [Will] [Inclination] [Velleity] [Purpose] fully—ed, [adj. pret. Re∣solution] high—ed, [Proud] ill—ed, Ill-purposing] adj. Malignity] well—ed, [Well affectioned] set one's— [a. Purpose] Sensitive internal. [Fancy] [Memory] call to— [a. Memory] put in— [a. Memory (make] [Appetite] [Desire] have a—to, [a. Desire.] Mindfull. [adj. Memory] Mine. [adj. I] [Metal (place] [Face (manner] to— RM. I. 5. Mineral. W. V. 1. Minew, vid. Minnow. Mingle, [a. Mixture] Minion. [Love (augm.] [Ordnance (kind] Minister. [Servant] [Clergyman] [Presbyter] to— [Serve] [a. Adjuvant] [Give to] Miniver, [Fur of Squirrels Weasels bel∣lies. Minks, [adj. Conceitedness (fem] Minnow. Fi. IX. 13. Minority, [Age Pupillary] Not-virile] Minster, [Monks College] [Monks House] Minstrel, [adj. Music (mech.] Mint. Herb. HF. VII. 1. Cat— HF. VII. 1. A. [Place of a. Money (mech.] to— [a. Money (make] [a. Fiction] Minute. [Small (dim.] —of time. Mea. V. 8. A. Miracle.   Mire, [Durt] Quag— [Bog] Mirobalan. Tr. II. 5. Mirrour. [Looking-glass] [adj. Excelling (thing] Mirth. AS. V. 4. Mis, vid. Miss. Misadventure. [Fortune (corr.] [Adversity] Misapply, [Apply (corr.] Misbecome, [Indecent] Misbegot, [Begot not in marri∣age] Misbehave, [Demeanor (corr.] Misbelief, [Belief (corr.] Miscall, [Name (corr.] Miscarry. TA. III. 7. —with child, [a. Abortion] Miscellany, [adj. Mixture] Mischance. Event (corr.] adj. Adversity (thing] [Abortion] Mischief. [a. Mischievousness] [Hurt] Mischievousness. Man. I. 4. D. Misconstrue. [Understand (corr.] [Interpret (corr.] Miscreant. [Believer (corr.] [Heretic] [Unholy (person] Misdeed, [Ill deed] Misdemeanour, [Demeanour (corr.] Misdoing, [Action (corr..] Misdoubt. [Suspect] [Distrust] Miser, [Penurious (person] Misery. Ha. I. 1. O. Misfortune. [Fortune (corr.] [a. Adversity] Misgive, [Doubt (make] Misgovern, [Govern (corr.] Mshap. [Fortune (corr.] [a. Adversity] Misinter∣pret, Understand Interpret (corr.] Mislead. [Lead (corr.] [Seduce] Mislike, [Disapprove] Misname, [Name wrong] [Name (corr.] Misplace, [Place wrong] (corr.] Misprision, [Suspition] Misreckon, [Reckon (corr.] Miss. [Err] [Omit] [Want] [Discover want] Missal, [Mass-book] Mishapen. [Figur'd (corr.] [Deformed] Mission, [Sending] Missive, [Sent (thing]
Mispend, [Spend (corr.] Mist. El. III. 2. A. Mistake. Wrong] Errour] [Opinion (corr.] Mistle-thrush. Bi. III. 3. Mistleto. Sh. III. 12. A. Mistress. [Master (fem.] [Suitor'd (fem.] Mistrust. [Doubt] [Distrust] [Suspition] Misuse, [Use (corr.] Mite. Insect. Ex. II. 7. Money. Miter, [adj. Bishop (sign) head vest.] Mitigate. [Diminish] [a. Remills] [Un-anger] Mittens, [Woollen hand (vest] Mix, [a. Mixture] Mixen. [Dunghill] [Heap of Dung] Mixture. T. III. 8. O. Mizen-mast. RN. III. 3. A. Mizzle. El. VI. 2. Mobility. [Motion (abstr.] [Unconstancy] Mock. Scoff. RJ. IV. 9. A. [Deceive] Mode of thing. T. VI. Model. [Description by lines) [Example (dim.] [Epitome] Moderation. [a Mediocrity] —in opinions. Ha. III. 4. —in recreations, Man. II. 5. Govern] Cohibit] Moderator, [Judge] Modern, [New] Modesty. —about disgraces. Man. III. 7. —about honours. Man. III. 9. Modicum, [Little] Modulation, [Warbling] Moil. [Operation (augm.] [a. Defilement] Moistness. Q. V. 3. Moity, [Half] Mold, vid. Mould. Mole. [Bank factitious] [Spot] Beast. Be. III. 8. Fish. Fi. II. 6. Molest, [Troubling] TA. V. 9. O. Indian Molle. Tr. III. 10. A. Mollifie, [a. Soft] Molten Melted] Cast] Moly. HL. IV. 11. A. Moment. —of time, [Instant] [Importance] Monarch, [Sole King] Monastery, [Monk's College] [Monk's House] Monastical, [adj. Monk] Mone, [Grief (sign] [Grief (voice] Money. Mea. IV. A. —wort. HL. VI. 11. A. Moneth. Mea. V. 4. Mongrel. [Of mingled extraction] [Spurious] Monition [Warning] Monk. RE. II. 7. Monky. Be. IV. 4. A. Monoceros Clusii. Fi. IV. 10. A. Mono∣poly Privilege of sole Appropria∣ted selling] Monosyllable, [Of one syllable] Monster, [Beside-natural (thing] Month. Mea. V. 4. Monument. [adj. a. Memory (sign] [Tomb] Mood. [Manner] T. VI. [Disposition] Moon. Planet. W. II. 8. New— [—Beginning her monethly course] appearing— [—(like) Mete∣or.] —wort. HL. I. 9. Half— Fortification. RM. VI. 5. Moor. Man, [Tawny man] Land. Po. I. 9. —hen. Bi. VIII. 9. to—a ship. Moot, [Discourse on Law-case.] Moral, [adj. Manners] —Philosophy, [Ph. concerning manners.] a— [Signification belonging to manners] Moralize, [Apply to manners] More. [Superiour] Adv. II. 2. —over, [Also] Morfew, [Disease of Scurf on the skin] Morgage. RC. VI. 7. Mormylus. Fi. V. 3. A. Morning. Mea. V. 7. Moroseness. Man. IV. 7. D. Morris, [a. Moor's dance] Morrow. [Day Next after] following] Good— [adj. Morning saluta∣tion.] Morse. Be. V. 3. Morsel, [Fragment] sp. off-bit∣ten.] Mortal. [adj. Dying (pot.] [adj. a. Dying (apt.] [Capital] —ity. [Dying (pot.] [Dying (apt.] [Killing infection] Mortar. For building. El. IV. 4. A. [adj. Contusion (vess.] Mortifie. [a. Death] [a. Repentance] Mortiss, [Hole in beam.] sp. in side of it.] Mortmain.   Mortuary, [Payment for the dead.] Mosaic work.   Mosque, [Temple] sp. of Maho∣metans.] Moss. HL. I. 3. Most. Adv. II. 2. A. for the—part, [adv. Most] [Chiefly] Mote. [Ditch (augm.] Atom, [Powder (dim.] Moth, Ex. II. 8. Ex. IV. 9. A. —mullein. HS. VIII. 4. A. Mother. [Parent (fem.] —tongue, [Language of one's own nation] —of pearl. Ex. VIII. 3. [Womb] PG. VI. 9. [Disease] S. VI. 7. —wort. HF. VII. 13. [Sediment] Motion. [Locomotion] Mo. —of Animals Progressive. Mo. I. —of the parts of Animals. Mo. III. Violent— Mo. VI. [Inclination] AS. IV. 1. Motive. [adj. Move (apt.] [Impulsive] Motley, [Variegated] Motto, [Appropriated sentence] D. III. 1. A. Move. [a. Motion] —the brows. AC. IV. 1. A. the head. AC. IV. 4. A. [Offer] TA. IV. 2. [a. Impulsive] [Persuade] [Allure] [Angry (make] Moveable, [adj. p. Mo∣tion (pot.] (apt.] —s, [Utensils] Mould.
[Earth] [Type] sp. convex] Casting (vess. of melted bodies] Figuring (vess. of melted bodies] —of the head, [Dent of the upper part of the head] to— a. Knead] a. Type] Moulder. [p. Powder by putrefaction] —away, [Decay] Mouldiness. HL. I. 1. A. [Mustiness] [Down (like) rottenness] Moulter, [Un-feathered (make] Mound. [Sepiment] [Bank] [Rampire] Mount. [Mountain] [Factitious hill] to— [Ascend] —a horse, [Ascend upon a horse] ill— —ed [Riding on horse (perf.] well- —ed [Riding on horse (corr.] —a cannon, [Lift a cannon to his carriage] Mountain. W. III. 1. E. Mountebank. Wandring Physician] Juggling Physician] Mourn. [Shew grief] [Grief (sign) sp. with (voice] in—ing, [adj. p. Vest adv. grief (sign] Mouse. Be. III. 7. A. Dor— [adj. a. sleep (apt.) Mouse (kind] Field— [Long snouted venom∣ous mouse (kind] Flitter— [Bat] —ear. HF. III. 13. A. —tail. HL. III. 16. codded— HS. IV. 12. A. Mouth. Proper. PG. III. 3. —full, [adj. Mouth capacity] foul—'d. [Speaking (apt) indecent (things] [Reviling (apt.] mealy—'d, [not- adj. reproof (apt.] Orifice [Mouth (like] [Entry] to— [a. Reviling] Mouthy, [adj. Reviling (apt.] Mow. [Heap] sp. of Corn.] [Mock] sp. with face (manner] Mowe, [Reap] Mue. [a. Imprisonment] —feathers, [Let go f.] Much. Great] Many] as— [Equal] for so—as Conj. IV. 1. make—of, [a. Courtesie (augm.] too— [Excessive] very— [Abundant] [Transc. (augm.] (intens.] Mucilaginous, [Slimy] Muck.   Mucus. Dung] Snivel] [Excrement] Mucketer, [adj. Wiping (thing] Mud, [Macerated durt] Muff, [Tube for warming the hands] Muffle, [Conceal (vest) sp. face] Muffler, [Mouth (vest] Mufy, [Mahometan chief Pri∣mate] Mug, [Pot for drink] Mugwort. HF. II. 11. A. Mulberry. Tr. III. 1. Mule. Be. I. 2. A. —fearne. HL. I. 8. Muletier, [adj. Mule (Off.] Mullein. HS. VIII. 4. moth— HS. VIII. 4. A. Sage— Sh. VI. 4. A. Mullet. Fi. IV. 6. English— Fi. IV. 3. A. Lesser— Fi. IV. 6. A. Mult. RJ. VI. 7. Multifarious, [Many (kind] Multifidous beasts. —of the biggest sort. Be. III. —of the middle sort. Be. IV. —of the least sort. Be V. Multiply. a. Many] Increase] [a. Multiplier] Multiplicity, [Variety] Multiplier. TM. VI. 8. Multitude. TM. III. 1. Mum. [Beer in which husks of Wal∣nuts are infused] [st'] Interj. III. 1. O. —ing, [Dance of Silents] —ing, [Dance of Disguied] Mumble. [Mastication (corr.] Voice confusedly] Speak confusedly] Mummy, [Gum (like) embalmed flesh] sp. of Man] Mump, [Move (corr.) the mouth] Mumps, [Disease swelling of the chaps] Munday, [Second day of the week] Mundane, [adj. World] Municipal, [adj. City] Corporation] Munificence, [Liberality] sp. in gifts] Muniment, [Deed] RJ. VI. 5. Munition. [Fortification] [Ammunition] Muraena. Fi. VI. 1. Mural, [adj. Wall] Murder. RJ. III. 4. Murex. Ex. VII. 2. Murmur, Grudging Discontent Indignation sp. (voice] Murr, [Disease of hoarseness through cold distillation] Murrain, Disease infecti∣ous Plague of (beasts] Murry, Dark red] Rust colour] Murrion, [Head (armour.] Murther. RJ. III. 5. Muscle. PG. II. 6. A. Fish. Ex. VIII. 7. A. Musculous, [adj. Muscle] Muse. [a. Verse (art.] [Feign'd Goddess of vers (art] [Hole through hedge] to— [Meditate] Mushrom. HL. I. 1. Music. Sound. Mo. V. 7. A. [Harmony] Art. Mo. V. 7. A. (art.) Musk, [Sweet (thing) of Muskcat] —cat. Herb. Muskadell.   Musket. Hawk, [Sparhawk (male] Gun, [Footman's gun (augm.] Mussle, vid. Muscle. Must. Mood of Necessity [Determination] AS. IV. 8. [Necessity] T. V. 7. [Wine not yet fermented] Mustaches, [Upper beard] Mustard. Common. HS. IV. 9. [Sauce of Mustard] Tower— HS. IV. 12. Yellow Arabian— HS. IV. 13. A. Muster. [adj. a. Number] [Catalogue] adj. a. TM. III. 7. O. Mustiness. Q. IV. 7. Mutable. [adj. Alter (apt] [Light] Ha. IV. 7. D. Muteness. AC. III. 1. O. Muting, [Dunging] Mutilous, NP. V. 1. O. Mutiny, [Sedition] Mutter, [Speak indistinctly] confusedly] grudgingly] Mutton, [Flesh of sheep] Mutual, [Reciprocal] Muzzle. [Bonds of mouth] [a. Silence (make] Myriad, [10000] Myrrh. Tr. VIII 1. Myrtle. Sh. III. 11. —Symach. Sh. III. 11. A. Mystery. Obscure (thing] Concealed (thing] [Trade] Mythology, [Interpretation of feigned Narrations.
N. NAdir, [Under- adj. Horizon pole] Nag, [Gelded horse (dim.] Nay, [Not] say— [Deny] Nail. —of Animal. PP. VI. 5. A. Iron pin to be driven in by knocking] Brass pin to be driven in by knocking] Naked, Not- clothed Un- covered Name. Word. T. I. 4. —ly, Conj. IV. 3. nick— [Name (corr.] [Reputation] Nap. [Tufted superficies] [Sleep (fit] Nape, [Hinder part of the neck] Naphew. HS. IV. 4. A. Naphtha. St. V. 5. A. Napkin, [Linen for wiping] Nappy.   Narciss, [Daffadil] HL. IV. 4. Narcotic. [adj. a. Sleep] [adj. A. Stupor] Nard.   Narration. D. V. 3. Narrow. op. to Ample, [adj. Sp. II. 5. O.] op. to Broad, [adj. TM. II. 2. O] —ly, [adv. Heedfulness] Nastiness, [Slovenliness (augm.] Nation. RC. III. 1. Native, [adj. Birth] Nativity. [Birth] [Birth (time] Natural. [adj. T. III. 7.] —ly, [adv. Spontaneity] —power. NP. —fool, [adj. Idiot (person] Naturalist, [adj. Nature (ar∣tist] Naturalize, [a. Nation] Nature. [Natural (abstr.] Law of— RC. IV. 1. [Temper of Mind] Body] [Disposition] Naval, [adj. Ship.] Nave. —of a Church, [Greatest Tem∣ple (room] —of cart, &c. Po. V. 7. Navel. PG. IV. 6. A. —wort. HL. VIII. 6. Sea— HL. I. 11. A. Navew. HS. IV. 4. A. Naught. [Nothing] come to— [Be annihilated] set at— [Contemn] [Evil] —for, [Hurtful to.] Navy. [Ships (aggr.] [Army of ships] Navigation, [Sailing] Nauseate. [a. AS. V. I. O.] Nauseousness, [Lothing] NP. II. 4. O. Nautic, [adj. Ship.] Nautilus. Ex. VII. 1. Neap-tide, [Shallowest tide] Neast, vid. Nest. Neat. Beast. Be. II. 1. [adj. Neatness] —ness. [Pureness] [Cleanliness] [Decentness (augm] [Ornateness] Neb, [Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Nebulous, [adj. Mist.] Necessary, [adj. Necessity] Necessity. Proper. T. V. 7. [Want] [Poverty] [Determination] Necessitous, [Needy] Neck. PG. IV. 1. —of land, [Isthmus] Necromancy, [Witchcraft by the dead] Nectar, [Drink of the feigned Gods] Nectarine. Tr. II. 1. A. Neece, [Nephew (fem.] Need, [Want] sp. of necessaries] must—s, [Must (augm.] Needfulness. [Necessity] [Expedience] Neediness, [Poverty] Needle, [Sowing▪ pin] —fish. Fi. III. 13. (p. Magnet] Mariners— [adj. iron pin. adj. Shepherds— [Venus combe] HF. I. 5. A. Needless, [Abundant] Neer. adj. neerness] adv. neerness] well— [Almost] [Beside] —ness. Nighness. Sp. II. 3. [Frugality] [Penuriousness] Neeze, [Sneez] Neezing-wort, [White Hellebore] HL. VII. 1. Nefarious, [Vicious (augm.] Negation. D. VI. 2. O. Neglect, [a. Negligence] Omission] Contemning] Negligence. Ha. IV. 5. D. Negotiate. [a. Business] [a. Commerce] Negro, [Black man] Neigh, [a. Horse (voice] Neighbour. RO. IV. 3. [Neer] sp. dwelling] Neither. [None of the two] [Nor] Neophyte, [New Disciple] Neotero, New [adj. Sp. I. 3. O. Nep, [Cat-mint] Nephew. RO. I. 3. O. Nerites. Ex. VII. 4. A. Nerve. PG. II. 5. Nest, [Room sp. of bird] [Bed sp. of bird] Nestling, [Bird (young) taken out of the nest] Net, [Squares (plain) of the thred] sp. for hunting] Nether. [More-low] [Inferiour] —most, [Most low] Nle. MF. I. 14. dead— [Archangel] HF. VII. 11 —tree, [Lotus] Tr. III. 4. Sea— Ex. IX. 6. A. Never. Sp. I. 9. O. —so much, [How much soe∣ver] —the less. Conj. II. 2. O. Neuter, [Of no Faction]. Neutrality. [Slightness] Ha. III. 4. E. [Being of no Faction] New. Sp. I. 3. —of the Moon, [Beginning of Moon's monethly course] —s, [New Narration] Newt, [Lizard] Be. VI. 5. Next. [Most sar] [Preceding] [Following] [Immediate] Nibble, [Gnaw (dim.] Niceness. op. to Hardiness. NP. IV. 7. O. Over-cleanliness. Man. II. 6. E. Niche, [Dent] Nick, [Notch] —name, [Name (corr.) sp. adj. Contempt] in the— [In the instant of time (perf.] to— Niess, [Hawk] Nigella. HS. V. 13. A. Niggard, [Penurious (person] Nigh, [Near] Night. Mea. V. 6. O. —crow. —mare, [Ephialtes] —shade. HS. IX. 4. Enchanters— HF. VIII. 3. A. Nightingale. Bi. V. 3. Nightly, [adj. Night (segr.] Nilling.
NP. I. 4. O. AS. IV. O. Nim, [a. Theft (dim.] Nimbleness, [Agility] NP. V. 8. Nimis, [Excess] Nine. Mea. II. 9. —ty. —hundred, &c. Ninny, [Fool] Nip. [Pinch between the tops of the fingers] [Bite (dim.] [Mock (dim.] Nipple, [Protuberance (dim.) of Dug.] —wort. HF. III. 14. A. Nit, [Egg of Louse] Nitre. St. V. 1. A. No. [None] [adj. Nothing] [Not any] —body, [No man] —where, [Sp. II. 8. O.] [Not] Nobility, [Lord (abstr.] Noble, adj. Lord. RC. I. 3. Money [6 s.—8 d.] Nocent, Guilty] Hurtful] Nock, [Notch] Nocturnal, [adj. Night] Nod, [Move the head] AC. IV. 4. A. Noddy, [Fool] Noddle, [Hinder part of the head] Node. [Protuberance] [Tumour] Noggin, [Pot (augm.) for drink.] Noise. [Sound (augm.] [Rumour (augm.] Noisom. [Hurtful] [adj. Molesting (apt.] Nolleity. AS. IV. 2. O. Nomenclator. [Teacher of Names] [Dictionary] Nominate. [a. Name] [Appoint] Nonage, [Pupillary age] Nonce, [Purpose] None, [adj. Nothing] Nones, [Days of the moneth next after the first] Nonplus, [Posing] D. VI. 8. Non-resident, [Not dwelling] Nonsuch, [Campion] Nonsuited, [adj. p. Desist plain∣tiffing] Nook, [Angle] Noon, [Mid-day] Nooze, [Loop] sp. of snare] Nope, [Bulfinch] Bi. IV. 5. Nor. Conj. I. 2. O. North. Sp. III. 2. Nose. PG. III. 3. A. Nosegay, [Flowers (aggr.] Nosthril, [Hole of the nose] Not. Adv. I. 1. O. —withstanding. Conj. II. 2. O. if— [Unless] to— —Sheep. Notable. [Extraordinary] [Excellent] Notary. RJ. I. 5. Notation, [Derivation of word.] Notch. Mag. IV. 2. O. Note. [Sign] [Character] [Comment (dim.] Tone. Q. III. 5. [Extraordinariness] of— [Extraordinary] to— [Observe] Nothing. T. I. 1. O. Notice. Knowledge] Warning] give— Known (make] Warn] take— Observe] Shew to know] Notifie, Known (make] Warn] Notion. T. I. 3. Notorious. [Extraordinary] [Manifest] [Publicly known] Novacula Fi. III. 15. A. Novel, [New] a— [New narration] Novelty, [Newness] November, [Eleventh moneth] Nought, vid. Naught. Novice. [New Disciple] [Not-expert] Noun. [Name] [Integral] Nourish. [Nutrition] AC. I. 6. [Feeding] Now, [At this time] —a days, [In these times] —and then, [At some times] Noxious, [Hurtful] Nuisance, [Hurtful (thing] Nullity, [Frustration] Number. Mea. II. A. Numerous, [adj. Multitude] Numness. Impotence. NP. III. 5. O. Disease. S. IV. 6. A. Nun, [Monke (fem.] ird, [Titmouse] Nunchion, [Refection in the af∣ternoon] Nuncupative, [Spoken] Nuptial, [adj. Marriage] Nurse. RO. III. 2. (fem.) —child. RO. III. 2. O. Nursery. [Children (aggr.] [Young trees (aggr.] Nusance, [Hurtful (thing] Nut. Fruit. PP. III. 3. Bladder— Tr. IV. 5. Chest— Tr. IV. 4. earth— HF. V. 10. Fistic— [Pistach] Tr. IV. 2. Hazle— Tr. IV. 3. A. Small— Tr. IV. 3. A. Wall— Tr. IV. 1. —cracker, [Nut-breaking (jug.] —of a bow, [Retaining (jug.) of the string.] —of the thigh, [Fat Glandule of the—] Nut-hatch. Bi. I. 9. A. Nutmeg, [Fruit of the Nutmeg∣tree.] —tree. Tr. IV. 6. A. Nutriment, [adj. Nourishing (thing.] Nutrition. AC. I. 6. Nymph, [Feign'd Goddess of Woods.] Rivers, &c.] O OAr. —of ship. RN. III. 3. —of metal, [Crude m.] Oath. RC. VI. 4. Oats. HL. II. 4. Obdurate. [Hard] [Impenitent] Obedience. Man. V. 7. Obey, [a. Obedience] Obelisk, [Round Pyramid] Object. T. VI. 2. Objection. D. VI. 5. Obit, [Funeral solemnity] Oblation. RE. VI. 2. Obligation. RC. VI. Written RC. VI. 5. Oblique. Ma. II. 8. Obliterate, [Un-write] Oblivion, [Forgetfulness] Oblong, [More long than broad] Obloquy, [Reproch] Obnoxious, [adj. p. Object (apt.] Obnubilate. [a. Cloud] [Darken] Obscene, [Unchast] Obscure. [Dark] op. to Plain. D. III. 9. Plebeian, [adj. People (kind] Obsecration, [Intreating (augm.] Obsequies, [Solemnity of buri∣al.] Obsequious, [adj. Obedience (augm.] Observe. Mark. AS. III. 1. A. [Perform] [a. Respect]
Observant. [adj. Respect] [adj. Obedience] Obsolete, [Unaccustom'd] Obstacle, [adj. Impedient (thing] Obstetrication, [Assisting Partu∣rition] Obstinate. Patience (exc.) Man. I. 8 E. Constancy (exc.) Ha. IV. 7. E. Obstruction. [Hindering] [Stopping up] Disease. S. I. 4. Obtain. TA. V. 1. Obtestation, [Entreating (augm.] Obtrude, [On- thrust] put] Obtuse, [Blunt] —angle. Mag. III. 3. E. Obvious. Sp. II. 6. Obumbration, [Shadowing] Occasion. T. II. 4. A. Occidental, [adj. West] Occult, [adj. p. Conceal] Occupation. [Business] [Profession] Occupy. [a. Business] [a. Possession] Occur. [p. Event] [Meet] Ocean. W. IV. 2. Ockam, [Tow for calking of ships.] Octave, [Eighth day after] Octavo, [Third figure of books] October, [Tenth moneth] Ocular, [adj. Ey] PG. III. 2. Odd ends, [Residue] Odds, [Superiority] at— Enemies] a. Contention] Ode, [Song] Odious. [adj. p. Hate (apt.] Odness. op. to Evenness. TM. III. 5. O. [Extraordinariness] Odor, [Smell] Odoriferous, [Sweet] Ods, vid. Odds. Oeconomic. RO. Oecumenical. [adj. World] [Universal] Of. Genitive. Prep. I. 1. [By.] Prep. I. 2. [Concerning] Prep. I. 3. A. out— Prep. I. 3. South— [S- from] Of. [Distant] Prep. III. 2. A. Cut— from- c.] Drive— from- d.] Offal, [Worst part] TM. VI. I. O. sp. adj. Residue. Offend. Displease] Hurt] [Sin] —in fighting. RM. I, 1. Offensive. [Displeasing] [Hurtful] Offer. —to do. TA. III. 3. A. —to give. TA. IV. 2. [Bid] [Give to God] [a. Oblation] [a. Sacrifice] [a. Incense] Offertory, [a. Oblation] Office. Trust. RC. IV. 6. A. [Employment] TA. III. good— [Benefit] house of— [adj. Dunging (house] (room] Officer, [adj. Office (person] Ecclesiastical— RE. II. Official, [Ecclesiastical Judge] Officious. Man. IV. 2. E. [adj. Complaisanc] Offspring, [Descendents (aggr.] RO. I. 1. O. Often, [adv. Frequent] Oh. Interj. Oil Pr. I. 6. —box of a Bird. PP. V. 8. A. —of corn, [Beard—] Oilet, [Hole] sp. for Button] Ointment. [adj. Anointing (thing] [Salve] Oister. Ex. VIII. 4. —weed. HL. I. 13. A. Okam, [Tow for calking of ships] Oke. TR. V. 1. bitter— Tr. V. I. A. holme— Tr. V. 2. Holy— HF. IX. 6. A. Scarlet— [Holm] —fearn. HL. I. 4. A. —of Cappadoia. HF. I. 13. A. —of Ierusalem. HF. I. 13. Oker. Yellow— St. VI. 2. Red— St. VI. 2. A. Old. [adj. Age] how— [of what age] —age. Mea. VI. 4. [Decrepit] adj. Mea. VI. 4. A. op. to New. Sp. I. 3. A. —clothes, [Decayed c.] —fashion, [Unaccustom'd f.] —souldier, [Experienc'd s.] —time, [T. past (augm.] Oleander. Sh. VI. 1. Olibanum, [Frankincense] Tr. VIII. 3. Oligarchy, [Government by a Fa∣ction] Olive. Tr. II. 4. Ominous, [Before-signing] Omitting. TA. III. 8. A. Omnipotency, [All-mightiness] Omnipresence, [adv. Ubiquity presence] Omniscient. [All-knowing] On. —the contrary, [adv. contra∣ry] —fire, [adj. p. Fire] [Toward] —the left hand, [Towards—] right hand, [Towards—] Concerning] In] agree— [Agree In] Concern∣ing] [Forward] come— [Proceed] fight— [Prosecute fighting.] hold— [Prosecute] set— a. Assault] a. Impulsive] [To] a. Assault] a. Impulsive] happen— [H. to.] [Upon] Prep. VI. 1. Once. [One (time] [In past time] all at— [Together-all] One. Proper. Mea. II. 1. —by— [adv. Segregateness] —another, [adv. Reciprocati∣on] —for another, [Compensati∣on] —with ano∣ther, [adv. Mixture] Confusedness] [Any] Pron. III. 1. some— Pron. II. 3 A. certain— Pron. II. 3. [Onely] RO. IV. 2. O. [The same] all— Equal] Alike] One blade. HL. VII. 5. Onely. Adv. IV. 1. O. [Alone] RO. IV. 2. O. Onerate, [Lode] O. VI. 7. Onion. HL. IV. 9. Onset, [Assault] Onslaught. [Storming] Onyx. St. III. 4. Opacity. Q. I. 4. O. Opal-stone. St. III. 1. Open. —ing. Unshut. O. II. 2. O. Uncover. O. II. 3. O. Unfold, [Spread] Un- adj. p. Seal (make] Un adj. p. Impedient (make] Un-adj. p. Obstruction (make] Un-conceal Reveal] Manifest] Un-adj. Publicness (make.]
Un-obscure, [a. Plain] Un-implicit, [a. Express] [adj. p. Opening] —air, [Clear air] —handed, [Liberal] —hearted. Frank, [adj. Man. IV. 4.] In excess, [adj. Man. IV. 4. E] —house, [Hospitality for all comers.] —war, [Manifested war] —weather, [W. not cloudy] frosty] Operation. Mechanic. O. I. in General. O. II. in Agriculture. O. III. in Fabrile. O. IV. in Sartorian. O. V. in Chymic. O. VI. in Pharmaceutic. O. VI. A. [a. Efficient] Ophidion Plinii. Fi. VI. 4. A. Opiniastre. [Conceited] [Wilful] [Obstinate] Opinion AS. II. 6. O. Opium, [Soporative juice of Poppy] Opopanax, [Gummy juice of the root of Hercules Allheel] Oppilation, [Obstruction] S. I. 5. Opponent, [adj. Opposition (per∣son] Opportunity. [Time (perf.] Occasion (time] adj. Congruity (time] Oppose, [a. Opposition] Opposition. T. VI. . O. —of proposition. D. VI. 4. in— [distant ½ of a great Cir∣cle] Oppression. RJ. IV. 5. Opprobry, [Reproch] Oppugn, [Oppose] Optic. [adj. Seeing] [Seeing (art] Optimacy, [Government by the chief (persons] Option. [Choice] [Wish] Opulent. [Rich] [Abundant] Or. Conj. II. 3.. —else, [adv. Other] Oracle, [adj. p. Speaking reve∣lation] Orage. HF. I. 9. Oral, [adj. Mouth] Orange. Tr. I. 7. A. Oration. D. V. 2. Orator, [adj. Oration Entreaty (per∣son] Oratory. [Oration (art.] [Prayer (place] Orb. [Sphere] —Imaginary. W. VI. A. Orbicular, [adj. Sphere] Orbis. —Echinatus. Fi. VIII. 2. A. —hirsuus. Fi. VIII. 1. A. —maricatus. Fi. VIII. 2. —scutatus. Fi. VIII. 1. Orchard. Po. I. 3. A. Orchis. HL. IV. 8. Ordain. [Appoint] [a. Ordinance] [a. Ordination] Order. TM. V. 2. Method. TM. V. 2. [Government] [Decree] —ly. [adj. Order (perf.] [adj. Manners Homiletic] [adj. a. Subjection] Orders. [plur. Order] [adj. Ordination (thing] Ordinance. [Decree] [Law] [Edict] [Institution] RE. VI. Cannon, &c. RM. V. 6. A. Ordinary. Usual. TM. V. 3.] Between course and fine. Q. VI. 3. [Bishop] Ordination. RE. V. 2. Ordure. [Dung] [Filth] Ore, [Metal not yet prepared] O're, [Over] Organ, [Instrument] Musical— Organy, [Wild Marjoram] HF. VII. 4. A. Orient. [East] [Bright] Orifice, Hole] Mouth (like] Origany. HF. VII. 4. A. Original. Primitive] First] [Beginning] [Rise] —copy, [Exemplar] Orizon, [Prayer] Ornament, [adj. a. Ornateness (thing] Ornateness. TM. V. 6. Orphan, [Un-parented] Orpiment. St. VI. 4. Orpin. HL. VIII. 2. Orrage. HF. I 9. Ort, [Fragment adj. Residue] Orthodox. RE. III. 1. Orthography, [a. Letter (perf.] Orthopnoea. S. V 2. A. Oscitation. [Yawning] [Carelesness] Osmund.   Osprey, [Bone-breaking Eagle] Ostentation. [Over-saying] [Glorying] Ostler, [Common horse (Off.] Ostrich. Bi. II. 9. Otes. HL. II. 4. Othe. RC. VI. 4. Other. adj. Diversity] Pron. II. 2. O. —wise, [adv. Other] —whiles, [In some (times] —where, [In other (places] every,— [Every second] the— [The rest] Otter. Be. IV. 8. A. Oval. Mag. VI. 6. Ouch, [Ornament of gemms] Oven, [adj. a. Baking (place] Over. [adj. Superiority] [adj. Power] Authority] [adj. Abundance] Excess] —bold, [B. (Exc.] —much, [Excess] adv. Vantage] Besides] —and above. more— [Also] [Above] Prep. V. 1. —thwart. Prep. III. 3. [Throughout] Prep. IV. 3. —again, [Through it again] all— [Through all] all is— [All is past] give— [Desist] read— [Beyond] Prep. VI. 2. A. —against. Prep. VI. 3. O. Overaw. [a. Fear (make] [Coaction by fear] Overbear. [a. Submit (make] [a. Magisterialness] Overbid, [Bid More then.] (exc.] Overbold, [Bold (exc.] Overburden, [Burden (exc.] Overbuy, [Buy dear (exc.] Overcast, Cover] hadow] Overcatch.   Overcharge, [Burden (exc.] Overcome, [a. Victory] Overfill, [Fill (exc.] Overflow. [Over-flow] [v. Abundance] Overglut, [Glut (exc.] Overgone, [pret. Gone (exc.] Overgrow. [Grow more than, &c.] (exc.] [Cover by growing]
Overhasty, [Hasty (exc.] Overhear, [adv. Concealed hear] Overheavy, [Heavy (exc.] Overlay. [Cover (exc.] [Kill by covering] Overly, [adv. Slightness] Sloth] Overload, [Load (exc.] Overlong, [Long (exc.] Overlook. a. Ey another's doing] Observe the thing doing done [Look too high] [adv. Omitting] Overmaster, [a. Victory] Overmatch, [a. Superiour] Overmeasure, [Excess] Overmuch, [Excess] Overpass. [Omit] [Excel] Overplus. [Redundant (thing] [Vantage] [Residue] Overrate, [Tax more than pro∣portion] Overreach, Overtake] a. Fraud] Overreckn, [Reckon (exc.] Overripe. NP. VI. 4. E. Overrule. [v. Superiour] RO. III. [Yield (make] p. by Autho∣rity] [Overcome] Overrun. [Fill (exc.] [Cover with multitude] Oversaying. Man. IV. 1. E. Oversee, [a. Oversight] Overshadow, [Cover with sha∣dow] Overshoot, [Beyond shoot] go] —himself, [a. Excess] Oversight. [Office.] sp. of observing what others do in their offices] [Errour] Overskip. Omit Lose sp. by neglect.] Overslip. [Omit] Neglect] Forget] Overspread, [Over-spread] Overt, [Manifest] Overtake. TA. VI. 6. A. —n with wine, [p. Drunken∣ness—] Overthrow, a. Transverse (make] a. Victory] to receive an— RM. II. 1. D. Overthwart, Transverse] Prep. III. 3. Overtoil, [Toil (exc.] Overture, [adj. p. Offer] sp. Proposition] Overturn, [a. Transverse] Overvalue, [Value (exc.] Overween, [a. Arrogance] Overweigh, [Weigh more than] Overweight, [More than weight] Overwhelm, [Cover (augm.] Ought. v. Dueness] Mood of duty] [Any thing] Ounce. Weight. Mea. III. 4. Beast. Be. IV. 3. Our, [adj. plur. Pron. I. 1.] Out. Material. Prep. I. 3. Local. Of Motion. Prep. IV. 2. get— [Obtain] sp. to be without] scrape— Of Rest. Prep. IV. 2. A. all is— Past] Finisht] Spent] Extinct] Discovered] Public] the secret is— he is— [He erreth] they are— [They are ene∣mies] —of date, [Un- custom'd] autoritied] —of doors, [Without d.] —of doubt, [Without d.] —of fashion, [Un-custom'd] —of frame, [Confused] —of hand, [adv. Sudden] —of heart, [Discouraged] —of joynt, [Un-joynted] —of kinde, [Degenerous] —of order, [Confused] —of patience, [Vn-patienced] —of sight, [Not-visible] —of use, [Not-used] —of wits, [Mad] —upon. Int. II. 1. O. Int. II. 3. O. Outcast. [Rejected] [Banished] Outcry, [Exclamation] Outgo. [ faster] beyond] [v. Superiority] Outlandish, [adj. Foreiner] Outlaw'd. Un-adj. Suit (pot.] Proscribed] Outlet, [Out-ition (place] Outlive, [Live longer than] after] Outmost, [Most adj. outside] Outpass, [a. Superiority] Outrage, [Injury (augm.] Outragious, [adj. Excess (augm.] sp. in Anger.] Outside. Sp. III. 6. O. Outstand, [a. Duration after] Outstrip, [Run faster than] Outward, [adj. Outside] Outwork. [adj. Outside. RM. VI.] [Rampier] RM. VI 3. Owe. as Debt, [a. Debtor] as Duty, [a. Dueness] Owl. Horned. Bi. I. 4. Not Horned. Bi. I. 4. A. Own. my— [adj. I, adj. I.] one's—man, [Rational (perf.] —er, [adj. Propriety (per∣son.] to— Appropriate] Claim] Owze. W. III. 7. A. Owzle, [Black bird] Ox, Bull. Be. II. 1. [untesti∣cled] Oxey. Herb. HF. II. 6. A. Bird. [Woodpecker (kind] Bi. I. 9. A. Ozier, [Sallow] Tr. VI. 9. A. P. PAce. [Mode of going] Mo. II. [Step] [Five foot] [Degree of swiftness] [Measure in dancing] —ing, [Ambling] Mo. II. 2. Pacifie, a. Peaceable (make] Un-anger] Pack, Aggregate. TM. III. 8. sp. together tied] —horse, [H. for carriage of pack] —saddle, [S. for carriage of pack] —thred, [Course thred for tying] to— a. Aggregate by toge∣ther tying] to— Heap and bind] —away, [Depart with one's goods] —cards, [Order C. fraudu∣lently] —Iury, [Chuse partially a Jury] to set—ing, [Depart (make] Packet, [Aggregate (dim.] sp. together tied] —boat. RN. I. 8. Paction. RC. VI. A. Pad. [Saddle (dim.] —nag, [adj. p. Riding (apt.) horse] —lock, [adj. p. Hanging (apt.]
Paddle, [Spade (like) staff] to— [a. Hand (freq.] sp. in water.] Paddock. [Frog] [Park (dim.] Paedobaptism, [Baptism of In∣fants.] Paganellus. Fi. III. 7. A. Paganism. RE. I. 2. Page. [Servant for waiting] —of pa∣per, Side Area of pa∣per] Pageant, [Arch for ights] Pagrus. Fi. V. 4. Pay, [adj. a. Paying (thing] —master, [adj. Paying (Off.] put out of— Souldiers— [S. hire] —ing. TA. IV. 8. [Compensating] Paigle. HS. VIII. 1. A. Pail, [Tub (dim) with handle] Pain. [a. Punishment] op. to Ease. NP. V. 3. O. [a. Torture] RJ. VI. 1. [Aking, &c.] AC. II. 7. op. to Pleasure, [a. Unpleasant∣ness.] [Grief] —s, a. Operation] a. Diligence] —fulness, [a. Pain Pains (apt.] Painim, [adj. Paganism (per∣son.] Painting. O. IV. 8. Pair. [Equal] [Companion] [Two] [Aggregate (thing] —of bellows, [B.] —of cards [Suit of c.] Palace. Po. II. 2. Palate. Roof. PG. III. 5. [Tat] Palatine, [adj. Palace] Pale. —ness. AC. IV. 9. A. a— [Lamin] sp. of wood] Pales, [Sepiment of Lamins erect.] Palinody, [Recanting] D. VI. 9. A. Palisado. RM. VI. 7. Pall.   Pallet, [Bed (dim.) to be laid on the floor.] Palliate, Seem (make] Cover (corr.] Palm. —of hand, [Concave (part] Tree, [Date] dwarfe— Sh. III. 2. [Carkin] PP. II. 1. A. Palmer. [Pilgrim] —worm, [Caterpillar] Palmeto royal [Cabbidg tree] Tr. VII. 7. Palmistry, [Wizarding by inspe∣ction of the hand.] Palpaple. [adj. p. Feeling (apt.] [Manifest (augm.] Palpitation. S. V. 4. Palsy. S. IV. 6. Palter, [a. Sloth] Lightness] Paltry, [Sorry] Pamper, [a. Fat (augm.] Pamphlet, [Sorry book (dim.] Pan, [Shallow wide (vess.] sp. earthen] Brain- [Concave bone cover∣ing the brain] Knee- [Convex bone cover∣ing the knee] Warming- [adj. Warming (vess.] Frying- [adj. Frying (vess.] —cake, [Fry'd Pudding (La∣min.] Panade, [Broth of boil'd bread] Panage, [Feeding for hogs under the deciduous trees.] Panch. Stomach] Belly] [Earthen Tray] Pander, [adj. Fornication (merc.] Pandiculation. Mo. III. 6. A. Pane, [Lamin] Panegyric, [adj. a. Praise orati∣on] Panel. [Lamin (dim.] [Catalogue of names] [Saddle for burdens] —of Hawk, [Belly—] Pang, [Impetus] sp. pain (imp.] Panic. [Corn] HL. II. 5. —grass. HL. III. 1. A. —fear, [Causeless univer∣sal f.] Panier, [Basket.] sp. for carri∣age on horse. Pannage, [Tax on cloth] Pannicle, [Membrane] Pannier, vid. Panier. Pansy. HL. VI. 5. A. Pant. S. V. 1. Panther, [Pard] Be. IV. 2. A. Pantler, [adj. Bread (Off.] Pantofle, [Loose foot (vest] Pantry, [adj. Bread Victual (room] Pap. [Water adj. p. consistence with bread.] —of an apple, [adj. p. consi∣stence pulp—] [Dug] Papal, [adj. Pope] Paper. Reed. Factitious. Pr. VI. 7. Papilionaceous fly. Ex. IV. 6. A. Papist, [Of the Pope's faction] Parable, [Tralatitious Narrati∣on] Parabola. Mag. III. 8. Parade, [a. Preparation] Paradise, [Pleasure (place] Bird of— Fools— [De∣ceiving Hope] Delight] Paradox, [Against common opi∣nion] Paragon, [Excellent] Paragraph, [Section] Parallax, [Difference between the true place and the seem∣ing.] Parallel. Mag. II. 7. Parallels. W. VI. 7. Parallelogram, [Quadrangle, whose opposite sides are paral∣lels] Paralogism, [Syllogism (corr.] Paralytic, [adj. Palsy] S. IV. 6. Paramor, Suitor Lover sp. (corr.) Paramount, [adv. Chief adj. right] Parapet. RM. VI. 9. Paraphrase. D. V. 5. A. Paraqueto. Bi. I. 7. A. Paraselene. El. V. 3. A. Parasite, [Flatterer] sp. for victuals] Parathesis. D. I. 7. A. Parboil, [Boil (dim.] Parbreak, [Vomit] Parcel, Part] Aggregate (dim.] to— [a. Segregate] Parch, [Dry (exc.) with heat∣ing] Parchment, [Paper of skin] Parcimony, [Frugality] Parcity, [Sparingness] Pard. Be. IV. 2. A. Pardon. RE. II. 9. —fault. [Absolution] —debt. TA. IV. 9. A. Pare, [From-cut Superficies] Extremity] Parelius. El. V. 3. Parenchyma. [Flesh] PG. II. 6. Parent. RO. I. 2. —age, [Parent (kind] Parenthesis. D. I. 7. Parget, [Plastering] Parish. RC. III. 4. A. Parity. [Equalness] [Evenness] Levelling. RC. I. O. Park. Po. I. 5. A. —leaves, [Tutsan] HS. V. . Parlament, [National Council] Parly, Confer] Treat] Parlour, [adj. Discourse (room] Parching. RN. VI. 1. A. Parochial, [adj. Parish] Parole, Word] Parole, Promise]
Paroxysm, [Impetus] Parrhesy, [Frankness] Parricide, [Murder of near kin] Parrot. Bi. I. 7. Parsimony, [Frugality] Parsly. HF. IV. 9. Bastard— HF. V. 12. A. milky— HF. V. 13 A. Stone— HF. IV. 2. Parsnip. HF. IV. 2. Cow— HF. IV. 15. Water— HF. IV. 15. A. Parson, adj. Parish-Priest] Possessor of Priest's re∣venue] Part. Portion TM. VI. O. Member TM. VI. O. Best— TM. VI. 1. Worst— TM. VI. 1. O. Person] Faction] Interest] for my— [Con∣cerning my Person] Interest] for the most— Concerning most persons] adv. Most] on all—s, [By all Persons] Factions] take one's— [Assist, &c.] Quality] Action] Duty] one of excellent—s, [—Quali∣ties] good ill —of him g. acti∣on] good ill —of him i. acti∣on] to take in good— [Ac∣cept (perf.] to take in ill— [Ac∣cept (corr.] to— [a. Division] Partition] Segregateness] [a. Open] Separate] [Depart] —a fray, [Un-a. Conten∣tion] Fight] Partake. [a. Partner] Accessory] Party. Person] Faction] [Aggregate] —of souldiers. a commanded— RM. IV. 6. —colour'd, [adv. Variety co∣lour'd] —per pale, [Alternly] [Accessory] Partiality, Ha. II. 6. O. Participate, [a. Partner] Accessory] Participle. D. II. 3. A. Particle, [Part (dim.] Word. D. II. . A. Particular. op. to Universal, [adj. TM. III. 3.] op. to General. [adj. TM. III. 4. a— [Catalogue] —ize, [a. Induction] Example] Partisan. [Partaker] [Halbert] Partition. —in a building. Po. III. 1. A. —in discourse. D. IV. 4. A. Partner. RO. IV. 5. Partridge. Bi. II. 6. red— Bi. II. 6. A. Parturition. AC. I. 3. Paru. Fi. III. 17. Pasch, [Passover] —flower, [Pussatilla] HF. IX. 3. A. Paschal, [adj. Passover] Pasquil, [adj. Mocking wri∣ting] Pass. [a. Ition] Coming] Going] Proceeding] Travelling] sp. Beside] Over] Beyond] -by Omit] Not-observe] -over, a. Omission] a. Transition] -one's life, [Live] word, [Promise] -as bell, [a. Dying (sign] [a. Past] -away. -one's right, [Alienate] -the time. bring to— Effect] Perform] come to— [adj. p. Event] let it— I will— [I will desist] Suffice] Exceed] Excell] I—not for it, [I esteem it not] a— [way] sp. over river] [State] brought to that— Venue, Thrust (imp.] Prick (end] [Written Licence for travel∣ling] Passable, [Indifferent] TM. I. 4. Passage. [Going] way] Entry] [Fare] —boat. [Transaction] [Clause] Passenger, [adj. Travelling (per∣son] Passer solitarius. Bi. III. 6. A. Passion. Suffering. T. I. 7. O. Affection. AS. V. [sp. An∣ger] Corp. action sign into it. AC. IV. Passive, [adj. Passion] Passover. RE. VI. 5. A. Pass-port, [Written Licence of travelling] Past, [adj. Past time] —time. Sp. I. 1. E. Paste. [Raw bread] [Glue of ground corn] Pasteler, [adj. a. Py (mech] Pastern, [Cavity of the heel] Pasty, [Py (augm,] Pastime. Recreation] Mirth] Pastinaca. Fi. II. 1. Pastor. Shepherd] Priest] Pastry. [adj. Store-room for adj. py (things] [a. py (art.] Pasture. Po. I. 5. Pat, [Congruous] Patch, [Fragment] to— [Repair with frag∣ments] —with, [a. Fraud] Pate. PG. III. 1. A. Patent. RC. IV. 4. Paternal, [adj. Father] Paternity, [Father (abstr.] Path, [adj. p. pret. Walk (place] Pathetic, [adj. a. Passion (apt.] Patible quality. Q. Patience. Vertue. Man. I. 8. Herb. Patient. [adj. Passion] Patience] a— [adj. p. Physician (per∣son] Patin, Wide shallow dish] Cover of cup] Patriarch. Before Christ. RE. II. 1. [Primate] Patrician, [Noble] Patrimony, [adj. p. Inherit (thing] Patriot, Lover of one's Na∣tion.] Benefa∣ctour of one's Na∣tion.] Patron, of Dependent. RO. III. 9. of Slave, [Master] of Church-living, [adj. Giving (pot.] Patronage, [a. Patron] Patronize. [a. Patron] [Protect] Patronymic, [adj. Family (name]
Pattern. [Example] [Type] Pattin▪ vid. Patin. [Under-adj. foot (jug.] Paucity, [Fewness] Pave, [a. Floor] sp. with stones] Pavement, [adj. Stone-floor] Pavillion. [Tent (augm.] Paw, [Multifidous foot] Pawn. RC. VI. 7. Pawnage, vid. Panage. Pawnch, Belly] PG. IV. 6. Guts (aggr.] to— [Un-a. bowel] Pawse, Discontinue] Rest] a— [Period] Peace. RM. O. —ableness. Man. IV. 3. to hold one's— [a. Tacitur∣nity] Silence] Peach. Tr. II. 1. to— [Accuse] Peacock, [Bi. II. 2. sp. (male] Peahen, [Peacock (fem.] Peal, [Tunable ringing] Pear. Tr. I. 2. Peasant, Rustic (person] Villain (person] Pease. HS. II. 2. A. Chich— HS. III. 2. Winged wild— HS. II. 5. A. —Earth-nuts. HS. II. 7. A. Peasecod, [Cod of Pease] Peccadillo, [Sin (dim.] Peccant, adj. a. Sin] Guilty] Peck, [Two gallons] to— Mo. VI. 5. A. Pectoral, [adj. Breast] Peculiar, [Proper] Pecuniary, [adj. Money] Pedal.   Pedant, Teacher (corr.) of children] adj. Pusillanimity (person] Pedee. RM. III. 8. A. Pedegree, [Series of Ancestors] Pedestal. Mag. V. 3. Pedler, [Wandring Merchant (corr.] Pedling, Sorry (dim.] Little (corr.] Pedobaptism, [Baptism of In∣fants] Peeble. St. I. 2. Peece. [Part] Chip] Fragment] —meal, [adv. Part (segr.] all to —s, [In parts] [Total] of one- Entire] Continued] [Gun] [20 s.] to— [Repair] sp. by adding fragment] -together, [Together-joyn] Peel, vid. Pill. Bakers— [Staff with Lamin at the end] Peep. —of day, [Day (inc.] to— [See (end) secretly] [Cry as Bird (young] Peer. [Equal] —less, [Not adj. p. Equal (pot.] [Nobleman] [Factitious bank] Peevishness, [Moroseness] Peg, [Pin] sp. for fastning] Peiony, HS. I. 1. Pelamis. Fi. III. 4. A. Pelf, [Riches (corr.] Pelican. BI. IX. 4. A. Pellet. [Bullet (like] Pellitory. —of Spain. HF. V. 11. —of the wall. HF. I. 16. Pellucid, [Transparent] Pelmel. [Game of striking bowl (dim.) through a hole] [adv. Mixture] Confusion] Pelt. Sheeps— [Sh. skin] Shepherds— [Sh. (vest.] to— [Chafe▪] [Cast stones] Pen. [Coop] [adj. Writing (instr.] -man, [adj. Wri∣ting (person] (Off.] -knife, [K. for pens] to— Sepiment] Write] Penal, [adj. Punishment] Penalty, [Punishment] Penance. [Punishment] [Repentance] Pence, [plur. Penny] Pencil, [adj. Painting (instr.] Pendant. [p. Hanging thing] [Flag] Pendu∣lous, adj. a. Swing] Doubtful] Penetrate, Into— ition] Through- ition] Out— ition] Penguin. Bi. IX. 6. A. Penisle. W. III. 4. O. Penitent, [adj. Repentance] Penner, [adj. Pen (vess] Writing (per∣son] Penny. Mea. IV. 2. —father, [Penurious (per∣son] —worth, [Price (manner] Pennyroyal. HF. VII. 8. Pennywort. Wall— HL. VIII. 6. Pennon, [Flag (dim.] Pension, [adj. a. Stipendiating (thing] —er, [adj. p. Stipendiated (person] Pensive, [adj. Grief Think∣ing (apt.] Pent, [adj. p. Sepiment] Pentagon, [Figure with five an∣gles] Pentecost, [Festival for descensi∣on of the Holy Ghost] Penthouse, [Protuberant margin of roof.] Penuriousness. op. to Liberality. Man. III. 3. E. op. to Magnificence, [Sordid∣ness.] Penury. Poverty Want. People. [Nation] Common— RC. I. 5. to— Fill Furnish with men] Pepper. Sh. II. 9. —wort. HS. VI. 6. Ginny— HS. IV. 8. A. Wall— HL. VIII. 5. A. Peradventure, [adv. Fortune] Contin∣gence] Perambu∣lation, About— walk∣ing] Through- walk∣ing] Perce, vid. Pirce. Perceive. a. Sense sp. inc.] See. sp. inc.] Understand sp. inc.] Perceptible, [adj. p. Perceive (pot.] Perch. [Transverse stick] to— [Sit upon a stick] Measure. Mea. I. 5. Fish. Fi. IX. 6. Sea— Fi. V. 10. Percolation, [Straining] O. VI. 4. Percussion, [Striking] Perdition, Destruction] Loss] Perdue. RM. III. 7. A. Peregrination, [Travelling] sp. forein] Peregrine, [adj. Foreiner] Peremp∣tory, Absolute] Obstinate] Perennial, [During through the year] Perfect. T. III. 9. [Finished] [adj. Integrity] [adj. Art] Experience] Perfidiousness, [Treachery] Perforate. [a. Hole (make] [Through-bore] Perforce, [adj. Coaction]
Perform. TA. III. 6. Perfume, [adj. a. Sweetness (thing] Perfunctory. [Slight] [Heedless] [Negligent] Perhaps, [adv. Fortune] Contin∣gence] Adv. I. 2. Periacantha. Sh. IV. 5. Perianthium, [Cp] PP. II. 8. Pericardium, [Skin about the heart] Pericarpium. PP. II. 8. A. Pericranium, [Skin about the skull] Peril, [Danger] T. V. 1. O. Perineum, [Under-privities (part] Period. [a. Ceasing] [End] [Sentence] D. III. 1. A.. Point. D. I. 6. A. Interpunction. D. I. 4. Periodical, [Returning at certain times] Periphery, Line about the ex∣tremity] Circle▪] Mag. III. 2. Periphrasi, [Paraphrase] D. V. 5. A Periploca▪ Sh. I. 7. A. Perish, Decay] p. Destruction] Peristai motion. Mo. III. 1. A. Peritonaeum, [Membrane of the belly] Perjury, [Swearing a Lie] Periwig, [Factitious hair (aggr.] Periwinkle. Shrub. HS. VIII. 10. Fish. Ex. VII. 6. A. Perk, [Proudly lift himself] Perl. Gem. St. III. 2. Mother of— [Shell of the adj. a. Perl-oyster] —in the ey, [Perl (like) spot in the ey] Permanent, [adj. Sp. I. 6.] Permit. [Not-forbid] [Not-hinder] [Yielding] TA. IV. 1. [a. Licence] Permutatin, [Change] Pernicious, [adj. . Destruction] Pernoctation [a. Night] Peroraion, [Conclusion of ora∣tion] Perpendicular, [Direct] Perpetrate. [Doe] [Perform] Perpetual. Sp. I. 8. Perpetuity]   Perplex, [Tangle] —ity. [Tangling (apt.) difficulty] [Anxiety] Perqui∣site, Necessary] Expedient] —s, [adj. Event profits] Perry, [Wine of Pears] Perriwig, [Factitious hair (aggr.] Persecute. [Pursue] [Afflict] For Religion. RE. III. 4. O. Perseverance, [Constancy] Persevere, [a. Constancy] Persian shell. Ex. VII. 7. A. Persist, [a. Constancy] Duration] Persly, vid. Parsly. Person. T. I. 4. A. —Iudicial. RJ. I. —Military. RM. III. Degrees of— RC. I. Personable, [Figured (perf.] Personage, Person] (manner] Personal presence. Sp. II. 1. Personate, [Imitate as Player] Perspective, [Seeing (art.] Perspicacity, [Sagacity] Perspicuity, [Plainness] Perspiration, [Transpiration] Persuade. RO. V. 2. Persuasion. AS. III. 6. A. Pert. Sprightly] Vigorous] (Confident] Pertein, vid. Pertinence. Pertinacy. Ha. IV. 7. E. Pertinence. TM. IV. 5. Perturbation. Molesting sp. by affecti∣on (augm.) Confusion sp. by affecti∣on (augm.) Perverseness. NP. IV. 1. O. Pervert. [Seduce] [Wrest] Pervicacy. [Pertinacy] Peruse, Through- consider] All- consider] Perwinkle, vid. Periwinkle. Pesant, Rustic (person] Villain] Pest, [Plague] Pester, [Molest] sp. (freq.] Pestife∣rous, adj. a. Plague] Hurtful (augm.] Pestilence, [Plague] S. II. 3. A. Pestle, [Brying (instr.) Cylin∣drical (fig.] —of Pork, [Thigh—] Pet, [Anger (imp.] Petard, [Ordnance (like) ma∣chin for breaking gate] St. Peters fish, [Doree] Fi. IV. 12. St. Peter's wort. HS. V. 7. A. Petition [Entreaty] Religious. RE. IV. 2. A. Petrifie, [a. Stone (make] Petronel, [Horseman's gun] Petty, Little] Sorry] Petticoat, [Loose thigh (vest] Pettifogger, [Lawyer (corr.] Pettishness, [Moroseness] Petulance, [Impudent wanton∣ness] Pew, [About-sepimented seat] Pewter. Met. II. 2. Phantasy, [Fancy] Phantasm, [Seeming (thing) to fancy (corr.] Phantastic, adj. a. Fancy (corr.] Conceited] Pharmaceutical operation. O. VI. A Phenicopter. Bi. VIII. 2. Phenix.   Phesant. Bi. II. 3. Phyllyrea. Sh. III. 3. Philologer. RC. II. 4. Philosopher. RC. I. 1. A. Philtre, [adj. a. Love (make] medicin] Phlebotomy. Mo. IV. 6. Phlegm. PG. I. 6. Pholas. Ex. VIII. 8. Phrase, Sentence (manner] Instead-word] Phrenetic, [adj. Frenzy] Phylactery, [Written (lam.) to be worn] Physic, [adj. a Physician (thing] Physician. RC. II. 3. Physiognomy. [Face (manner] [Wizarding by inspection of the face.] Physis. Fi. V. 11. Py. Provision. Pr. I. 4. A. Bird. Mag— Bi. I. 8. Sea— [Sea-mew] Bi. VII. 8. Piacular, [That ought to be ex∣piated by sacrifice] Piazza, [About-housed Area.] Pibble. St. I. 4. Pick. [Peck] [Pluck] [Open] —a lock. [Discover] —out. —a secret. [Chuse] —out, [a. Election] [Gather] —up. [Gain] —out of one, [Gain from one] —a quarrel, [Obtain (end) an occasion of q.] —a thank, [Obtain (end) thanks [sp. by accusing] [Pilfer] —Pocket, [a. Theft out of p.] —Purse, [a. Theft out of p.] [Cleanse] — a boe one's ear one's teeth, [Cleanse b.] — a boe one's ear one's teeth, [Cleanse e] — a boe one's ear one's teeth, [Cleanse t]
Pickax, [adj. a. Pecking ham∣mer] Picked, [adj. p. Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Pickeer, [a. Skirmish] Pickerel, [Pike (dim.] Pickeroon, [adj. a. Bootying ship.] Pickle, [adj, a. Pickling (things] [State (corr.] Pickling. Pr. III. 9. Pickrel, [Pike (dim] Picture. Pr. VI. 8. Pied, [Variegated] Pierce. Into— ition] thrusting] [Boring] —a vessel, [Broach a v.] —ing pain, Pricking] Smarting] —er, [Boring (instr.] Piety. to God, [Religion (hab.] to Parents, [Gratitude] Pig, [Hog (young] Be. II. 4. Ginny— Be III. 6. A. —of lead, [Cast (thing) of Lead.] Pigeon. Bi. III. 1. Piggin, [Tub (dim.] Pike. [Spear] RM. V. 3. Fish. Fi. IX. 1. Pilchard Fi. III. 10. A. Pile. [Post] [Heap] [Emroid] —wort. HF. IX. 4. A. Pilfer, [a. Theft (dim.] Pilgrim, [Vow'd traveller for Religion.] Pill. a— [Ball (dim.] [Rinde] to— Strip, rinde] clothe] [Un-a. rinde] clothe] [Rob] Pillage. [Robbery] [Booty] Pillar. Po. III. 5. Pillaster, [Pillar (dim.] Pillion, [Woman's riding cushi∣on] Pillory, [Imprisoning (jug.) for head and hands] Pillow, [Cushion for the head] —beer, [Case of Pillow] Pilot. RN. V. 4. A. Pimpernel. HS. V. 10. A. Pimple, [Pustule] S. III. 1. Pin. Figure. —without head. Mag. IV. 1. —with head. Mag. VI. 2. A. —fish. Fi. VI. 2. A. —and web, [Suffusion in the ey.] —fold, [Imprisoning (sep.) for beasts.] to— Bolt] Shut] —a house, [Under-fill the foundation] Pincer, [adj. Pinching (jug.] Pinch. [a▪ Compression] as pain, [Twitch] [a. Narrow (make] —penny, [Penurious (per∣son] [a. Anxiety] Pine. Tr. V. 4. A. —apple, [Nut of the Pine∣tree] to— [a. Decaying] Lean (augm.] Pink. Flower. HS. V. 1. A. [Ship (dim.] to—Pr. III. 5. —eyed, [Narrow ey] Pinna. Ex. VIII. 7. Pinnace, [Ship (dim.] Pinnacle, [Turret for orna∣ment] Pinnion. Figure. Mag. V. 5. A. —of wing, [Elbow—] to— [a. Bonds for the arms] Pinte.   Pioneer. RM. III. 8. Piony. HS. I. 1. Pious, [adj. Piety] Pip. [Point] [Disease] Pipe. [Tube] Square. Mag. V. 9. Round. Mag. V. 9. A. [Barrel] Measure. Wind— PG. VI. 1. A. —tree. Sh. IV. 1. White— Sh. V. 3. A. to— [a. Music with pipe] Acuteness] Piper, [Tub-fish] Fi. IV. 5. Pipkin, [Earthen (dim.) adj. boiling (vess.] Pippin.   Pique, Malignity sp. secret] Hatred sp. secret] Pirate, [adj. Sea-robber.] Pisces, [Last of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.] Piscis triangularis. Fi. VIII. 3. —Cornutus. Fi. VIII. 3. A. Pish, [Int. of Contempt] Aversation] Pismire, [Ant] Ex. IV. 5. Pissing. Mo. IV. 8. Pistach. Tr. IV. 2. Pistol. [adj. Hand-gun (dim.] Money. Pit, [Dent] Arm— [Concave (part) under the arm] —fall, [Concave (place) in the earth for catching birds] Pitch. [Height] —of a hill, [Obliquity (inc.)—] [Tar boyled to a consi∣stence] to— [Smear with Pitch] —Camp, Place c.] —Net, Direct n.] —Tens, Fix t.] —a floor, [a. Floor with stones] Pitcher, [Earthen pot.] Pitchfork, [Fork] Piteous, vid. Pittiful. Pith. PP. I. 5. A. Pithy. [adj. Pith] Importance] Pittance, Part (dim.] Proportion (dim.] Pittty. AS. IV. 7. O. Pittiful, [adj. a. Pitty (apt.] p. Pitty (apt.] Pittiless. [Not-adj. a. Pitty] [Cruel] Pituitous, [adj. Phlegm.] Pizzle, [Genital (male] Placable, [Un-adj. p. anger (apt.] Placard, Patent] Edict] Place. Proper. Sp. II. [Situation] —Military. RM. VI. [House (augment.] [Order] [Dignity] [Degree] RC. I. [Office] [Stead] to— a. Place] Put] chuse in ones's— [a. Substitute (make] Successor (make] give— Yield Superiority (sign] Take Superiority (sign] take— Yield Superiority (sign] Take Superiority (sign] Placid, [Meek] Plagiary. [Stealer of Men] Writings] Plague. [Pestilence] S. II. 3 A. [Adversity (augm.] to— Afflict] Punish] Play. op. to Work. O. A. —fellow, [Companion in play.] —with, [Together-play] Imitate] a. Action] —fast and loose, [a. Light∣ness.]
— the Coward, [a. C. the Fool, [a. F. the Hypocrite, [a. H. the Truant, [a. T. the Wanton, [a. W. —er. RC. II. 9. Stage— [adj. p. Player (thing] a. Recreation] Mo. V. a. Game] Mo. V. A. —at a game, [a. Game] —at Dice, &c. [a. Dice, &c.] —at single Rapier, &c. [a. Fence at s. &c.] —upon an instrument, [a. Mu∣sic.] —upon a man, [a. Mock a man.] —upon with guns, [a. Gun] Plaice. Fi. VII. 4. Plain. Plain. Mag. III. 4. Even.] Q. VI. 2. Champain. W. III. 1. Carpenter's— [adj. a. Even (instr.] Not-obscure. D. III. 9. Manifest] TA. I. 9. Simple] Mean] Homely] Sincere] Frank] Plaint, [Complaint] Plaintiff. RJ. I. 4. Plais. Fi. VII. 4. Plaister, vid. Plaster. Plait, vid. Pleit. Plancher, [Room for fatting of Boar] Plane. Tr. VI. 10. A. [adj. a. Even (instr.] Planet. W. II. 3. —struck. Planisphere, [Picture of sphere in plain] Plank, [Thick adj. wood (la∣min] to—[a. Floor with wood (la∣min] Plant. W. V. 2. to— Q. III. 6. —guns, [Place guns on bank] —a Country, [a. Colony] —of foot, [Bottom—] Plaintain. Herb. HL. VII. 2. Sea— HL. VII. 4. Tree. Tr. I. 9. Plantation. [Planting] [Colony] RC. III. 1. A. Plash, [Spread boughs] —of water, [Lake (dim.] —y, [adj. Lake dim.] Plaster. Medecin. Pr. VI. 4. A. Morter. El. IV. 5. A. —er, [adj. Morter (mech.] Plastic, [Figuring (art.] sp. by Carving] Moulding] Plat, vid. Pleit. Plate. [Lamin] sp. Metall (lam.] [Vessel] sp. of Silver or Gold] [Shallow dish] Platform. Exemplar] Description by lines] Sconce] Platter, [Shallow dish (augm.] Plaudite Praise (voice] Joy (voice] Plausible, [adj. p. Praise (apt] Plea, RJ. II. 3. A. Pleader. RJ. I. 7. Pleasant. T. IV. 2. [adj. a. Delectation (apt.] [adj. Mirth] [adj. Urbanity] Pleasing. [Delectation] [Appeasing] Pleasure. Ha. II. 3. [Delectation] [Will] at one's— [According to ones will] to—one, [a. Benefactor] Compla∣cence] Plebeian, [adj. People (kinde] Pledge, [Pawn] to—one, [Answer in drink∣ing] Pleit Fold in wrinkles] Weave with the fingers] Plenary, Full] Totall] Perfect] Plenipotentiary, [Perfectly au∣thorized] Plenty, [Abundance] Pleonasm, [Abounding (manner) of sentence] Plethory. S. I. 3. Pleurisie. S. V. 6. Ply, [a. Diligence] Operation] Pliable [adj. Limberness] a. Obedience (apt.] p. Persuasion (apt.] Pliant, [adj. Limberness] a. Obedience (apt.] p. Persuasion (apt.] Plight, [Oblige] [State] in good— [adj. Vigour] Plot. Area] Description by lines] [Design] Plover. green— Bi. VII. 2. grey— Bi. VII. 2. A. Plow, [adj. Plowing (jug.] —ing. O. III. 1. A. Pluck, Pull] Draw] —a Bird, [Un a. feather] Sheeps— [Sh. PG. VI.] Plug, (Wooden adj. stopping (thing] Plum. PP. III. 2. —tree. Tr. II. 2. A. Plumb, [Perpendicular] —rule, Perpendicu∣larness mea¦su∣ring (instr.] Transversness mea¦su∣ring (instr.] Plume, [Feather] PP. V. 1. [Feathers (aggr.) for orna∣ment] to— Un- a. Feather] a. Order (perf.) the feathers] Plummer, [adj. Lead (mech.] Plummet, [Weight (dim.] Carpenter's— [Weight for measuring perpendicular∣ness.] Plump. [Fat] [Convex (perf.) with fat∣ness] Plunder, [Booty] Plunge, Dive (make] Difficulty (imp.] Plural, [adj. Plurality] —ity. TM. III. 2. O. Pluff, [Silk adj. p. superficies with long tuft] Poche. [Hunt (corr.] —egg, [a. Consistence by boiling] sp. unshelled] Pock. Small— S. II. 4. —hole, [Concave Pox (sign] French— S. II. 6. —wood [Guaiacum] Tr. VII. 2. Pocket, [adj. Garment (bag] Pod, [Cod] PP. III. 5. A. Poem, [adj. p. Poet (thing] Poet. RC. II. 4. A. Poetry, [adj. Poet (art.] Poinard, [adj. Pricking (apt.) sword (dim.] Point. Title. Mag. I. 1. —blank, [Transverse] Full— [Period] [Instant] —of death. [Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. —in the compass, [A two and thirtieth part of the cir∣cle.] —in Tables, [A four and twentieth part of the Area.] —of land, [Promontory] [Cord (dim.] [Part] in every— it is a—of [State] 'tis come to that— [Proposition] [Case] [Question] —in controversie.
to— [a. Point] [Shew with finger] [Distinguish with Period] Poise. [Try the gravity] [Weigh equally] Poisoning. RJ. V. 5. A. Poke, [Bag] Pole, vid. Poll. [Staff (augm.] —ax, [Cut∣ting Club] Hammer] —of Cart. Po. V. 5. A. —of a ship. RN. III. 3. A. —of a globe. Mag. II. 1. A. Measure. Mea. I. 5. Fish. Fi. VII. 2. Polecat. Be. IV. 5. Polemic [adj. RM.] Disputation] Policy. [Wisdom] [Government] Civil— [adj. RC. (art.] —of assurance, [Bond against loss] Polipus. Ex. IX. 1. sweet—Ex. IX. 1. A. Polish. [a. Smooth] [Brighten] Polite, Beautiful] Adorn'd] Political Relation▪ RC. Poll, vid. Pole. [Hinder part of the neck] by the— [adv. Persons (segr.] to— [Cut (perf.) the hair] [a. Tax] Oppress] Impoverish by taxes] Pollard. [Deer (male) adj. pret. let go his horns] [Lopped tree] Pollute, [Defile] Poltron, [Coward] Polygamy, [Having many wives] Polygon, [Having many angles] Polymountain. HF. VI. 6. Polypody. HL. I. 6. Polysyllable, [Having many syl∣lables] Poman∣der, Sphear of per∣fumes] Apple (like] of per∣fumes] Pomecitron, [Apple of the Ci∣tron-tree] Pomegranat. —tree. Tr. I 6. Pomel, [adj. Sphear (part] to—[Bear] Pomp, [Solemnity] Pompholyx. Met. IV. 2. A. Pompion. HS. VII. 1. Pompous∣ness, Solemnity (augm.] Magnificence] Pond, [Lake. W. IV. 7. A. (dim.] —weed. HL. VII. 8. narrow leaved— HF. VIII. 6. A. Fish— Po. I. 6. Ponder. [Deliberate] [Meditate] [Consider] Ponderousness, [Heaviness] Poniard, vid. Poinard] Pontage, [Tax for bridge] Pontificial. [adj. Bishop] Primate] Pool. W. IV. 7. A. Poop, [Hinder part of ship] Poor. [adj. Poverty] Needy, [adj. wanting] [Lean] [Little] [Sorry] [adj. p. Pitty (apt.] —ness, [Poverty] Pop, Bladder] Sound of breaking of bladder] —gun, [Gun (like) Tube] Pope. [Father] [Bishop] sp. of Rome] Popinjay, [Parrot] Poplar black— Tr. VI. 8. white— Tr. VI. 8. A. Poppet, [Statue (dim.] Poppy. HS. VI. 4. bastard— HS. VI. 4. A. horned— HS. IV. 10. Populace, [People (kind] Popular. [adj. People] [Beloved by the people] Populous, [adj. p. People (aug.] Porcellane. Herb. HL. VIII. 3. Vessel. Porch, [adj. Door (room.] Porcupine. Be. III 5. Pore. Mag. VI. 1. —blind. to— [Look near] fixedly] Pork, [Hog's flesh] Porker, [Young hog] Porphyry, [Reddish Marble] Porpois. Fi. I. 1. A. Porrage, vid. Pottage. Porringer, vid. Pottinger. Port. [Haven] [Gate] —hole. RN. II. 7. [adj. out-side Dignity] Portable, [adj. p. Carry (pot.] (apt.] Portage, [Payment for carri∣age] Portal, [Door (room] Portcullis. RM. VI. 8. A. Portentous, [Fore-signing some evil (augm.] Porter, [adj. Door (Off.] [Bearer] Porthole. RN. II. 7. Portion. [Part] [adj. Proportion (part] Wife's— [W. part of the Inhe∣ritance] Portmantean, [adj. Riding-bag] Portray, a. Description] a. Picture] Portsale, [Public sale] Pose. [Try] sp. by questions Non-plus. D. VI. 8. Posie, Flowers (aggr.] Sentence upon-written] Position. Proposition] Affirmation] Site] Posture] Positive. T. III. 3. Positure, [Posture] Posnet, [Standing pot with a handle] Possess, Have] Hold] a. Possession] —ion. Po. Prescription, [Custom of possession] take— (Possess (inc.] Posset, [Broth of coagulated milk] Possibility. T. IV. 4. Post. [Wooden column] [Swift, Carrier] Messenger] ride— [Ride on divers horses successively] to— [adv. Swiftness (ition.] sp. Riding] [Publish by writing on co∣lumn] —accounts [Write the summes in another page] book] Post-date, [Date after pret. writing] Posteriority, [Succeeding (abstr.] Posterity, [Descendents (aggr.] RO. I. 1. O. Postern, [adj. Hinder-part (door] Posthumous, [Born after Father's death] Postil, [adj. p. Preaching (thing] Postilion, [Before-riding (per∣son] Postpone, [Less esteem] Postscript, After- written (thing] Under- written (thing] Postulation, [Demand] Posture. AC. VI. A. Pot. Pr. V. 5. —companions, [adj. a. Drun∣kenness c.] —hangers, [adj. a. Hanging (jug.) for pot.] —herb, [H. for broth] —lid, [adj. Covering (thing) for pot.]
—sherd, [Fragment of earthen (vess.] Potable, [adj. p. Drink (apt.] Potato. HS. IX. 3·. Potent, [adj. Power] Potentate, Powerful (person] Prince] Potential, T. III. 5. O. Potgun. [Gun (like) Tube] Potion, [Potable (thing] sp. Medicinal] Potsherd, [Fragment of earthen (vess.] Pottage, [Broth] Potter, [adj. O. IV. A. (mech.] Pottinger, [Dish for broth] Pottle, [Two quarts] Potulent, [adj. p. Drink (apt.] Pouch. [Bag (dim.] [Stomach]. o— [Swallow] Pouder. TM. VI. 4. A. gun— RM. V. 7. A. to— [a. Pouder (make] Sprinkle. Pr. III. 7. A. sp. with salt] Poverty. Ha. II. 2. O. Poult, [Grouse] Poultice, [Soft plaster] Poultry, [Cock Bi. II. 1. (kinde] Pounce, [Claw of bird] to— [Pink] Pound. Weight. Mea. III. 5. Money. Mea. IV. 5. Pinfold, [Imprisoning (sep.) for beasts.] to— [Imprison] [Bray with Cylinder] Mo. VI. . Poun∣dage, Tax adv. Pound (segr.] Payment adv. Pound (segr.] Pourcontrel. Ex. IX. 1. Pouring. O. II 8. Pourtraicture, [Picture] Pout, [Angry mouth (manner] to— AC. IV. 2. O. Eel— Fi. VI. 6. A. [Heathcock] Bi. II. 5. Power. Natural— NP. Might] Ha. II. 6. Authority] —full, [adj. a. Power] in one's— [adj. p. Power] Pox. French— S. II. 6. Small— S. II. 4. Practice. RC. II. A. —Law RC. II. A. L.] —Physic RC. II. A. P.] Action] Endeavour] Essay] Exercise] —ed, [Expert] Pragmaticalness, [Diligent (corr.] Pray. RE. IV. 1. Prayer, [adj. RE. IV. 1. (thing] Praise. RO. V. 8. Prance, Go proudly] Trot] Prank. [Extraordinary action] to— [a. Ornate (make] Prate, [a. Loquacity] Pratic, [Licence to trade] Prattle, [a. Loquacity] Pravity, [Evil (abstr.] Prawn, [Shrimp] Ex. VI. 4. Preach. RE. IV. 4. Preamble, [Prologue] Prebendary, [As∣sessor of Cathedral Collegiate Church] Precaution, [Warning] Precedence. Sp, I. 2. E. Precedent. [Exemplar] [Preceding] Precellence, [Excellence] Precept, [Command] Precinct, [Authority (place] Precious, [adj. Price (augm.] —stone, [Gem] Precipice, [Steep (place] Precipitate. Chymic. O. VI. 3. A. Capital punishment. RJ. V. 3. A. [Hast (exc.] [a. Rashness] Precise. Perfect (augm.] Regular (augm.] [Scrupulous] Precocity, [Soon (exc.) Ripe∣ness. Precognition, [Before-know∣ing] Precontract, [Before-contract] Predatory, [adj. a. Booty] Predecessor, [adj. Preceding (person] Predestinate, [Before determine] appoint] Predicable, [adj. p. Predicate (apt.] Predicament. TA. Predicate, D. II. 5. A. Predication, [a. Predicate] Prediction, Before-telling] Prophecy] Predominant, More power∣ful] adj. a. Victory] Pre-election. [Rather-chusing] Pre-eminence. SuperIority] Excellence] Dignity] Privilege] Preemp∣tion, Before-buying.] First-buying.] Preexistence, [Before-actual∣ness] Preface, [Prologue] Prefect, [adj. Autho∣rity Office (person] —ure, Authority] Office] Prefer. More- esteem] Before- chuse] —person, [adj. a. Dignity] Power] —bill, [adj. a. Bill] Prefigure, [Before adj. a. type] Prefix, [Before- adj. a. Fasten] Appoint] Pregnant, Full] Important] Prey, [Booty] Prejudice, [Before-opinion (corr.] —ial, Hurtful] Impedient] Prejudicate, [Before- a. Sentence] Condemn] Preke, [Pourcontrel] Ex. IX. 1. Prelate, [Bishop] RE. II. 4. A. Prelude, [adj. Preparation play] Premeditate, [Before-medi∣tate] Premise, [Before- put] suppose] Premonish, [Before-warn] Premunire, [Forfeiture of goods and liberty] Prentice [Disciple (merc.] (mech.] Preoccupation, [Before-possess] Preordain, [Before-ordain] Prepare. TA. III. 2. —food. Pr. III. Preponderate, [More-weigh] Preposition. D. II. 8. Preposterous, [Against-order'd] Prepuce, [Skin to be cut off in Circumcision] Prerogative. RC. IV. 7. Presage, [Before-sign] Presbyter. RE. II. 5. A. Prescience, [Before-knowing] Prescribe. [Before-appoint] —by Law, [a. Law] —by Custom, [a. Right (make) by pret. custom] Presence. —in place. Sp. II. 1. —chamber, [Room for King's presence] —in time. Sp. I. 1. [Sprightliness] Present, [adj. Presence] to— [Represent] [Accuse] a— [Gift] Prn∣tation Right of gi∣ving Giving of right Priest's (place] Presently adv. Present] adv. Future (dim.] Preserv, Keep] Defend] Condite] Action of God. AS. I. 4.
Preservative, [adj. a. Preserve (thing) President. [Prefect] [Example] Press. Thrusting] a. Compression] —to death. RJ. V. 3. Printer's— [adj. a. Printing (jug.] Wine— [adj. Wine (jug] [a. Dense Fast Hard Heavy make] [a. Necessity] Coaction] —souldiers, [a. Souldier (make) by coaction] [a. Persuade Intreat (augm.] a— Throng, [Dense Multitude] Aggre∣gate] —for Apparel Books [Box—] Pressure, Pressing] Necessity] Affliction] Prest, [Ready] Prestigiator. RC. II. 9. A. Presume. [a. Boldness] Confidence] [a. Hope (corr.] Presumption. [Presuming] [Strong argument] sp, Conjectural] Presumptuousness. [Hope (corr.] [Rashness] Irreverence] Arrogance] Presuppose, [Before-suppose] Pretence. Seeming cause] Feigned cause] Pretend. [Seem (make] [Dissemble] Preterition, [Omission] Pretermit, [Omit] Pretext. Seeming cause] Feigned cause] Pretty. [Handsom (dim.] [adj. Mediocrity] Prevail. [a. Superiour] Victory] [Obtain] Prevarication. [Betraying by pleading] [Deceit∣ful, Action] Speech] Prevent. TA. III. 9. Previous, [adj. Preceding] Preparation] Pry, See (end] a. Spy] Priapism. Disease. Price. RC. V. 7. Prick. [Point]. Mark [adj. p. Object (thing] Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Prickle, [Thorn] PP. I. 3. A. —ing. Mo. VI. 7. A. —pain. AC. II. 7. A. —forward, [a. Impul∣sive] —on, [a. Impul∣sive] —in, [a. Plant] up, [a. Direct] —wood. Sh. I. 4. A. Pricket, [Buck. Be. II. 6. of the second year.] Prickle, [Thorn] PP. I. 3. A. Pride. Man. V. 2. D. Priest. Iewish— RE. II. 2. Christian— RE. II. 5. Primary, [Chief] Primate. RE. II. 4. Prime, First] Chief] Primitive. TM. IV. 1. Primogeniture, [First birth (abstr.] Primrose. HS. VIII. 1. Prince. RC. I. 2. A. [King's Son] —'s feather. HF. I. 15. A. —'s wood. Tr. VII. 6. A. Principal. [Chief] [Governour] [Money demised] disbursed] —ness. TM. IV. 4. Principality. [Government (place] Principle. [Cause] [Rule] [Element] Print. [Mark] [Impression] —ing. AC. III. 7. A. Prior, [Abby (Off.] Priority, [Preceding (abstr.] Prism. Mag. III. 6. O. Prison, [Imprisonment (place] Prisoner. Reputed Criminal. RJ. I. 3. O. [adj. p. Imprison (person] Pristin, Former] Old] Privado, [Friend (augm.] Private. op, to Public, [adj. TM. V. 5. O. [Concealed] —man, [Not-magistrate] Privateer, [Private man of war.] Privation, [a. Privative] Privative. T. III. 3. O. Privet. Sh. II. 11. Ever-green— Sh. III. 3. A. Mock— Sh. III. 3. Privy. [Knowing] [Accessory] [Hidden] [Secret] —parts. PG. VI. . Jakes, [Dunging (room] Privilege. RC. IV. 7. A. —ed place, [p. Immunity (place] Privities. PG. VI. 8. Prize. [Booty] [Reward of victory] Fighting sp. for wager] Gaming sp. for wager] to— [a. Price] Value] [Esteem] Probable, [adj. Opinion Probation (apt.] Probation. D. VI. 6. —er, [adj. p. Essaying (per∣son] Probe, [Depth measure (pin] Problem, Proposi∣tion to be dis∣puted] Question to be dis∣puted] Proboscis, [Trunk] PP. V. 4. A. Proceed. TA. VI. 2. -from, [adj. p. Cause Birth Being from] -ings, [Series of actions.] -Iudicial. RJ. II. the— Gain] Revenue] Process. [a. Proceeding] [Series] —of a bone, [Protuberant (part] —of time, [After some much time] —in law, [Citation] sp. written] Procession. [Proceeding] [Solemn about-walking] Proclaim, [Publish] sp. solemn∣ly] Proclama∣tion Publishing] Edict] Proclivity, [Inclinableness] Procra∣stinate Delay sp. till next day.] Protract sp. till next day.] Procreate, [Generate] Proctor. [Substitute] [Advocate] Procuration. [adj. Proctor (make] sp. writing] [Procuring] Procure. [Cause] [Furnish] [Obtain] Prodigality. Man. III. 1. E.
Pro∣digy, Preter-natural (thing] Extraordinary (thing] sp. before-signing a. ad∣versity] Prodigious. [adj. Prodigy] [Great (augm.] Produce. [Out-take] sp. from conceal∣ing (place.] [a. Cause] —fruit, [a. Fruit] —by Multiplication, [a. Pro∣duct] [Known (make] Extend] Long (make] Continue] Product. TM. VI. 8. O. Proem, [Prologue] Profane. Irreligious, [adj. RE. IV. D.] [Not-consecrated] to—, RE. V. 1. O. Profess [a. Profession] —ion [Acknowledgment] Calling. RC. II. Proffer, [Offer] Proficient, [adj. Profit] Profit. [adj. Profitable (thing] [Gain] [Revenue] —able. T. IV. 1. to— [a. Profit] —in learning, [Increase—] Profligate. [Driven away] [Vicious (augm.] Profound. [Deep] [Obscure] Profundity. [Depth] [Obscureness] Profuse, Prodigal] Squandering] Progeny, [Descen∣dents (kinde] (aggr.] Progenitor. RO. I. 1. Prognosticate. [Before- know] tell] Progress. Proceeding] Journey] [Increase] —ion. [Proceeding] —of Animals. Mo. I. Continuing] Joyning] Prohibit. [Forbid] [Hinder] Projecting. [Designing] [Contriving] Projection. —Chymic, [a. Factitious Gold] —of sphere, [Repressing it up∣on a Plain] Prolation, [Articulation] Prole, [Wander seeking] Prolifical, [Fruitful] Prolix, [Long (augm.] [Ample] Prolocutor, [adj. Speaking (Off.] sp. First Chief Speaker] Prologue. D. V. 8. Prolong. [Lengthen] [Delay] Prominent, [Protuberant] Promiscu∣ous, Mixed] Confused] Promise. RO. V. 6. —to God, [Vow] —in contract. RO. VI. 3. —for another, [Stipulate] Espouse. RO. II. 3. Promontory, W. III. 4. Promooter, [adj. Accusing (Off.] Promote. [a. Help] [a. Dignity] Prompt. [adj. Dispatch] Alacrity] [adj. p. Disciple (apt.] [adj. Sagacity] to— [Dictate secretly] Promptuary, [adj. Laying-up (place] Promulgate, [Publish] Prone, [adj. p. Disposition] Inclination] Prong, [adj. Pricking (apt.) Fork] Pronoun. D. II. 7. Pronounce, [v. Articulate] Proof. [Probation] [Essaying] of— [adj. p. Essaying] in— [Fat] Prove. Probation] Confirmation] [Essay] [Become] Prop. Po. III. 7. Propagate, [v. Multitude (kind] Propensity, Alacrity] Inclination (apt.] Proper. op. to Common. [adj. TM. IV. 6.] op. to Figurate [adj. D. III. 6. [Tall] Property. [Proper (thing] [Propriety] Prophane. Irreligious. [adj. RE. IV. D.] [Not-consecrated] to— RE. V. 1. O. Prophesie, [a. Prophet] Prophet. RE. II. 1. A. Propinquity, [Nearness] Propitiation, Un-enemy] Un-guilty] Un-anger] sp. by Sacrifice] Propitious, [adj. Favour] Proportion. Mea. A. —Arithmetical, [Equality of differences] well—ed, [Figured (perf-] Propose. [a. Proposition] [Offer] Proposition. D. V. 1. Propound, vid. Propose. Proprietary, [Proper owner] Propriety. RC. IV. 5. Prorogue, [a. Stay till another time] Proscarab. Ex. I. 6. Proscribe, [Pub∣lish Command Permission to kill] Prose. D. III. 4. Prosecute. AS. IV. 6. —judicially, [Continue adj. a. Accuser] Proselyte, [Convert] Prosodia, [Measuring (art) of quantities of syllables] Prospect, [adj. p. See (pot.] (Place] (Area] —ive glass, [Glass (instr.) for seeing remote (things] Prosperity. Ha. I. 2. Prostitute, [adj. p. object (make) adv. common] sp. to a. Unchastness] a— [Commona. unchast (fem] Prostrate, [Lying] AC. VI. 7. O. Prosyllogism, [Preceding Syllo∣gism.] Protect. Man. VI. 4. [Conservation] [Defending] Protest. RC. VI. 3. A. —against. RJ. II. 8. Protono∣tary, First notary] Chief notary] Proto∣type, First type.] Chief type.] Protract. TA. III. 5. O. Protuberance. Mag. IV. 3. Proud, [adj. Pride] —bitch, [adj. Coition (apt) b.] Prove, vid. Proove. Provender, [Corn for horses] Proverb, [Adage] Provide. [a. Providence] [Furnish] -for, [a. Heedfulness against] —ed that, Conditionally that.] If.] Providence. —of God. AS. I. 2. —of Man. Man. III. 2. Provident, [adj. a. Providence] Province. RC. III. 3. —Eccesiastical, [Primate's (place] Provincial, [adj. Province]
a— [Chief (Off.) of a Pro∣vince] Provision. [a. Providence] Necessaries. Pr. Proviso, [adv. Condition] Provoke. [a. Cause] Impulsive] [Angry (make] Challenge. RM. I. 2. Provost, [adj. Authority Office (person] Prow, [Fore-part of a ship] Prowess, [a. Fortitude] Proxy, [Substituted (person] Proximity, [Nearness] Prudence, [Wisdom.] Prune. [Plum] to— O. III. 8. Prunel.   Psalm. RE. IV. 3. A. Psalter, [Book of Psalms] Ptisan, [Broth of Barley] sp. Medicinal.] Publican, [adj. Tax (Off.] Publicness. TM. V. 5. Publish, [a. Publicness (make] Pucker, [Un- a. Evenness by shrinking] Puck-fist, [Fuzball] HL. I. 2. A. Pudding. Pr. I. 2. A. —grass, [Penny-royal] Puddle, [Stagnum] W. IV. 7. A. [Durty water] to— [a. Durty (make] Puet, [Lapwing] Bi. VII. 1. Puff. Wind (imp.] Breath (imp.] [Swell] sp. with wind] S. I. 5. A. —up, [a. Proud (make] Puffin. Bi. IX. 6. Pug, [Monkey] Puissance, [Power] Puke, [Vomit.] Pulchritude, [Beauty] Pule, [Acute grief (voice] Pull. O. I. 4. sp. looking toward the object.] sp. without suc∣cess] —bird, [Un- a. feather b.] —down, Diminish] Weaken] —in pieces, [Tear into frag∣ments] Pullein, [Cock Bi. II. 1. (kinde] (aggr.] Pullet, [Young hen] Pully, [adj. O. I. 3. (jug.] Pullulate, [Sprout (inc.] Pulp.   Pulpit, [Preaching (place] Pulse. Motion. Mo. III. 1. [Legumen] oyly purging— HS. VII. 10. A. Pulverize, [a. Powder (make] Pumice. St. I. 7. Pump. Po. VI. 3. A. Shoe, [limber-bottom'd adj. foot (vest.] to—out, [Know (end) by questioning] Pumpion.   Punaise, [Wall-louse] Ex. II. 6. A. Punch, [Thrust (imp.] [adj. p. Hole (make) by stri∣king] [Drink of Brandy and Wa∣ter] Punctilio, [Point (dim.] Punctual, [Perfect] Pungent, [Pricking] Puny, New] sp. Learner] Unexpert] Punishment. Ha. I. O. —Capital. RJ. V. —not Capital. RJ. VI. Punk, [adj. Unchast (fem.] Pupil. RO. III. 4. O. Puppet, [Image (dim.) of man] Puppy, [Dog. Be. III, 1. (young] Purblind, [Not-adj. a. See (pot.) remote (things] Purchase, [Buy] Pure. [Simple] [Clean] —ness. TM. V. 7. [Holy] Purgation. Mo. IV. vid. Purge. Purgatory, [Punishment (place) for purging from sin] Purge. Evacuation. Mo. IV. [Dunging] sp. by Physic] [Cleanse] [Pure (make] Expiating [Unguilty (make] [Absolving] —upon oath, [Swear (make) innocence] a— [a. Dunging medecin.] Purifie, [a. Pure (make] Purity, vid. Pureness. Purle. of lace. Pr. IV. 5. A. [Mixture of drinks] sp. with wormwood.] Purloin, [a. Theft] Purlue, [Margin of Forrest] Purple. Fish. Fi. Ex. VII. 2. A. Colour. Q. II. 4. —s, [adj. a. Purple fever] Purport, [Meaning] Purpose. Intention. AS. IV. 3. [Design] full— [Resolution] beside the— [Impertinent] of— [adv. Design] on— [adv. Considerate] to the— [adv. Congruous] Pertinent] Perfect] to no— [adv. Frustration] Frivolous] to what— [For what end] Purpura. Ex. VII. 2. A. Purse, [Bag for money] —er. RN. V. 5. A. —net, [Net bag (like] Shepherd's— Pursevant. RJ. I. 6. Pursy, Asthmatical] Fat (corr.] Purslane. HL. VIII. 3. —tree, [Halimus] Sh. VI. 6. Pursue, [Follow] —ing. RM. II. 3. E. Purvey, [Provide] Purulent, [Mattery] Push. Tumor (dim. S. III. 1. to— [Thrust (imp.] Pusillanimity. Man. III. 8. D. Puss, [Cat] Pustule. S. III. 1. Put. Proper. TA. I. 1. a. Place] [a. Cause] —away, [Abdicate] —back, [Retire (make] —by, [a. Frustration] —down, [Un-a. Power] Authority] Office] —forth. Publish] Pllulate] Un-a. Authority] Power] Office] —in, [a. Inside] —bail, [a. Stipulation] —a box, [Into a box] —execution, [a. Execute] —fear, [a. Fear (make] —one's head, [a. Think (make] —hope, [a. Hope (make] —mind, [a. Remember (make] —order, [a. Order] —practice, [a. Practice] —print, [a. Print] —remembrance, [a. Memory (make] —writing, [a. Write] —off, Delay] Sell] —ones clothes, [Un- a. clothe] —on, Hasten] a. Impulsive] —one's clothes, [a. clothe] —over, [a. Digestion] Assign] —out, Quench] Annihilate] Publish] —of doors, [a. Exile] —of office, [Un- a. Office] —of order, [a. Confusion] —one's eyes, a. Blindness] Un- a. Eye]
—to Adde] Apply] Arbitrator (make] Shut] —be done, [Appoint to be d.] —be kept, [Appoint to be k.] —death, a. Dy] a. Capital punish∣ment] —flight, [a. Fly (make] —shame, [a. Shame] —shift, [a. Difficulty] —it, [a. Difficulty] —sword, [a. Sword] —venture, [a. Essay] —use, [a. Usury] —together, [Together▪ put] —up. —a hare, [a. Motion h.] —petition, [a. Petition] —sword, [a. sheath s.] —wrong, [Not-revenge w.] —upon, [a. Impulsive] —case, [Suppose] —an end to, [a. End] —trick on, [a. Affront] Mock] Putrefaction, [Rottenness] Putrefie, [a. Rotten (make] Putrid, [Rotten] Puttock, [Kite (kinde] Puzzle, [Pose] Pygmy, [Man (dim.] Pyramid. Mag. III. 7. O. Pyromancy, [Wizarding by in∣spection of fire] Pyx, [Box] Q QVacksalver, [Physician (corr.] Quadrangle, [Four-angled Area.] Quadrant, [The fourth part of a Circle] Quadrate, [Square] Mag. V. 1. A. Quadrature, [Squaring] Quadripartite, [Divided into four parts] Quadruple, [Fourfold] Quaff, [Drink (augm.] Quagmire, [Bog] Quail. Bi. II. 8. to— [adj. p. Discourage∣ment] Quaint. Beautiful (augm.] Ornate (augm.] Perfect (augm.] Quake, [Tremble] Qualifie, [a. Quality] Moderate] Quiet] Qualifica∣tion. Quality] Condition] Quality. T. I. 6. A. Transcendental Relation of— TM. V. Sensible. Q. Visible— Q. I. Audible— Q. III. Belonging to Tast or Smell. Q. IV. Tactile— more Active. Q. V. more Passive. Q. VI. [Disposition] [Habit] [Manners] [State] [Degree] Qualm. Nauseousness (imp.] Fainting (imp.] Quandary. [Doubt] [Musing] Quantity, T. I. 6. Relation of in General. TM. I Continued. TM. II. Discontinued. TM. III. Quarrel, [a. Contention] —of glass, [adj. Glass (lam.] Quarry. [Stones (place] [Booty] Quart.   Quartan, [Ague returning every fourth day] Quarter. [Fourth part] —of the Moon, [The fourth part of her monethly course] —of corn. —of timber, [The fourth part of a tree cut long-wise] —staff. —of Mutton, [The fourth part of the body of sheep] to— [Cut into quarters] Capital punishment. RJ. V. 1. A. [Coast] [a. Guest] —master. RN. V. 2. [Immunity from killing] Quartile, [Distance of /4 of great —Circle.] Quarto, [Second figure of book] Quash, [a. Shame Despair (make] Herb, [Pompion] HS. VII. 1. Quave, [Tremble] sp. a bog] Quaver. [Tremble] [Modulation] Quean, [adj. Unchast (fem.] Queazy, [adj. Nauseousness (apt.] Queen, King (fem.] King's Wife] Queest, [Ringdove] Bi. III. 1. Quell, [a. Conquer] Quench, [Un-a fire] —thirst, [Un-thirst] Querister, [adj. Singing (Off.] Quern. [Grinding mill.] Querulous, [adj. a. Grudge Complain (apt.] Quest, [Seeking] [Sworn adj. searching (Off.] Question. D. VI. 1. to call in— Accuse (inc.] Suspected (make] 'tis a— ['Tis a doubted disputed (thing] Quetch, Motion (dim.] Noise (dim.] Quibble, [a Urbanity in sound of words] Quick. [Alive] Sprightly] Vegete] —of apprehension, [adj. Saga∣city] Nimble] Swift] Soon (augm.] Transitory (augm.] [adj. Dispatch] —sands. W. III. 7. —set, [Growing sepiment] —silver. Met. III. 1. Quicken, [a. Quick] Quicken-tree. Tr. III. 3. Quiddity, [Being (abstr.] Quiet. op. to Motion. Mo. O. [adj. Silence] [Peaceable] op. to Molest. TA. V. 9. [Without care] Quill. PP. V. 1. A. [Pin] sp. concave] Quillet, [a. Frivolousness (dim.] Quilt. [Satiate] [Stiffen with sowing] Quince. Tr. I. 2. A. Quintal, [100 pound] Quintessence, [Best part] sp. extracted Chimically] Quintin.   Quipp, [Se∣cret Scoff] Reproof] Quire. —of Church, [Chief Temple (part] —of people, [Singers (aggr.] —of paper, [Four and twenty sheets] Quirk, [Little ftivolous (thing] Quit. to be—with, [adj. a. pret. Compensate] to— Acquit] Absolve] [Forsake] Quitch, [Dogs grass] HL. III. 5. A. Quite, [adv. Total] —and clean. [adv. Total] Quittance, [adj. Acquitting (thing] sp. writing] Quiver, [Case for arrows] to— [Tremble] Quoil, Confused noise] Endeavour (augm.]
Quoit, [adj. p. cast (apt) stone (lamin.] Quotation. D. IV. 9. Quoth, [Saith] Qtidian, [adj. Days (segr.] Quotient. Number TM. VI. 9. R. RAbbet, [Cony] Be. III. 4. Rabbin, [Jew∣ish Teacher] Graduate] Rabble. RC. I. 7. Race. [a. Running] [adj. Running (place] [Series] [Descendents (aggr.] RO. I. 1. O. to— [Spoil] vid. Raze. Rack. [Jugament of parallel pins (augm.] —for horse, &c. [Rack for Hay] —for spit, [Spit-supporting (jug.] —for torment, [adj. RJ. VI. 3. (jug.] —bone. PG. IV. 3. to— [Extend violently] Torment. RJ. VI. 3. —wine, [Separate it from the Lees] Racket. [adj. Net (instr.) for a. balling] [Tumult] Radiation, [a. Shining adv. line (figure] Radical, [adj. Root] Radicate. [a. Root] Radish. HS. IV. 5. Raff, [Worst part] Raft, [Ship (like) of together-tied Timbers] Rafter, [Wooden column (dim.] Rag, [Off-torn fragment] —stone. St. I. 2. —wort. HF. III. 7. Rage. [Violence (augm.] sp. of anger] Ragged, [adj. p. Rough] sp. by tearing] Raya Oxyrinchos. Fi. II. 3. Ray. Fish. Maide.] [Half diameter] Beam [Line of light] [Leaf of metal] —in battel, [adj. p. Order for battel] —of a Fish. PP. IV. 6. A. Ray-weed, [Darnel] Rail. [Bar] Bird. Bi. II. 8. A. to— [Revile] Raillery, [a. Urbanity] Raiment, [Clothing] Rain. Water. El. III. 3. —bow. El. V. 1. Raise. Lift] Rise (make] —Devils, [Appear (make) D.] —from sleep, [Waken] —siege, [Un- a. siege] —up, [Up-raise] [High (make] [a. Dignity] [a. Cause] —a bank, [a. Bank (make] —men, Gather—] —money, Gather—] —war, [War (make] [a. Intension Augmentation sp. more-] —one's voice, [More-a. voice] Raisin, [Dried grape] Rake, [Staples (line] —of a ship. RN. II. 9. A. [adj. Staples (line) together adj. gathering (instr.] —hell, [Vicious (augm.) per∣son] to— [Gather with Rake] —up together, [Gather as with Rake] [a. Pain adv. scratching (like] Rally, [Again- a. gather] a. order] Ram. [Sheep. Be. II. 2. (male] [Stinking adv. Goat (like] to— [a. Dense] Fast] sp. by down-knocking] —Into, [Into-ram] —mer, [a. Dense Fast (instr.] sp. by knocking] Ramage.   Ramp, [Leap] —ant, [Standing on the hinder legs] a— [Wanton adj. a. Rusticity (fem.] Rampier. RM. VI. 3. Rampion. HS. VII. 7. Ramson. HL. IV. 12. mountain— HL. IV. 12. A. Rana piscatrix, [Toad-fish] Rancour, [Hatred (augm.] sp. old] Rand. —of beef, [Flank—] —of leather, [Long (part—] Random, [Wandering] —shot, [Not-aimed] Range. [Sift] [a. Order] Wander] About-v. journey] Rank. [Excessive] [Leafed (exc.] [Rammish] [Genuine (corr.] a— [Order] [Series] [Line] op. to File. RM. IV. 4. [Degree] sp. of person] RJ. I. Rankle, [Rot] Ransack. [Booty] [Search (augm.] Ransom, [Price for un- slaving] captivating] to [Un- a. slave captive sp. with price] Rap, [Little striking (imp.] Rapacity. Greediness. NP. IV. 5. [Scraping] Man. III. 2. E. Rape. [Wild Turnip] [Force] [Forcible stupration] Rapid, [Swift (augm.] Rapier, [Sword adj. pricking (apt.] Rapine, [a. Scrapingness] sp. by violence] extortion] Rapture, [Extasie] Rare, [adj. Rarity] [Thin] [Seldom] [Excellent] Rarifie, [a. Q. V. 3. D.] Rarity. [Seldomness] Sp. II. 6. O. [Excellence] Tactil quality. Q. V. 3. D. Rasbury. Sh. I. 1. Rascal. [Lean] [Sorry] Rasher, [Broil'd (lamin] Rashness. op. to Fortitude. Man. I. 7. E. op. to Considerate. Ha. IV. 1. D. Rasp, [adj. Filing (instr.) adj. teeth (plain] Raspis. Sh. I. 1. Rat. Be. III. 7. —'s bane, [Arsenic] Rate. [Proportion] [Price] [Tax] [Chide] Rathe. [Soon] [Early] Rather, [More] sp. More-willingly] I had- [I more will] before chuse] Ratifie. [a. Authority] [Confirm] Ratiocination.
[a. Rational] [Discourse] Rational. [adj. NP. I.] —Power. NP. I. —Soul. W. I. 6. Rattle, [adj. Rattling (instr.] Rattling. [Noise by mutual striking of solids (dim.] [Reproving (augm.] —of ship. RN. IV. 2. Ravage, [a. Booty] Rave. S. IV. 1. A. Ravel, [Tangle] [a. Confusion] Ravelin.   Raven. Bird. Bi. I. 5. to— [a. Rapacity] [a. Scrapingness] Extortion] [a. Booty] Raving. S. IV. 1. A. Ravish. Take violently] Stuprate violently] [a. Extasie] Raw. [Un-skinn'd] Not-cook'd. adj. Pr. III. O. [Not-digested] [Unexpert] Raze. [a. Ruine] [a. Destruction] Spoiling] sp. by shaving] Razor. [Shaving (instr.] [Knife for shaving] Fish. Ex. VIII. . A. Bird —bill. Bi. IX. 7. Re. Ad. III. 3. A. Reach. [Extend] AC. VI. 2. —out. [Extend one's arm] [Deliver with extended arm] a. Pandiculation] Vomit (end] [v. Continuance until] Take] Obtain] —after, [Take (end] [Understand] a— —of a river, (curve (part) of stream] End] Design] Reachless. [Careless] [Idle] Read. AC. III. 4. —ing, [Learning] Ha. VI. 4. —to, [a. Teacher] Ready. [Present] Soon] Near] [Easie] Willing] Inclined] [adj. Alacrity] Prepared] Furnish'd] Clothed] [Dispatch'd] —to dy, [Almost adj. fut. dying] Readmit, [Again-admit] Reality. [Thing (abstr.] [Sincerity] Realm, [King's (place] Ream, [Twenty quires] Reap. O. III. 4. A. Rear. [Raise] [a. Direct (make] Reason. [Cause] sp. Impulsive] Final] [Argument] Faculty. NP. I. Moderation] Equity] by—of. Prep. I. 2. O. in— [adv. Equity] out of— [Excessively] to— —in one's mind. Discourse] Dispute] —for, [a. Probation (end] —against, [Confute (end] Reasonable, [adj. Reason] Mediocri∣ty] —government. Man. VI. 6. Reassemble, [Again-assemble] Reave, [Un-knit] Rebaptize, [Again-baptize] Rebate, [Diminish adv. propor∣tion] Rebeck.   Rebellion. Vice. Man. V. 5. D. Crime. RJ. III. 3. Rebound, [Leap reflexly] Rebuff, [Back-striking] Rebuild, [Again-build] Rebuke, [Reprove] Rebus, [Expressi∣on (manner) of Name Sentence by picture] Recall, Back-call] Recant] Recantation. D. VI. 9. A. Recapitulate, [Repeat the sum] Recede. [Back-go] [Retire] Receit. [Receiving] [Direction of Physic] [adj. Acquitting (thing] Receive. Proper. TA. IV. 3. O. [Accept] [Entertain] —er. [adj. Receiving (person] [adj. Gathering (Off.] —ed, adj. p. Receive] Customary] Receptacle. Receiving (thing] Containing (vess.] Reception, [Receiving] Recess. [Receding] [adj. Concealing (place] Rech, vid. Reach. Recidivation, [Relapse] Reciprocation. T. VI. 7. O. Recite. [Repeat] [Again-say] [a. Narration] Reckon. [Esteem] [a. Number] [Account.] TA. IV. 6. —up, [a. Number] over— Number (exc.] Account too-much] the—ing, [adj. p. ought pay (thing] Reclaim. [a. Gentle (make] [Turn] —from errour, [Convert] —from vice, [Repent (make] Recline, [Down-oblique the su∣perficies] Recluse. [Shut up] [Solitary] Recognize. [Consider again] [Acknowledge] Recognizance, [Bond acknow∣ledged before Magistrate] Recoil. [Reflect] [Retire] Recommend. [Offer] [Entrust] sp. adv. Commending] Recompence. [Compensate] [Reward] Reconcile. [Un-a. Enemy] Contention] [a. Peace (make] Reconquer, [Back-conquer] Record. [a. Memory] [a. Notary] take to- [a. Notary (make] —er. Notary] RJ. I. 5. Judge assistant to the City (Off.] [adj. Music pipe] Recover.
[Back-come] [Again- obtain] Gain] [Possess again] [Repair] [Again- v. Healthy] Recount. [a. Narration] [Consider] Recourse, [To-coming] sp. often] Recreant, [Perfidious] sp. through Cowardise] Recreation. Mo. V. Moderateness in it. Man. II. 5. Immoderateness in it. Man. II. 5. D. Recrement, [Worst part] —of Metals. Met. IV. Recriminate, [Retort accusa∣tion] Recruit, [Again- strengthen] fill] Rect. op. to Curve.] —angle, [Square having four right angles.] Rectifying, [a. Right (make] Chymical— O. VI. 6. A. Rector, [Governour] Recum∣bency, Leaning] Trust] Recusant. [adj. Refusing (person] [Schismatic] Red. Q. II. 2. —breast. Bi. V. 5. —lead, [Cinnabar] —start. Bi. V. 5. A. Redargution, [Reproof] Redbreast. Bi. V. 5. Redeem. Action of God. AS. I. 7. [Back-buy] [Buy liberty] [Un-captivate] [Un- a. slave] Redeliver, [Back-deliver] Redemand, [Back-demand] Redemption, [Redeeming] AS. I. 7. Redolent, [Sweet] Redouble, a. Double] Repeat] Redoubt. RM. VI. 6. —ed, [Excellent] sp. in Reputation] sp. for Fortitude] Redound, [a. Event] Redress. Remedy] Amendment] Redshank. Bi. VII. 4. Redstart. Bi. V. 5. A. Redwing. Bi. III. 5. A. Reduce. [Cause] Make] Again-make] [Bring back] Redundant. [adj. Excess] [Superfluous] Reduplicate. [a. Double] [Repeat] Reed. HL. III. 7. Burr— HL. III. 15. A. flowring— HL. V. 4. sweet smelling— HL. III. 11. —mace. HL. III. 15. Re-edifie, [Again-build] Reek. [Heap] [Vapour] Reel. [Stagger] Mo. II. 4. O. [a. Skein] a— [adj. a. Skein (instr.] (jug.] Re-entry, Again— entry] Back— entry] Re-esta∣blish, Again— esta∣blish] back— esta∣blish] Refection. [Refreshment] Feeding. Pr. I. 1. A. Refectory, [adj. meal (place] Refell, [Gonfute] Refer. [a. Relation] [a. Arbitrator (make] Reference, [a. Arbitrator (make] Refine. [a. Pure (make] [Un- a. sediment] Reflect, [a. Mag. II. 9.] [Look back] [Again-consider] Reflecti∣on, Reflecting] a. Reputation (corr.] Reflux, [Ebbing] Reform▪ RO. VI. 7. Reformado, [adj. pret. Military (Off.] Refracted. Mag. II. 9. A. Refractoriness. [Perversness] [Contumacy] Refrain, [Abstain] Refrane, [Proverb] Refresh. op. to weariness. TA. V. 8. [Mend] [Renew] Refrigerate, [Cool] Refuge, [To-flying] sp. for safety] Place, [adj. Safe Prote∣ction (place] Refulgent, [Shining] Refund. TA. IV. 5. A. Refuse. [Denying] [Rejecting] [Abdicating] [Power of first buying] the— [Worst part] Refute, [Confute] Regal, [adj. King] Regard. [a. Relation] in that— [Therefore] Conj. III. 3. A. in—of. Pron. I. 2. [Esteem] [Respect] [Observe] —less, [Careless] Regene∣rate, Again beget] a. Ha. V.] Regent, [Instead-King] Regiment. [Government] [Militia] as a—of souldiers. RM. IV 2. A. Region, [Country] W. III. A. —of the air, [Part] Register, [Notary] Regrate, [Buy to sell (corr.] Regerss, [Again-come] Regret. [Grudging] [Nolleity] [Aversation] Regular. RE. II. 6. Regularity. TM. V. 4. Regulate, [a. Rule] Regulus Cristatus. Bi. VI. 4. —non cristatus. Bi. VI. 4. A. Rehearse. [Repeat] [Again-say] [a. Narration] Reject. AS. IV. 5. O. [Abdicate] Reign. [a. King] [King's (time] Reimbark, [Into a. ship again] Reimburse, [Pay] Rein. Horse— [adj. Cohibiting (arm] [Cord of Bridle] [Kidney] PG. VI. 7. Running of the— [Flux] Reindeer. Be. II. 4. A. Reinforce, [Again-strengthen] Reinvest, [Again-invest] Rejoyce, [v. Joy] Rejoynder, [Again-answer] Reister, [Horseman] Reiterate, [Repeat] Relapse, Again— fall] Back— fall] [Again-sicken] [a. Apostasie] Relate. [a. Relation] [Tell] [Pertain to] Relation. T. I. 8. —Oeconomic. RO. —of Consanguinity. RO. I. —of Affinity. RO. II. —of Superiority and Inferiority. RO. III. —of Equality. RO. IV. —Civil. RC. —Iudicial. RJ. —Military. RM. —Naval. RN. —Ecclesiastic. RE. [Narration]
[Report] Relative, [adj. Relation] Relaxation. [Loosning] [Ease] [Refreshing] Release. [adj. a. Liberty] [Un-ty] [Un-imprison] [Un-captivate] [Acquit] Releef, [Relieving] High- [Protube∣rance (augm.] Low- [Protube∣rance (dim.] Relegation. RJ. VI. 5. A. Relent. [Soften] a. Pity (inc.] a. Repent (inc.] Rely, [v. Confidence] Relick, [Residue (thing] Relict. [Residue] [Widow] Relief, vid. Releef. Relieve. [a. Adjuvant] [Refresh] [a. Alms] —guard, [Renew g.] —town. RM. I. 4. O. Religion. RE. II. Natural— RE. II. 1. Gentil— RE. II. 2. Iewish— RE. II. 3. Christian— RE. II. 4. Mahometan— RE. II. 5. Religious, [adj. Religion (hab.] a—person. Regular. RE. II. 6. Relinquish. Leave] Let go] Abandon] [a. Desertion] Dereliction] Relish, [Tast] Reluctancy. [Nolleity] [Aversation] Remain. [a. Permanent] Residue] [Stay] Remainder, [Residue] Remark, [Observe] —able, Observable] Excellent] Remedy. TA. III. 9. A. Remember. [a. Memory] [a. Express] Remission. —of fault. RJ. II. 9. O. —of debt, TA. IV. 9. O. Remisseness. op. to Intenseness. TM. I. 8. D. [Slightness] Ha. III. 4. E. [Sloth] Ha. IV. 5. D. Defect of justice. Man. I. 1. D. Remit, [Send] sp. back] [v. Remission] Remisseness] Remnant, [Residue] Remonstrance, [adj. a. Publicness (make) writing] Remora. Fi. VI. 8. A. [adj. a. Impedient Staying (thing] Remorse. AS. VI. 4. Remoteness. Sp. II. 3. O. Remove, [From- motion] ition] Remunerate, [Reward] Rencounter, [Meeting] sp. sudden] Rend, [Tear] Render. [a. Efficient] [Yield] —as taken. RM. II. 6. D. [Give] [Back-give] [Repeat] —lesson, [Repeat l.] [Compensate] —like for like, [Compen∣sate] [Translate] —account, [a. Account] —a reason, [Shew reason] —thanks, [a. Gratitude] Rendezvouz. [Convention] sp. Military] [Convention (place] Renegado. [Revolter] [Apostate] Renegue, [Abdicate] Renew. [a. New] [Repair] [Repeat] Rennet, [adj. a. Fermenting (thing) of Calf's stomach] Renovation, [Renewing] Renown. Reputation (augm.] Fame (augm.] Renounce. [Abdication] [Rejection] Rens, [Wash (dim.] Rent. [Tear] [Revenue] [Hire] Renverse, [Reverse] Repay, Un-disburse] Back-pay] Repair. Restore] Mend] TA. II. 9. Compensate] [Go] in good— [In g. state] Reparation, [Repairing] to give— [Compensate] Repast, Eating] Refection] Repeal, [Un-law] Repeat. TA. II. 6. A. —lesson, [Say I.] Repel, [Back-drive] Repentance. AS. VI. 4. A. Repeople, [Again-inhabited (make] Repercus∣sion, Back-strike] a. Reflex] Repete, vid. Repeat. Repetition, [Repeat] Repine, op. to Alacrity] Aversation (augm.] Replenish, [Fill] Repletion, [Filling] Replevy, [Un-arrest] Reply, [Again-answer] Report. [Rumour] [Narration] [Reputation] —of a gun, [Sound of gun] Repose. [Put] [Lay down] [Rest] [v. Confidence] Repository, [adj. Laying-up (place] Reprehension. RO. V. 7. O. Represent. TA. II. 8. Repress. [Restrain] [Subdue] Reprieve, [Procrastinate Execu∣tion] Reprize, [Diminution of pay∣ment] Letters of— [Commission for Compensation for losses by bootying] Reprobate, [Rejected] Reproch. RJ. IV. 8. Reproving, [Reprehension] Reptile, [adj. Creeping (thing] Republic, [adj. RC (thing] Repudiate. [Reject] [Abdicate] [Un-marry] Repug∣nant, Opposite] Contrary] Repullulate.   Repulse. [Back-driving] [Denial] Reputation. Ha. II. 4. Repute. [a. Opinion] [Esteem] Request, [Petition] Master of—s, [Receiving (Off.) of Petitions] Requiem, [Rest] Require. [Demand] [Command] Requi∣site, Necessary] Expedient] Requite▪ [Compensate] Rere, [Hinder-part] Rere-boil'd, [Boil'd (dim.]
Reremouse, [Bat] Rereward, [Hinder part of ar∣my] Rescind, [Spoil] Rescript, [Edict] Rescue. [Deliver] [Un- captive] prisoner] Resemble. [Like] [Compare] Resent, [a. Apprehension] Reserch, [Inquisition] Reserve. [Keep, part] till another time] [Except] a— —of souldiers. RM. IV. 5. A. —edness. Man. IV. 4. D. Reside. [Inhabit] [v. Present] Residue. TM. VI. 7. O. Resign. [Let go] [Assign] [Yield] [Deliver] —to God , [a. Self-denial] Resin. PP. I. 6. A. Resisting. RM. I. 3. O. Resolve. [Un- a. doubt (make] [a. Solution] Answer] [Purpose] AS. IV. 4. [a. Result] Resolute, [adj. pret. Resolve] Constancy] Fortitude] Resolution. [Resolving] [Resoluteness] Resort, [Come (freq.] Resound, [Sound (augm.] Resource, [Again-rising] Respect. [Relation] Deference. Man. V. 4. in—of, [For] Prep. I. 2. A. Respiration. Mo. III. 2. Respite, Time of Intermission] At times] Interval] Sp. I. 8. O. sp. of ease] to— [Protract] Resplendent, [Shining] Responsal, [Answer] Responsible, [adj. Paying (pot.] I will be—for, [I stipulate for] Rest. op. to Motion. M. O. Stay] Desist] a. Period] —in Mu∣sic, Silence (sign] Period (dim.] —of gun, [Stick for support∣ing gun.] to be at— P. Quiet∣ing] to set at— a. Quiet∣ing] —upon, Lean] a. Confidence] Trust] the— [The residue] Restauration. [Restoring] [Mending] Restharrow. [Cammock] HS. III. 14. Resty. vid. Restive. Restitution. [Restoring] TA. II. 7. [Compensating] TA. II. 7. A. Restiveness. [Disingenuity] [Disobedience] [Contumacy] Restorative, [adj. a. Restoring (apt.) Medecine] Restore. TA. II. 7. —to Estate [re- adj. p. Estate Favor [re- adj. p. Favor Health [re- adj. p. Health Liberty [re- adj. p. Liberty Life [re- adj. p. Life (make] Restrein. [Diminish] sp. Liberty] Ha. II. 1. O. [a. Cohibit] Impedient] [a. Shortness] Narrowness] holding] exempting] limiting] excepting] Restreint, a. restreining] p. restreining] [Imprisonment (dim.] Restriction, [Limitation] Restringent, [Binding] Mo. IV. O. Result. [Event] [Summe] [Illation] Resume. [Again— take] [Back— take] [Again- begin] [Re— begin] [Repete] Resurrecti∣on, Again- Re— life] Retail, [Sell parts (segr.] Retaliation, [Compensation] Retard, [a. Late Slow make] Retching, [Stretching] [Pandiculation] [Vomiting (end] Retchlesness. [Improvidence] Man. III. 2. O. [Carelesness] [Sloth] Retein. [Hold] [Keep] TA. V. 5. as his Lawyer, [Bespeak] sp. with earnest] —to adj. Pertinence] Dependent] Reteiner, [Dependent] Retenti∣on, Holding] Keeping] Retentive faculty, Holding Keeping (pot.] Retinue, Waiters Dependants (agg.] Retire. [Back-go] [Go] TA. VI. 1. O. —for safety] RM. II. 2. D. —for Concealment] Privacy] Solitariness] Retired, [adj. pret. retir] [Solitary] Retirement. [a. Retire] [adj. Retire (place] Retort. to— D. VI. 7. A. a— [Crooked (vess.) adj Bot∣tle (fig.] Retract. [Back-draw] [Recant] D. VI. 9. O. sp. part] Retreat. [a. Retire] [adj. Retire (place] Retrench. [From-cut] sp. part.] [a. Ablatum] Diminution] Retribution [Compensate] Retrive, again- finde re— finde Retrogade, [back-going] Retrospection, [Considering past (thing] Return. [re- be] come] go] [Repent] [again- be] come] go] [a. Turn] T. VI. 8. Reciprocation] T. VI. 8. A. Answer] Retort] [Repeat] Restore] Compensate] Refund] Pay] —Money, [Lend m. to be paid in another (place] —to life, [re-live] [re- cause] doe] give] Reveal. [Revelation] AS. I. 6.
[Shewing] TA. 1.8. Reveils, Sound (fig.) for waking Music (fig.) for waking (make] Revelation. AS. I. 6. Revel, a. Man. II. 5. O.] a. Riotousness] sp. Late in the night —rout, [Sound (augm.) of a. riot] —s, [adj. Night recreations] sp. of dancing] Revenge. AS. V. 9. A. Revenue. Po. A. Reverberate. [Re-strike] [Reflect (make] Reverence. Man. V. 3. Sir— [Dung] Reverend, [adj. p. Reverence (apt.] Reverse. to— Annull, [Un- law] decree] sentence] [Turn] AC. VI. 8. A. the— [Hinder part] Reversion. Right of fut, possession] Potentialness] [Residue] Revert. [Return] [Be right of fut. possession] Revy, [More-bet] Review, [again See] Consider] Examin] Revile. RJ. IV. 9. Revise, [Again See] Consider] Examin] Revive, [re-a. Life] Vigor] Reunion, [re-a. One] Reunite, [re-a. One] Wholeness] Revoke. [Recall] [Recant] [a. Nothing] —law [Un-law] sentence a. sentence] Revolt. [a. Apostate] [a. Rebellion] Revolve, [Consider (freq.] (augm.] Revolution. [Vertigination] sp. till the same situation] [Altering] Revulsion [From- pulling] motion] Reward. Ha. I. Rhapsody [Confused mixture] Rhetoric, [Speaking (art.) adv Ornate] Rhetorician, [Teaching (artist) of speaking ornately] Rheubarb, vid. Rubarb. Rheum, [Catarrh] Rheumatic, [adj. Catarrh] Rheumatism. S. IV. 4. A. Rhinocerot. Be. II. 6. —Fly Ex. V. 1. Rhomb. Line, [Line of Vergency] Figure, [Square having all its sides equal, but no right An∣gles] Rhomboide, [Square having its 2 opposite Angles equal, but not all its sides equal] Ry. HL. II. 1. A. Rial.   Rib. —of Animal. PG. IV. 4. A. —of Ship, [Direct beam of Ship.] Ribaldry, [Unchastity] Riband. Pr. IV. 6. Rives, [Red Goosberries] Rice. Plant. HL. II. 3. A. Jugament, [adj. a. Skein (ju∣gament] [Branch smear'd with Bird-lime] Rich. [adj. Riches] [adj. Price (augm.] Riches. Ha. II. 2. Rick, [Heap] Rickets. S. IV. 8. Rid. [adj. pret. riding] to— [Empty] O. II. 7. O. [Un- burden] tangle] [a. Liberty] Ha. II. 1. [Deliver] AS. I. 5. get- Escape] Obtein liberty] [Dispatch] TA. IV. 5. —way, [Dispatch his journey] Riddance, a. rid] p. rid] Ridden, [adj. p. ride] Riddle [Speech obscured with figure] Ride. —on horse, &c. Mo. II. 7. —at anchor. RN. VI. 5. Rider. [adj. riding (person] [Lowest adj. horse (Off.] Money (kinde] Ridge. Bank. Mag. V.7. —bone, [Back bone] [Upper Margin] Side] Ridiculous, [adj. p. Laugh (apt.] Ridgeling, [Having only one te∣sticle] Riding, vid. Ride. [Shire (part] Rise, Frequent] Obvious] Riffraff. [Worst part. TM. VI. 1. O. [Sorry (augm.) discourse] Rifle. [Spoil] RM. II. 5. E. Dice. Rift, [Chink through clea∣ving] Rig. [a. Rigging] [Wanton (fem.] Rigging. RN. IV. Right. Subst. RC. IV. Adj. [Streight] Mag. III. 10 adj. Justice] Equity] True] Good] Genuine] Natural] Simple] Perfect] Due] Worthy] Lawful] Congruous] Regular] Pure] —angle. Mag. III. 3. —hand, [adj. right side h.] —side. Sp. II. 9. make— [Repair] Set (to—S.) [Repair] adv. Right. —in the nick, [adv. perfect in the nick] &c. Righteousness. [Holiness] Ha. V. 3. [Vertue moral] Man. I. Justice] Equity] Rightful, [adj. Justice] Equity] Rigid, [adj. Rigor] Rigor. Stiffness. AC. IV. 5. D. op. to Justice. Man. I. 1. E. Equity. Man. I. 2. O. op. to Gratiousness Man. VI. 1. O. Clemency. Man. VI. 8. O. Rill, [Stream (dim] Rimm, [Margin] —of the belly, [Membrane of the b.] Rime. Verse D. III. 5. A. [Mist that freezes in falling] El. III. 5. A. Rince, [Wash (dim.] Rind. PP. I. 5. Ring. to— Neuter. Q. III. 2. Active, [a. Ring.] —all in, [a▪ Ring the last (time] —in peal, [a. Ring adv. [Har∣mony] —out, [a. Ring (augm.]
a—of bells, [Suit of bells] a— figure. Mag. V. 2. —bone, [Bone in Horses foot] —dove▪ Bi. III. 1. A. —finger, [Fourth finger] —leader, [Principal] —tail, [Buzzard having white streak on his train] —worm, [Tetter] all in a— [adj. Circle (fig.] hog— [Pin adj. p. Circle (fig.] ride the— [Ride adv. Circle (fig.] Rinse. [Wash (dim.] Riot. [a. Riotousness] [Sedition] Riotousness. Man. III. 4. E. Rip. [Unsow] [Open by cutting] Ripeness. NP. VI. 4. Ripier, [Carrier of fish] Rise. the— Source. Sp. II. 4. A. to— [v. Rising] Upward-go] More-adj. p. High] arise. AC. VI. 1. [adj. p. Birth] Beginning] Being] Increase] [Grow] as Hill, [Upward-adj. ob∣lique] as Fountain, [Spring] as Sun, appear (inc.) a∣bove Horizon] above-adj. Hori∣zon (inc.] Rising, [v. Rise] Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. Top] Sp. III. 7. —of a hill, [Oblique (part) of h.] Hill, [Mountain (dim.] Tumor] S. III. Inflation] S. I. 5. A. Barm, [adj. a. Fermenting (thing] Insurrection, [Rebellion (inc.] Resurrection, [Re-life] Risk, Essaying] Danger] Rite, [Circumstance] sp. Customary] sp. Solemn] Ritual, [Book of Ceremonies] Rival. RO. II. 2. A. Rive, [Cleave] Rivel, Wrinkle] Furrow] River, W. IV. 7. Rivet, [Fasten pin by flatting the point of it] Rivulet, [Stream (dim.] Ro. Of Fish. Soft— [Milt] hard— [Spawn] Beast. Be. II. 5. Roan horse.   Rob. RJ. III. 7. Robe, [Loose upper (vest] sp. Solemn] Robin red breast. Bi. V. 5. Robins. RN. IV. 5. Robusti∣ous, Strong] Hardy] Rock. a— Stone. W. III. 3. [Staff of adj. Spinning (ma∣chin] to— [a. Volutation] Roch. Fi. IX. 9. A. —Allum, [Allum of the rock] Rochet. Fish, [Red Gournet] Vest, [Bishops upper adj. Li∣nen (vest] Rocket. HS. IV. 7. base— HF. I. 11. A. double— [Dames Violet] HS.IV.2. Rod. [Wand] PP. I. 4. A. Measure, [16 foot & ½] [adj. Whipping (instr.] of branches (aggr.] Rode. [Public way] —for Ships, [adj. Resting (place) for ships] Rodomon∣tade, Oversaying Glorying Rogation, [Week of walking a∣bout the bounds] Rogue. [Begger] [adj. Wandring (person] Vice (person] Fraud (person] [adj. Scurril (person] Roial, [adj. King] the—s of a Stag. Roialty, [Prerogative] sp. of King] Roister, [a. Riotousness] Insolence] Magisterialness] Roll. to— [a. Vertigination] —land. O. III. 2. A. —a Swathe about one, [Clothe adv. Helical] [a. Volutation] as Ship—RN. VI. 7. A. a— adj. a. Rolling (instr.] adj. p. Roll (thing] [Cylinder] —of paper, &c. [Paper, &c. adj. p. Cylinder (fig.) by Vertigination] [Catalogue] [adj. Ring (fig.) ornament] sp. adj. p. Twist.] Roller, [Cylinder] sp. adj. p. Vertigination (apt.] sp. for rolling] O. III. 2. A. Rolling [Sub. role] [Adj. role] —eye [adj. mo∣tion (apt. eye] —tongue [adj. mo∣tion (apt. tong.] —Press, [adj. rolling (machin) for Printing] Rolls. [Catalogue of judicial causes and proceedings] [adj. No∣tary (things] No∣tary (place] Master of the— Romb, vid. Rhomb. Romance, [Feigned Narration] Rome, [Wander] Rood. [Stick] Measure, [16 foot & ½] [Wooden pillar] [Wooden Image of Christ crucified] Roof. —of house. PO. III. 8. —trees, [Rafters that support the roof] —of mouth, [Palat] PG. III. 5. Rook. to— [a. Fraud] a— [Crow that feeds on corn] Chess. Room. Space] Place] sp. Sufficient] to make— [Prepare place] in a house. Po. III. 2. of Predecessor. TG. VI. 6. Roost, [Birds adj. sleeping (place] Root. Proper. PP. I. 1. to— [v. Root] to take— [v. Root] —out [out pluck the Roots] —up [out pluck the Roots] —of a number the Number which multiplied by it self produces that other number.] the side] Mag. II. 3. A Extraction of— —of the tongue, [bottom of t.] Hebrew— [Primitive H. word] Rope. a— [Cord (augm] —of onions, [Onions (aggr.] to— [v. Sliminess] Ropy, [adj. Sliminess] Rore, Sound Exclamation (augm.] Ros Solis, [Sun-dew] Rosary.   Rose. Sh. I. 2. —Cake, [Caput mort. of distil∣led roses.] —water, [distilled w. of roses] Guelder— Sh. II. 12. holy— Sh. VI. 1. our Ladies— Sh. VI. 8. Sweet mountain— Sh. VI. 5. A. —Bay, [Oleander] Sh. VI. 1. A —Campion. Sh. III. 2. —of Iericho. Sh. VI. 8. Rosemary. Sh. VI. 4. Rose noble, Money (kind]
Rosewood. Tr. VII. 4. A. Rosewort. HL. VIII. 2. A. Rosy, [adj. Rose] Rosin. PP. I. 6. A. Rost. —ing. Pr. III. 3. rule the— [a. Power] Authority] Rot. to— [v. Rottenness] the— among sheep] Rota.   Rotation, Vertigination] Wheeling] Rote. by— [With∣out- Rules] a. Reason] Rottenness. Putrefaction. NP. V. 2. O. Tast or Smell. Q. IV. 7. O. Rotundation, [From cutting the less parts] sp. the parts not-aliquot] Rotundity, [Roundness] Rove, [Wander] Rover, [Wanderer] at—s [Not adj. a. Object] [adj. Sea. adj. Robbing (person] Rough. Proper. —to feeling, Having unequal Surface] Q. VI. 2. D. —cast, [Rough p. plaster] —draught, [First Picturing] Writing] —hew, [First cutting] —mason. —Sea, [adj. p. wave (aug.) Sea.] —way. [Hairy] —footed. —to tast. Q. IV. 3. Moral. [Fierce] Rigorous] Churlish] Morose] Magisterial] Rustic] Insolent] Supercilious] Harsh] Austere] [Angry] Transc. Unpleasant] Violent] T. V. 5. O. Not-wrought] Homely] to—u [Reprehend adv. An∣ger (like] Rouncival, [Great (augm.] Round Proper, [not-adj. p. angle] More perfect. [adj. Sphere (fig.] Oval (fig.] Bowl (fig.] —hill, [Hill whose top is adj. Sphere (fig.] Oval (fig.] Bowl (fig.] [adj. Cylinder (fig.] Tube (fig.] [adj. Cone (fig.] [adj. Circle (fig.] Ring (fig.] Wheel (fig.] [adj. Spiral (fig.] Helix (fig.] Less Perfect. [Crooked] [adj. Bow (fig.] [adj. Parabola (fig.] Hyperbole (fig.] Ellipsis (fig.] adv. —about, [On every side] turn— Vertiginate] Turn adv. Vertigina∣tion] Winde to— —hair, [adj. equal (make) by clipping] —a place, [about-go] Round improper. [Perfect] —blow, [b. (augm.] —number. —Sum, [Sum (augm.] adv. tell him—ly, [Tell h. plainly] go—ly on, [Pro∣ceed without Let] Haesitation] to—one in the ear, [Whisper] a—in music, [Continued cir∣cling (like) Song] a—of a ladder, [Step of l.] Roundelay.   Roundhouse. RN. II. 4. A. Roundish, [Round (dim.] Rounds.   Rouse. [Rise (make] [a. Impulsive] Rout. [Confused multitude] [Overthrow] to— Fly (make] Unorder Army] [Snore] —as hog, [Un-root plants] Rowze, vid. Rouse. Row. of Fish. hard— [Spawn] soft— [Milt] of bodies, [Series] [Rank] [File] to— [a. Motion (make) with Oats] Pole] a—Barge. Rowel. a— [adj. Wheel (fig.) adj. pricking (jug.] to—a horse. Rowen hay, [Second mowen hay] Rowle, vid. Roll. Ru. Herb, vid. Rue. to— a. Repentance] Wish un-done] Rub. a— [adj. Impedient (thing] [adj. Promberance (thing] to— Scrub. O. V.8. —along, [Go] sp. adv. dif∣ficulty▪] —off, [From rub] —at Cards. Rubarb. HF. I. 1. Monk's—[Patience] Rubbers, [Two Games] Rubbish   Rubble [Confused ruine] [Worst part] Rubellio. Fi. V. 4. A. Ruby. St. IV. 2. Rubrick, [Rules for direction in red Letters] Rudder. RN. II. 3. A. Ruddy, [Red (dim.] Ruddle Red Oker] Cinnabar] Ruddock, [Red brest] Bi. V. 5▪ Rude. [Homely] Not-taught] Unlearned] Ignorant] Unskilful] Morose] Rustic] Rudiment, Element. D. I. adv. First adj. p. Learner (thing] Rue. HS. V. 13. Goates—HS. III. 8. Meadow—HF. I 12. Ruff. Vest. Bird. Bi. VII. 4. A. Fish. Fi. IX. 6. A. at cards. to— Ruffian. Bawd] Ribald] [Swagger] Ruffle. [a. Roughness Confusion (make] [a. Sound of Silk (vest] Ruful, [adj. a. Grief Pity (make] Rug, [Tusted bed (vest] Rugged, vid. Rough. Ruine, [a. Ruines] Destruction] Poverty] —s. Po. II. O. Ruinous, [adj. Ruine] Rule. Sentence. D. IV. 5. Law] Edict] —ed case, [Condition adj. p. rule (ought) according to ex∣emplar.] according to— [Regular] Power] Authority]
to— Direct] Govern] instrument, [adj. a. Measu∣ring (instr.] to— [a. Line with adj. a. mea∣suring (instr.] Ruler. [Magistrate] [adj. a. Measuring (instr.] Rumb, vid. Rhomb. Rumble, [Confused noise] sp. as of rolling] Ruminate. Mo. III. 5. A. [Consider] Rummage, [Move things for seeking] Rumor. D. V. 3. A. Rump, [Bone at the end of the Vertebrae] —of bird. PP. V. 8. —of beef. Rumple, Unsmooth] a. Furrow] Run [ition swift] sp. of Animal] Proper. Mo. II. 1. A. [Fly] RM. II. 3. D. Ition] —the adven∣ture to-ition essay risk submit to the danger] [Become] —a ground. —ashore. —mad. [Continue] —his course. [Proceed] [Increase] as weeds— [a. Contagion] [Abound] [Exceed] as tong—s [Spread] O. II. 6. O. Stream] as —ing water Weep] as —ing eye Drop as —ing nose Let go as —ing nose [Spend] [Finish] hath—his course. v. Swiftness. —a division [Swiftly Sing Play a divi∣sion] [Thrust (imp.] [Dispatch] —about —all— [Spread, sp. by adj. p. dissolving] —after after-ition] follow (augm.] Pursue] —against run thrust (imp. against] —at thrust (imp. at] assault] — large, [Abound] random, [v. Exorbitan∣cy] tilt, [Fence with (spears] —away, [Fly] —before Become before] Prevent] —down, [a. Falling by thrust∣ing (imp.] —in discourse, [Posing] —with blood, [Streaming with b.] —forth, Let-go] Spill] —in, [Prick] —debt Become Increase being debtor] —upon one, Thrust (imp.] Storm] —off, From-ition] Digression] —on Proceed] Increase] —over Through-ition swift∣ly] Let-go] Sp. through fulness (exc.] —out. —as Prodigal [Spend (exc.] —as Vessel, [Let-go] —in discourse, [Abound] — his course [Finish] his length, —through, [a. hole by thrust∣ing (imp.] —to ruine, [Become ruinous] —up, [Increase] sp. adv. Soon] —upon, Begin hastily] Storm] Runagate, [Apostate] Runaway, [Fugitive] Rundle, [Round thing] sp. Circle] Ring] Rundlet, [Barrel (dim.] Rung. RN. II.1. A. Runner. Bird. [Upper stone of Mill] Runt, [Bull (dim.] Rupture, [Breaking] a— S. VI. 8. —wort. HF. I. 17. Rural, [adj. Country] Rush. HL. III. 12. A. Flowering.— HL. V. 6. to— [a. Running Thrusting (imp.] Russet, [Gray] sp. adv. Natural] Rust. Mea. IV. 4. —of bacon [Rottenness (inc.] Rustic, [adj. Country] Rusticity] Rusticity. Man. IV. 9. D. Rustle, [Sound of confused mo∣tion] Ruthful, [adj. a. Pity Grief (apt] Ruthless, [Pitiless] Rut of Cart, [Sign of Wheel ha∣ving gone] Rutting, [Coition] sp. of Deer] S. SAbbath, Day of rest] Festivity] sp. Weekly] Iewish —[The 7th. day of the week] Christian— [The first day of the week] Sabbatical year, [7th year] Sable. [Black Martin] [Skin of Black Martin] [Black] Sacerdota, [adj. Priest] Sack, [Bag (augm.] [Course hairy-cloth] —cloth. [Spanish Wine] to— [Spoile] RM. II. 5. E. Sackbut.   Sachel, [bag (dim.] Sachettus. Fi. V. 10. A. Sacrament. RE. VI. 4. the— [Eucharist] Sacred, Holy] Consecrated] Sacrifice. RE. VI. 3. criledge, Theft of con∣secrated (things] Robbery of con∣secrated (things] Sad. —Disposition] [adj. Melancholy] [adj. Seriousness] [adj. Dulness] Lumpishness] [adj. Grief] —color, Dark Black (dim.] —bread, [Dense (exc.] Saddle. Po. V. 8. —backt, [Hollow backed] —tree, [adj. wood (part) of S.] Pack— [Saddle for burdens (augm.] Saddler, [adj. Saddle (mech.] Safe. [adj. Safety] —and sound, Healthy] Whole] —Conduct Compact of safe return (pot.] Licence for safe passing] —guard, [Safety] Womans— [Uppermost adj. riding (vest) of woman] a— [Box] Safety. T. V. 3. Saffron, [Crocus] HL. IV. 7. A. bastard— HF. III. 5. meadow— HL. IV. 7. Sag, [Move (dim.] sp. backward] Sagacity. Ha. III. 1. Sagapenum, [Concrete juice of Giant Fennel] Sage. Herb. HF. VI. 1. —of Ierusalem. HL. IX. 3. Wood— HF. VII. A. [adj. Wise] Sober] Sagittarius, [Ninth of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Say. to— [Speak] AC. III. 1.
—by heart, [Say adv. memo∣ry.] —less than true, [Undersay] —more than true, [Oversay] —nay, [a. Negation] —nothing, [a. Silence] that is to— Conj. IV. 3. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Subst. [Adage] Part. TM. VI. 3. Stuff. Saying, adj. Spoken (thing] Sentence] Sail. a— of Ship, &c. RN. II. 6. —yard. RN. III. 2. main— [Principal S. of Ship.] mizzen— [S. of hinder (part) of Ship] Sprit— [S. of forepart of ship] top,— [Highest S.] hoise— [Up-lift S.] strike— [a. fall the S.] [Ship] to— Mo. II. 7. A. Sailer. RN. V. 8. Saim, [Soft fat of hog] Sainfom. HS. III. 5. A. Saint. RE. III. 5. —s bell. Sake [end] T. II. 6. for the—of. Prop. I. 2. A. Saker. Hawk. Ordinance. Sal, vide Salt. —armoniac. St. V. 6. —Gemma. St. V. 2. A. Salable, [adj. p. Sell (apt.] Salacity, [Lust (Pron.] Salad. [Sawce of herbs] [adj. head (armor] Salamander. Land— Be. VI. 5. Water— Be. VI. 5. A. Salary, [Wages] Sale, [Sell.] Saleable, (Fit to) adj. p. Sell (apt.] Saligot. [Water-Nut] Saline, [adj. Salt] Saltishness] Salivate, Spit (make] Drivel (make] Sallet, vid. Salad. Sally. RM. I. 6. A. Sallow. Tree. Tr. VI. 9. A. Color, [yellow (dim.) adj. Sallow (like] Salmon. Fi. IX. 2. Salomons Seal. HL. VII. 7. Salpa. Fi. V. 2. A. Salt, vid. Sal. Subst. St. V. 1. A. —Armoniac. St. V. 6. —Peeter, [Nitre] St. V. 1. —wort, [Glsswort] Bay— [Coursest S. (kind] Drinous— St. V. 5. Vessel. —Sellar, [adj. Table, adj. Salt vessel] Trencher— [adj. Trencher. adj. Salt (vessel] adj. —taste, [adj. Q. IV. 5. —Marshes, [Marshes] Saltive.   Salve. Pr. VI. 4. to— [a. sound (make] Salvation. [Deliverance] [Safety] Everlasting bliss. Ha. I. 4. Salvediction. AC. V. 8. Salvo, Exempting] Exception] Salute. AC. V. 3. —at meeting. AC. V. 8. —at parting. AC. V. 8. A. Samarre, [Upper most loose adj. Woman (vest] Same. Pron▪ II. 2. —ness, [Identity] of the—time, [Simultaneous] Samphier. HF. V. . A. Golden flowred— HF. III. 10. A, Sample Exemplar. T. II. 3. Sampler Exemplar. T. II. 3. Sanamunda. Sh. VI. 2. Sanctifie. [adj. Holiness (make] [Consecrate] Sanction, Law] Edict] Sanctity, [Holiness] Sanctuary. [Temple] sp. Inner (part) of it] [adj. a. Safety (place) for of∣fenders] Sand. St. I. 8. —eeles. Fi. VI. 4. A. the—s, Strand. W. III. 6. Quick—s. W. III.7. —blind. Sandal, [Lamin for the bottom of foot] Sandarach. St. VI. 5. Sanders. Red— Tr. VII. 3. Yellow— Tr. VII. 3. A. Sandover, [Scum of glass] Sanguin. [adj. Blood] PG. I. 6. [Merry] Sanguinary, [adj. a. RJ. III.] Sanhedrin, [Council] Sanicle. HL. VI. 9. bears ear— HS. VIII. 3. Spotted— HL. VIII. 4. Yorkshire— [Butterwort] HL. VI. 7. Sanity. [Health] [Soundness] Sap. Subst. [Juice] PP. I. 7. —of tree, [adj. juice (part) of tree] to— [Undermine] Saphena vein, [Vein at the An∣kle] Saphire. St. IV. 5. White— St. IV. 1. A. Sapience, [Wisdom] Saphic.   Saracens Conound [Comfrey] HL. IX. 4. Sarcasm. [Mock] Sarcocolla. Tr. VIII. 2. A. Sarda, [Chalcis] Fi. III. 12. A. Sardius. St. III. 3. Sardonix.   Sargs. Fi. V. 3. Sarplier,, [adj. packing cloth] Sarsaparilla, [Root of herb▪ like pricking Bindweed] Sartorian Operation. O. V. Sassafras. Tr. III. 10. Satan, [Devil] W. I. 2. O. Sate. AC. VI. 5. A. Sated, [adj. p. fill (augm.] (exc.] Satelles. W. II. 8. A. Saterday, [Seventh day] Satiate, [a. Sufficience] Satiety, [a. Sufficience] Satisfaction. [Sufficience] Mind-quieting. AS. III. 5. [Conviction] [Payment] [Restitution] Satisfy, [a. Satisfaction] Sattin. [Smooth shining Silk] Herb [Bulbonach] HS. VI. 2. Saturn. W. II. 4. Satyr. [adj. Mocking Reproving Verse (aggr.] [Baboon] Be. III. 1. Satyion, [Orchis] HL. IV. 8. Savage, Fierce] Cruel] Sauce. Pr. II. 2. Sauce alone HS. IV. 8. Saucer, [Shallow dish] sp. for Sauce] Saucy, Impudent] reverent] Saucidge, vid. Sausage. Save. General. —from danger, [a. Safety] T. V. 3. —from loss Preserve] AS. hurt I. 4. —one's oath, [pr▪ himself from perjury] incumbent, [Deliver] AS. I. 5. imminent. as to it, [prevent] TA. III. 9. as to him Defend] O. VI. 5. Protect] a. Man. VI. 4
Special, as to Estate, Lay up] TA. V. 4. Keep] TA. V. 5. from spoiling. M. II. 5. from spending. Ta. V. 3. Liberty. RM. II. 6. Event of War. RM. II. 7. Soul. from Sin, [Redemption] AS. I. 7. from Hell, [Salvation] Ha. I. 4. Comparate. [Exempt] TA. II. 7. O. [Except] D. IV. . O. Conj. [Unless] Prep. [Besides] Savin. Sh. III. 10. A. Saving, vid. Save. Savingness, [Frugality] Savior, [adj. a Save (person] Savor. [Tast] Q. IV. [Smell] Q. IV. A. Savory. [adj. Savor (pers. Winter— HF. VI. 7. A. Saurus. Fi. IV. 7. A. Sausage, [Pudding of minced Hogg's flesh] Saw. to— O. IV. 3. A. —dust, [Powder made by Pawing] a— [adj. Sawing (instr.] —wort. HF. III. 3. Fish. Fi. I. 2. an old— [Adage] I—[I am adj. pret. See] Sawyer, [adj. Sawing (mech.] Saxifrge. Burnet— HF. IV. 12. Golden— HL. VI. 10. A. White— HL. VI. 10. Scab. S. III. 1. A. Scabbard, [Case for Sword] Scabous. HF. II. 13. Scaffold. Po. II. 6. A. Scalad, [Storming with Lad∣ders] Scalde. [a. Heat (excess] sp. with Li∣quor] [Un-a. skin feather hair with hot liquor.] —head, [Un-haired head] sp. with scurf] Scale. —of fish. PP. IV. 1. —of bone, [Scale (like) Fragment Chip of bone] —of metal. Met. IV. 3. to— [Un-adj. a. Scale] [Dish of the librating (jug.] Pair of—s, [Librating (jug.] [Ladder] —as of miles, &c. [Line adj. p. part for measuring di∣stances] to— Climb] Storm] sp. with Ladder.] Scallion, [Onion (dim.] Scalp, [Pate] PG. III. 1. A. —ing iron, [adj. Iron. adj. Scratching (instr.] Scamble. [Catch (end) adv. Confu∣sion] [a. Confusion by curting (corr.] Scamony. HS. VII. 6. A. Scan. Consider] Examin] —verse [a. Msure v.] Scandal, Tempting] Occasioning to sin] Scandalous. RE. III. 5. O. Scant, [adj. Scarcity] Deficience] Narrowness] adv. [Scarce] adv. V. 2. Scantling. [Little] [Say] TM. VI. 2. [Measure] Mea. II. [Proportion] Scape, [Escape] a— [Fart] Scapula, [Shoulder] PG. IV. I. Scar, [pret. p. Wound (sign] Scarab Ex. V. Scarabee Ex. V. great water— Ex. V. 8. little water— Ex. V. 8. A. Scarce. [adj. Scarcity] Seldomness] Rareness] [adv. Adv. V. 2.] adv. Difficulty] Scarcity. TM. I. 2. D. Scare, [a. Fear] —crow, [adj. Vanity (thing) for a. fear] Scarf. Pr. IV. 6. A. Scarlet, [Bright red] —Oke, [Holm] Scorrifie. Mo. IV. 6. A. Scatches, [Leg-lengthning sticks] Scate. Fi. II. 5. Scath, [Hurt] Scatter. O. II. 5. O. Come in—ing, [Come (segr.] Scavel, [adj. hungry (exc.] Scavinger, [adj. a. Cleanliness (Off.) of streets] Sceleton, [Frame of dead bones] Scene. [a. Player (room] [The place represented] [The home of any action] [Chapter of adj. p. Player (thing] Scepter, [adj. King (sign) Stick] Sceptic, [adj. Incredulity] Doubting (apt.] Schedule, [Paper (lam.] Scheme, [Figure] sp. Lined] Pictured] Schism, [Schismatic (thing] Schismatic. RE. III. 2. O. Scholar. [Learner] [adj. Learning (person] —of a Colledge, [Spediated Learner] —ship, [Learning] Scholastic, [Learned (like] Scholast, [adj. a Commentary (dim.] School. Greater place, [University] —man, [adj. University Di∣vine] Lesser place, [RC. III. . A.] —boy, [Learner at School] —master, [Teacher of School] [Sect] Schreight, [Missle bild] l. III. 3. Sciatic, [Gout in the Hip] Science, [Ha. VI. 1. A. Liberal— [adj. Learning Sci∣ence] Scimiter, [Crooked Sword] Scink, [Small-headed Lizard (kind] Scintilla volantes. El. . . A. Sciolist, [adj. Science (dim.] Scion, [Branch] PP. I. 3. Schirbus. S. III. 4. A. Scissors, [adj. Clipping instr. Scecheon, vid. Sccheo. Scoff, Reproch] Mock] Scold, a. Contention (voice] Reprove (ex] Scole, [Fishes (aggr.] Scolop. Ex. VIII. 5. Scolopendra. Ex. II. 10. Sconse. [Mult] Military place. RM. I. 2. [adj. Hanging adj. supporting (instr.) for Candle] Pate] adj. Head (vest] Scoop, Pr. V. 7. A. Scope. End] T. II. 6. Object] T. VI. 2. Liberty Sufficient] Space Sufficient] Place Sufficient] Scorbutica [Scurvy] Scorch, [adj. a. Fire Heat (exc. the out∣side] Scordium. HF. VII. 8. Score. [adj. Reckoning (thing] [Stick notched (freq.) for reckoning] in— [Debtor] upon -[Debtor] —up. quit—s ▪ [Ballancing] [Twenty] Scoria. Met. IV. 3.
Scorn, Contemn] AS. IV. 2. a. Indignation] Scornfulness, [Superciliousness] Scorpana. Fi. IV. 11. A. Scorpiides. Fi. III. 14. A. Scorpion. Ex. II. 5. A. —grass. HS. III. 12. water— Ex. I. 9. Fish. greater— Fi. V. 6. lesser— Fi. V. 6. A. Constellation [8th. (part) of the Zodiac.] Scot. [Shot] [Tax] Scotfree. [adj. p. Immunity from pay∣ment] [not-adj. p. Hurt] Punishment] Scotomy, [Vertigo] S. IV. 5. Scoul, [Lowring] Scoundrel, [adj. Sorry (person] Scour. a— [Shallow (part) of swift river] to— Wash (augm.] Rub (augm.] [adj. a. Purity] Brightness] sp. by Washing (augm. Rubbing (augm. [Dung (exc.] Scourge, [Whip] a— [adj. Whipping (instr.] Scourse, [Exchange] Scout. RM. III. 5. Scrag, Tooth] Rough protuberance] Scraggy, [Lea (augm.] Scray, [Sea Swallow] Bi. IX. 9. A. Scrall, [Write (corr.] Scramble, [Climbe (corr.] Scrap, Residue] Fragment] Scrape, Rub] Scratch] Shave (corr.] —for favour, [Fawning] —out, Spoil as Nothing by scrat∣ching] —together, [Gather adv. Scraping∣ness] Rapacious∣ly.] a— [Trap] Scrapingness. Man. III. 2. E. Scra, [Of both sexes] Scratch. AC. II. 6. A. the—es [Disease in horse's heels] Scrawl, [Writing (corr.] Scream, Acute Voice (augm.] Exclamation Screech, [v. acute exclamation (augm.] —Owl, [Owl] Screeking, [acute sound of Solids rubbing together] Screen, [adj. a. shadow (jug.] Screw, vid. Scrue. Scribble, [Write (corr.] sp. swift∣ly] Scribe, Notary adj. writing (Off.] Scrip, [Bag] Scripture. RE. VI. 1. Scrivener, [adj. Writing (mech.] Scrole, [Paper (Iam.] [Catalogue] Scrophula, [King's Evil] Scrophularia, [Pilewort] Scrue. O. I. 6. —into, [Into-wriggle] —out, [Obtain by-a. Craft] Scrub, [Rub (augm.] a— [Sorry (person] Scruple. Weight. Mea. III. 2. [Doubt (dim.] practical. AS. III. 5. O. (Pron.] Scrupulousness, Doubting Scruple Incredulity] Scrutiny, Inquisition] Examining] Scud, [v. Ition swiftly] Scuffle, [Confused Mutiny] fighting (dim.] Scull. [Bone of Head] Pate] [adj. Head (armor] Pae (armor] —of fish, [Fishes (aggr.] Sculk, [v. Concealing] Sculler, [Boat adj. p. Oa by one man] Scullory, [adj. Washing (room) of adj. Cookery vessel] Scullion, [Cook's Servant] Sculpture, [Carving] Scum. TM. VI. 3. a— [Sorry (person] Scummer, [Spoon for taking away the Scum] to— [Dung] Scooper. RN. II. 7. A. Scurf. S. II. 6. A. Scurrility. Man. IV. 9. F. Scurvy. Disease. S. VI. 4. —grass. HL. VI. 13. adj. Sorry] Evil] Scut, [Tail] PP. VI. 6. A. Scutcheon. [Picture of shield] [Area of painted degree] —in building. (sign] Scuttle. [Basket] —of Ship. RN. II. 6. A. to—water, [Un-defile w. by motion] Sea. W. IV. A. —bat, [Flying fish] —bells HL. VI. 13. A. —bindweed HL. VI. 13. A. —Calf. Be. V. 3. A. —Card. —Coast, [adj. Shore Coun∣trey.] —Cob. Bi. IX. 9. —Cole. Herb. HE. VI. 13. A. Stone. St. VI. 3. A. —Coot. —Cormoran —Devil. Fi. II. 4. A. —dragon. Fi. IV. 8. —drake, [Cormorant] —ear. Animal. Ex. VII. 8. Plant. HL. I. 13. —fan. HL. I. 15. —faing man. RN. V. —frog. Fi. II. 4. A. —grass. HL. I. 14. —green, [Green adj. Sea (like] —gull. Bi. IX. 9. —hog, [Porpois] —lettice. HL. I. 12. —man. RN. V. —mew. Bi. IX. 9. —moss. HL. I. 12. —navelwort. HL. I. 11. A. —nettle. Ex. IX. 6. A. —onion. HL. IV. 13. —raven, [Cormorant] —sick, [Sick through motion upon the sea.] —swallow. Bi. IX. 9. A. —toad. Fi. II. 4. A. —weed, [S. moss] —withywinde. HI. VI. 13. A. arm of the— [Bay] W. IV. 4. [Fretum] W. IV. 5. calm— W. IV. 1. narrow— [Fretum] W. IV. 5. Seal, [adj. RC. VI. 5. (instr.] Fish, [Sea-calf] Be. V. 3. A. Sealing. RC. VI. 5. A. Seam, [adj. p. sowing (thing] —of the head. —of Ship. RN. II. 8. [Hog's fat] Seamster, [adj. Sowing (mech.] Sear, [Dry (exc.] to— [Harden with a. fire] —ed Conscience, [Unconsci∣onableness.] Searce, [Sift] O. VI. 1. A. [adj. Sift (instr.] Search. [Seek] [a. Inquisition] [Try] Transc. TA. II. 5. A. Judic. RJ. II. 4. A. —ing, [Sagacity] Season. [Time] adj. Congruity (time] Time (perf.] in— [adv. Perfect] out of - [adv. Corrupt] —of the year, [Year (part] sp. adj. Congruity] to— a. Salt] Q. IV. 5. a. Condite] Pr. III. 9. A. Seasonable, [adj. Season] Seat.
[adj. p. Sitting (g.] Stool] Po. VI. 5. Chair] P. VI. 6. [Situation] sp. III. Sebesten. Tr. II. 5. A. Secant. Mag. II. 4. Secession, [Separation] Seclude, Out-shut Exempt Except Second. [adj. Two] Every— [Every adv. turn adj. two] Subst. —of a degree. in Magn [3600th (part) of a Degree] in Time, [60th part of a Mi∣nute] [adj. Acces∣soriness, Fighter] Speaker] Doer of any thing] to— [Do any thing adv. Accessoriness] Immediate af∣ter] Secondary, [adj. Two (kind] Secondine. PP. VI. 7. A. Secre∣cy, Concealing] Taciturnity] Secret. Concealed] adj. p. Taciturnity] Secreta∣ry, Notary] adj. Writing (Off.] Sect, Faction] Schism] Sectary, [Schismatic] Section, [adj. p. Cut (part] Part of Book. D. III. 2. A. Sector.   Secular. [Temporal] RE. O. [Laic] RE. II. O. [Not-regular. RO. IV. 6.] Secundine. PP. VI. 7. A. Secure. [Safe] Confident] Assured] Fearless] Heedless] Careless] to— [a. Security] [a. Imprisonment] Security, Safety] Confidence] &c. Sponsion] Morgage] Sedan. Po. V. 3. Sedate, [adj. p. Quiet] Content] Satisfaction] Sedentary, [adj. Sitting] Sedge, Flagg] Reed] Sediment. TM. VI. 3. A. Sedition. RJ. III. 3. A. Seduce. RO. VI. 1. O. Sedulity, [Diligence] See. v. Sight] a. Heedfulness] —to, [a. Heedfulness] —you do it, [a. Heedfulness that you do it] fair to—to, [Beautiful] go to— [Visit] a— [Bishops City] Seed. —of Plants. PP. III. 6. —plot, [adj. p. Sowing (place] —time, [adj. Sowing (time] run to, [a. Seed] —of Animal. PG. I. 4. Seeing. Sight. NP. III. 1. [adj. a. Sight] —that, [Whereas] Seek. TA. I. 7. —to do Inquisition to do] Design to do] Endeavour to do] —to him, [Intreat him] Seeling. of Room. Po. III. 8. A. of Ship, [Heeling] RN. VI.7. —birds eye, [Sow together the Eyelids] Seem. TA. I. 9. A. Seem∣ly, Beautiful] Decent] Seen, [adj. p. Sight] to be— Shew] Manifest] by Shew] Manifest] well—in, [Skilled (perf.] Seer, [Prophet] Seeth, [Boyl] —over, [Spill by Seething] Segment, [From-adj. p. Cut (part] Segregate. TM. III. 6. —ing, [Separate] TA. II. 1. O. Seigniory, [Magistrate (place] Seise, Take to possess] Arrest] Seizin. RC. V. 8. A. Seldom. Sp. I. 7. O. [Rare] Sp. II. 6. O. Select, [Elect] Selenite. St. II. 5. Sell. RC. V. 3. Self. him— [Him him] beside -[adj. Dotage] Frenzy] Madness] my— [Me me] thy— [Thee thee] by it— [Solitary] he is him— [He is adj. Understand∣ing (perf.] In State (perf.] Selfconceit, Pride] Esteem (exc.) of self] Selfdenial. Ha. V. 3. Selfends, [Selfishness] Selfheal. HF. VII. 16. Selfishness. Ha. V. 3. O. Selflove, [Love of Self] Selfwill, Disobedience] Contumacy] Pertinacy] Selvage, [Margin of loth] Semblable, [Like] Semblably, So] Also] Accordingly] Semblance, Seeming] Likeness] Sembreef.   Semicircle, [Half Circle] Semicolon. D. I. 5. A. Seminary. [Seed (place] [Education (place] Semination, [Sowing] Sena. Sh. IV. 4. bastard— Sh. IV. 4. A. Senary, [Six] Senate, [Council] Send. TA. VI. 4. —for one, [Call by one sent] Senembi. Be. VI. 3. A. Seneschal, [Steward] Sengreen, [House-seek] HL. VIII.1. Indented— HL. VIII. 4. A. Senior. [More old] [Superior] sp. through more age] Sennight, [Week] Sense. —of a word, [Meaning] Faculty. —internal. NP. II. common— NP. II. 1. —external. NP. III. Sp. [Feeling] Sensible. [adj. a. Common sense Understanding (apt. [adj. p. Common sense Understanding (pot.] —Quality. Q. Sensitive. —Soul. W. I. 5. —faculty. Internal. NP. II. External. NP. III. —plant. HS. III. 8. A. —action. AC. II. Sensless. [adj. Stupor] [Not adj. p. Understanding (pot.] Sensual, [adj. Sensuality] Sensuality. Man. II. 1. O. Sent. pret. Send] adj. p. Send] [Smell] Sentence. [Opinion] Clause. D. III. 1. A. —in Court. RJ. II. 5. A. Sententious, [Abounding in short sentences.]
Sentiment. Understanding Common sense Apprehension Opinion Sentinel RM. III. 7. Sentry RM. III. 7. Senvi, [Mustard seed] Separate. TA. II. 1. O. Segregate Abstract a. Schismatic] Excommunicate] Separatists, [Schismatic] Sepiment. RM. VI. 4. Seps Serpt.   September, [9th month] Septenary, [Seven] Septuagint, [Seventy Transla∣tors] Septuple, [Sevenfold] Sepulchre, [adj. Intombing (thing] (place] Sepulture, [Burying] Sequel, Following] Event] Illation] Sequence, [Following adv. Se∣ries] Sequestration, [Depositing with not-party] Seraglio, [Palace of the Maho∣metan King] Seraphin, [Angel] Serenade, [a. Music near ones adj. sleeping (place] Serene. Clear] Bright] [Gracious] adj. Man. VI. 1. Serjant. [pursevant] RJ. III. 6. —at arms, [Most adj. Superi∣ority. RJ. III. 6.] — of Law, [Most adj▪ Supe∣riority Graduate of com∣mon Lawyers] [Chief pleader (kind] [Highest degree of Pleaders (kind] —of foot. RM. III. 4. Series. TM. III. 7. Serinus. Bi. VI. 1. A. Seriousness. The Disposition. NP. IV. 3. The Vertue Sobriety] Gravity] Sermon, [adj.-p. Preaching (thing] Sermountain. HF. IV. 7. Serous, [adj. Serum] Serpent. Be. VI. 6. Sea— Fi. VI. 2. Serpentine, [adj. Serpent] —Line, Spiral] Mag. III. 9. Helix] Mag. III. 9. A. Serve. [v. Slave] Servant] Souldier] —as to wages. [adj. p. Hiring] as to work, [a. Slave] Servant] Souldier] [a. Subjection] Obedience] —God, [a. Obedience Worship God] [Wait] Carry] Deliver] —Process. —up to Table. —wine. Furnish] Sell] —one with ware, [Sell w. to one▪] as to use, Transc. [Action] —one, a trick in his kind [v. adj. Adjuvant] Profitable] v. adj. Congruous] Convenient]▪ —when time—s. [v. adj. Stead] — for instead of [v. adj. Sufficience] Pertinence] —for such a use. Servant. RO. III. 7. O. [Suitor] RO. III. 2. [Beneficiary] RO. III. 8. O. Service. [v. Servant] [a. Souldier] [a. Obedience] divine— [d. worship] Waiting. first [meats (aggr. carried adv. first] second [meats (aggr. carried adv. second] [v. adj. Adjuvant] Profitable] [a. Benefactor] —doing one a [p. Use] [Berry of Service-tree] —Tree. Tr. I. 4. Common— Tr. I. 4. A. Serviceable, [adj. Service (pot.] (pron.] Servile, [adj. Servant] Slave] Villain] Servingman, [Servant for wait∣ing] Servitor, [Servant] Servitude, [p. Slave (thing] Serum. PG. I. 2. Seseli, [Hatwort] Sessions, [Convention] RC. III. sp. for RJ. Set. [Cause, sp. by motion] to be in a Place sp. of Rest] to be in a Situation sp. of Rest] [Cause to be so] —a copy, [a. Exemplar (make] —a song, [a. Tune (make) for a s.] —fast, [Fast (make] —free, [a. Liberty (make] —open, [Open (make] —packing, [From-go (make] —Right, Put (perf.] adj. Right (make] —upright, [Upright (make] Design] Appoint] sp. according to Con∣tract.] —an allowance, [appoint an all.] —a fine on, [Appoint, &c.] —a form, [appoint a form] [Offer] sp. for p. Hire] Sell] [Esteem] AS. II. 8. —Light by, [Contemn] AS. II. 8. A. a. Place] Put] —himself, a. place h.] Purpose (augm.] —ones hand to Put ones, &c a. Adjuvant] Write under] -Birds observe the place of B.] -Travellers, &c. observe the place of Tr.] [a. Scituation] Figure] —a bone Place (perf.] Situate (perf.] —a bowle. —a Ruff, [a. Situation (perf Figure (perf [Motion] Mo. as Current, [v. Motion] as Boatman [Thrust (imp) with hands] as Horse [Thrust (imp) with feet] [a. ition (make] [Rest] Mo. O. Plant. the Root. O. III. 6. the Grain. O. III. 6. A. [Sit (make] [a. Steadiness] Q. VI. 6. Fastness] Q. VI 6. E. —fast, a. Fast (make] Imprison] —about [a. Begin] [a. Endeavour (inc.] against, [v. opposite] [a. opposite] —apart a. Segregate] Reserve] Appropriate] —aside, a. Segregate] Exempt] Except] Reject Forsake]
—at [a. Impulsive] —at liberty, [adj. a. Liberty (make] —nought, [Contemn] —ods, [Un-a. peaceable (make] —peace, [Un- War (make] Fight (make] Contention (make] —by [Esteem] —the ears, [a. contention (make] —down— Down-ition (make] Write] —farther off, [More-distant (make] —forth, Vid. out. [v. Go (inc.] [a. Travel (inc.] Manifest] a. Publick (make] [a. Ornate (make] [Praise] —for∣ward [v. Travel (inc.] [a. Proceed (inc.] —in [Begin] —order, [a. Order] —off, vid. forth. —farther off, [More-distant (make] —on, vid. upon Impulsive] Incourage] —edge, adj. a. edge (make] a. Stupor —fire, [a. fire (make] —foot, Begin] Cause (inc.] —over the fire, [Place above the fire] —a fine on, [a. Mulct] —out, vid. forth. [Out-ition (make] — Ship [furnish & send Sh.] Souldier [furnish & send So.] —to To-put] Operate (end] — Hire] Sale] —work, a. Operate (make] Operate (inc.] —ones hand. —toge∣ther, Joyn] a. One (make] —by the ears, [a Contention (make] —up, [Begun] —again, Repeat] Restore] —a building, [Build] —a fashion. —a trade. —one instead of another, [a. Room] —upon his Legs, Lift] a. Upright] —upon, vid. on. —a person, &c. Assault] Offend (end] —a thing Resolve] Undertake] Attempt] Subst Aggregate] Series] Suit] [Game] —at Cards. Dice. Sun— [Under-a. Horizon] Adj. Purposed] Designed] Appointed] sp. by consent] —allowance. —Battle. —Company. —Fight. —Form. —Place. —Price. —Purpose. —Resolution. —Speech —Time. He is— [Has lost the game] Sun is— [S. is under the Hori∣zon] Well— [adj. p. figure (perf.] Setter. [adj. Setting (person] Theefs—spy] [Dog. adj. Observing (apt.) the place of Birds] Settle. v. a. Cause] Confirm] [adj. Permanence] —ones estate, [Assign the sut. right of it] sp. by sealed adj. Obligati∣on (thing] —to a busi∣ness, Prepare for per∣manence in a b] Permanent (inc) in it.] Staying] Dwelling] as Bird, Rest] Stand] [adj. Staiedness] Fastness] as grounds Precipitate] Sediment] [Habit] Sobriety] Gravity] Subst. [Long Chair] —bedstead, [Bedstead adj. p. folding (apt.] Setling, vid. Settle. [Sediment] Seven. Mea. I. 7. Sevenfold, [Seven (kind] Sevennight, [Week] Seventeen. 17. Seventh, [adj. Seven] Seventy. 70. Sever. Separate] Segregate] [adj. Solitary (make] [a. Difference] Diversity] Several. [adj. Difference] Diversity] [adj. p. Sever] Severity. Man. VI. 7. [Rigor] Sewee. [adj. a. Order (Off.) of meats] Suit (Off.) of meats] [Sink] Po. II. 9. A. Sewer, Hard Fat] Dried Fat] Sex. NP. VI. 1. Sextant, [Sixth part of Circle] Sextary, [Roman measure] about a pint] Sextile, [Distance  of a great Circle] Sexton, [adj. Sweeping (Off.) of Temple] Sextuple, [Sixfold] Shackles, [Bonds] Shad. Fi. III.11. Shade Q. I. 2. Shadow Q. I. 2. —in painting, [Shadow (like] Shaft. [Cylinder] [Arrow] Cone] Pyramid] [Steeple] of Coach, &c. Po. V. 5. Shagg, [Rough hair] Bird. Bi. IX. 5. A. Shake. Proper. Mo. VI. 3. A. —Hands. AC. V. 5. A. —down, [Down-a. ition (make) with shaking] —off, [Abandon] —in pieces, [Break with shaking] —to pieces, [Break with shaking] —up, [Reprehend severely] [Tremble] Shake-rag, Clothed (freq.) with torn (vest] Beggar] Shall. fut. Shale. a— [Pod] PP. III. 5. A. to— [Un-a. pod] Shallop, [Ship (dim.] Shalot. HL. IV. 10. Shallow. Not deep. TM. II. 3. A. a- Shallow (place in the sea] Bank] W. III. 5. A. Not wise, [adj. Folly] Shalm, [adj. Tube adj. Music inst.] Shamble, [adj. Butchering (place] Shame. Affection. AS. VI. 2. A. Cause, [Infamy] Shamefaced, [adj. Shame (apt.] Modesty] Sheepishness] Shameful, [adj. Shame] Shameless, [adj. Impudence] Shamois, [Goat▪ (kind) having small horns hooked at the end]
Shank. of Animal. PG. V. 5. of Plant, [Stalk] Shape, [Figure] Share. [Part] sp. adj. Proportioned] to— Divide] Distribute] Partner (make] Pubes. PG. IV. 7. A. —bone, [Bone of the sh.] Plow— [adj. Cutting (part) of the adj. plowing (jug.] Sharer, [Partner] Shark. Fish. Fi. I. 3. [adj. a. Fraud (person] sp. impudently spending ano∣thers] Sharp. [adj. Acute Angle] [adj. Point] Edge] [adj. Cutting] Pricking (apt.] of Animal, [adj. Vigor] —sighted. —of hearing] —voice, [Shrill] —in music. Q III. 5. E. of taste. Q. IV. 4. [Hungry] of mind [Sprightly] [Sagacious] Severe] Austere] Cruel] Sharpen, [a. Sharp (make] Sharpling, [Stickleback] Shat∣ter, Shake into parts (dim.] Bruise (freq.] Shave. O. IV. 1. —grass, [Horse tail] Shaver, [adj. Shaving (person] a notable— [Extraordinary (corr.] Sheaf, [Aggregated (thing] sp. by together-p. bind] Shear, [Clip] Shears, [adj. Clipping (instr.] Sheard, Fragment of earth∣en vessel Piece of earth∣en vessel Sheat. Rope. RN. IV. 5. A. —Anchor, [Last anch.] —fish. Fi. VI. 6. [Young hog] Sheath. a— [Case] —fish. Ex. VIII. 8. A. —flies wing, [Crust of fly w.] to— [into-a-case] —a ship. RN. VI. 3. Shed. Lose. Let go. Spill. Lose. —tears Drop tears] Weep] —water, [Spill w.] a— [House (dim.) sp. not wal∣led] Shee, He (fem.] Female] Sheep. Be. II. 2. —Cote, [House for sheep] —Fold, [About-sepimented (place) for sheep] —Hook, [Shepherds Hook] Sheepishness. Man. III. 7. E. Sheere, [Clip] —water, [Simple water] —wind, [adj. Cutting (like) wind] Sheet, [Lamin] —of Linnen, [adj. l. Bed (vest] Shell. of Animal. of Oyster, &c. PP. IV. 2. of Lobster, [Crust] PP. IV. 2. A. Egg— [Crust of Egg] of Vegetable. —of Nut, [Stone] PP. II. 2. A. —of Bean, &c. [Cod] PP. III. 5. A. —of Grain, [Husk] PP. III. 3. Shellaple. Bi. IV. 5. A. Sheldrake. Bi. IX. 2. Shelf. Boord. Po. VI. 4. A. Flat in the Sea, [Bank] W. III. 5. Shelter. [adj. a. Safety (place] [adj. a. Protection] Defence] sp. (place] Shelving, [Oblique] Shent, [adj. p. Reprehend] Shepherd, [Herdsman of sheep] —s bodkin, [Cranes bill] —s fly. Ex. IV. 8. —s needle, [Venus comb] HS. I. 5. A. —s purse. HS. VI. 3. A. —s rod. HF. VIII. 2. A. Sheriff, [adj. Shire (Off.] Shew. Gene∣ral, a. Know (make TA. I. 8. Un-a. Conceal TA. I. 8. Perfect, [Manifest] TA. I. 9. Publick, [a. Public (make] —what is not▪ [a. Appear∣ance] —Otherwise than it is a. Seeming TA. I. 9. A. a. Hypocrisie to sense. by signes, [a. sign] [a. Finger (sign] by like, [Represent] to the ear. [Narration] [Interpretation] [Probation] to the eye Offer to be seen] a. See (make] —sights, [a. Sights] —tricks, [a. Prestigiator] to the mind, [Revelation] Impro∣per, Do] Give] —mercy, [a. Mercy] Shy, [adj. Reservedness] Shide of wood, [Thick piece of w.] Shield, [Buckler] to— Defend] Protect] —of Brawn. Shift. a— [Means] sp. (corr.] [a. Craft] Fraud] make—to [Obtain to] Put to his—s, [Necessitated to difficult (things] to— Change] Alter] —place, [Go] —per¦son, Escape] Deliver] —thing, Prevent Remedy (alter∣ing] —for, [Provide for] —off Delay] Avoid] Frustrate] sp. adv. Craft] Shifter, [Crafty person] sp. Living by craft] Shilling. Mea. IV. 3. Shin, [Forepart of Leg] Shine, [a. Brightness] Shingle, [adj. wood (lamin) for (roof] —s [Tetter] Ship. RN. I. 1. A. —wrack Destruction Ruine of ship] —wright, [adj. Ship (mech.] Shire. RC. III. 4. Shirt, [Inmost Linnen (vest] Shittle, [Inconstant] vid. Shuttle. Shive, [Chip] Shiver. to— [Tremble] —in pieces Shake Break into chips] a— [Chip] Shock. —of Corn, [Heap of c.] —of battel, [Battel (imp.] Shod, adj. pret. Shoo] adj. p. Shoo] Shog, [Move (imp.] Shole. [Shallow (place] [Fishes (aggr.] Shoo. [adj. Leather adj. Foot (vest] —ing horn, [On-drawing (instr.) for shoo.] horse— [Under-foot (armam.) for horse] Shook, [adj. p. pret. Shake] Shoot. Move swiftly] Fly swiftly] Out— Cast] Powre]
as Bow Gun [a. b.] g.] o.] Ordinance —one. RJ. V. 2. A. as Star [fall Suddenly] Swiftly] as Plant, [a. Sprout] —off, Desist] a. Gunner] —up, [Grow swiftly] a— Sprout] PP. II. 5. Branch] PP. I. 3. Sucker] PP. I. 2. A. Hog (young] Shop, [adj. [a. Mechanic Merchant room] —keeper, [Merchant] Shore. of land. W. III. 6. of water. W. IV. 6. bird. Bi. V. 2. to—up, [a. Prop] Shorn, [adj. Clip] Short. op. to long, [adj. TM. II. 1. O] Low] Little] Less] [adj. Epitome] Soon] Transitory] —ly, [adv. Soon.] Future (dim.] —breathing S. V.1. —windedness S. V.1. be— with a. Fewness a. Harshness words] come— fall— v. long (def.] v. short (exc.] [adj. Defect] [be more short] sp. than it was expect∣ed] keep— [a. Coibiting] Shorten, [a. Short (make] Shot. adj▪ p. pret. Shoot] adj. p. Shoot] [Bullet] [adj. a. pay (thing] —free, [adj. p. Immunity from paying] Shotten, [Having spawned] Shove, [Thrust] —net, [Net for catching fish] sp. by thrusting and lift∣ing it.] Shovel, [Up-take∣ing (vas) Fluid Granulous (things] —er. Bi. VIII. 6. Should, [Mood of Duty) Necessity] Shoulder. of trunk. PG. IV. 1. A. —blade, [Broad bone of—] Joynt. PG. V. 1. A. to— [Thrust up with shoul∣der] —up, [a. Prop] Support (end.] Showr. El. VI. 2. O. Shout. [Voice (augm.] [Exclamation (imp.] sp. for joy] Show, vid. Shew. Shread, [Mince] Po. III. 6. A. a— [Chip (dim.] Shreek, [Acute exclamation (imp.] Shreeve, a. Confess (make] Examin for a. confess (make] sp. adv. Solitary to Priest] Shrew, [adj. Moroseness Contention (fem.] —mouse, [Long-snouted vene∣mous mouse (kind] Shrewd. [Crafty] [Hurtful] —turn, [a. Hurtfulness] Shrift, [a. Shreeve] Shrill, [adv. acute adj. Sound (augm.] Exclamation] Shrimp. [Little] Fish. Ex. VI.4. River— Ex. II. 11. A. Shrine, [Case] sp. of Image] Shrink. Gesture. AC. VI. 3. Posture. AC. VI. 3. A. [adj. Density] [adj. Diminish] [Back-draw] [Retire] Shrivel, [Wrinkle] Shroud. —of a Ship. RN. IV. 1. [adj. Shrouding (thing] [Outmost adj. Linnen (vest) of the dead] to— [Cover] sp. for protection] Shrovetide. [adj. Shreeving (time] [adj. Feast (time) next before Lent] Shrub. Sh. to— [a. Cudgel] Shrugging. AC. IV. 7. A. Shuddering, [Trembling] Shuffle, [Mingle confusedly] sp. by motion (freq.] Shun, [Avoid (end.] Shut, vid. Close. —ing. O. II. 4. —in of the day, [Evening] —up, Shutting (augm.] a. Conclusion] Shuttle. [adj. p. Cast (apt.) adj. Wea∣ving (instr.] [adj. p. Motion (apt.] —Cock. —headed, [Inconstant] Sybil, [adj. Paganism Prophet (fem.] Sick, [adj. Sickness] Sickle, [adj. Reaping (instr.] Sickly, [adj. Sickness (apt.] (freq.] Sickness. in body. S. the— [Plague] in mind. TA. V. 7. O. Side. Part. Sp. III. 4. —of a Figure. Ma. II. 3. A. —of ones body. PG. IV. 5. Page, [Surface] [Margin] —blow adj. oblique striking] —long, [adj. Side] —wayes, [adj. Aside] Obliquity] —of the Country, [Part of the Country] —of the hill, [Oblique (part) of the h.] —of River Sea [Shore] kin by the Mothers— [Kin by the Mother] on this— Citerio] Prep. VI. 2. on that— Ulterior] Prep. VI. 2. O.] on the other— Opposite] Prep. VI. 3. O.] on eve∣ry— Environing] Prep. III. 3. O. on my— [For (Prep. II. 3.) inc.] to— [a. Faction] League] Accessory] Sider, [Wine of Apples] Sidesmen, [Churchwardens adj. adjuvant (Off.] Siege. Leaguer. RM. I. 4. [a. Dunging] Sift. Searce. O. VI. 1. A. [Examin] —out, [Find by examin∣ing] Sigh. AC. IV. 6. E. Sight. Sence. NP. III. 1. a. Seeing] —of the eye, [adj. Seeing (part) of eye] —of a gun, [Through-adj. p. See (apt.) gun (part] Seeing—s. Mo. V. 7. Sigil, [adj. Wizarding seal] Signature, [a. Sign] Signe. Mark. T. VI. 5▪ —of an affection, AC. IV. [Constellation] —in the Zodiac, 1/12 of the Zodiac] to— RC. VI. 5. Signet, [Seal (dim.]
Signifie. [a. Sign] [a. Meaning] [Narrate] Silence. op. to Sound. Q. III. O. Virtue, [Taciturnity] Silk. Pr. IV. 3. —man, [adj. Silk (merc.] —worm. Ex. III. 6. A. —Grass, [Upright Dogs-bane] HS. IV. 3. A. Sill, [adj. Foundation Beam] Sillabub, [Drink of milk coagulated with wine] &c.] Silly, [adj. Folly] Silver. Met. I. 2. quick— Met. III.1. —weed, [Wild Tansey] Silurus. Fi. VI. 6. Similar, [All of one kind] Simile, [adj. Translatitious (thing] Similitude, [Likeness] Simnel.   Simony, [Buying (corr.) of re∣ligious (thing] Simper, [Smile] Simple. [adj. Simpleness] —figure. Mag. III. [Simple medicinal (thing] sp. Herb] to— [Know (end.) the growing herbs] Simpleness   Simplicity Singleness] Primitiveness] op. to mixture. T. III. 8. Purity] Homeliness] Sorriness] op. to figurateness. D. III. 7. O. [Sincerity] Folly] Unskilfulness] Unlearnedness] Unexpertness] Simulation, [a. Hypocrisie] Simultaneous. Sp. I. 2. Sin v. a. Ungraciousness] Unholiness] [Vice] [Evil action] Since. [Before this time] [After this time] —that, [Whereas] Sincerity. Ha. IV. 4. Sine. Mag. II. 6. Sinew. PG. II. 5. Sinful, Ungracious] Unholy] Vicious] Sing. AC. III. 5. as the ears—[Ring (like] Singe [Burn (incept.] Outside] Hair] Single. One (kind] Simple] [Singular] Solitary] Onely] —combate, [Duelling] —life, [Coelibate] RO. II 2. A. a— [Tail of Deer] Singular. Excellent] Unlike all others] —number. TM. III. 2. Singularity, Affectation of being unlike others] Conceitedness] Sinister. [Left side] [Malign] [Censoriousness] [adj. Adversity] Sink, [Down-ition under wa∣ter.] Proper. Mo. I. 4. O. [Soke] —into ones mind, [Be fixed in ones m.] —ing paper, [Porous (augm.] [Drown] Improper, [Fall] sp. (inc.] —under the burden. [adj. p. Dent] [Diminution] [Ruining (inc.] a— Po. II. 9. A. Sinnet, [Cord (augm.) of three Cords together twisted] Sinople. Subst. [Cinnabar] adj. [Green] Sip. [Drink (dim.] [Suck (dim.] Sippet, [Bread (lam.) adj. p. Soke (apt.] Siquis, [adj Paper (lam.) pub∣lish'd for finding lost (things] Sir, [Voc. adj. Dignity (per∣son] Sire, [Parent (male] Sirname, [adj. Parent name] Sirra, [Voc. Mean (person] Sise, [Six] Siskin, [Finch green] Sister, [Brother (fem.] Sisterhood, [Corporation (fem.] Sitting. Gesture. AC. VI. 5. Posture. AC. VI. 5. A. —as Commissioners, [Toge∣ther sitting] —as a hen, [a. Fotion by up∣on sitting.] —down. [Sitting] —out, [Not-playing] —up, Rising] adj. Permanence out of bed.] as Bird, Rest] Stand] [Permanence] —hard at it, [adj. a. Dili∣gence. adv. permanence] Site Sp. III. Situation Sp. III. Sith that, [Whereas] Sithe, [adj. Reaping (instr.] Sive, [adj. Sifting (instr.] Sivet, [Sweat of the Civet Cat] —cat. Be. IV. 4. A. Six. Mea. I. 6. Sixfold, [Six (kind] Sixt. [adj. Six] Sixteen, 16. Sixty, 60. Size. Proportion Measure Gummy liquor, [adj. a. varnish (thing] sp. of boil'd Leather] to— [a. Size] [Sear the Seams] assize, [Convention of shire for adj.  J (things] Sizers, [adj. Clipping (instr.] Skein. Mag. VI. 7. A. Skeleton, [Frame of bones] Skew, [Oblique] Sky. [Aether] El. II. 1.. [Heaven] Skill. [Science] [Art] [Learning] it —eth not, [It is not adj. im∣portance] Skillet. Pr. V. 6. A. Skim, [Unskum] Skin. Hide. PG. II. 3. —and bone, [Lean (ex.] to— Un-a. skin] Cover with skin] Membrane] PG. II. 3. A. [Husk] PP. II. 3. Skink, [Scink] to— [Powre for p. drinking] Skinker, [adj. Waiting (Off.) that skinketh] Skinner, [adj. Skin (merc.] Skip. [Leap] —Iack, [Sorry man (dim.] [Omit] Skipper, Sailer] RN. V. 8. Master] RN. V. 4. Skirmish. RM. I. 8. Skirret. HF. IV. 11. A. Skirt, [Margent] —of doublet, [Lower Margent of d.] Skittish. [adj. Leap Kick (pron.] Disingenious] Wanton] Skreen. —for corn, [adj. Seperating (jug.] —between Rooms, [adj. Sepa∣rating (sep.]
Sku, [Oblique] Slab, [adj. Moor Bog (place] Slabber. [Let-go Spittle] [Wet (corr.] [Defile] Slack. Loose] Limber] [adj. Remission] Diminution] [adj. Slight] Neglect] [adj. a. Slow] Protract] [adj. a. Cunctation] Slay, [a. Die (make] —of weavers loom. Slake, [a. Remission] —fire Un- a. fire (dim] —thirst Un- a. thirst (dim] Slander▪ [Calumny] Slank. [Thin] Herb, [Wrack] Slant, [Oblique] Slap, Strike] Cudgel] —up Eat greedily] Lick (corr.] Slash. Cut in many places. Pr. III. 5. A. [Cut deep] [Whip] Slate. St. I. 5. Slattering. [a. Slightness] [Carelesness] Improvidence] Man. III. 2. D. Slave. RC. I. 9. O. Slaver, vid. Slabber. Slaughter, [a. Die (make] —house, [adj. Butchering (room] Slaunder, [Calumny] Sleave. —silk, [Not-spun S.] —fish. Ex. IX. 3. red— Ex. IX. 3. A. Sleazy, [Loose] Sled. Po. V. 4. Sledge, [Hammer (augm.] Sleek, [Smooth (augm.] —stone, [adj. stone adj. a. smoothing (instr.] Sleep. AC. II. 3. A. [Numness] Sleepy, [adj. Sleep (apt.] Sluggardliness] Sleering, [Crafty oblique a. eye manner] Sleet. El. VI. 4. A. Sleeve, [adj. arm (vest] Sleeve∣less Impertinent] Vain] Sleight, vid. Slight. [a. Craft] Art] Slender. [Thin] TM. II. 5. O. Remiss] Not sufficient] Sleve. —silk, [Not-spun S. —fish. Ex. IX. 3. red— Ex. IX. 3. A. Sly, Crafty] Reserved] Sliceing. Cut. Pr. III. 6. a— From-sliced (part] Chip] sp. Thin] iron— to— [Dng] Sliding, [Motion swift whose parts are not seen] Proper. Mo. II. 5. —knot, [k. un-adj. p. ty (apt.) by pulling] —as water, [a. Stream adv. si∣lence] away from -ition adv. silence] -back back -ition adv. concea∣ling] -by [beside -ition adv. silence] -over [over -ition adv. concea∣ling] Slight, vid. Sleight. [Thin (augm.] Little] Deficient] [Loose] Sorry] Remiss] [adj. Vanity] [Homely] Moral, [adj. Ha. III. 4. E.] [Careless] to— [Contemn] [a. Disrespect] —works, [Spoil w.] Slim, [Long thin] Slime, [adj. a. Sliminess (thing] Sliminess. Q. VI. 4. Sling, [adj. Casting (instr.] pair of—s. [adj. Lifting (instr.) for Carriage] sp. of Barrels] Slink, [Abortive Bull (young] —away [from -ition adv. Concealing] —back [back -ition adv. Concealing] Slip. Proper, [Slide (dim.] [Stumble through sliding (dim.] [Err] [Omit] -away, [From -ition adv. Concealing] -back, [Back -ition adv. Concealing] -by, [Beside -ition adv. Concealing] -off, [From- ition, &c.] -on, [Upon— ition, &c.] — Clothes cloth (swiftly] — Clothes un-cloth (swiftly] give one the— [From ition adv. Concealing] let— Omit] Let go] Lose] sp. through Carelesness] a— [v. Slip] —of plant, [Branch] to— [From Cut] Pull] [Cord with Loop in the end] —knot, [Tied (part) for a Loop (make] Slipper, [adj. Foot (vest) not adj. p. ty (pot.] Slipperiness. Smoothness] Unctuousness] [adj. Let go (pron.] [Lightness.] Ha. IV. 7. D. Slit Cleft] Chink] to— Cleave] a. Chink] Slive, [Chip] Slo, [Plum of Slow tree] —tree. Sh. I. 4. Slop, [Loose adj. Thigh (vest] Slopeing, [Oblique] Slot, [adj. Foot (sign) of stag] Sloth. [Laziness] NP. IV. 6. O. Negligence. Ha. IV. 5. D. [Sluggardliness] Man. II. 4. O. Beast. Be. III. 2. A. Sloven, [adj. Slovenliness (male] —liness. Man. II. 6. O. Slouch Great (corr.] adj. Rusticity (person] Slough. [Bog] [Abandoned skin] Slow. op. to swift. NP. V. 9. O. op. to soon, [Late] [adj. Protracting] Slow worm. Be. VI. 8. Slubber, [a. Negligence] Unskilfulness] Slovenliness] —over, [Per∣form Negligently] Unskilfully] Slovenly] Sluce, [Stream stopping (jug.] Slug, [adj. Sluggishness] Sluggardliness] Slowness] —abed, [adj. Man. II. 4. D. (person] Sluggard, [adj. Sluggardliness (person] Sluggardliness. Proper. Man. II. 4. O. [Negligence] [Slowness] Sluggishness, Sluggardliness] Laziness] Lumpishness (dim.] Slumber, [Sleep, (dim.] (inc.] Slung, adj. a. pret. sling] adj. p. sling] Slunk, adj. a. pret. slink.] adj. p. slink.]
Slur, Fraud.] Affront] Slurry, Disgrace] Defile] Slut. [Woman (corr.] [adj. Sluttishness (fem.] Sluttishness. Man. II. 6. D. Smack. [Sound of separating the lips] [Kiss] [Tast. Q. IV. (dim.] a—of it, [p. adjunct (dim.] Small. [Little] —nut. Tr. III. I. [Fine] cut— Cut into pieces (dim] Mince] —as—beer, [Weak] —number, [Few] —wares, Wares (dim.] Little (things) of value (dim] Smallage. HF. IV. 9. A. Smaragd, [Emerald] Smart. AC. II. 8. A. —in discourse, [adj. Vigor] —of tast, [adj. Vigor] Freshness] Smatch▪ [Tast (dim.] Smatter, [Skill (dim.] Smear. O. V. 6. A. [a. Defiled (make] Smell. Sense▪ NP. III. 3. —out, [Find by sm.] a—feast, [Flatterer for p. feast] Object. Q. IV. [a. Unsavoriness] Smelt. pret. Smell] adj. p. Smell] Fish. Fi. IX. 2. A. Smile. AC. XIV. 2. Smirking, [Smiling adv. mirth] Smite, [Strike] Smith, [adj. a. Fabrile (person] Smock, [Inmost linnen (vest] sp. of man (fem.] Smoke. El. II. 3. A. [Fume] Exhalation] Vapor] Smooth. Proper, [adj. Q. VI. 2. E.] of behaviour, [adj. Courtesie▪] Complaisance] Smother, [Stifle] Smug, Cleanly (augm.] Ornate (augm.] Smut [Defile with black (dim.] Smutch [Defile with black (dim.] Smutty, [Defiled with black (dim. Snacket, [Hasp of Casement] Snaffle, [Bridle] Snail. Ex. I. 2. A. —Trefoil. HS. III. 15. water— Ex. VII. 1. A. Sea— Ex. VII. 4. Snake. Be. VI. 7. —weed. HL. VII. 3. —wood. Tr. VII. 2. A. Snap. [Bite (imp.] [Sound of bite (imp.] —dragon. HS. VIII. 6. Snaphans, [Gun with Fire∣lock] Snap∣pish, [adj. Rash anger] adj. Biting (apt.] Morose] Snare, [Loop for entangling] [Trap] Snarle. [adj. Anger (voice) of Dog] [adv. a. Con∣fusion, Knit] Entangle] Snatch, [Catch (imp.] by—es, [Sp. I. 8. O. (imp.] Sneak, Look adv. Conceal∣ing (end.] Go adv. Conceal∣ing (end.] into corners, [adj. p. Conceal (end.] Sneaking∣ness. Sheepishness] Abjectness] Sneer∣ing, Dissembling Smiling] Crafty Smiling] Sneezing. Mo. IV. 1. [White Hellebore] —wort. HL. VII. 1. HF. II. 10. Austrian— HF. III. 2. A. Snib, Secret reprehend] Short reprehend] Sniff, [Suck-up breath (imp.) with nose] Snip, [Chip] to— From-cut chip] a. Tuft margent by cut∣ting] Snipe Bi. VII. 7. A. Snite Bi. VII. 7. A. Snivel, [Fluid excrement of the nose] Snore Mo. III. 2. A. Snort Mo. III. 2. A. Snot, [Consistent excrement of the nose] Snow. El. III. 4. A. —drop, [Bulbous violet] HL. IV. 5. A. Snout. [Nose] P. III. 3. A. [Trunk] PP. V. 4. A. Snudge. [Crumpled] Snuff, [Suck up the breath with nose] [Huff] AC. IV. 6. take in— [Be Displeased Angry (with] —of Candle, [Burning end of the Wick of Candle] to— [From- cut the adj. Ashes Shadowing (end of. &c.] Snuffers, [adj. Bright (instr.] Snuffle, [a. Voice through the nose] So. op. to as, Adv. I. 3. O. —that If] Conditionally that] op. to how, Adv. II. 1. O. —Long. —Many. —Much. —Oft. And—forth. Conj. IV. 2. O. So so, [Indifferently] Soake, vid. Soke. Soar, [Fly high] Sob. Mo. III. 4. Sober, [adj. Sobriety] Sobriety. in temper, [Seriousness] In Judgment. Ha. III. 3. In drink. Man. II. 3. In conversation, [Gravity] Soccage.   Sociable. [adj. Homiletical vertue] [adj. Companion Society (apt.] Society. [Companion (abst.] Community. RC. III. A. [Corporation] Sock, [Inner adj. foot (vest] Socket, [Hollow (part) for con∣taining] Sod, [adj. p. Boil] a— [Lump covered with grass] Sodain, vid. Sudden. Sodering. O. IV. 4. Sodomy. RJ. III. 6. A. Soft. Proper, [adj. Q. VI. 1. E. [Gentle] Merciful] Meek] Courteous] Complaisant] Gracious] Clement] Dull] Lazy] Nice] Weak] Slow] [Foolish] Cowardly] Impatient] Sheepish] Pusilsanimous] Soho. Int. III. 1. Soil. Land] Land (kind] [adj. a. Manuring (thing] to— [Manure] [adj. a. Defiling (thing] to— [adj. a. Defiled Spotted (make] —of Boar, [adj. Foot (sign) of Boar adj. pret. going] take— as Deer, [Go into wa∣ter] Sojourn, [a. Guest] Soke.
Steep. O. V. 7. [Drink (augm.] [a. Drunkenness] Solace. [Comfort] [Mirth] Soland Goose. Bi. IX. 4. Solar, [adj. Sun] W. II. 2. A. Sold, adj. a. prt. Sell] adj. p. Sell] Soldier. RM. III. Sole▪ alone; [Solitary] —of foot [Bottom (part] —of shoo [Bottom (part] Fish. Fi. VIII. 1. Spotted— Fi. VII. 1. A. to— —a bowl, [a. b. (place) for volutation (inc.] —ones ear, [Pull (augm.)—] —a shoo, [to- sow bottom (part] Solecism, [a. Grammar (corr.] Solemn, [adj. T. VI. 3. A.] —look, [adj. Gravity, face (manner] Solemnity. T. VI. 3. A. Solemnize. a. T. VI. 3. A. Solicite. [Instead- a. Action] Business] [Intreat, augm.] freq.] Solicitous, [adj. Carking] Solicitude, [Carking] Solid. Body. Ma. I. 4. [Massie] [Sufficient] Judicious] Grave] Soliloqu, [Alone-speaking] Solitary. RO. IV. 2. O. Solitude. [Solitary (abstr.] [Not-inhabited Countrey] Solstice, [Motion (time) of Sun in Tropic] Solve, [a. Solution] Soluble. [adj. Dunging (apr.] [adj. p. Solution (pot.] Solution. D. VI. 5. O. Solutive, [adj. a. Dunging (apt.] Some. —one. Pron. II. 3. O. —certain. Pron. II. 3. —body, [—(person] —time. [in some (time] [adv. at times] Sp. I. 8. O. —what [—(thing] Little (part] (dim.] —while [Through some (time] [adv. Permanence (dim.] Son. [Child] sp. (male] —in Law, [adv. Affinity Son] God the▪— G. II. Song, [adj. p. Sing (thing] sp. verses (aggr.] Sonorous, [adj. Sound (augm.] Sontic. [Hurtful (augm.] [adj. a. Impotent] Soon. Sp. I. 4. —at night, [in the evening] Soop, [Drink by sucking (imp.] Soot. El. IV. 3. A. Sooth, [Truth] Soothing, [Assentation] Soothsayer, [adj. Wizarding (person] sp. by signes] Sop, [Soked bread (lam.] to— [Soke] Sope, Pr. VI. 5. —wort. HL. VII. 3. A. Sophism, [a. Argumentation (corr.] Sophisticate. a. Spurious] Forge] [Make worse by mixture] Sophistry, [adj. Se∣duce (apt.) a. ar∣gumentation (Art] (Manner] Sorb, [Service] Sorce∣ry, Witchcraft sp. by a. Lots] Wizarding sp. by a. Lots] Sordidness. [Slovenliness, [Man. II. 6. D. Baseness. Man. III. 4. D. [Pusillanimity] Man. III. 8. D. Sore. [adj. Pain] [Fierce] (augm. —afraid, [afr. (augm.] to— [Fly high] a— [Ulcer] [Deer (male) of the fourth year] Sorel, [Deer (male) of the third year] Sorites, [Syllogism (aggr.] Sorrel. HF. I. 2. —colour. French— HF. I. 2. A. Sorry. [adj. Grief] Contemptible. TM. I. 4. D. Sorrow, [Grief] Sort. Kind] Species] to— [a. Kinds Species (segr.] [Manner] after a— [in some Manner] Relation] Sortition, [a. Lots] Sot. [Fool (augm.] [Dull (augm.] [adj. Dotage (person] [Drunkard] Souce, [Pickle] Soverain. [Chief] [King] [Excellent] Sought, adj. a. pret. Seek] adj. p. Seek] Souldier. RM. III. —fish. Ex. VI. 5. Soule. W. I. 3. Vegetative— W. I. 4. Sensitive— W. I. 5. Rational— W. I. 6. Sound. adj. Sanity, [adj. NP. V. 2.] [adj. Health] [Whole] Perfect] Great] [Solid] [Sincere] a— Noise. Q. III. Articulate. Q. III. 3. A. Fretum. W▪ IV. 5. [Condited stomach of Cod∣fish] to— [Sound (make] —wll [a Reputati∣on] —ill [a Infamy] [Essay for knowing the depth] [Essay for knowing by con∣ference] Sour. as Vinegar, [adj. Q. IV. 4.] as green Fruit▪ [adj. Q. IV. 3.] [Morose] Look— [Lowr] Source. [Original] [Fountain] [Rise] South. Sp. III. 2. O. —ern wood. HF. II. 10. Sow. [Hog. Be. II. 4. (fem.] —gelder, [Un-adj. a. Testicle (mech.] —'s bred. HL. VI. 6. A. —thistle. HF. III. 14. Insect. Ex. II. 9. —of Lead. [Cast (thing)—] Sowe. as Land, &c. O. III. 4. as Cloth, &c. O. V. 4. —up, Shut by sowing] Joyn by sowing] Souse, [Pickle] Sowter, [adj. Mending (mech.) for adj. Foot (vest.] Sowthistle. HF. III. 14. Space. Sp. Interval, [Between—space] Spacious, [Ample] Spade, [adj. lamin adj. digging (instr.] Spada marina. Fi. VI. 8. Spay, [Un-a. testicle] Spaid, [Red Deer (male) of the third year] Spalt, [Spelter] Met. III. 4.
Span. [Measure by extending the fingers] [Prepare adj. Gun (machin) by a. vertiginating] Spangle, [Little round adj. metal (lamin] Spaniel, [Dog hunting birds by smell] Spanish picktooth. HF. V. 12. Spar. [Lapis Selenites] or [Muscovia glass] [Bolt (augm.] Spare. Not-used] Abundant] —time, [adj. Leisure (time] [adj. Lean] —ribs. to— Not-punish, [a. Clemency] Not-spend, [Save] TA. V. 3. Not-use, [Abstain] Leave] Want] Sparingness, [Frugality] Spark. El. I. 1. A. [Gallant (person] Sparkle. El. I. 1. A. Sparrow. Bi. IV. 3. Mountain— Bi. IV. 3. A. —bill, [Pin (dim.] —hawk, [Least long wing∣ed h.] —mouth'd, [Wide-mouth'd] Sparus. Fi. V. I. A. Spathula, [adj. a. spreading (la∣min. Spatterdashes, [adj. outward-buttoned Leg (vest] Spavin. S. III. 9. Spawl, Spit (augm.] Spawn. PP. IV. 8. A. —er, [Fish (fem.] Speaking. AC. III. 1. —against, [a. Contradicti∣on] —for, [Intercession] —in the nose, [a. Voice through the n.] —with, [Conference] Speaker. [adj. Speaking (person] —in Parliament, [Speaking (Off.] Spear. [Pike] boar— [Pike for hunting b.] fish— [Pike for hunting f.] Kings— [Asphodel] —mint. Special. [Principal] [Particular] op. to general, [adj. TM. III. 4.] Specialty, [Bond] RC. VI. 5. Species. T. I. A. Specifie. [Name the particulars] [a. Example] D. IV. 8. A. Specifical, [adj. a. Species] Specious, [adj. Seeming (perf.] Speck, [Spot (dim.] Speckled. Q. II. 6. Spectacle. [Sight] Mo. V. 7. [adj. Glass (instr.) for helping the fight] Spectator. [adj. Seeing (person] [adj Mo. V. 7. (person] Specula∣tion, Meditation] Inquisition] Speech. Speaking] Spoken (thing] —less, [Not-adj. Speak (pot.] [Oration] [Language] Speed. Swiftness] Soonness] Dispatch] [Event (kind] good— [Prosperity] —well. HS. VI. 11. Female—well. HS. VIII. 9. A. Speight, [Woodpecker] Spell. [Charm] to— AC. III. 4. A. Spelt.   Spelter. Met. III. 4. Spence Room for adj. susten∣tation ord. (things] Box for adj. susten∣tation ord. (things] Spend. TA. V. 3. O. [a. Decay (make] [a. Diminution] —Time— [v. Time.] Spendthrift, [adj. Squandring (person] Sperage.   Sperme. PG. I. 4. Spermaceti.   Spew, [Vomit] Sphacelus. S. I. 8. Sphear. Mag. III. 5. Coelestial, [Orb] W. VI. A. Sphyraena. Fi. IV. 7. Spy. a— RM. III. 5. A. to— [a. Spy] a. Eye.] Sight] Observe] sp. adv. Concealed] Spice. Pr. II. 4. to— [Powder] sp. with Spice] a—of a dis∣ease, Beginning— Degree (dim.) (of disease] Spicknel. HF. V. 4. Spider. Ex. II. 5. —wort. HL. V. 1. A. Crustaceous— Ex. VI. 9. A. Sea— Ex. VI. 9. Water— Ex. II. 4. Spignel. HF. V. 4. Spigot, [Tap] Spike, [Lavender] Spikenard.   Spill. Shed. O. II. 8. O. [Mar] Spin. O. V. 1. A. —out time, [Protract] as a top, [p. Vertiginate] Spinach. HF. I. 8. Spinal, [adj. Backbone] Spindle, [adj. Vertiginating adj. axis (pin) of adj. spinning (mach.] —tree. Sh. II. 10. A. Spink, [Chaffinch] Spinster, [adj. Spinning (mech.] Spiral. Mag. III. 9. Spire Cone] Pyramid] [Steeple] to— as corn, [v. ear (inc.] Spirit. Immaterial substance. W. I. holy— G. III. Angel] Devil] [Soul] Animal— PG. I. 1. —s extracted. Pr. II. 7. Disposition] Temper] Sprightliness] Vigor] Spiritual. [adj. Spirit] Ecclesiastical. RE. —Persons Eccl. RE. II. Spirituous. [adj. Spirit. PG. I. 1.] [adj. Freshness] Spirt, [Syringe] O. I. 6. A. for a— [adv. Transitoriness (imp.] Spit. Excretion. Mo. IV. 4. [Rosting (instr.] —Fish, [Lucius Marinus] —deep, [Deep the length of adj. digging (lam.] Spite, Malignity] Hatred] Envy] in- [adv. Enemy] Contempt▪] —of Contrary to ones will] adj. Coaction] Spittle. [adj. p. Spit (thing] [House of sick (persons] Spitter, [Smooth horned Red Deer (young] Splayfooted, [adj. Oblique foot∣ed] Spleen. PG. VI. 5. A. —wort. HL. I. 7. A. Rough— HL. I. 6. A. Splendid, [Bright] Splendor, [Brightness] Splenetic. [Sick in the Spleen] [Hypochondriac] [Adj. Anger] Spindletree. Sh. II. 10. A.
Splent. [Lamin] sp. adj. Furrow (fig.] [Chip] Splinter, [Chip] Split, [Cleave] [Chink] Spodium. Met. V. 2. Spoil. [Mar] —for use. TA. II. 9. O. Harras. RM. II. 5. D. Spoke. [adj. pret. p. speak] —of wheel. Po. V. 7. A. Spokesman, [Instead-speaker] Spondyl. Ex. VIII. 4. A. [Vertebra] PG. IV. 3. A. Fish. Ex. VIII. 4. A. Sponk, [Touchwood] Sponsion. [Paction] Suretiship. RC. VI. 6. Spontaneity. AS. IV. 9. Spool of weaver.   Spoon. Pr. V. 8. —bill. Ei. VIII. 6. Sport. [a. Wanton] [Play] [Recreation] [Game] [Mirth] Sportful, [Wanton] Spot, [adj. a. Spottedness (thing] Spotted, [adj. Q. I. 5. O.] —fever, [Malignant f.] Spouse, Betrothed (fem.] Married (fem.] Spout. Concave (thing Tube for out-stream∣ing] Narrow (vas for out-stream∣ing] [Faucet] —of Rain. El. VI. 3. to— Powre Syringe Stream (dim.] Sprain, [a. place (corr.] sp. by stretching (exc.] Sprat, [Herring (young] Sprawling. [Creeping] Lying] Reverse] Spread. Unheap. O. II. 6. O. Stretch] AC. VI. 2. Be extended] AC. VI. 2. A [a. Publick (make] A. [a. Contagion] Sprig, [Branch (dim] PP. I. 3. Sprightliness. NP. IV. 2. Spring. [adj. Beginning (part] —of the year. Mea. V. a. Day— [Day (incept.] [Rise] Sp. II. 4. A. —Fount. W. IV. 3. A. [Increase] -Tide, [Tide at the New Full of the Moon] Motion. O. I. 7. -of Lock, [adj. Spring (inst.] to— Sprout] Grow] [Leap] Mo. I. 5. —forth, [Being (inc.] —from, [be Effect] Descendent] —a leak, v. Chink v. Crack (inc.] —a mine, [Find a m.] —Partridges, Rise Fly (make) Partr.] Springal; [adj. Adolescency male] Springe, [Trap of threads] Sprinkle. [Scatter drop] Baste] Powder] Sprit. Boul— (RN. II. 4.) —Sail. Sprout. PP. II. 5. Spruce, [Ornate (augm.] Sprung, a. pret. Spring] adj. p. Spring] Spu, [Vomit] Spud, [Short Knife] Spume, [Froth] Spun, a. pret. Spin] adj. p. Spin] Spunge. HL. I. 11. Spungy, [Porous] Spunk, [Match] Spur. —of Bird. PP. V. 5. -of a boo, [adj. heel (arm.) of horseman] to— [Impulsive] Spurge. HS. V. 11. —Laurel. Sh. III. 5. —Olive. Sh. III. 6. Tree. Sh. IV. 6. Spurket. RN. II. 8. A. Spurious. adj. T. III. 4. op. Spurn, [Strike with foot] Spurry. HL. IX. 10. A. Spurt, vid. Spirt. Squab, [adj. Fat (augm.] to— [Break] sp. by down casting] Squabble, [a. Contention (corr.] Squadron. RM. III. 4. A. Squall, [Exclamation] Squalid, Slovenly] Defiled] Squander. in spending. Man. III. 3. D. not lay up. TA. V. 4. O. Square. Proper Plain. Mag. V. 1. A. Solid, [Cube] Carpenters— [c. adj. Squa∣ring instr.] Improper. [Spread] AC. IV. 2. A. —out of— [Exorbitant] —dealing, [a. Justice] to— [a. square (make] —with, [a. Congruous] Squash, [Break] sp. by down ] Squat. [Sit] a— [Sate] [Bruise] sp. by down casting▪] adj. [Thick short] Squatino-Raia. Fi. II. 3. A. Squeak v. Exclamation acute] Squeal v. Exclamation acute] Squeamish. [adj. Loathing (apt.] sp. of meats] [adj. Niceness] Squeezing Compressing] Straining] Squib. [adj. Gunpowder (instr.) for (sound] [Jest] Squill. HL. IV. 13. Squilla Mantis. Ex. VI. 4. A. Squinancy. S. IV. 9. Squinant, [Camels-hay] Squint, [a. Eye (manner) oblique (corr.] Squire, [Middle (kind) of Gentle∣man] Squirrel. Be. III. 6. Squirt, [a. Syringing] Squirting, [Sorry] St. Int. III. 1. O. Stab. RJ. V. 4. Stability. Steadiness] Fastness] [Constancy] Stable. [adj. Stability] [adj. Horse (room] Stablish. [adj. Stability (make] [a. Confirmation] Stack, [Heap] Stachas. Golden— HF. II. 5. Staff, [Stick] PP. I. 4. —of a Song, [Section of S.] Stag. Be. II. 3. A. —Beetle. Ex. V. 1. A. Stage. [Scaffold] [adj. a. Player Room] —Play, [adj. Player fight] [Journey] [adj. Staying (place] Staggering. Mo. II. 4. O. Doubting] Wavering] Staggers.   Staggerwort, [Ragwort] Stagnate, [v. Stagnum] Stagnum. W. IV. 7. A. Stay, u. Continue rest] a. Discontinue moti∣on] Continue, [Duration] —Little while, [Transitori∣ness] —Long time, [Permanence] —for ever, [Perpetuity]
the same being. T. I. 7. the same gree. T. I. 8. the sae goodness. T▪ I. 9. the same place. TA. VI. O. [Stand his ground] RM. II. 2. [Keep the field] RM. II. 3. [Home] sp. II. 4. [Dwelling] Po. I. A. [Rest] Mo. O. Discontinue. Cohibitive] Impedient] [Obstruction] Hold] Keep] —Injuriously. RJ. IV. 3. A. [Protract] [Desist] —by, Adhere] Constancy] —for, [Wait expecting] —up, Bear] Prop] —upon▪ [Lean] a— [adj. a. Stay thing] great— to one Adjuvant] Refreshing] Bring to that— [a. state] Keep at a— TM. I. 9. Staid, Serious] Sober] Grave] Staies. —of a ship. RN. IV. 1. A. Stain. [Dying] O. V. 3. A. [a. Spottedness] [a. Colour (corr.] [Defile] [Infamy] Stairs. Po. IV. 1. Stake. [Stick] PP. I. 4. [Wager] —down, [a. wager in present money, &c.] Stale. [Old] sp. corr.] —Beer, [B. ripe (augm.] [Urine] sp. Old u.] [adj. Alluring (thing] Stalk. a— —of plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. —of leaf or flower. PP. II. 7. to— Walk lofty. Mo. II. 3. [Go Covered] Concealed] Stall. Room] Table] sp▪ for selling things] Head— [adj. head (par) of bridle] Stallion, [Horse kept for genera∣tion] Stamen▪ PP. II. 6. A. Stammel, [Red (dim.] Stammer, [Stutter] Stamp. [Pound] Mo. VI. 5. —with foot, [Pound with sole of foot] [Contusion] [Print] AC. III. 7. A. Coin, [. money with strike∣ing] Stanch. Cohibit] Desist (make] sp. Dropping] Streaming] [adj. Taciturnity] Reservedness] Stand, Be for some time, unmo∣ved, in posture direct. AC. VI. 1. A. [Being] [Duration] —little while, [Transitoriness] —long time, [Permanence] —of long—ing, [ad] [Rest] —still▪ [Stay] —ones ground. RM. II. 2. [Stagnate] —ing water, [Stagnum] [Consist] Q. V. 5. Place] Situation] Posture] [Direct] Mag. II. 8. E. [Grow] —er, [Tree left for growth] —ing corn, [Not reaped] —about, [Protract] —against, [Resist] -by, Help] Defend] —er by, [Not-concerned (person] —for, [adj. Faction] —child, [Be Godfather] —degree, [Be Candidate] —preferment, [Obtain (end) p.] —in [p. Price] [adj. Permanence] Constancy] Obstinacy] sp. in affirming] —Doubt, [adj. Doubt] —Fear, [adj. Fear] —good-stead Adjuvant] Useful] —the way, [Impedient] —off, adj. aversion] Demurring] —out. [Be constant] sp. Opposing] Resisting] Not-yield] Hold-out] [Be protuberant] —to [Be constant] Assist] Defend] Compensate] Refund] —under, [Bear] —up, Stand] Rise] —upon. Esteem] Value] [adj. Permanence disputing] —with, [adj. Permanence treating] a— [adj. Standing (place] —for drink, [adj. bearing (jug.] —of Pikes, [RM. IV. of p.] Beat a— TM. I. 7. Stand Doubting] Stay Doubting] Keep at a— TM. I. 9. ke a— [Stay (imp.] Standard. [adj. Standing] [Ensign] sp. adj. King] —bearer, [Ensign] RM. III. 2. sp. adj. King] [adj. Permanence] Measure. Mea. II. 4. Standergrass, [Satyrion] Standish, [adj. Ink (vess] sp. Not-adj. p. carry (apt.] Stannery, [adj. Tin (place] Stanza, [Section of Poem] Staphylinus. Ex. V. 7. Staple. for bolt, &c. Po. IV. 6. A. figure. Mag. IV. 5. [Publick sale] Star. Proper. W. II. 1. fixed— W. II. 2. wandring— [Planet] day— [Venus] Morning— [Venus] Evening— [Venus] Blazing— Star. W. II. 3. A. Meteor. El. I. 2. falling— El. I. 2. A. Herb. -of Bethlehem, [Ornithogalon] -wort. HF. III. 9. Sea— HF. III. 10. Fish. Fl. VIII. 6. —in forehead, [Star (like) sign in foreh.] Starboard, [Right side] Starch. Pr. VI. 5. A. Stare. Bi. III. 4. to— AC. IV. 1. as hair [Direct] sp. adv. Confusion] Stareling, [Stare] Bi. III. 4. Stark. [Stiff] (aug.] —Dead, [Whole dead] Start, [Move (imp.) sp. through Fear] Admirati∣on] Passion sign. AC. IV. 5. [Move (imp.] [Run (inc.] —a Hare, [Raise a H.) —aside [a. Levity] —back [a. Levity]
Abandon] Forsake] —up, [Rise (imp.] get the— [Ob∣tain Precedence] Superiority] Starter, [adj. a. Levity (person] Starting hole, [Way of escape] Startle, [Fright (imp.] Startup, [Outmost Leg (vest) for warmth] Starve. RJ. V. 5. Starveling, [Lean (augm.] Starwort. HF. III. 9. Sea— HF. III. 10. State. General. [Quality] [Condition] [Circumstances] Extraordinary, [Solemnity] All together. T. VI. 4. Personal. [Age] Disposition] Temperament] [Dignity] [Degree] sp. of Nobility] Gentility] Take—upon him, [Arrogate, &c.] [Revenues (aggr.] Right] Possession] Civil. RC. the—s, [Chief Magistrates (aggr.] Ecclesiasticals. RE. —of Religion. RE. III. Stately. [Noble] [adj. Solemnity] [adj. Generosity] Proud] Supercilious] Static, [adj. Measuring (art.] Station, Resting (place] Standing (place] Stationary, [adj. Standing] Stationer, [adj. Paper Book (Merc.] Statue, [Image] Statuary, [adj. Image (mech.] Stature, [Height (manner] Statute. [Law] [Morgage] Stave. —a barrel, [Unbottom a b.] —off, Off-keep] a. Distance] sp. with staff.] Stavesacre. HS. I. 4. A. Stead. as Successor. T. VI. 6. as Substitute. T. VI. 6. A. in—of. Prep. II. 1. A. in no— [Not Helpful] Useful] Steadfast. Steady] Fast] To look—ly, [a. Eye adv. heedfulness] Constant] Steady. Not-loose. Q. VI. 6. go— Mo. II· 4▪ Not light, [Constant] Steake, [Fried flesh] Steal. [a. Theft] Come (adv. Concealing] Goe (adv. Concealing] Stealth, [Theft] To come by— [Come adv. Con∣cealing] Steam, [Exhalation] El. II. 2. Steed, [Horse (perf.] Steel. Met. II. 3. a— [adj. Steel (Instr.] Steep Oblique (dim.] Almost-perpendicular] to— [Soke] Steeple. Po. II. 3. A. —figure, Cone] Pyramid] Steer, [Bull (young] to—a ship, [Direct with the Rudder] Steerage, [adj. Rudder (room] Stellion, [Spotted Lizard] Stem. [Descen∣dants, (aggr.] (kind] —of a plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. —of a ship. RN. II. 2. [Austere] Stench, [Unsavoriness] Step. a. Motion] a. Going] Mo. I. 1. —in, Come Enter sp. suddenly] foot— [adj. foot (sign] a— figure. Mag. V. 8. A. —father Father adv. affini∣ty] Mother's husband] —mother Mother adv. affini∣ty] Father's wife] Sterility, [Barrenness] Sterling, [adj. p. Authority by Law] Stern. [Austere] sp. Face (manner] —of a ship. RN. II. 2. A. Stew. Pr. III. 2. A. a— [adj. Bathing (room] [adj Keeping (place) for fish] Steward, [adj. Revenue (Off.] Stewes, [adj. Fornication (house] Sty. [adj. Hog (house] [Pustle within the eye-lid] Stibium, [Glass (like) O. VI. of Antimony] Stick. to— [a. Clamminess] Gluing] Stay. —at Doubt] Demur] —in, [into-fasten] —out, [Protuberance] —through, Prick] Stab] —to adhere] v. Constant] —with Cloves, &c. [Lard with cl. &c. a— PP. I. 4. Stickadove, [Cassidony] HF. VI. 5. A. Stickle, Endeavour (augm.] a. Business] a. Intercession] —back. Fi. IX. 13. A. Stiff. op. to Limber. Q V. 6. D. —gale of wind. El. VI. T. [adj. Rigor] AC. IV. 5. D. [Stout] Zealous] [Rigid] [Pertinacious] —necked. Disobedient] Contumacious] Stifle. RJ. V. 6. Stigmatize. RJ. VI. 6. A. Stile, [Transverse sepiment for over-pition] Still. [Calm] [Gentle] [adj. Silence] Taciturnity] Peaceable] adj. Quieting] [adv. Permanence] Perpetuity] [Yet] [Distill] Stilborn, [Abortive] Stilletto, [Short sword (dim.] Stilts, [Leg-lengthning sticks] Stimulate, [a. Impulsive] Sting. PP. V. 5. A. Stink, [a. Unsavoriness] Stint. Cohibit] Limit] [Remit] [Cease] Bird. Bi. VII. 6. A. Stipend, [Wages] to— RO. VI. 4. A. Stipulation, [Sponsion] Stir. [Move] [Endeavour] [Provoke] —up, [a. Impulsive] —s Troubles] Sedition] Stirrop. Po. V. 8. A. Stitch. Disease, [Cramp] Pain, [Pricking] [Sowing]
through— Totally Perfectly —wort. HS. V. 9. Stithy, [Supporting (instr.) of hammer'd (thing] Stoat. Be. IV. 7. Stoccado.   Stock. —of plant. PP. I. 2. [Descen∣dents. (aggr. RO. I. 1. O. (kind. RO. I. 1. O. [Chief Revenue] Possessions] [adj. a. Gain (thing] Laughing—[adj. p. Laugh (thing] Stockdove. Bi. III. 2. Stockfish.   Stockgilliflower. HS. IV. 1. Stockings, [adj. Leg (vest] Stocks, [Prison for the feet] Stoic.   Stole. adj. a. pret. Steal] adj. p. Steal] [Long loose (vest] Stolidity, [Folly] Stoln, [adj. p. Theft] Stomach. Ventricle. PG. VI. 4. [Appetite] Anger] Courage] Stomacher, [adj. Brest (vest] Stone. St. Common— St. I. middle sort of— St. II. Precious— —less transparent. St. III. —more transparent. St. IV. Weight. Mea. III. 6. —pitch, [Hard p.] Disease. S. VI. 7. —of a plum. PP. II. 2. A. Testicle. PG. VI. 8. A. to—one, [Throw stones at one] —to death. RJ. V. 2. Stonebow, [Cross-bow (dim.] Stonebuck [Goat (kind) having angular knotted horns] Stonecrop. HL. VIII. 5. Stonefern.   Stonesmiche. Bi. V. 8. Stonewort.   Stool. Seat. Po. VI. 5. Close— [Stool (like) adj. dunging (vess.] going to— [a. Dunging] Stoop. AC. VI. 4. —as Barrel, [a. Oblique] Stop. [Stay] [a. Impedient] [a. Binding] Obstruction] [Fill] —up [Shut] [a. Period] to make a— Stay (make] Hinder] Stopple, adj. Stopping. (pin] Tap] Storax. Tr. IV. 2. A. Store. [Provisions] Multitude] Abundance] to— [Lay up] Story, [adj. p. Narration (thing] of building▪ [Degree of rooms] Stork. Bi. VIII. 1. A. Storm. El. VI. 4. to— Chafe, Be angry (augm.] v. Anger (voice] [Assault] RM. I. 6. Stote. Be. IV. 7. Stove. Room. Po. II. 5. [Box for Heating] Drying] Stout. Active. NP. IV. 6. Strong] adj. Fortitude] Hardy] Obstinate] [Perverse] NP. IV. 1. O. [Proud] [Contumacious] Stow, Lay up] Heap] Stradle. Mo. II. 3. A. Straggle, [Wander] Stray, Wander] Err. Straight, vid. Streight. Strain, vid. Strein. Strake, [Variegating line] —of Cart-wheel, [Ring—] Strand, [Shore] W. III. 6. Strange. Not-adj. Custom] Extraordinary] [Seldom] [Not-expected] [New] [adj. Stranger] Stranger. RO. IV. 4. O. Strangle. RJ. V. 8. A. Strangury. S. VI. 7. A. Strap, [adj. Leather thong] —of Boot, [Loop for on-draw∣ing] Strappado. RJ. VI. 3. A. Stratagem. RM. I. 9, Stratifying. Pr. III. 8. Straw. Pr. V. 1. A. —worm, [Cadew] Ex. III. 4. A. to— Scatter] Spread] Strawberry. HS. IX. 1. —tree. Sh. III. 4. Streak, Line. —of Cart-wheel, [Ring—] —s in the sky. El. V. 4. Stream. W. IV. 7. —er. RN. III. 8. Street. Po. II. 7. Streight. op. to crooked, [adj. Ma. III. 1.] [Narrow] Strict, [adj. Rigor] —against. Prep. VI. 3. A. —forward. [adj. Proceeding adv.—] —way, [adv. fut. (dim.] a— [Perplex difficulty] Necessity] Distress] [Fretum] W. IV. 5. Strein. a. Intend] Endeavour (augm.] [Hurt by endeavouring (aug.] Depress (augm.] Compress] [Arrest goods] Percolate. O. VI. 4. a— [Degree] —of musick, [Part of tune] Strength. [Power] —of body. — Vigor] Strength] NP. V. 7. —of mind. — Sprightliness] Fortitude] Military. Forces] RM. IV. Places] RM. VI. Importance] Intenseness] Taste (augm.] Smell (augm.] [a. Drunkenness (apt.] Strenuous. [adj. Stoutness] Diligence] [adj. Strength] Fortitude] Stress, Endeavour (augm.] Depression] Gravity] Stretch. Extend] AC. VI. 2. Pandiculation] Mo. III. 6. O. Long (make] Broad (make] Ample (make] Coaction] Wrest] Strew∣ing, Scattering] Powdering] Striated. Q. II. 6. A. Stricken, [adj. p. strike] in Age, [Old] adj. Mea. VI. 4. Love, [adj. Love (augm.] Years, [Old (augm.] with amazement, [Extasied] Strict. Perfect] Regular (augm.] Rigorous] Severe] Stricture. [Touch (dim.] [Comment (dim.] Stride, [Stradle] Strife, [a. Contention] Emulation]
loose— yellow— HS. V. 12. A. Strike. Proper. Mo. VI. 4. Knock] Pound] Peck] Stab] Cudgel] Cause (imp.] Move (imp.] as Sail, a. Downward] Fall (make] —a bargain, [a. Paction] —blind, [Blind (make] —a colour, [cause a c.] —corn, [a. Even the surface] sp. by upon motion of straight (thing] —fire, [Cause to sparkle] —heat, [Cause h.] —in, vid. Stricken. Come Suddenly] v. Friend Suddenly] Bargain Suddenly] [Stab] —off. —account, Ballance] Acquit] —ones head, [Behead] —out. [Spoil] [Unwrite] —to the heart. [a. Passion (augm.] [Stab] —up. [Begin] sp. Music.] [a. Paction] —ones heels, [Fall (make] sp. by wrestling] —with, vid. Stricken] a— [Bushel] [Stick for a. Even (make] String. [Cord] [Fibre] Strip. [Un- a. Skin] Clothe] [a. Privative] Stripe, [Stroke] —ed, [Variegated with lines] Stripling, [adj. Adolescence (male] Strive. [a. Contention] Emulation] Endeavour (augm.] a. Diligence] —against, [Resist] —for, [Obtain (end] Stroy, [Destroy] Stroke. a— [Striking] bear a. great [adj. power] to— [Wipe with hand] Stromateus. Fi. III. 15. Strong. [adj. Strength] —hold. RM. VI. Strow, [Scatter] Struck, vid. Stricken. Structure, [Building] Struggle. [Wrestle] [Strive] Strumpet, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Strung, adj. a. pret. String] adj. p. String] Strut. [Swell with fullness] [Stalk] [Go proudly] Stub. [Bottom (part) of stock] [Fragment of stick] Stubble. Stalk, [adj. p. residue after reaping] —goose, [adj. Autumn fatted Goose] Stubborn. [Contumacious] [Obstinate] [Perverse] Stuck, adj. a. pret. Stick] adj. p. Stick] Stud, [Protuberance (dim.] Student, [adj. a. Learning (end] Study. Endeavour] a. Diligence] Meditation.] a. Considerateness] Closet, [adj. meditation (room] Studious, [adj. Study (apt.] Stuff. [Matter] —of cloathing. wollen— Pr. IV. 1. Hairy— Pr. IV. 1. A. [Utensils] [adj. Filling (thing] to— [Fill by into-thrusting] Stum, [Wine not-adj. pret. Fer∣menting] Stumble. Mo. II. 5. A. Stump. [adj. Residue (part) after Cutting] Felling] Stupidity. [Dulness] [Numness] S. IV. 6. A. Op. to common sense. NP. II. 1. O. Stupifie, [adj. a. Stupidity (make] Stupor, [Numness] S. IV. 6. A. Stuprate, [adj. a. Fornication] Sturdy. Bold] Valiant] [Obstinate] [Strong] Sturgeon. Fi. I. 8. Stutter. AC. III. 2. Stygian, [adj. Hell] Style, Discourse (manner] Writing (manner] Sentence (manner] to— [Name] sp. of Dignity] of a flower. PP. II. 6. Styptic. [Astringent] [adj. Acerbity] Su. Intreat] Petition] for Marriage, [a. Sutor] Preferment, [a. Candi∣date] [in law, [a. Action] Suasory, [adj. Persuade] Subaltern, [Inferior] Subcontrary [Opposite together-true (pot.] Subdeacon, [Next RE. II. under deacon] Subdivide, [divide the Parts] Species] Subdue, a. Victory] Conquer Subduction, [a. Ablatum] Subject. op. to praed. D. II. 5. op. to adjunct. T. VI. 1. Liable, [adj. p. Subject (pot.] op. to. Governour. RC. I. 1. O. [adj. a. Subjection] [adj. a. Obedience] Submission] Subjection. Man. V. 5. Subjoin, [After-join] Subjunctive.   Subliming, O. VI. 7. Sublimation, O. VI. 7. Sublime.   Sublimity, [Height] Submission. [Humility] [Subjection] op. to conquest. RM. II. 7. D. to Action. TA. IV. 1. A. Suffering. Man. V. 8. Submissive, [adj. Submission] Submit, [a. Submission] Subordinate, [Inferior] sp. in Series.] Suborn. RJ. IV. 6. A. Subpoena, [Citation with express threatning] Subscribe. [Under-write] [Sign] Subsidy, [Tax] Subsidiary, [adj. Adjuvant] Relieving] Subsist. [Being] sp. Absolute] sp. Permanent] [v. Substance] [Maintain himself] Substance. [Predicament. T. I. 5. [Matter] T. II. 7. [Possessions] Po. Substantial. [adj. Substance] [adj. p. matter (perfect] [Of suffici∣ent Wisdom] Possessions]
Substitute, [adj. Stead. TG. VI. 6. A. (person] Substract, a. Ablatum] Diminish] Substruction, [Under-building] Subter∣fuge, Escape] Solution (corr.] Subterraneous, [Under-adj. earth] Subtle. [Fineness] [a. Craftiness] Subvert. [Destroy] [Ruine] Suburb. [City (part) without the walls] Suck. Proper. Mo. III. 3. A. —in, [Suck] —up. —the breath. AC. IV. 6. D. give— [Lactation] Succedane∣ous, Instead-of coming] adj. Succeed] Succeed. Be after, Mag. I. 2. D. Be Successor, [a. T. VI. 6.] Come by Succession. RC. IV. 2. A. [Be Event] —ill, [adj. Adversity] —well, [adj. Prosperity] Success. [Effect] [Event] —of war. RM. II. [Prospering] Succession. RC. IV. 2. A. Successive, [adj. Succeed, adv. Series] Successor, [adj. a. Succeed (per∣son] Succinct, Brief (perf.] adj. Epitomy] Succor, [adj. Adjuvant] Relieve] Succory. HF. II. 16. A. Gum— HF. III. 11. A. Succuba, [adj. Coition (fem.] Succulent, [adj. Juice] Succus nutritius. PG. I. 2. A. Such. [of that Quality] Quantity] [of the same quality] like quantity] —as it is, [Such so ever] Suck, vid. Suc. [a. Suction] —up the breath. AC. IV. 6. D. give— [Lactation] Sucker. Branch. PP. I. 2. A. —of a Pump, [adj. Suck∣ing (part] Sucket, [Confection] Suckle, [Lactation] Suction. Mo. III. 3. A. Sud, [Froth] Sope—s. Suddain. [Soon] [Swift] [adj. Dispatch] Sudorific, [adj. a. Sweat (make] Suet, [Hard Fat] Suffer. [Passion] —affliction, [adj. p. afflicti∣on] —persecution, [adj. p. Per∣secution] —punishment, [adj. p. pu∣nishment] —execution, [adj. p. Exe∣cution] Licence] Toleration] Not-hinder] —to take, [Yield] TA. IV. 1▪ —to do, [Submit] TA. IV. 1. A. Meekness] Condescension] Patience] Submission] Sufferance, Licence] Toleration] Suffice, [adj. Sufficience] Sufficience. TM. I. 3. Sufficient, [adj. Sufficience] —man, [Of Suff. Wisdom] Riches] Suffocate. [Stifle] [Strangle] Suffocation of the womb. S. VI. 9. A. Suffragan, [Instead Bishop] Suffrage, [Consent (sign] Suffumigation, [Fuming] Suffusion, [Spreading] Sug, [Sea-lea] Ex. II. 11. A. Sugar. Pr. II. 3. Suggest. Think (make] Remember (make] [Dictate] Suit. Intreaty] Petition] —in law, [Action] Aggregate. TM. III. 8. to—with, [adj. v. Congruity] Suitable, [adj. Conveniency] Congruity] Suiter. [adj. Intreating (per∣son] Petitioning (per∣son] —for marriage. RO. II. 2. [Candidate] RC. I. 4. A. Sullen. [Disingenuous] [Morose] [Contumacious] Sully. [a. Colour (corr.] [Defile] Sulphur. St. V. 7. —wort, [Peucedanum] Sultan, [King] Sultry, [Hot (exc.] Sum. —of money, [Money (aggr.] total— TM. VI. 6. A. Sumach. Tr. III. 2. A. Red— Sh. V. 5. A. Summary, [Epitome] —ly, [Briefly] Summer. Mea. V. 2. A. [Principal beam] Summer∣sault, Leap] Vault] Summon, [a. Citation] Summum jus. Man. I. 2. O. Sumner, [adj. Citation (Off.] Sumpter, [adj. Riding (apt.) box] Sumptuary, [adj. Spend] Sumptuous. [adj. Spend (augm.] Price (augm.] [Generous] Sun. True. W. II. 2. A. —Shine, [Brightness] to— [Open to the Sun] appearing—[Parelius] Sunday, [First day of the week] Sunder, [Separate] Sundew. HL. VI. 8. A. Sundry, [adj. Diversity] Sunflower, HF. II. 1. Sung, a. pret. Sing] adj. p. Sing] Sunk, a. pret. Sink] adj. p. Sink] Sup. [Suction] [Drink adv. Suction] [adj. Evening meal] Superabound, [more-abound] Superciliousness. Man. VI. 3. O. Supereminence, [Superiority] Supereroga∣tion, a. good more-than duty] Deserve for o∣thers] Superfetation, [Again-concepti∣on of impregnated (fem.] Superficial. [adj. Superficies] Slight] Careless] Superficies. Surface] [Outside] Superfine, [Fine (augm.] Superflui∣ty, Excess] Abundance] Superinducing, [Again-marrying of married (person] Superintend. [adj. p Office] sp. to observe what others do in their Offices] Superintendent. [adj. Superintending (per∣son] [Bishop] Superiority. TM I. 5. E. Relation of— RO. III. Superlative.
[Most— Great] Excellent] [Principal] Supernal, [adj. Upper side] Top] Supernatation, [Upon-swim∣ming] Supernatural, Above- adj. na∣ture] adj. Miracle] Supernumerary, [Beside the due number] Superscription, [Upon-write] Super∣sede, Desist] Omit] Superstition. RE. IV. E. Superstructure, [Upon-building] Supervene, [Whilst-event] Supine, [Careless] Supper, [adj. Evening meal] —of the Lord, [Eucharist] Supplant. [a. Fraud] [Dispossess by fraud] Supple, Soft] Limber] Supple∣ment, adj. Supplying (thing] Vantage] Supply. a. Adjuvant] adj. a. Perfect] [Un-deficient (make] [Again-fill] [Relieve] Compensate] Repair] [a. Room] T. VI. 6. Suppliant, [adj. a. Petition (per∣son] Supplicate. [Intreat] [a. Petition] Support. [Bear] [a. Adjuvant] [a. Patron] [Maintain] Supposing. [Thinking] [v. Opinion] [v. Supposition] Supposition. D. VI. 3. Supposititious, [Forged] Suppository, [Cylinder (dim.) Medicinal] Suppress. a. Victory] Conquer] [Conceal] Suppuration, [Ripening of rotten (thing] Supremacy, [Right of being most principal] Supreme, [Most principal] Surbate, Un-skin Bruise by motion (freq.] Surcease, [Desist] Surcharge, [Burden (exc.] Surcingle, [About-adj. p. bind∣ing (arm.] sp. for horse] Surcoat, [adj. Upper (vest] Surd, [adj. Deafness] —number, [Root not-expres∣sible by numbers] Sure. Certain] Assured] [Betrothed] Constant] Faithful] [Fast] [Safe] Surely, [Truly] adv. I. 2. O. Surety, [adj. (Sponsion (person] Surface, [Superficies] [Outside] Surfeit. [Sickness through Eating (exc.] Drinking (exc.] Labor (exc.] [Excess] [Gluttony] Surge, [Wave▪ (augm.] Surgeon. RC. II. 3. A. Surly, Fierce] Morose] Supercilious] Surmise. [Opinion] [Conjecture] Distrust] Jealousie] Surmount, [v. Superior] Surname, [adj. Family name] Surpass. [a. Excess] Excell] Superiority] Better] Surplice, [Upper linnen (vest) of Ecclesiastic (person] Surplus. [Residue] [Vantage] Surprize, Take Unexpectedly] Arrest Unexpectedly] sp. by Stratagem] sp. by Ambush] Surque∣dry, Pride] Insolence] Surrender. [Let go] Yield] Submit] [Deliver] Surreptitious, [adj. Theft] Forgery] Surrogate, [Substitute] Surround, About-go] a. Circle] Survey. [a. Eye] [Consider] [Measure] Surveyer. [Officer for observing others] sp. in building] [adj. Measuring (artist] Survive, [Continue after-li∣ving] Suspect. [Distrust] Diffidence] Jealousie] [a. Censoriousness] Suspence, [Doubtful Expectarion] Demurring] Wavering] Suspend. RE. V. 4. Suspition, vid. Suspect. Sustein. [Bear] [Maintain] [Suffer] [a. Patience] Sustenance, [adj. nourish∣ing (thing] Sustentation, [adj. nourish∣ing (thing] Ordinary. Pr. I. Extraordinary. Pr. II. Sutable, [Congruous] Suture— [Sowed Series] Line] Swabber. RN. V. 7. Swaddle, [About-bind adj. bot∣tom (like] [Cudgel] Swag, [adj. p. Oblique] sp. with shaking (imp.] Swage, [a. Remission] Swagger. [a. Insolence] [a. Glorying (corr.] Sway. Power] Authority] Direction] [a. Magistrate] [a. Oblique (make] Swain. [adj. Country (person] Swallow. Bird. Bi. V. 1. —tail, [adj. Mag. IV. 4. end of beam]▪ —wort. HS. IV. 14. A. Sea— BI. IX. 9. A. —fish. Fi. III. 6. A. —ing. Mo. III. 7. A. [Gulf] Swan. Bi. IX. 1. Swap, [Exchange] Swarm, [adj. Aggregate (thing] Multitude (thing] Swart, [Dark (dim.] Swarth, [Ridge of mowen grass, &c.] Swashbuckler, [adj. Boasting (person) of fighting] Swathe, [About-bind adv. bot∣tom (like] Swear. RC. VI. 4. Sweat. Mo. IV. 3. Sweeping, [Brushing] Sweet. Proper. Q. IV. 1. —bread, [Glandule] PG. II. 7. A. —meats, [Banquet (thing] [adj. p. Love] Delectation] —heart, [Suter] [adj. a. Pleasure] —music.
[adj. a. Courtesie] Swell. [Tumor] [v. Protuberance] Swelter, [a. heat (exc.] Swerve, [Err] Swift, [adj. Swiftness] Bird. Bi. V. 14. Swiftness. NP. V. 9. Swill, [Drink (augm.] —for swine, [Drink for swine] Swimming. Mo. I. 4. Disease, [Vertigo] Swine, [Hog (kind] —s bread, [Sow-bread] —s grass, [Knot-grass] —Pipe, [Redwing] Bi. III. 5. A. Swing. Mo. VI. 3. Swinging, Striking (aug.] Whipping (aug.] Cudgelling (aug.] adj. [Great (augm.] Swingle, [adj. Striking (part) of adj. threshing (instr.] Swipe, [adj. Lifting (instr.) on direct Pole] Switch, [Wand] PP. I. 4. A. to— [Cudgel with wand] Swivel, [Wheel] Swoln, [adj. p. Swell] Swoon. S. V. 5. A. Sword. Proper. RM. V. 2. A. Put to the— [a. Dy (make) with sword] —of Bacon. [Skin of Bacon] —fish. Fi. I. 2. A. green— [Grassie land] Sworn, [adj. p. Swear] pret. Swear] Swum, [pret. Swim] Swung, [pret. Swing] Sycamore. Tr. VI. 6. A. Sycophant. [adj. Fawning Accu∣ser] Syllable. D. I. 3. Syllogism. D. IV. 7. Sylvan, [adj. Woods. (person] Symbol, [Sign] sp. adj. Private] sp. adj. Obscure] sp. adj. p. Concealing] Symbolizing, [adj. Congruity] Symmetry, [Proportion (perf.] Sympathy, Congruity (pron.] Friendship] (pron.] Together-suffer∣ing] (pron.] Pity] Congratulation] sp. Concealed] Sympho∣ny, Concord] Harmony] Symptom, [Simultaneous sign] sp. corr.] Synagogue, [adj. Jews Church] Convention Eccle∣siastic] Temple] Synchronism, [Narration of simul∣taneous (things] Syndic, [Magistrates Assessor] Synedrium, [adj. Jews principal Council] Synod, [Council Ecclesiastic] Synonym, [Of same meaning] Synopsis, [Epitome] Syntax, [Together-joyning of Integrals] Syren.   Syringe, [Tube for syringing] Syringing. O. I. 6. A. Syrt, [Quicksands] W. III. 7. Syrup. Pr. II. 3. A. System, [Epitome] T. TAbacco. HS. VII. 11. Tabernacle, [Tent] Tabid, [adj. Consumption] Table, Lamin sp. adj. Tressel (fig. sp. for a. meal. Lamin. for upon-writing. —Book, [Book of Lamins upon-adj. p. writing (apt.] [Catalogue] for upon-playing. Pair of — s, [adj. Mo. V. 2. A. (jug.] —man, [adj. Mo. V. 2. A. (instr.] Play at—s. Mo- V. 2. A. Adj. Tressel (fig.) Po. VI. 4. Meat. Plentiful— to—[a. Host] Guest] Tabler, [Guest] Tablet, [Flat Gem] Tabor [Drum (dim.] Tabret [Drum (dim.] Taca mahaca. Tr. VIII. 7. A. Tachygraphy, [Swift writing (art.] Tach, Hook] Loop] Tacit. [adj. Silence] [Understood] adj. D. III. 8. O. Taciturnity. Man. IV. 5. Tack. [Pin (dim.] hold- [Hold out] RM. II. 4. to— [Fasten] sp. with pin (dim.] [Turn] Tacks of ship. RN. IV. 7. Tackling, [Armament] —of ship, [Rigging] Tactic, [War (art] sp. of Ordering. RM. IV. Tactil, [adj. Feeling] —Quality. Q. V. Tadpole, [Toad (young] Taedium. AS. V. 1. O. Taenia major. Fi. VI. 3. —minor. Fi. VI. 3. A. Taffety, [Silk adj. Sound (apt.) in p. motion] Tag, [Pin of string] —&—rag, [Rabbe] Tail. PP. VI. 6. A. to— [Tie by the tail] Tailor, [adj. Clothing (mech.] Taint. [a. Contagion] [adj. Rottenness (make] [Defile] Take, Cause to be out of anothers &—in ones own possession] Proper. without consent. TA. I. 4. Judicially. Person or Goods, [a. Ar∣rest] Part for Whole, [a. Seisin] Injuriously, [Usurp] Militarily. Person, [Captivate] Place. RM. II. 4. E. Goods, [a. Booty] with consent. Receive] Accept] Improper. Undertake] Think] Esteem] [Elect] [Find] To—ition] Into-ition] [Obtein] sp. its end] [Please] [Have] [Use] —account, [Reckon (make] —the air, [Go into the open Air] —Breath, [a. Breath] —Exceptions, Except] adj. v. Displi∣cence] —fire, [adj. v. fire (inc.] —Head, adj. p. Power (inc.] adj. Disobe∣dience (inc.] —Heart, [adj. p. Encourage∣ment] —Heavily, [adj. a. Grief for] —Heed, a. Heedfulness] Observe] —his heels, [Fly] —the height, [Measure the h.] —hold, [a. Hand (inc.] —horse. as a man, [Up-ition upon his h.] as mare, [v. Coition] —ill, v. Displicence] Esteem not-adj. friend] —Leave, [a. Valediction] —Notice, [Observe] —Oath, [Swear] —pains, a. Diligence] Operation (augm.]
—place, [Precede] —a pride, [Glorying] —Prisoner, [Captivate] —a Purse. [Steal a purse] [Rob money] —Root, [a. Root] —shipping, [into a. ship] —tardy, Discover defect] Find adj. pres. acti∣on] —warning, [adj. p. Warning] Heedfulness] —Water. [Into-take water] [Go into water] [Navigate (inc.] —well, [adj. p. Delectation] Consent] —away. [a. Privative] Diminish] a. Ablatum] —forth, Imitate] Proceed to learn] —in. —a town. RM. II. 4. E. —hand, Undertake] Attempt] —Pieces, [Separate the parts] —Writing, [Write] —off From-take] Diminish] —on. [a. Grief (sign] Anger (sign] —to, To-ition] Confidence] —Mercy, [Be merciful to] —Wife, [Marry] —up. [Lifting take] [Reprehend] sp. angerly] —Cloth, [Buy c. &c. with∣out paying] —money, [Borrow money] —a quarrel, [Un-adj. a. con∣tention (make] —his rest, [Rest] —time, [Spend t.] —upon him, [Claim] Taken, [adj. p. Take] —for, [In∣stead— Thought] Judged] —with. as with diseases, [Sick] as with pleasure, [Pleased with (augm.] Talc. St. II. 5. A. Tale. [Narration] sp. adj. fiction] [Number] —bearer, [Backbiter] Talent. [Natural power] [Acquired Habit] Talio, [Compensation] Talisman, [adj. Wizarding I∣mage] Talk, Speech] Conferring] Discourse] Talkative, [adj. Loquacity] Tall, [High] —wood [Blocks] Tally, [Notched stick for reckon∣ing] Tallow, [Hard Fat] sp. for Candle (make] Talon, [Claw] PP. V. 3. Tamarind. Tr. VI. 2. A. Tamarisk. Sh. V. 2. Tame, [adj. Tameness] to— Tame (make] Conquer] Tameness. Disposition, [Gentleness] Vice. op. to Fortitude, [Cowar∣dize] op. to Peaceableness. Man. IV. 3. E. Tan. [a. Yellowness (corr.] Make Leather by juice of Oak] Prepare Leather by juice of Brasil] &c. Tang, [Tast (dim.] sp. Unsavoriness (dim.] Tangent. Mag. II. 4. Tangible, [adj. p. touch (pot.] Tangle. O. II. 2. A. Tankard, [Pot having cover] Tanner, [adj. a. Leather (mech.] Tansy. HF. II. 12. Maudlin— HF. II. 4. A. Wild— HF. IX. 1. Tap. [Striking (dim.] to—[Strike (dim.] Spiggot. Pr. V. 7. —House, [adj. Selling (House of Ale] —House, [adj. Selling (Room of Ale] to—[Stream (make] sp. by into-thrusting fau∣cet] Tape, [Narrow Ribbon] Taper. [adj. Wax candle] [Conical] Tapestry, [adj. Room (vest) wo∣ven with pictures] Tapster, [adj. Selling (Off.) of Beer, &c.] Tar, [Black li∣quid Rosin of Fir Pine &c. trees out∣drawn by fire] Tarantula, [Spider (aug.) adj. poison (apt.) by bie∣ing] Tardy. Slow] Late] [Guilty] take—[Find adj. pres. acti∣on] Tare, [Worst part] Tares. HL. III. 5. Target, [Buckler] Tarragon. HF. II. 10. A. Tarras. [adj. Walking (place) on Building] [Courser plaister adj. p. hard (apt.) in water] Tarry. [Stay] —for, [Wait] Delay] Protract] Tart. [adj. Austereness] Q. IV. 3. a— [Py of fruits] sp. of sowr f.] Severe] Austere Man. VI. 8. O. Tartar. St. V. 4. Task, Appointed operation] Undertaken business] —work, [adv. Aggregate (segr.] Tassel, Tuft] Tufted Button] —of hawk, vid. Teircel] Tast. the Sense. NP. III. 4. Sensible quality. Q. IV. to— a. Tast] a. Essay] sp. by tasting] —er. [before adj. tasting (off.] [Cup (dim.) for essaying by tast] Tatter, [adj. Tear freq.] augm.] a— [Fragment from adj. p. tear] Tattle, [a. Loquacity] sp. Uncertain] Tavern, [adj. Wine (merc.) house] Taught, adj. a. pret. Teach] adj. p. Teach] Taunt. [Mock] [Reproach] [Reprove adv. Mock] Reproach] Taurus, [Second of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Tautology, [Repetition of words] sp. Vain] Taw, Beat] Rub] sp. for Limberness (make] Tawny, [Dark yellow] Tax. [Proportion] Payment public. RC. V. 9. A. [Price] to— [a. Tax] [Accuse] [Reproach] Teach, [a. Teacher] —er. RO. III. 3. Teal. Bi. IX. 3. A. Team, [Series] sp. of drawing beasts] —of ducks, [Aggregate of ducks (young] Tear.
a— [adj. p. Weeping drop] Iob's—s. —ing. Mo. VI. 6. A. Teat, [Dug] PG. IV. 2. A. sp. Nipple of it] Teazle. HF. VIII. 1. Technical, [adj. Art] Tedious. Irksom, [adj. a. AS. V. 1. O. (apt.] Tiring, [adj. a. Wearying (apt.] Long (exc.] Slow (exc.] Teeming, [adj. p. pret. impreg∣nate] Teeth, [plur. Tooth] Teint, vid. Taint. Telescope, [Tube for seeing re∣mote (things] Tell. [Say to] [a. Narration] cannot— [Know not] [a. Openness] Loquacity] [a. Discover] Shew] —tale Blab] Informer] [admonish] [a. Number] Tellina. Ex. VIII. 6. A. Temerity, [Rashness] Temper. natural— NP. —of mind. NP. IV. —of body. resp. Individ. NP. V. resp. Propagation. NP. VI. Iust— TM. I. 8. [Disposition] out of— [Sick (dim.] to— [Mix] [a. Mediocrity (make] [Moderate] Temperament, ]Temper] Temperance. Man. II. 1. Temperate. [adj. Temperance] adj. Mediocrity] Moderation] —Heat, &c. Q. V. 1, &c. Tempest. El. VI. 7. A. Temple. Po. II. 4. Temples. PG. III. 7. A. Temporal. [Secular] adj. RE. O. [Transitory] [adj. Temples.] Temporality, [Secular estate] Temporary, [Transitory] Temporize, adj. a. Con∣gruity with times] Alter with times] Tempt. [Try sp▪ into a. vice] [Allure sp▪ into a. vice] [Seduce sp▪ into a. vice] Ten.   Tenacity. [Keeping (apt.] [Penuriousness] Tenant, [Hirer of Farm] House] Land] Tench. Fi. IX. 7. A. Sea— Fi. VI. 4. Tend. [v. Tendency] [Wait] [v. Leisure] Tendency. Sp. III. A. Tender. Soft] Brittle] [adj. p. Hurt (apt.] Gentle] Nice] Compassionate] Merciful] Courteous (augm.] Clement] Fond] [adj. Aversati∣on from Hurting Offending to— [a. Tender] [Offer] Tendon. PG. II. 2. A. Tendrel. PP. II. 7. A. Tenement, [Farm] Tenent, [adj. Affirmed (thing] Tennice, [Balling with adj. net (fig.) striking (instr.] Tennon, [Protuberance (dim.) in the end of beam] Tenor. Contained (thing] Sum] [Meaning] —in musick, [next (part) a∣bove the Base] Tent. Tabernacle. Po. II. 1. A. —work, [White Maiden hair] HL. I. 5. [Pin of Down (like) for stop∣ping wound] Tenter, [Hooked Pin] Tenth, [adj. Ten] Tenuity, [Thinness] Tenure, [Right (kind] Tepid. Q. V. 1. Terce, vid. Tierce. Tergiversation. [Deny] [Forsake] sp. Cowardly] Unfaithfully] [Demur] Term] [Limit] [Time] sp. limited] [adj. . (time] [Word] [Name] —s Conditions] State] Coming off upon equal— RM. II. 1. Termi∣nate Desist] End] Termination, [Ending (part] Ternary, [Three] Terrene, [adj. Earth] Terrestrial, [adj. Earth] Terrible, [adj. a. fear (make] Herb. Sh. VI. 3. Terrier. [Catalogue of lands] [Dog for hunting beasts out of holes in the earth] Terrifie, [adj. a. Fear (make] Territory, [adj. authority▪ place] Terse. [Wiped] [Clean] [Smooth] Tertian, [Returning every second day] Test. [Trial. [Vessel (dim.) for trial by melting] Testaceous, [adj. Shell. PP. III. 2. Testament. [adj. Bequeathing writing] [Scripture] RE. VI. 1. Testator, [adj. Bequeathing (per∣son]▪ Testy, [Morose] Testicle. PG. VI. 8. A. Testifie, [a. Witness] Testimo∣ny Witnessing (thing] Witnessed (thing] Testimonial. [adj. Witnessing (thing] sp. Writing] Testor. [adj. Covering (jug.) of bed∣stead] [Half shilling] Tet, vid. Teat. Tether, [adj. tying (thing for the leg] Tethya. Ex. IX. 6. Tetter. S. III. 2. A. Tew, [Pull (augm.] Text. [adj. Subject writing] [adj. Scripture sentence] Texture, [Weaving] sp. (manner] Thanks, [a. Gratitude] —fulness, [Gratitude] Thanksgiving, [a. Gratitude] —to God. RE. IV. 3. That. [the] Art. II. [he] Pron. I. 3. that. Pron. II. 1. O. —Same, [Same] [Which] Pron. III. 2. A. that. Conj. III. 1. Thatch, [adj. Straw roof] to— [a. Roof with straw] Thaumaturgic, [operation (art) of things adj. p. admiration (apt.]
Thawing. [Un-a. frost] [Dissolving] The. Art. II. Theater, [adj. Sights a. Player Place] Thee, [Thou] Theef, [adj. These (person] Theevery RJ. III. 7. A. Theft— RJ. III. 7. A. They Pron. I. 3. pl. Them Pron. I. 3. pl. Theme, [Subject adj. p. Speaking] Writing] Then. Comparative. Adv. III. 1. O. [at that time] how— How therefore] what Next] if- [If Therefore] Next] Thence. From that (thing] (time] (place] Theology, [Divinity] Theologue, [Divine] Theorem, [Rule adj. Theory] Theo∣ry, Meditation] Inquisition] sp. adj. a. Science (apt.] There, [in that Thing] Place] —about. Adv. V. 3. —fore. Conj. III. 3. O. —in in it] —of of it] —upon [Upon it] [Upon that] Conj. IV. 1. O. Thesis. [Proposition] [Positive sentence] Thi, [adj. Thou] Thick. as to magnitude. TM. II. 5. as to number, [adj. multi∣tude] as to time, [Frequent] [as to place, [Obvious] as to parts. Their greatness, [adj. Course∣ness] Their nearness to each other, [adj. Density] the cause of it. In Arids, [Fulling] In Liquids, [Coagulating] our sence of them, [adj. Opa∣city] the sense it self. —of hearing, [Dull of hearing] Thick∣e, Shrubs (aggr.] Woods (dim.] Thigh. PG. V. 4. Thill, [Shafts] Thiller, [The horse between the Shafts] Thimble, [adj. Finger, (armam. (armor for sow∣ing] Thin. as to magnitude. TM. II. 5. O. [Lean] as to number, [adj. Fewness] as to time, [Seldom] as to place, [Rare] as to parts] their nearness, [Rare] their bigness, [Fine] The cause of it. In Arids. In Liquids, [Dissolving] Our sense of it, [Transparent] Thine, [adj. Thou] Thing. T. I. 2. (Thing) Think. [Cogitation. AS. II. 1. [v. Opinion] me—s, [I am adj. opinion] [adj. v. Perswasion] [Consider] [v. Meditation] [Esteem] —good Approve] Consent] —much, [adj. v. Nolleity] —well of, [Esteem (aug.] good] Third, [adj. Three] Thirsting. AC. II. 2. Thirteen. 13. Thirty. 30. This. Pron. II. 1. Thistle. HF. III. 1. Fullers— [Tezzle] Globe— HF. VIII. 2. Sow— HF. III. 14. Thither, [To that place] —ward, [Toward that place] Thlaspi. HS. VI. 3. Thong. Pr. IV. 8. Fi. II. 2. A. Thorn. Prickle. PP. I. 3. A. Tree. Black— Sh. I. 4. Box— Sh. I. 6. A. Bucks— Sh. I. 7. Christs— Sh. I. 6. Ever green— Sh. III. 4. Goats— Sh. IV. 9. Purging— Sh. I. 5. White— Sh. I. 3. A. —Apple. HS. VII. 7. A. Thornback. Fi. II. 2. A. Thornback Dog. Fi. I. 5. Thorpe, [Village] Those, [Plur. He] That] Thou. Pron. I. 2. Though, [Although] Conj. II. 2. Thought, v. [Thinking] —Taking Anxiety] Heedfulness] Thoughtfulness, [Thinking (aug.] Heedfulness] Carking] Thousand. 1000. —pound. in weight. Mea. III. 8. in money. Mea. IV. 7. Thrall, [Slave] Thrasonical, [Boasting Coward] Thrave, [24 Sheaves] Thred. to—a needle, [Through-put thred] Thred-bare, Worn to the threads] Un-adj. p. Wool by wearing] Threatning. RO. V. 6. O. Three. Mea. I. 3. —Fold, [Three (kind] Threescore. 60. Thresh. O. III. 5. Threshold. Po. IV. 3. Thrice, [adv. Three] Thrill. [Bore] [v. Inward trembling (like) sound] Thrift. [Frugality] Herb. HF. II. 14. A. Thrifty, [adj. Frugality] Thrive. [adj. p. Prosperity] Increase] Become rich] Grow] adj. v. Vigour] Throb, [Pulse of the heart] sp. Pulse (augm.] Throne, [adj. King Chair] Throng, [Dense multitude] to— Thrust] a. Density] Throstle, [Thrush] Throat PG. III. 5. A. Set out— [Exclamation] —Boll, [Protuberance of the (th] —wort. HS. VII. 7. A. Throttle, [Protuberance of the Rough Artery] to— [Strangle] sp. by compressing throat] Through. Prep. IV. 3. Perfect] Total] Only] —& through, [Through both sides] —fare, [Through-passage] —out, [adv. Perfect] Whole] —Paced Perfect Only— ambling] —stitch, [Perfect] quite— [Through both sides] [For] Prep. I. 2. A. [By Impulsion Means of] [With] Prep. I. 1. A. [Over] Prep. III. 3. [By] Prep. I. 2. Through wax. HF. IV. 14. Codded— HS. IV. 6. A. Throw. [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. —a dart, [a. Dart] —down, [a. Fall] —Person, [Precipitate] —Building, [a. Ruine] —forth Unpossess] —out Unpossess] Pang, [Pain (imp.]
Thrum, [Tuft] Thrush. Bi. III. 3. A. Sea— Fi. V.9. Thrusting. O. I. 4. O. —forth [Un-possess] —out [Un-possess] Himself in, [Usurp] —into, Prick] Stab] —through, [Through Stab] Wound] Thumb, First Finger] biggest Finger] Thump. [Strike] sp. with obtuse (thing] [Sound of striking] Thunder. El. I. 3. A. —Bolt Long (dim.) Peb∣ble (kind] —stone Long (dim.) Peb∣ble (kind] Thursday, [5th day of the week] Thus. [In this manner] —far, [Until this (time] (place] Thwack, Strike] Cudgel] Thwart. [adj. Transverse] Cross] [Contrary] [adj. Disingenuity] to— [Oppose] [Contradict] Ty. Knit. O. II. 2. [Bind] [Oblige] Tice, [Allure] Tick, vid. Tike. Ticket, [adj. Written (dim.] Tickling. AC. II. 8. Tide. motion of the Sea. W. IV. 6. A. Season, [Time] good— [Festival] Tidings, [Narration] sp. of new (thing] Tierce, [2/ of a Hogshead] Tiercel, [Hawk (male] Tiffany.   Tigby, [Laugh (exe.] Tight. [Whole] [Stiff] Tike. [adj. Countrey Rusticity (person] Insect. Ex. II. 6. Sheep— Ex. II. 6. A. Bed— [Case of Bed] Tile. St. I. 5. A. to— [a roof with Tiles] Till. a— in a Chest, [Box (dim.) adj. drawn (apt.] adv. [Untill] to— [a. Prop] [Allure] a. Agriculture] a. Plow] —ed Land, [Arable] Tillage, [Agriculture] Tilt. a— [adj. Cloth roof] to— [Fence with Spear] —a vessel, [adj. a. Oblique v.] Tilth, [State] sp. of Land] Land in— [L. adj. p. agricul∣ture (perf.] Timber [Wood for building] —of fur [aggregate—] Timbrel, [adj. Music (instr.] Time. Space. Sp. I. —to come, &c. [ Future, &c.] at—s. Sp. I. 8. O. at all—s. [adv. Perpetuity] often—s, [adv. Frequency] Some—s, [adv. Rarity] [Date] Duration] Age] for a— [adv. Transitory] Long— [adv. Permanence] —in music. measure of— Mea. V. Leisure] Opportunity] in— adv. time (perf.] in good— adv. time (perf.] out of— [adv. time (corr.] [Action in the—] First, [f. action] the—s, [adj time (things] Time. Herb. HF. VI. 4. Timely. [Opportune] [Early] Timeserving, vid. Temporizing. Timidi∣ty, Fear (apt.] Cowardise] Timorous, [adj. Timidity] Tin. Met. I. 3. —glass, [Bismute] Met. III. 3. to— a. surface with Tin (lam.] Tinca marina. Fi. VI. 4. Tincture. [Dying] [Coloured Liquor] [Colour] Tind, [v. Fire (inc.] Tinder, [Charred Linen] Tine, [Toothed (pin] Ting, [Ring (dim.] sp. adv. acute] Tingle. AC. II. 9. A. Tinker, [adj. Wandring. adj. me∣tal (mech.] Tinkle, [Ring (dim.] sp. Acute] Tinsel, [Cloth between-woven with Copper silver (like] Tintamar, [Jangling sound (augm.] Tip. Sp. III. 7. to— [a. Tip] [a. Fall by striking with adj. p. cast (thing] Tippet.   Tippling, Drinking (freq.] a. Drunkenness] Tipstaff, [Marshal] Tiring. [Wearying] —for hawk, [adj. a appe∣tite (thing) by adj. p. peck∣ing] [a. Clothing] —woman, [Hair-[adj. a. Order Ornate (mech.] Tissick. S. V. 2. Tissue, [Cloth between-woven with Gold] Tit. Bird. crested— Bi. VI. 8. A. long-tail'd— Bi. VI. 8. [Horse (dim.] to—over, [Fall] Tithe, [Tenth (part] Tithymal, [Spurge] HS. V. 11. Titillation, [Tickling] Title. [Name] sp. of Dignity] [Right] Titmouse. Bi. VI. 7. great— Bi. VI. 6. Tittle. [Point] [Most-little (thing] —tattle, [adj. Loquacity (thing] Titular, [adj. name] To. Prep. [For] —the end, [For the e.] —that, [That] [In] to day [in this day] morrow [in next day [Of] Prep. I. 1. according— Prep. II. 1. in— Prep. IV. 1. un— Prep. II. 1. —and fro, toward to several places] Subst. [Finger of foot] —do Doing &c.] —say, &c. Saying &c.] Toad. Beast. Be. VI. 2. A. —'s flax. HS. VIII. 6. A. —Stool, [Mushrom] HL. I. 1. —fish. Fi. II. 4. A. Tobacco. HS. VII. 11. —pipe. —fish. Fi. III. 13. A. Tod, [28 pounds] Together. Adv. IV. 1. —with. Prep. II. 2. Toy. [Vain (thing] [adj. Valour (dim.] to— [a. Wantonness] Toil.. [Net] [Labour (augm.] Token. [Sign] [adj. Witness (sign]
[Pawn] [Gift] sp. sent] Told, adj. a. pret. Tell] adj. p. Tell] Tole, vid. Toll. [adj. Paid (part) out of adj. p. rinding (thing] [Tribute] —boothe, [Prison] Tolerable. [adj. p. Patience (apt.] [Indifferent] Toleration. RC. IV. 9. Toll, vid. Tole. to— [Ring (dim.] [Allure] Tomb, [adj. Entombing (place] Tome, [Book] D. III. 3. A. Tone. [Voice (manner] [Distance between two notes] Tong. PG. III. 4. —tied, [Dumb through not-motion (pot.) of tong] Dogs— HM. II. 3. [Language] —of a ballance, [Direct pin of ballance] Tongs, [adj. Taking (jug.) for adj. fire (things] Tonsilla, [Glandules] adj. PG. III. 9. A. place of them. PG. III. 9. A. Too. [adv. Excess] [Also] Conj. IV. 2. Tool, [Instrument] Tooth. PG. III. 4. A. —and nail, [adv. Diligence] Fierceness] —som, [adj. Taste (perf.] Eye— [Longest.] figure. Mag. IV. 2. —wort. HS. IV. 2. A. —without Leaves. HL. V. 8. A. Top. Highest. Sp. III. 7. —of a ship. RN. III. 1. A. Best part] Principal] [Cone. adj. p. Vertiginate (apt.) by ad.. p. whipping] to— [Cut off the top] [a. Superiority] [a. Stay] Topaz. St. IV. 3. A. Tophus. St. I. 5. Topic. —medicine, [m. applicable to the Sick (part] [adj. Invention (place of ar∣gu∣ment] [Foundation (like of ar∣gu∣ment] Topsy turvy, [With top adj. p. un∣dermost] Torch, [adj. Wax Candle Pitch (augm.] Torment Pain (augm.] Torture] Tormentil. HF. IX. 2. A. Torn, [adj. p. Tear] Tornado. Wind. Torpedo. Fi. II. 1. A. Torpid, Num'd] Dull] Torrent, [Stream (augm.) sp. transitory] Torrid, [Hot (augm.] Tortion, [Twisting] Tortois. Be. VI. 1. Torture, RJ. VI.1. Pain (augm.] Toss, Cast upward] a. Volutation] —pot, [adj. Drunkenness (per∣son] Toste, [Roste] sp. without vertigination] Total, [adj. Whole] Sum] Totter, Shake] Stagger] Touch. [Feeling] NP. III. 5. [Sense] Extern. NP. III. Intern. NP. II. [Anger] [Tactil quality] —active. Q. V. —passive. Q. VI. [v. Contiguity] Essay] a. Experience] Try] the— [p. Experience] —stone. St. I. 6. A. [v. Pertinent] —ing, [Concerning] Prep. I. 3. A. a— Little] Say] to— Speak little of] a. Object (dim.) —wood, [Fungus of tree for a. fire (inc.] Touchy, [Morose] Toughness. Q. VI. 5. E. Touze, [Pull (augm.] Tow, vid. Towe. Toward. [That adv. way] —ly, [adj. Learn (apt.] About. Adv.] V. 3. Almost Adv.] V. 1. Towe, [Hemp prepared for adj. p. spinning] to— [Draw with cord] Towel, [Linnen for wiping] Tower. Po. II. 3. Town. RC. III. 2. A. —s man adj. Town (person] Citizen] Towre, [Fly high] Towze, vid. Touze. Toze, [Loosen by pulling (freq.] Trabs. El. I. 4. Trace. Harness. Po. V. 9. A. to— Follow by track] Hunt by track] Trachurus. Fi. IV. 8. A. Track, [adj. Foot Wheel sign] Tract. [Country] W. III. A. [Written Discourse] —of time, [Time (augm.] Tractable, Gentle] Courteous] adj. p. Govern (apt] Trade. [Profession. RC. II. sp. Un∣learned] [Art. Ha. VI. 3. sp. Un∣learned] to— [a. Merchant] —winde, [Constant w.] Tradition. [Narration] sp. Successive] Ecclesiastic. RE. VI. 1. A. Traduce. [Reproach] [Calumniate] Traffick, [a. Merchant] Commerce] Tragedy, [Play adv. a. Grief end∣ing] Tragical, [adj. a. Grief] sp. in the Ending] Tragicomedy, [adj. a. Grief play adv. mirth ending] Tragopogon. HA. I. 8. A. Tray. Pr. V. 4 A. Trail, [Draw on the ground] sp. for a. Sent (make] Train. —of garment, [Long hinder part of g.] bird's— PP. V. 2. A. Series —of powder. Aggregate. [Waiters (aggr.] —of an Army. RM. IV. 7. [Allurement] to— a. Teacher] Educate] [Entice] Traytor, [adj. Perfidiousness Treason person] Tralatitious. D. III. 6. O. Tramel, [Net adj. p. carry (apt) between two (persons] Trample. [on- a. foot] [a. Sound (augm.) with a. foot (augm.] Trance, [Extasie] Tranquillity. [v. Quieting (abstr.] [Contentation] Transaction. [a. Business] Transcendent. T. [Excellent] Transcribe, [a. Type writing] Transfer. Remove] Deliver] Alienate] Transfigure, [Alter the form] Transgress. [a. Excess]
a. Disobey] a. Violate] [a. Sin] Transient, [Transitory] Transition. D. V. 9. Transitory. Sp. I. 6. O. Translation. D. V. 5. vid. Transfer. Transmarine, [Beyond adj. Sea] Transmigration, [ition from one (place) to another (place] Transmit, Derive from, &c.] a. ition from, &c.] Transmutation, [Altering] Transom, [Transverse beam] Transparent. Q. I. 4. —stone, vid. Stone. Transpiration. Mo. IV. 3. A. Transplant, [Re-move into another (Place] (Coun∣trey] Transport. [Carry into another Coun∣trey] [a. Extasie] Transpose, Exchange the Place] Alter the Order] Transubstantiation, [Altering the substance] Transverse. Ma. II. 8. D. Trap. PO. VI. 8. A. —door, [Door adj. p. open with lifting] Trappings, [adj. a. Ornate (arm.] Trash. [Sorry] [Worst part] [Filth] Travel. [Journey] TA. VI. 3. sp. into forreign Coun∣treys] [Labour] [Parturition] Travellers Ioy. Sh. V. 7. A. Traverse. to —[a. Transverse] —Suit, [Denying the action]. Treachery. op. to fidelity. Man. IV. 2. D op. to Loyalty. Man. V. 6. D. Treacle, [Physical mixture of vi∣pers, &c.] Tread. [a. Foot] —down, [a. Prostrate by up∣on- a. foot.] [Goe] [v. Coition] sp. as bird (male] Treason. RJ. III. 2. Treasure, Money (place] Riches (aggr.] —r, [adj. keeping (Off.) of money] Treat. [a. Object] [Entertain] in order to a Bargain. RC. VI. 1. A. Treaty, [a. Treat] Trea∣tise, Written Discourse] Printed Discourse] Treble. [Threefold] —in Music. Q. III. 1. E. Treddle, [Navel of fut. Chick in egg.] Tree. Tr. —of life. Tr. V. 6. A. —of saddle, [adj. wood (part) of s.] Trefoil. bean— Sh. IV. 3. Hedghog— HS. III. 15. A. Shrub— Sh. IV. 3. A. Snail— HS. III. 15. Starheaded— HF. VIII. 5. A. Trey. Pr. V. 4. A. [Three] Trembling. AC. IV. 5. E. Trench, [Ditch] Trencher. Pr. V. 9. —friend, [Flatterer for victu∣als] —man, [Eater] Trepan. [adj. boring (instr.) for head∣bone] to— [allure into p. Hurt] Danger] Trepidation, [Trembling] sp. through fear] Trespass. [a. Excess] Disobey] Violate] [a. Sin] [Injury] Tress. [Lock of hair] [Tassel (like] Tressle. Mag. V. 5. Trevet, [Stool with three legs like] Try. Consider] Examine] TA. II. 5. A. —at law. RC. II. 4. A. Prove. TA. II. 5. A. Essay] a. Experience] —out, [Try the utmost] Refine, [Separate the course parts] Triangle. Mag. V. 1. Tribe, [Society] sp. from one progenitor] Tribula∣tion, Adversity] Misery] Tribunal, [Seat of Judge] Tribune, [adj. Regiment (Off.] Tribute. RC. V. 9. Trice, [Instant] Trick. [a. Craft] [a. Prestigiator] Action (dim.] thing (corr.] to— [a. Ornate] Trickle, [Drop] sp. adv. Series] Trident, [Halbert with three teeth] Trifle. [Vain (thing] [Thing of no value] —ing, [a Wantonness] [a Sloth] [a Lightness] [a Cunctation] Trigger. [adj. Staying (instr. of ver∣tigination] Impedient (instr. of ver∣tigination] [Sign of standing (place] Trill, [Tremble (like) with voice] Trim, [adj. Ornate] —ing a boat, [a. Ballancing] —ing a ship— RN. VI. 4. A. Trine, [Distance  of a great Cir∣cle] Tringa. —major. Bi. VII. 5. —minor. Bi. VII. 5. A. Trinity, [Three (abstr.] Trinkets, [Sorry (Instruments] (Things] Utensils] Trip. [a. Slide (make] [Stumble (dim.] —along, [Walk nimbly] Tripe, [Prepared stomach of beast] Tripartite, [Three (kind] Triple, [Threefold] Trivial. Ordinary] Common] [Sorry] [Vain] Triumph. RM. II. 8. Triumvi∣rat, Government of to∣ge∣ther-three (persons] Magistracy of to∣ge∣ther-three (persons] Trochisc, [Round lamin (dim.] Trochus. Ex. VII. 6. Trod, adj. a. pret. Tread] adj, p. Tread] Troy weight, [w. of 12 ounces in a pound] Troll, [Ition adv. Smooth] [Hunt fish with adj. vertigina∣ting (mach,] Troop. Company. RM. IV. 3. [Aggregate] Trooper, [Horseman] RM. III. 1. A. Trope, [a. Tralatitious] Trophee. RM. II. 8. A. Tropic. —of Cancer. W. VI. 6. —of Capricorn. W. VI. 6. A. Trot. a— [adj. Decrepit (sem.] to— Mo. II. 2. A. Trotter. [Foot] sp. of Sheep] Trouble. Molest. TA. V. 9. O. in— [adj. p. TA. V. 9. O.] Adversity] Misery]
Grief] Remorse] Anxiety] —water, [Un▪ a. quiet] Trouble∣som, adj. a. Trouble (apt.] Contentious] Trough, [Long Trey] Trout. Fi. IX. 3. Trowel. [adj. spreading (instr.) of Mortar] Trowle, vid. Troll. True, [adj. Truth] Genuine] Truant. [Wanderer] [Slothful (person] Trub. HL. I. 2. Truce, Transitory peace Between-space of qui∣et] Truchman, [Interpreter] Truck, [Exchange] Truckle, [Wheel of pully] to— under- Be] Ly] [Submit] Trucu∣lent, Fierce (augm.] Cruel (augm.] Trufle, Trubs. HL. I. 2. Truly. Adv. I. 2. O. Trull, [Common adj. fornication fem.] Trump. [Trumpet] [adj. Victory (kind) of Cards] Trumpe∣ry, Sorry (things] Worst part] sp. (aggr.] Trumpet, [adj. Trumpeter instr.] Trumpeter. RM. III. 3. A. Fish. Fi. IV. 10. Trunche∣on, Short thick stick] adj. Cudgelling (inst.] Trundling, [motion Upon wheels] adv. Vertiginating] Trunk. Body. —of plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. —of animal. PG. IV. [Box] Chest. sp. with convex adj. covering (thing] Tube] Snout. PP. V. 4. A. Truss. Together— Tie] Up— Tie] [a-aggregate by tying] —of hay, [adj. p. bound (aggr.) of h.] Trust. [Believe] v. Confidence] AS. III. 4. —with, [Deposit] —for, [Lend] Trusty, [Faithful] Truth. T. III. 1. in— Adv. I. 2. O. Tub Pr. V. 3. A. —fish Fi. IV. 5. Tube Round— Mag. V. 9. O. Square— Mag. V. 9. Tuberous, [adj. Protuberance (freq.] (Sword] Tuck, [Long adj. pricking (apt.) of a ship. RN. II. 9. to— [Fasten the extremity] Tuesday, [Third day of the week] Tuff Taffate, [Tufted Taffata] Tuft. Tassel. Mag. IV. 6. —of flower. PP. II. 6. [Aggregate] Tugg, [Pull (augm.] (imp.] Tuition, [a. Guardian] Teacher] Tulip. HL. IV. 3. Tumbling. Mo. II. 6. A. Tumbler, [Dog hunting lesser beasts by agility] [Praestigiator by tumbling] Tumbrel, [Cart] Tumor. S. III. Tumult. [Sedition] [Confused multitude] Tumultuary. [Seditious sudden] Tun. [Barrel (augm.] [Measure] Weight. Mea. III. 9. Tune. Q. III. 6. to— [Prepare (perf.] —able, [adj. Music] Tunhoof, [Ground-Ivy] HL. VI. 11. Tunicle, [Membrane] Tunnage, [Tribute] Tunnel, [Concave Cone] —of Chimney, [Concave (part) of ch.] Tunny. Fi. III. 4. Turbant, [adj. head (vest] Turbinated, [About—spirald adj. Cone] Turbith. Tr. VI. 11. A. Turbith.   Turbo. Ex. VII. 5. A. Turbu∣lent, Seditious] Contentious] Turbut. Fi. VII. 3. Turcois. St. III. 5. Turdus. Fi. V. 9. Turf, [Grassie clod] Turgid, [adj. Tumor] Protuberance] [Full (augm.] Turks Cap, [Martagon] HL. IV. 2. A. Turky. Bi. II. 2. A. Turmoil, Trouble] Operation (augm.] Business (augm.] Turn. op. to proceed. TA. VI. 2. O. —head, [Resist] Gesture. AC. VI. 8. —inside out. —upside-down. [Fold] —down. —up. [Dig] —up the ground. Bend] Curve] [a. Helical] Spinal] [a. Volutation] [a. Vertigination] —Spit. —with a Lave. O. IV. 7. A. —er, [adj.—ing (mech.] [Change] —into [Become] [v. Convert] [v. Apostate] [Translate] —away, [From—] —back, [Back—] —over —out, [Eject] —up a— [Turning] [Alteration] at every— [Office] a good— [a. Benefactor] an ill— [Mischief] Course. T. VI. 7. by—s, [adv. Course] Turnament, [Game of horsemen mutually assaulting with spears] Turnep. HS. IV. 4. Turnpike. RM. VI. 8. Turpentine, [Liquid resin of Larch Turpentine Pine Tree out∣drawn by incision] —tree. Tr. III. 3. A. Turpitude, [Indecency (augm.] Turnstile, [adj. p. Vertiginate (apt) transverse cross] Turret. [Tower (dim.] fig. Mag. VI. 3. A. Turtle. Bird. Bi. III. 2. A. Beast. Be. V. 1. A. Tush. Int. I. 3. II. 3. A. Tusk, [Long Tooth] Tut, vid. Tush. Tutelary, [adj. a. Protection] Defence] Safety] Tuty.   Tutor, Guardian] Teacher Tutsan. HS. V. 8. Tutty, [Flowers (aggr.) toge∣ther-tied] Twayblade. HL. VII. 5. A. Twain, [Two] Twang, [Ring] Tweez, [Box of instruments dim.]
Twelve.   T —month, [Year] wenty. Twibill, [adj. pecking (instr.] Twice, [Two times] Twig, [Wand] PP. I. 4. A. Twilight. Q. I. 1: Twins, [Two together-born] Twine, Twist sp. mutu∣ally.] Embrace sp. mutu∣ally.] Twinge, Pull (imp.] Pain (imp.] Twinkle, [Un-appear (freq.] Twirl, [Vertiginate (imp.] Twist. the— [share] to— O. V. 1. Twit, [Upbraid] Twitch. [Pull (imp.] [Pain] AC. II. 9. Twittle, [Chirp (dim.] Two. Mea. II. 2. —fold, [Two (kind] Tygre. Be. IV. 2. Tympany. S. VI. 3. A. Type. T. II. 3. A. [Letter-printing (instr.] Typographical, [adj. Printing] Tyranny. Man. VI. 4. O. Tyrant. [Kingship, adj. Usurping (per∣son] [adj. Man. VI. 4. O. (person] V. VAcant. [Empty] [Not-Furnished] [Not-Used] [adj. Leisure] Vacation. adj. Leisure (time] not-adj. RC. (time] Vacillation, [Staggering] Mo. II. 4. O. Vacuity, [Emptiness] Vagabond, [adj. Wandering (per∣son] Vagary. [v. Wandring] [a. Conceitedness] Vail, vid. Veil. —s [adj. Van∣tage Profits] Revenue] sp. besides-wages] Vain. [adj. Vanity] —glory, [Glorying (corr.] vid. Vein. Vallens, [About- adj. hanging (vest) of the upper Margin of the Bedsted] Vale, [Valley] W. III. 1. D. Valediction. AC. V. 8. A. Valerian. HF. IV. 8. Valet, [adj. Waiting (Off.] Valiant, [adj. Fortitude] Validi∣ty, Sufficience (apt.] Efficience (apt.] Valley. W. III. 1. D. Valour. Worth. Mea. IV. [Fortitude] Value. Worth. Mea. IV. to— [Esteem] a. Valour] a. Price] Vamp, [Mend by Adding] [Mend by Renewing part] Van. [Forepart] sp. of army] [Winnowing (jug.] Vane, [Flag for shewing the ver∣gency of the wind] Vanish, [Un-appear] Vanity. Frivolousness. T. IV. 5. O. Not-profitableness] Frustrating (abstr.] Wantonness] Conceitedness] op. to gravity. Man, IV. 6. O. Vanquish, [a. Victory] Conquest] Vantage. TM. VI. 2. A. Vantcurrier. RM. IV. 5. Vantgard, [Forepart of army] Vapor. [Exhalation] El. II. 2. A. [Glorying] Vardingale.   Vary. v. Diversity] [Alter] [a. Contention] Varia∣ble, adj. Alter (apt.] Inconstant] Variance, [Contention] Variegated. Q. II. 5. Variety, [Diversity] Varix. S. III. 8. Varlet, [Sorry (person] Varnish. O. IV. 8. A. Varvels, vid. Vervels. Vassal. [Subject] [Villain] Vast, [Ample (augm.] Vat Tub (augm.] Barrel (augm.] Vate Tub (augm.] Barrel (augm.] Vault. Po. II. 8. to— [a. Vault] [Leap] Mo. V. 5. A. Vaunt. [Glorying] sp. corr.] [a. Insolence] —gard, vid. Vantgard. Vauward, [Forepart of army] Vaumure. RM. VI. 4. Vbiquity. S. II. 9. Vdder, [Dug] PG. IV. 2. A. Veal. [Calf] [Flesh of Calf] Veer. [Turn] Let-go more Sail] Out-put more Cord] Vegetable, [Plant] W. V. 2. Vegetation. [adj. p. Vegetative soul (make] [a. Vigor] Vegetative. [Plant] W. V. 2. —Soul. W. I. 4. its actions. AC. I. Vegetous, [Vigor] Vehemence. [Intenseness] [Fierceness] Ha. III. 4. D. Vehicle, [adj. Carrying (thing] Veil. a— [adj. Covering thing] sp. thin] to— [Cover] [a. Respect (sign] Vein. —of animal. PG. II. 4. opening a— [a. Bleeding] Mo. IV. 6. —of Metal [Vein (like) line of— m in the earth] —of Stone [Vein (like) line of— S in the earth] Temper] NP. IV. Disposition] [Style] Vellam, [Paper of Calves skin] Velleity. AS. IV. 2. Vellication. [Pulling (frep.] [Twitching] AC. II. 9. Velvet, [Silk adj. p. surface with short tufts] Venal adj. p. Sell (pot.] adj. p. Sell (apt.] Vendible adj. p. Sell (pot.] adj. p. Sell (apt.] Vending, [Selling] Veneration. [Reverence] [Worship] Venery. [Coition] [Hunting] Vengeance. [a. Revenge] [Punishment] Venial, [adj. p. Forgive (pot.] [adj. p. Forgive (apt.] Venison, [Flesh of hunted beasts] Venom, [Poison] Vent. Wind] Exhalation] [Hole for out-a. Wind] [Hole for out-a. Exhal.] [Sent] Q. IV. A. to— [a. Vent] in— ition (make] out- ition (make] sp. Air] [Sell] Ventiduct, [adj. a. wind (jug.] [adj. a. wind tube] Ventilation, [Winnowing]
Ventosity, [Wind (abstr.] Ventricle. [Hollow (place] [Stomach] PG. VI. 4. Venture. [Danger] [Fortune] [Essay] sp. its danger] sp. ones fortune] at a— [adv. Essaying its danger] at a— [adv. Essaying ones fortune] Venturous. [Dangerous] [adj. Essaying (apt.) danger] [Bold] [Rash] Venu. [Thrust (imp.] [Stab (end] Venus. W. II. 5. A. —comb. HS. I. 5. A. —flax. —Looking glase. HS. V. 3. —Shell. Ex. VII. 7. Veracity. Man. IV. 1. Verb. D. II. 3. Verbal, [adj. Word] Verbatim, [adv. Word (segr.] Verbosity. [a. word (exc.] [Loquacity] Verderer, [adj. Forrest (Off.) as∣sessor] Verdict. [Sentence] [Opinion] Verdigreece. Met. IV. 5. Verdure. [Greenness] [Vigor] Verge. [Margin] [Capacity] [Stick] Verging. Sp. III. A. Verger, [Before—adj. Walking (Off.] Very. Self] same] (augm.] True] Genuine] —ly. Adv. I. 2. O. in—deed Adv. I. 2. O. Verifie. [a. Truth (make] [Perform] Prove] Confirm] Verity. T. III. 1. Verjuice. Pr. II. 5. A. Vermilion. Met. III. 5. A. Vermin. [Insects] sp. Hurtful] [Hurtful Animals] Vernacular, [adj. ones Nation (place] [adj. ones Tribe (place] Vernal. [adj. Spring] Vernish, [adj. a. Vernishing (thing] —ing. O. IV. 8. A. Verse. Part of Book. D. III. 2. op. to Prose. D. III. 4. O. Versicle, [Verse (dim.] sp. adj. preceding] Versifie, [a. D. III. 4. O.] Version, [Translation] Vertebra. PG. IV. 3. A. Vertical. [adj. Top] —point, [Upper pole of the Horizon] [adj. Vertex. Ma. II. 2. Vertiginous. [adj. Vertigo] —motion. O. I. 5. Vertigo. S. IV. 5. Vertue. [Habit (perf.] infused. Ha. V. acquired. intellectual. Ha. VI. moral. Man. I. Respecting the body. Man. II. Respecting the state and digni∣ty. Man. III. Homiletical. —Common. Man. IV. —belonging to superior. Man. V. —belonging to Inferior. Man. VI. Instruments of— Ha. II. Affections of— —Intellectual— Ha. III. —Moral— Ha. III. [Efficacy] Verven. HS. V. 9. Vervels, [adj. Leg bonds of Hawk] Verule, [adj. Lamin ring] Vesicle, [Bladder (dim.] Vespers, [adj. Evening worship] Vessel. General. Pr. V. —of animal body, [adj. con∣taining (apt) hollow (parts] —Heterogeneous. PG. VI. —Homogeneous. PG. II. [Ship] Vestment, [Clothing] Vestry, [adj. Clothing (room] Vesture, [Clothing] Vetch. HS. II. 3. bitter— HS. II. 4. Crimson grass— HS. III. 7. hatched— HS. III. 6. Kidney— Milk— HS. III. 3. A. Yellow wild— HS. II. 6. Veternus. S. IV. 2. Vex. [a. Angry (make] [a. Grieved (make] [Molest] [a. Anxiety] Vgly Deformed (augm.] Indecent (augm.] Vy. a. Emulation] Provoke] [More—a. wager] Vial. [adj. Glass bottle (dim.] [adj. Music (instr.) to be sounded with bow] Viands, [Victuals] Vibrate, [Swing.] Mo. VI. 3. Viburnum. Sh. I. 5. Vicar. [Deputy] [Second (kind) Presbyter] Vice. [Moral] Man. I. O. Feign'd fool] adj. Scurrility (person] [adj. Holding (mach.] Vice— [instead] Vicegerent, [Substitute] Viceroy, [Instead-King] Vitiate. [Vitious make] [Unchast (make] [Mar] Vicinity. [Neighborhood] [Neerness] Vicount, [Nobleman of the fourth Degree] Vicissitude. [a. Turn] T. VI. 8. [Alteration, adj. turn] Victim, [Sacrifice] Victor, [adj. RM. II. E. (per∣son] Victory, [adj. RM. II. 1. E. (thing] get the—RM. II. 1. E. Victualler, [adj. Victuals (Off.] [adj. Victuals (Merc.] Victualling house, [House of adj. Victuals (merc.] Victuals. Pr. I. fall to his—[Eat] View. [a. ey] PG. III. 2. [Observe] [Examine] Vigilance. Abstinence. Man. II. 4. [Heedfulness] Vigils. [a. Vigilance] [adj. p. Wake night before fe∣stival] [Day before the Festival] Vigor. NP. V. 4. Vile. [adj. Valor (dim.] [Sorry] [Vicious] Vilifie. [a. Disrepect] [Contemn] Village, [Houses (aggr.] [Parish] Villain. Lowest degree of Commonal∣ty, RC. I. 8. [Sorry (person]
[Wicked (person] Vindicate. [a. Defendant] [a. Advocate] [Shew Innocence] Vindictiveness, [a. Revenge (apt.] Vine. Sh. II. 1. Vinegar. Pr. II. 5. Vinewd, Mouldy] Musty] Vintage. [Gathering grapes] [a. Wine (make.] Vintner, [adj. wine (merc.] sp. adv. segregate] Vineyard, [Orchard of Vines] Violate, TA. III. 6. O. Violence. T. V. 5. O. in Motion. Mo. VI. [Coaction] [Fierceness] Ha. III. 4. D. Violet. HL. VI. 5. bulbous— HL. IV. 5. A. dames— HS. IV. 2. Violin, [Vial (dim] Viol. [adj. Music (instr.) so be sounded with Bow] vid. Vial. Viorna, [Travellers Joy] Sh. I. 7. Viper. Be. VI. 7. A. —s grass, [Scorsonera] Virago, [Man (like) woman] Virga, Meteor. El. V. 4. Virgin. [Not-married] RO. II. 1. [Chast unmarried] RO. II. 1. A. First] New] —honey, [First h. of Bees] —parchment, [p. made of the skin of an abortive] [Undefiled] —s bower, [Clematis] Sh. V. 7. Virginals, [Chest (like) adj. Mu∣sic (instr.) with metallin string] Virginity. RO. II. 1. A. (abstr.] Virgo, [6th of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Virility. age of manhood. Mea. VI. 3. [Male (abstr.] Virtue, vid. Vertue. Virulent. [adj. Poison] [adj. Malice] Visage. Face. PG. III. 1. [Face (manner] [Seen (part] Visard, [Factitious face] Viscous, [Clammy] Visible, [adj. p. See (pot.] Vision. [Seeing] adj. apparence (thing] adj. p. See Revelation] Visit. AC. V. 1. [About-ition for a Disci∣pline] Visor of Helmet, [Up—adj. p. fold (apt.) adj. forehead (part] Vital, [adj. life] Vitiat, vid. Viciat] Vitrifie, [a. Glass (make] Vitriol. St. V. 3. Vivacity, [Long life (apt.] Vivifie, [a. Live] Viviparous, [adj. parturition adj. living (thing] Vlcer. S. I. 7. Vlterior. Sp. II. 2. D. Vltimate [Most- Remote] Latter] Vmber. Fish. Fi. IX. 4. A. Colour] Vmbilical, [adj. Navel] PG. IV. 6. A. Vmbles, [Inwards] PG. VI. Vmbra. Fi. IV. 2. A. Vmbrage. [Doubting] Distrust] Jealousie] Vmbrella, [adj. Shadowing (jug.] Vmpire, [Sole arbitrator] Vn— vid. In— [Not—] [Not-yet] Vnable, [adj. Impotence] Vnacceptable. Not— acceptable] Against acceptable] [adj. Displicence] Vnaccessible, [Not-adj. p. come] Vnaccustomed, [Not-accustomed] Vnacquainted, [Stranger] Vnadvised, [Rash] adj. Ha. IV. 1. D. Vnallowed, [Not-allowed] Vnanimous, [adv. Identity— Opinioned] [adv. Identity— Minded] Vnappeasable, [Not-adj. p. Peaceableness] [Not-adj. p. Meekness] Vnapt, [Not-apt] Vnapproachable, [Not-adj. p. Neerness] Vnarm∣ed, Not- armed] Un- armed] Vnassured, [Not-assured] Vnasswaged, [Not-asswaged] Vnavoidable, [Not adj. p. escape (pot.] Vnauthorize, [Un- a. Authority] Vnawares [Not— Heeding] [Not— Expecting] taken at— [Surprized] Vnbar, [Un-a. bar] Vnbelief. AS. II. 4. O. [Incredulity] Ha. III. 2. D. [Infidelity] Ha. V. 4. O. Vnbend, [Un-bend] Vnbenum, [Un-a. Stupo] Vnbeseem, [v. Indecency] Vnbesot, [Un-a. Dotage] Vnbewitch, [Un-a. Witchcraft] Vnbidden, [Not-bidden] [adj. Spontaneity] Vnbind, [Un-a. bind] Vnblameable, [Not-adj. p. blame (pot.] Vnblind, [Un-a. blind (make] Vnboild, [Not-boild] Vnbolt, [Un-a. bolt] Vnbound, [Not-adj. p. bind] Vnbounded, [Not-adj. p. bound] Vnbowel, [Un-a. bowel] Vnbrace, [Un-a. brace] Vnbridle, [Un-a. bridle] —d, [Irregular] Vnbroken, [Not-adj. p. break] Vnbuckle, [Un-a. Buckle] Vnburden, [Un-a. burden] Vnburied, [Not-adj. p. buried] Vnbutton, [Un-a. button] Vncalled, [Not-adj. p. call] Vncapable, [Not-capable] Vncase, [Un-a. case] Vncaught, [Not-adj. p. catch] Vncertain. [Not-certain] [Doubtful] [Wavering] Vnchain, [Un-a. chain] Vnchangeable, [Not-adj. p. alter] Vncharitableness. Ha. V. 6. D. Vncharm, [Un-a. Wizard] Vnchastness. Man. II. 7. D. Vnchewed, [Not-chewed] Vncircumcision, [Not- p. circum∣cision] Vncircumspect, [Careless] Vncivil. [Morose] [Rustic] Vncle RO. I. 3. Vnclasp, [Un-a. clasp] Vnclean. [adj. Defilement] [Unchast] Vnclose, [Un-a. close] Vncloth∣ed, Not- clothed] Un— clothed] Vncomely, [Indecent] Vncomfortable [adj. Discomfort] Vncompounded, [Simple] Vnconceivable, [Not-adj. p. ap∣prehension] Vncondemned, [Not-condemned] Vnconquerable, [Not-adj. p. con∣quer (pot.] Vnconscionable. NP. I. 3. O. Vnconstant. adj. Ha. IV. 7. D. Vnconstreined, [Not-adj. p. coa∣ction] Vncorded, [Not-adj. p. cord] Vncorrected, [Not-adj. p. corre∣ction] Vncorrupt. [Not-corrupted] [Sincere] [Impartial] Vncover. O. II. 3. O. Vncouple, [Un-joyn] Vncourteous. [Not-courteous] [Rustic] Vncouth. [Not-adj. custom]
[adj. Stranger] [New (corr.] [Extraordinary (corr] Vnction, Anointing] Vnctuousness. to feeling. Q. VI. 4. D. to tast. Q. IV. 2. Vncurable, [Not-adj. p. cure] (pot.] Vndaunted, [Not-adj. p. fear (pot.] Vndecent. adj. T. V. 2. O. Vndecided, [Not-decided] Vndefiled. [Not-defiled] [Pure] Vndefrayed, [Not- Paid] Refunded] Vnder. Proper. Prep. VI. 1. O. —foot —hand [adv. Private] Concealed] —hand and seal, [Under writ∣ten and sealed] [With in] Contain —it. [c. within its capacity] [Below] —age [of adj. pupil age] —years [of adj. pupil age] Less. Too little —bid] —price. —sell. —value. [Lower] —leather. —lid of eye. —lip. —side. Sp. III. 5. O. —woods. Inferior] Subordinate] —Butler. —Officer. —Sheriff. [Dependent] [Subject] bring— Subject Conquer (make] Keep—   Vnder∣go, v. Subject] Suffer. Vnderhand, [adv. Private] Concealed] Vnderlay, [Mend by under-put∣ting] Vnderleather, [Lower Lea∣ther] Vnderling. RO. III. O. Vndermine, RM. I. 5. —craftily, [a. Treachery] Vndermost, [Most-adj. under part] Vnderneath. Prep. VI. 1. O. Vnderpart. Sp. III. 5. O. Vnderpin, [Instead-a. foundation] Vnderprop, [a-prop] Vndersay. Man. IV. 1. D. Vndersell, [Sell for less.] Vnderset, [a. Prop] Vndersheriff, [Inferior adj. shire (Off.] Vnderside. Sp. III. 5. O. Vnderstand. a. Intellect. NP. I. 1. give to- Narrate] Know (make] Omit. D. III. 8. O. [Suppose] Vnderstanding. Faculty. NP. I. 1. action of the— Speculative. AS. II. Practical. AS. III. Vnderstood. adj.-a. pret. Understand] adj. p. Understand] Omitted. D. III. 8. O. Vndertake. TA. III. 1. A. —for, [a. Sponsion] —to do [Oblige himself by promise] Vnderva∣lue, Value less than due] Contemn] Vnderwoods, Lower woods Young woods Vndeserved, [Not-deserved,] Vndeserving, [Unworthy] Vndetermin∣ed, adj. Liberty] Not-determined] Vndigested, [Not-digested] Vndischarged, [Not-discharged] Vndiscreet, [Foolish] Vndistinct, [Not-distinct] Vndivi∣ded, Not-divided] Entire] Vndo. [Un-do] [Un-ty] [Loosen] Spoil] a. poverty (augm.] Vndone. [adj. p. Undo] [Not-done.] Vndoubted, [Not-doubted] Vndress, [Un cloth] Vndue. T. IV. 3. O. Vndulate. Figure. Mag. IV. 9. Motion, [a. Wave] W. IV. 1. E. Vndutiful. Man. V. 1. D. Vneasie, [Difficult] Vnequal. [Not-equal] [Not-equitable] Vnestimable, Not-adj. p. Esteem (pot) Worthily] Sufficient∣ly] Vnevenness. Q. VI. 2. O. Vnevitable, [Not adj. p. escape pot.] Vnexcusable, [Not-adj. p. excuse pot.] Vnexecuted, [Not-executed] Vnexpected, [Not-expected] Vnexpert. Ha. VI. 4. D. Vnfaithful. Man. IV. 2. O. Vnfashion∣ed, Not-figured] Figured (corr. Vnfast∣ned, Not-fast∣ned] Un— fast∣ned] Vnfeather∣ed, Not-feather∣ed] Un—feather∣ed] Vnfeigned. Not-feigned] Sincere] Vnfetter∣ed, Not-fetter∣ed] Un—fetter∣ed] Vnfinisht, [Not-finished] Vnfit▪ [Not-congruous] Vnfitting, [Indecent] Vnfix, [Un-fix] Vnfold, [Un-fold] [Explain] Vnformed, [Not-formed] Vnfortified, [Not-fortified] Vnfortunate, [adj. Fortune (corr.] Adversity] Vnfriendly, [Not-adj. friend] Vnfruitfulness. Barrenness. NP. VI. 3. O. [Unprofitableness] Vnfurnisht, Not-furnish∣ed] Un—furnish∣ed] Vngainful, [Not-adj. a. gain (apt.] Vngarnisht, [Not- adj. p. or∣nate] Vngentle, [Notgentle] Vngird∣ed, Not-adj. p. Bound] Un—adj. p. Bound] Vnglew, [Un- a. glue] Vngodly. [Graceless] [Unholy] Vngraciousness. Ha. V. O. Vnguent, adj.-anointing thing] Salve] Vnhabitable, [Not-adj. p. dwelling pot.] Vnhallowed [Profaned] [Unholy] Vnhand∣som, Deformed] Indecent] Vnhappiness, [Misery] Vnharness, [Un-a. armament] Vnhealthy, [Not-healthy] Vnheard, [Not-adj. p. hearing] Vnheeded, [Not-heeded] Vnholy. Ha. V. 2. O. Vnhorse, Down-put from hors Un-a. ride (make] Vnhurt, [Not-hurt] Vnhusbanded, [Not-adj. p. agri∣culture] Vnicorn, [One-horned beast] Vniform, [adv. Identity adj. p. Figure] Manner] Circumstance] Vniformity, [Identity (manner] Vnimaginable, Not-adj. p. ima∣gination (pot.] Vnimitable, [Not-adj. p. imita∣tion (pot.] Vninhabited, [Not- adj. p. dwel∣ling] Vnjoyn, [Separate] Vnjoynt. [Un-a. joynt] [Separate the parts] Vnion. [a. One] Peaceableness] League]
Vnison, [adj. p. Identity adj. a sound] Vnit, [One] Vnite, [a. one (make] Vnity, [One (abst.] Vniverse, [Whole world] Vniver∣sal, adj. Universality] Whole] Vniversality. TM. III. 3. O. Vniversity. RC. III. 6. Vnivocal, [Of one signification] Vnjust, [adj. Injustice] Vnkennel, [Un-a. bed (room] Vnkind. [Uncharitable] [Discourteous] adj. Man. IV. 7. O. [Not-adj. friend] Vnkle. RO. I. 5. Vnknit, [Un-ty] Vnknown, [Not-known] Vnlace, Un—a. Lace] Not-a. String] Vnladen, [Un-adj. burdened] Vnlaw∣ful, Not—Lawful] Against-Lawful] Vnlearn, [Un- a. Learner] Vnlearned. Ha. VI. 5. D. Vnleavened, [Not-leavened] Vnless. Conj. I. 3. O. Vnlike, [adj. Unlikeness] —ness. TM. V. 1. O. Vnlike∣ly, Not—True like] Against-True like] Vnlimited. Not- Limited] Cohibited] Determined] [Infinite] Vnlined, Not-lined] Un-lined] Vnload, [Un-a. burden] Vnlock, Un-a. lock] Open-with key Vnlookt for, [Not-expected] Vnloose, [Loose] Vnlove∣ly, Not—adj. p. love (apt.] Againstadj. p. love (apt.] Vnlucky, [adj. Fortune (corr. Event (corr. Vnmake, [Un- a. Efficient] adj. Creation] Vnmannerly, [adj. Rusticity] Disrespect] Vnman¦ly, Not—adj. man (male] Against-adj. man (male] Vnmannured, [Not-manured] Vnmarried. [Not-adj. pret. married] [Divorced] [adj. Celibate] Vnmask, [Uncover the face] Vnmatchable, [Not adj. p. equal (pot.] Vnmeasurable. [Not- adj. Measure (pot.] [Infinite] Vnmeet, [Indecent] Vnmerciful, [adj. Cruelty] Vnmindful, [Not-adj. remem∣bring] Vnmingled, Simple] Pure] Vnmoveable, [Not-adj. p. move (pot.] Vnnail'd, Not-nail'd] Un-nail'd] Vnnatural, [Against-natural] Vnnecessary, Not-neces∣sary] Vnneedful- Not-neces∣sary] Vnnoble, [Against-noble] Vnoccupied, [Not- adj. p. Business] Use] Vnorderly. [Confused] [Irregular] Vnpack∣ed, Not-bound toge∣ther] aggregated] Un-bound toge∣ther] aggregated] Vnpaid, [Not-paid] Vnpainted, [Not-painted] Vnpair∣ed, Not- Un-companioned] sp. (perf.] Vnpardonable, [Not adj. p. par∣don (pot.] Vnpeaceable. Man. IV. 3. O. Vnpeople, [Un-adj. p. Dwelling] Vnperformed, [Not-performed] Vnpinned, Not-fastened with pin] Un-fastened with pin] Vnplant∣ed, Not-planted] Un-planted] Vnpleasant∣ness, Ha. II. 3. O. T. IV. 2. O. Vnpleasing, [adj. Displicence] Vnpolished, [Not-polished] Vnpolluted, [Not-defiled] Vnprepared, [Not-prepared] Vnprofitable, [Not-profitable] Vnprosperous. [Not-prosperous] [Adverse] Vnproved, [Not-proved] Vnprovided, [Not-provided] Vnpunisht, [Not-punisht] Vnquenchable, [Not-adj. p. quench (pot.] Vnquiet. [Against-quiet] [adj. Molesting] Vnrank∣ed, Not-ranked] Un-ranked] Vnravel, [Un-intangle] Vnready, [Not- Prepared] Clothed] Vnreasonable. [Irrational] Not—adj. Equity Against—adj. Equity in commanding, [Man. VI. 6. O.] [Irregular] [adj. Excess] Vnreclaimed, [Not—r.] Vnrecompensed▪ [Not—r.] Vnreconcileable, [Not—r.] Vnrecoverable, [Not—r.] Vnredeemed, [Not—r.] Vnregarded, [Not—r.] Vnremedied, [Not—r.] Vnrepaired, [Not—r.] Vnreproved, [Not—r.] Vnrestored, [Not—r.] Vnreturned, [Not—r.] Vnrevealed, [Not—r.] Vnrevenged, [Not—r.] Vnrewarded, [Not—r.] Vnrighteousness. [Injustice] [Unholiness] Vnripeness. NP. VI. 4. D. Vnrivet∣ted, Not-rivetted] Un-rivetted] Vnroll, Un—roule] Back-roule] Vnroot∣ed, Not-r.] Un-r.] Vnruly. [Irregular] Rebellious] Disobedient] Vnsad∣led, Not-s.] Un-s.] Vnsafe, [Dangerous] Vnsaid. [Not-said] [Recanted] Vnsalt∣ed, Not—s.] Fresh] Vnsaluted, [Not—s.] Vnsatiated, [Not—s.] Vnsavoriness. Q IV. 1. O. Vnseal∣ed, Not-s.] Un-s.] Vnsearchable, [Not-adj. p. search∣ed (pot.] Vnseasonable, [adj. Time (cor.] Vnseemly, [Indecent] Vnseen, [Not—s.] Vnserviceable, Not-adj p. use (pot] (apt] Unprofitable] Vnsetled, Not-fast] Loose] Light] Vnsheath, [Un-a. Case] Vnshod, Not-adj. p. Shoo] Un—adj. p. Shoo] Vnshorn, [Not-clipped] Vnskilfulness. Ha. VI. 3. O. Unlearnedness] Inexperience] Vnsociable, [adj. Man. IV. O.] Vnsound. Not-sound] Rotten] Vnsow∣ed, Un—Sowed] Not-Sowed] Vnspeakable, [Not-adj. p. speak (pot.] Vnspent, [Not-spent] Vnspot∣ted, Not-spotted] Clear] Vnsta∣ble, Not-constant] Light] Vnstaid, [Light] Vnstained, [Not-stained] Vnstead∣fast, Not-constant] Light] Vnsteady, [Not-steady] Vnstirred, [Not-stirred] Vnstitch∣ed, Not—sowed] Un—sowed]
Vnstopped, [a. Open] Vnstrung, Not— Strung] Un— Strung] Vnstuf∣fed, Not— Stuffed] Un— Stuffed] Vnsubdued, [Not-subdued] Vnsufferable, [Not-adj. p. suffer (pot.] Vnsure, [Not- Certain] [Not- Safe] Vnsuta∣ble, Not-congruous] Disagreeable] Vnswath∣ed, Un— swath∣ed] Not— swath∣ed] Vnsworn, [Not-sworn] Vntamed, [Fierce] Vntangle, [Un-tangle] Vntaught, Not-taught] Ignorant] Vnteach∣able, Dull] Incredulous] Vnthankfulness, [Ingratitude] Vnthought of, [Not-thought of] Vnthriftiness, [Squandring] Vnti∣ed, Not— Tied] Un— Tied] Vntil. Adv. III. 2. O. —now, [Until this time] Vntilled, [Not-tilled] Vntimely, [Not-timed (perf.] —birth, [Abortion] Vnto, [To] Vntold, [Not-adj. p. Speaking] Narration] Number] Vntoucht, [Not-toucht] Vntowardnes Incredulity Vntractableness Contumacy Disingenuity] Dulness] Fierceness] Incredulity] Fierceness] Pertinacy] Undutifulness] Disobedience] Contumacy] Vntrim∣med, Not-ornate] Homely] Vntrue, Not-true] False] Vntrus∣sed, Not— trussed] Un— trussed] Vntrusty, [Treacherous] Vntruth, [Falshood] Vntuna∣ble, Not-harmonious] adj. Discord] Vntwined, Not- twisted] Vntwisted, Un— twisted] Vnvaluable, [Not-adj. p Value (pot.] [Not-adj. p Price (pot.] Vnvanquisht, [Not-vanquisht] Vnvaried, [Not-varied] Vnveil, [Uncover] Vnverst, [adj. Inexperience] Vnusual. Extraordinary] Not-customary] Seldom] Not-common] Vnutterable, [Not- adj. p. ex∣press (pot.] Vnwalled, [Not-walled] Vnwary, [Careless] Vnwashed, [Not-washed] Vnwasted, [Not-wasted] Vnwearied, [Constant] Vnweaved, [Not-weaved] Vnwel∣com, Not-welcom] adj. a. Displicence] Vnweildy. Lumpish] Slow] [Not-adj. p. motion (apt.] Vnwholsom, [adj. a. sickness (apt.] Vnwilling. [adj. Nolleity] Aversion] [adj. Coaction] Vnwind, [Un-wind] Vnwise, [adj. Folly] Vnwisht for, [Not-wisht] Vnwit∣ting, Not-knowing] Ignorant] Vnwonted, [Not-adj. p. Cu∣stom] Vnworthiness. TG. IV. 6. O. Vnwrap, [Un-fold] Vnwreath, [Un-twist] Vnwrinkle, [Un-wrinkle] Vnwritten, [Not-written] Vnwrought, Not-wrought] Homely] Vnyoke, Un-yoke] Separate] Vocabulary, [adj. Catalogue Book of words] Vocal, [adj. Voice] Vocati∣on, Calling] Profession] Vocative, [adj. Calling] Vogue, Reputation] Rumor] Voiage, Sailing] Travelling] Voice. Proper. Q. III. 3. Song of 3—s, [Song for 3 to∣gether-singing (per∣sons] Suffrage, [Consent (sign] Void. adj. [Empty] —of, [Without] [Not-possest] [adj. Frustrate] Vanity] Nothing] to— [a. Empty] [Un-possess] [Go] [Banish] [Purge] [Dung] Spoil] adj. Nothing(make] Voider, [Dish (aug.) Shallow] sp. for carrying adj. meat (things] Voidance, [Un-possessing.] Volatil. [Flying] [adj. a. Exhalation (apt.] Volly, [Together-shootings (aggr.] Volubility, [Agility] sp of tongue] Volum, [Book] Voluntary, [adj. Will] Spontaneity] Voluptuousnes, [Sensuality] Volutation. O. I. 5. A. Vomiting. Mo. IV. 9. Voraci∣ty, Rapacity] Gluttony] Vorago, [Whirlpool] Votary, [adj. pret. Vowing (per∣son] Vote. Wish, [Velleity] Suffrage, [Consent (sign] sp. by speaking] Vouch. [a. Protestation] [a. Sponsion] Vouchsafe, [Condescend] Vow. RE. IV. 1. Vowel. D. I. 2. Vp, [Upward ver∣gent▪ toward Upperside] [Upward ver∣gent▪ toward Top] [Direct] —on end. he is— [adj. p. pres. motion] Bell is— b. is in moti∣on] Hare is— h. is in moti∣on] Name is— n. is in moti∣on] from Beginning Part Imperfection till end] whole] perfection] Finally] Wholly] Perfectly] —and down, to and fro] divers ways] —by the root, [Together with the r.] —hill, [Upward on the hill] —to, [Until at] Barrel— [Lay up in Barrel] Blow— a. Tumor] a. Inflation] Upward cast] Overthrow] sp. by firing Gunpow∣der] Bring— Begin] Educate] Burn, [b. perfectly] Clap— Bargain] Finish] Give— Yield] Submit] Let-go] Knit- K. together] Finish] Lay— Put on the heap] Store- TA. V. 4. Lift— [Lift]
Put— a. case] a. patience] Rise— [Rise] Rouze— [Rise (make] Sit— [Sit direct] Sow— Sow together] Shut by sowing] Stay— [Bear] Stand— [Stand] Stir— Provoke] a. Impulsive] Ty— Together-ty] Shut by tying] Vpbraid. RJ. IV. 8. A. Vphold, Bear] Prop] Vpholster, [adj. Bed (mech.] Vpland, [adj. Mountain Coun∣trey] Vpon. Accus. Grow— [Usurp] Look— [a. Sight] [Concerning] agree— [Toward] —that hand, [t. that side] [To] Happen— Prep. VI. 1. come— [Assault] Run— Assault] Storm] [After] —this, [after th.] worde—word. Vpper. Proper. —end, [Top] —side. Sp. III. 5. [Superior] —hand, [adj. Dignity (place] Get the— [a. Victory] Vpright. [Direct] ly—[ly adj. reverse] [adj. Sincerity] Integrity] —Deal∣ing Equity] Justice] Vprising, [Rising] Vproar, [Sedition] Vpshot, [Event] Vpside, [Upperside] —down Lying] Upside down turn∣ed] Vpsitting. [Sitting direct] Vpstart, [New corr.] Vpward. Prep. V. 1. Vranoscopus. Fi. IV. 11. Vrbanity. Man. IV. 9. Vrchin. [Hedgehog] [Little sorry (person] Vre. [Custom of useing] Vreter, [adj. Urining Vein] Vrge. [a. Impulsive (augm.] [a. Fierceness] [Intreat (augm.] [Angry (make] Vrgent. [Intense] [Fierce] Vrine, [Pissed (thing] Salt of— St. I. 5. Vrinal, [Glas (vess.) for Urine] Vrn, [adj. Figulatory Pot] sp. for burying Ashes] Vrtica. Ex. IX. 6. A. Vrus, [Bull (kind) bearded] Vs, [We] Vsage. [Use (manner] [Entertaining (manner] [Custom] Vse. [Using] [Usus fructus] Interest, [Rent of money] Lend upon— [Lend for hire] Take upon— [a. hire] [Manner] sp. adj. Custom] [Custom] in— [adj. Custom] Out of, [Un-adj. Custom] [Habit] [Practise] to— TA. V. 6. [Apply] [Entertein] [Accustom] [Practise] Vsher. [adj. Preceding (Off.] —in In-bring] Precede] [Accessory Teacher] Vsual. [adj. p use (freq.] [Customary] Common] Ordinary] Vsufructuary, [adj. Usus fructus (person] Vsurp. RJ. IV. 3. Vsury, [Hire of money] Vsus fructus. RC. IV. 5. A. Vtensil. Po. VI. Vterine, [adj. Womb] PG. VI. 9. Vtility, [Profit-ableness] Vtmost. [Most-adj. Outside] [Extream] [Most] [Whole] Vtopia, [adj. p. Fiction Country (perf.] Vtter. [adj. Outside] [adj. Extream] [Whole] to— Out-put] Shew] Speak] Express [a. Narration] Alienate] Sell] Vtterance, [Speak∣ing (pot.] (manner] Vttermost. vid. Vtter. Vulgar, [Common] —People, [Rabble] Vulnerary, [adj. Wound] Vulture. Bi. I. 1. A. Vvula, [adj. Flesh Cylinder (dim.) for shutting the wind∣pipe] Vxorious, [Fond of Wife] W. WAd, [adj. heap (thing) toge∣ther-tied] Waddle, [Walk adv. Volutation] Duck (like] Wade, [Walk In— through River, &c. Wafer, [Thin (lamin] sp. of Pudding (kind] Waft, [Carry over-water] Wag, Motion (dim.] Shaking (dim.] a— [adj. Urbanity (person] Wage. —Law, [a. Suit] —Souldiers, [Bargain with S.] —War, [a. War] Wager. RC. VI. 8. Wages. RC. V. 6. A. Waggle, [Wag (dim.] Wagon, [Wain] Waife, [Abandoned (thing] Wagtail, Bi. V. 7. Yellow. Bi. V. 7. A. Way. adj. ition (place] factitious way. Po. II. 7. A. —faring, [adj. Travelling] —man, [adj. Travelling (person] —Tree. Sh. II. 3. —Laying, [a. Ambush] give— [not— Resist] Oppose] [Submit] go his— [Go] Lead the- Lead] Before-go] make— [Prepare w.] shew the— [Direct in the w.] By the- Accessorily] adj. Digression] In the— [Hindring] Set in the— [Direct] on the— Bring on the— [Accompany in the beginning of his journey] Go on his— [Proceed] Out of the— [Beside the scope] Erring] Wandring]
[Avoiding] [adj. a. Losing] [Distance] [great— [Remote] —about, [Curve (augm.] —off, [Remote (augm.] [Vergency] many—s, [adv. Diversity vergent] Kind] Manner] Means] Method] Wail, [a. Sor∣row (Voice] (sign] Wain. P. V. 1. A. Wainscot, [Wooden lining of a Room] Wait. [Stay] TA. V. 1. O. Stay, by With For one. AC. V. 1. A. as Companion, [a. com∣panion] Dependent, [a. de∣pendent] Servant, [a. Ser∣vant] Lay— [a. Ambush] Waits, [Wakening Music.] Waiward, [adj. Disingenuity] Moroseness] Wake. awaken. [End sleep] [Begin to wake] not-sleep. AC. II. 4. [adj. p. Wake night before fe∣stival] [adj. Country festival] —Robin. HL. V. 9. A. Wakeful, adj. p. wake (apt.] [Vigilant] Walk. Proper. Mo. II. 1. a— [Walking place] fetch a— [Go for a walk] as Ghost, [appear] Wale, [Ridge of threeds in cloth] Wall. Po. III. 6. [Sepiment] [Rampier] [Partition] —creeper, [Woodpecker] of a long slender bill, about the bigness of a Sparrow] —eyed, [White eyed] —flower. HS. IV. 1. A. —Louse, [Punaise] Po. III. 6. —Nut. Tr. IV. 1. A. —Rue, [White Maiden hair] HL. I. 5. —wort, [Danewort] Wallet, [Riding bag] sp. Open in the middle] Walnut. Tr. IV. 1. Wallowing, [Volutation] Wambling, [Volutation] Loathing (dim.] Aversation (dim.] Wan, Pale] Dead like] Wand. PP. I. 4. A. Wander. TA. VI. 3. A. Wane, [Decrease] Want. [Have occasion to use] Not have. TA. I. 5. O. [Not have enough] Scarcity] Defect] [Poverty] —little of [Almost.] a— [Mole] Wantonness. Playwardness. NP. IV. 3. O. [Unchastity] Wapentake, [Hundred] War. RM. Man of— [Souldier] Ship. RN. I. 6. Warbling, [Trembling (like) voice] Ward. Defend] Protect] —off, [Defend from] Guard] RM. III 6.: Watch] RM. III. 6. [Together adj. ought, Guard City (part] [Imprisonment (place] [Pupil] —of key, Cavity in the la∣min of the key] Notch in the la∣min of the key] —of a lock, [Curve (lamin) within L.] Warden. adj. Keeping (Off.] Magistrate] —tree, [Pear (kind] Warder. [adj. Keeping (Off.] [adj. Guard (person] Watch (person] Wardrobe, [adj. Keeping (Room) of clothing] Ware. [adj. p. Sell (thing] [a. Imperat-heedfulness] Warfare, [War] Wariness. [Heedfulness] [Reservedness] [Frugality] Warlike, [adj. War] Warm. [Temperate] Fierce (dim.] Zealous] Warn. RO. V. 4. A. —to appear, [Citation] Warp. the— [Direct threed] to—[Bend] Warrant. [Written Command] [Sponsion] Warranty, [Paction for safe (make] Warren, [Park for Rabbets] Warrener, [adj. Park (Off.) of Rabbets] Warrier, [Souldier] Wart. S. III. 5. Was, [Am having been] Wash. O. V. 6. —es. W. III. 6. A. hog— [Broth for hogs] Wasp. Ex. IV. 2. —ish, [Morose] —like . Ex. IV. 3. A. Wassail, [adj. Country Banquet] Wast. Girdlestead, [Middle (part) of trunk] —of a ship. RN. II. 5. Not— Used] Inhabited] —land. [Superfluous] —water. to— Decay] Diminish] [Booty] Mar] Destroy] [a. Ruine] [Spend (corr.] [Squander] Wastcote, [Thin adj.  (vest] Wastful, [adj. Squandering] Watch. to— [Wake] [a. Vigilance] a. Heedfulness] Observe] a. Guard] Watch] —for, [Expect waiting] —with, [Wait waking] a— [a. Watch] —man, [adj. Watching (person] (Off.] -for custo∣dy of Persons, [Guard] Places. RM. III. 6. A. —word, adj. word (sign) of Watch] time (sign) by word] Clock without Bell] adj. Pocket Clock] Watchet, [Blue (kind] Watchfulness. (Vigilance] [Heedfulness] [Diligence] Water. Element. El. III. the— W. IV. Running— [Stream] Standing— [Pool] by— Swimming] Sailing] in a— [adj. Sweating (aug.] under— [Covered with—] —bank. —beetle. Ex. V. 8. —Chein, [Chain (dim.]
—Course Stream] Aqueduct] —Furrow, [Trench for drein] —Hen, [Moorhen] Bi. VIII. 9. —Lilly. —man, [adj. Rowing (person] —Nut —Pepper. —Raile —Rat —Scorpion. Ex. I. 9. —Shoot, [Barren branch (dim.] —Snail. Ex. VII. 1. A. —Spider. Ex. II. 4. to— —Cattle, [Drink (make) c.] —garden, [a. Wet (make) the surface with—] —meat [Soke in with water] Vrin. to make— [v. Vrination] [Out—[Distilled (thing] [adj. [Washing (thing] sp▪ Medicinal] mouth— Watery adj. Water] Waterish adj. Water] —blood, [Serous blood] —tast, [adj. water (like t.] Wattle, [a. Weaving sticks (dim.] [Gill] PG. V. 7. A. Wave. W. IV. 1. E. —ing. [Undulation] [Shaking (dim.] Aversion] Avoiding] Waver. AS. IV. 4. O. Wax. Subst. El. III. 7. A. ear— [Excrement of the ear] to— [a. wax] Begin (inc.] [Increase] [v. Event] Waze, [Wreath] sp. of Straw] Weakness. [Impotence] Feebleness. NP. V. 7. O. Remisseness] Deficiency] Weale, Being (perf.] Happiness] Wealth. [Riches] Common— [adj. RC. (thing] [Common prosperity] [Government by the people] Wean, [Teach to abstain] —a child, [Un- a. suckle Child] Weapon. RM. V. 1. Wear. Lessen by use] Worse by use] Decay by use] —out, [Spoil by use] —as clothes, [v. Clothing] Pr. IV. —in his pocket, [Carry] Mo. VI. 1. —as Ring, &c. [with p. Or∣nate] TM. II. 6. a— [adj. Taking (mach.) of fish] Weary. to— TA. V. 8. O. —of [Sick of] adj. TA. V. 7. O. Wearish tast, [Unsavory t.] Weasand, [Wind-pipe] PG. VI. 1. A. Weather. [Guelt Sheep] Be. II. 2. Temperament of Air. El. VI. —Cock, [Shewing (jug.) of the vergency of the wind] —glass, [adj. Glass (instr.) for shew∣ing Heat Cold of the air] to—one, [a. patience] Weave. —ing. O. V. 2. —er. [adj. Weaving (mech.] Fish. Fi. IV. 8. Web, [Woven (thing] Cob- [Woven (thing) of Spi∣der] [White spot in the eye] Wed, [a. Marriage] Wedding, [adj. Marriage solem∣nity] Wedge. [Prism] sp. for cleaving] —of Silver. to—in. [In-thrust (augm.] [In-fasten] sp. by prisms in-thrusted about it] Wedlock, [Marriage] Wednesday, [4th day of the week] We. Prep. I. 1. A. Weed. [Sorry garment] [Herb] sp. Unprofitable] Hurtful] —ing. O. III. 3. A. Week. —of time. Mea. V. 4. A. —of Candle, [adj. p. flame (apt.) string (part] Weel,, [adj. Taking (machin) for fish] Weeld. [Handle] [Swing] Ween, [a. Opinion] [a. Supposition] Over— [a. Pride] Weeping. AC. IV. 3. O. Weesel. Be. IV. 7. A. Weevel. Ex. V. 1. A. Weigh. v. mea. III. —with Balances. O. I. 2. [Be heavy] v. Q. V. 4. —anker, [Lift a.] —down. [Depress] [Consider] Weight. Gravity. Q. V. 4. E. Measure of. Mea. III. Measuring (instr.) Mea. III. A. Gold— Weight per∣fectly equal] Standing— Weight per∣fectly equal] [Importance] Weighty, [adj. Weight] Welk, [Periwinkle] Ex. VII. 6. A. Welkin, [Sky] well. [adv. Good] Regular] Sufficient] —a day. Int. II. 2. O. —advised, [a. Considerate] —beloved, [Loved] —born Noble man] Gentle man] —come Accepted (perf.] adj. a. Delectation] to—one. [Joy. AS. VI. 6. (sign) for his coming] [Entertain (perf.] —fare, [Being (perf.] —favoured, [adj. Decent] (fig.] —in health, [adj. Health] —in years, [adj. Old (dim.] —nigh, [Almost] Adv. V. 1. —now Int. III. 2. O. —then Int. III. 2. O. —to pass, [Rich (dim.] —willing adj. Favour] —wishing adj. Favour] as— Adv. II. 1. a— W. IV. 3. Welt, [Margin] sp. made by sowing] Welter, [v. Volutation] Wen. S. III. 5. Wench. [adj. Childhood (fem.] Adolescence (fem.] [Sorry (fem.] [adj. Fornication (fem.] to— [a. Fornication] Went, [adj. pret. go] Wept, [adj. pret. weep] Were. [are having been] it— [It might be] as it— Adv. IV. 2. O. West. Sp. III. 1. O. Wet. Q. V. 2. E. Whale. Fi. I. 1. —of the river, [Sheatfish] Fi. VI. 6. Wharf,, [adj. River haven] Wharfinger, [adj. Wharf (Off.] What. Interrog. Pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A. —manner of, [of what manner] kind] —soever. Pron. III. 3. A.
—a poor shift, [How sorry a shift] Wheal. [Pustle] S. III. 1. —worm. Ex. II. 7. A. Wheat. HL. II. 1. Buck— HF. I. 3. Cow— Indian— [Maiz] HL. II. 2. Wheat-ear. Bi. V. 6. A. Wheat-grass. HL. III. 3. Wheedle. [adj. Fawning adv. Fraud] Wheel. Figure Mag. V. 3. A. to— [Vertiginate] —about Turn] Go in crooked (Line] —of Curt, &c. Po. V. 6. —Barrow. [One wheel'd Cart] to break on the— RJ. V. 9. A. Wheeze, [a. Asthma with sound (augm.] Whey. [Serum] PP. I. 2. Whelk. [Pustle] S. III. 1. Whelm. [Cover] (augm.] Whelp, Dog (yong] Lion (yong] &c. (yong] When. [At what time] [Whereas] Conj. IV. 1. Whence. [From what place] —soever, [From whatsoever place] Where. What. —by, [By what] —in, [in what] —of, [of what] —to, [to what] —as. Conj. IV. 1. —fore. Conj. III. 3. [in what place] —soever, [In whatsoever place] any— [In any place] every— Sp. II. 8. no— Sp. II. 8. O. Wherl (adj. Vertigination (jug.] Whern (adj. Vertigination (jug.] Wherret, [Striking] sp. with hand] Wherry, [Boat adj. p. row (apt.) with 2 Oars] Whether. —of the two, [Who of the two] Affirm. Conj. I. 1. Negat. Conj. I. 1. O. —or no. Conj. I. 1. or Conj. I. 1. O. Disjunctive indefinite. Conj. II. 3. A. Whet. as point adj. p. tooth (make] adj. a. pricking (apt.] as edge, adj. p. edge (make] adj. a. Cutting (apt.] —Stone. St. I. 6. Why, [Wherefore] Which. Interrog. Pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A. VVhiffler, [Disguised adj. waiting (Off.) with Candle] VVhig. [Drink of acid whey] VVhile. [Time] sp. between] a good —adv. perma∣nent] a great —adv. perma∣nent] a long —adv. perma∣nent] — age [adv. old] — since [adv. old] a little — [adv. transi¦tory] a short — [adv. transi¦tory] — ago [adv. new] — since [adv. new] mean— [in the middle time] after a — [after some time] within a — [after some time] after a little— [adv. soon] within a little— [adv. soon] after a long— [adv. late] within a long— [adv. late] to—Off. a. Cunctation] Delay] Protract] VVhilst. Adv. III. 3. VVhimper, [Acute (dim.) grief (voice] VVhimzy. [a. Fancy (corr.] [adj. Conceitedness (thing] VVhin. [Furz] VVhine, [acute (dim.) desire grief (voice] VVhip. [adj. Whipping (instr.] Figure. Mag. IV. 7. [adj. hand (part) of Rud∣de] to— Punish. RJ. VI. 2. [a. Agility] [about-wind threed] —a top, [Vertiginate t. with adj. Mag. IV. 7. (instr,] VVhipsaw, [Saw (dim.] VVhirl. —bone, [Bone covering the knee] —pool. W. IV. 1. D. —wind. El. II. 4. A. o— [Vertiginate (augm.] [Cast adv. Vertiginating] VVhirligig.   VVhirtle. Sh. III. 3. A. VVhisk. [Move (imp.] [Brush by striking] VVhisker, [Great] [Mustache] VVhisper. AC. III. . —er, [adj. Whispering Backbiting (person] VVhist. Int. III. 1. O. VVhistle. [Whistling (instr.] sp. adj. Tube (fig.] —ing. Q. III. 4. A. VVhit, [Least] any— [adv. any] every— [adv. all] whole] VVhite. —Colour. Q. I. 1. E. —bread, [Fine bread] —lead, [Ceruse] —liver'd, [adj. Coward] —meats, [adj. milk victu∣als] —pot, [Fluid Pudding] —ing. [White (make] Fish. Fi. III. 2. A. VVhither. [To what place] —soever, [To whatsoever place] VVhitlow. [Bile on the finger] —grass. Whitsontide, [adj. Festivity (time) for pret. Descension of the Holy Ghost] Whitster, [adj. a. white (mech. of Linen] Whittle, [Cut (corr.] —'d, [Drunk] Whizz. [adj. Hissing (voice] Who. Interrog. pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A. —So Pron. III. 3. A. —soever Pron. III. 3. A. Whole. Total. TM. VI. Entire] NP. V. 1. adj. Soundness] NP. V. 2. Sum. —Sale, [Selling adv. aggre∣gate] —ly [adv. Whole] All] Wholesom, [adj. Health] Sondness] Whom, vid. Who. Whoop, [v. Exclamation (augm.] Whore. [adj. fornication (fem.]
—dom, [Fornication] —monger, [adj. fornicati∣on (male] Whortle. Sh. II. 2. Sweet— Sh. II. 6. A. Whose, adj. Who] of Who] Whosoever. Pron. III. 3. A. Wicked, Graceless] Unholy] Vicious (augm.] Wicker, [Woven (thing) of wands] sp. adj. Ozier] Wicket. [Door (dim.] Wide. [Ample] —open, [Wholly open] [Remote] —from the matter, [Imper∣tinent (augm.] Widgin. Bi. IX. 3. Widow. RO. II. 5. —Wail. Sh. III. 6. A. Wield. [Handle] [Govern] Wife, [Married (fem.] house— [Mistress of family] good— [adj. Providence] Frugality (fem.] [Woman (corr.] Wight, [Person] Wild. —ness. Wantonness] Fierceness] Conceitedness] Lightness] [Riotousness] [Barbarousness] [Irregularness] [Impertinence (augm.] —fire, [Confection of wetted Gunpowder] —plant, [Naturally growing] Wilderness, [Not-adj. p. Dwelling (place] Wilding, [Naturally growing Ap∣ple] Wile, [a. Craft] Will. Future tense] Mood III.] Faculty. NP. I. 4. Act. AS. IV. Inclination] Velleity] Purpose] Desire] Command] Good— [favour] with a good— [adv. Ala∣crity] Ill— [Malignity] with an ill— [adv. Grudg∣ing] [Testament] —with a Wisp. El. I. 6. Wilful. [Fierce] [Pertinacious] [adj. Disobedience (apt.] [Not-adj. p. Perswade Dissuade (apt.] Willingness. [Will (abstr.] [Spontaneity] [Alacrity] Willow. Tree. Tr. VI. 9. Herb. Codded— HS. IV. 3. Spiked— Sh. V. 1. A. Wimble. [adv. p. Vertigination Boring (instr.] Wimple.   Win. Obtain] Gain] —a Victory, [a. Victory] Take] Conquer] Perswade] Allure] Wince, [Strike with heels] Winch, [adv. Ver∣tiginated Pulling Scruing (machin] Wind. Proper. El. II. 4. —fall, [adj. p. Fall Event sp. by wind] —flower, [Anemony] HF. IX. 3. —mill, [Mill adj. p. operati∣on (make) by the wind] Side— [Oblique—] Whirl— El. II. 4. A. Air (augm.] Vapor] Fume] —gall. —in the guts, [Colic] [Breath] —pipe. PG. VI. 1. A. fetch— [a. Respiration] long —ed] short —ed] [Sent] is in the—of [Discover (inc.] to— —a horn, [a. sound h.] [smell] sp. (inc.] [v. Crooked] v. Parabolical] v. Hyperbolical] v. Elliptical] [Turn] —ing way. [Fold] —ing sheet, [adj Linen (vest) for adj. buried (person] [v. Round] Circular] [Vertiginate] [v. Undulated] [Wriggle] —in and out Turn adv. Diversity] Wriggle adv. Diversity] —up and down. [Insinuate] —into one. —one out of [v. Spiral] Helical] [Twisting] [v. Bottom] Skein] [Glomerate] —up, [End] —a Bottom, [a. Bottom] —a Skein, [a. Skein] —a Watch. Windle. Mag. IV. 5. A. Windlass, [Pulley] Window. Po. IV. 2. A. Wine. Pr. II. 6. Wing. PP. V. 2. —of an army, [adj. side (part) of Army] Wink. [Shut eye] [Sign by shutting eye] —at. [Seem not to observe] [Not— Correct] Punish] Winnow. O. III. 5. A. Winter. Mea. V. 3. A. —cherry. —Gillyflower. —Green. HL. VI. 8. to— Permanence through the win∣ter] Dwelling] through the win∣ter] Wipe. Stroke. O. V. 8. A. —clean, [a. Clean by wipe∣ing] —out, Annihilate by—ing] Spoil by—ing] [a. Fraud] [Jeer] Wire, [adj. Metal threed] Wise. [Manner] [adj. Wisdom] Wisdom. Ha. VI. 2. Wish. a. Will] Desire] —one to do, Advise one &c. Command one &c. —well to [a. Favour] [a. Velleity] Wisp. [Wreath] sp. of Straw] [Inflammation of the eye∣lid].
Wist, [Pret. know] Wistly, [Steddily] Wit. [Understanding] [a. Fancy Invention (person] [Sprightliness] Wisdom] Art] —less, [Without— adj. wit] in oness, [adj. Understand∣ing (perf.] out of ones—s [Mad] little— [Wit (def.] Pleasant — [Facetious∣ness.] Searching— [Sagacious∣ness] to— [Conj. IV. 3. Witch, [adj. RJ. III. 1. (per∣son] —Craft. RJ. III. 1. With. Fight — Run — [Against] [Fight—] [by] Adv. I. 1. A. —much pain, [adv. Pain∣ful] together— Adv. II. 2. —all With it] Also. a— [Twisted Wand] Withdraw. Abstain Giving] Cease Giving] [Take away] sp. Concealing] [Remove] [Depart] [Retire] sp. adv. Concealing] -ing Room. [Inner Room] Wither. [Decay] sp. through Nutrition Moisture (def.] Withers of a horse, [Convex (part) between the shoul∣ders] Withhold. Hold] Detention] [a. Impedient] Withy. Willow. Tr. IV. 6. Sallow. Tr. IV. 6. A. Within. [On this side] Prep. VI 2. in. Prep. IV. 1. A. —a little, [Almost] Without. Not with. Prep. II. 2. O. —doubt, [adv. Certain] Not within. Prep. IV. 2. A. Beyond. Prep. VI. 2. A. Withstand. Oppose] Resist] [a. Impedient (end] Withwind.   Witness. RJ. I. 7. A. Wittal, [Consenting to his Wifes Adultery] Witty. [adj. Wit] Witting. [adj. Knowledge] Witwal. [Wood speit] Bi. I. O. Wizarding. RJ. III. 1. A. Wo. Misery] Grief] Woad. HS. VI. 8. Woful [adj. Misery] Grief] Wolfe. Beast. Be. V. 1. A. —sbane. HS. I. 3. Berry bearing— [Herb Chri∣stopher] HS. IX. 5. wholesom— HS. I. 3. A. Winter— HS. I. 4. [Cancer] S. III. 4. Woman, [Man. W. V. 5. [fe∣male] —s, age Man. VI. 2. estate Man. VI. 2. —s, Sex. NP. VI. 2. O. Womb. PG. VI. 9. Wonder. [Admiration] Wont. [Custom] Woo. [a. Suitor] Wood. Part of Tree. PP. I. A. Place of Trees. Po. I. 7. —man [adj. Po. I. 7. (Off.] —ward [adj. Po. I. 7. (Off.] [Trees (aggr.] Woodbind. Sh. II. 8. Vpright— Sh. II. 8. A. Woodcock. Bi. VII. 7. A. Woodculver, [adj. Wood-pige∣on] Wood, Angry (exc.] Mad] Woodfretter.   Woodlark. Bi. IV. 1. A. Woodlouse.   Woodman. adj. Po. I. 7. A. Woodpecker. Bi. IX. 9. Woodpile. [Heaped wood (aggr.] Woodroof. HL. IX. 10. Woodsear.   Woodsorrel. [Three-leav'd Sorrel] Woodspeight. Bi. IX. 9. Woodward, [adj. Po. I. 7. (Off.] Woodworm, [Wood-boring in∣sect (dim.] Woof, [Transverse threeds of wo∣ven (thing] Wool. PP. VI. 1. A. —en cloth. Pr. IV. 1. Word. Proper. D. II. at a— [Briefly] in a— [Briefly] in—only, [adv. Hypocrisie] by—of mouth, [adv. present speaking] by— [Proverb (corr.] [Watchword] [Narration] bring b. [Narration] send s. [Narration] [Promise] Work. a. action] v. efficient] [Operation] O. make— a. Efficient more-operation] Do adj. must. un∣done (things] [a. Mechanic] sp. for Ornateness] [Embroider] [Ferment] a— [adj. p. work (thing] [Book] Workman, [adj. Work (per∣son] sp. (perf.] —ship, [Work] sp. (perf.] World. The Universe of Creatures. W. The Globe of earth and wa∣ters. W. II. 7. The earth. W. III. a—of [adj. Multitude (aug.] Worldly. [adj. world] [adj. Scraping] Worldling Graceless (person] Selfish (person] Covetous (person] Worm. Insect. bear— Ex. III. 8. A. belly— Ex. I. 1. A. blain— churr— [Evechurr] Ex. II. 2. A. earth— Ex. I. 1. Gally— palmer— Ex. III. 8. A. Silk— Ex. III. 6. A. Skipping— Ex. III. 7. Wheal— Ex. II. 7. A. [Spiral Pin] Wormseed. Treacle— HS IV. 13. Wormwood. Sh. V. 3. Worn, adj. a. pret. Wear] adj. p. Wear] Worry, [Shak in teeth] Worse. TM. I. 6. D. —and— [adj. Worse]
Worship. [Dignity] [a. Reverence] adoration. RE. IV. Worshipful. [adj. Dignity] [Gentleman (kind] Worst. [Most evil] —part. TM. VI. 1. O. to— [Overthrow] Worsted. [Fine threeds of Wool] Wort. [Herb] ale [not yet fermented] beer [not yet fermented] Worth Worthiness] Excellence] [Valor] [Price] [Riches] Worthiness. TM. IV. 6. Worthless, [Sorry] Wote, [Know] Woven, [adj. p. Weave] Would. —ing, [Velleity] —god, [I wish] I— [Have it] [Mood conditional III] Wound. hurt. S. I. 2. adj. a. pret. Wind] adj. p. Wind] Wrack. Spoil Ruine sp. of Ship] go to— [Wracked (inc.] Herb. HL. I. 14. Wrangle. [a. Contention] sp. in words] Wrap, Fold] Cover by folding] —about, [About fold] —up. Together-fold] Cover by folding] [Tangle] [a. Obscure] Wrath. [Anger (augm.] Wreath. [Twist] a— [Cylinder about-spi∣rald] Wreck, Perform] Execute] Wren. Bi. VI. 3. Wrench. [Violent∣ly extend] open] sp. by lifting] [Hurt by violently extend∣ing] Wrest. [Coaction] sp. by twisting] [Interpret (corr.] —from. [From-take by wresting] [Extort] VVrestle. Mo. V. 6. VVretch, [adj. wretchedness (person] VVretchedness. [Misery] [Penuriousness (augm.] [Sorriness] VVry. [Oblique] [Crooked] —neck, [Woodpecker (kind] adj. holding (freq.) his head adv. oblique] VVriggle. as Reptils. Mo. I. 6. to denote affection. AC. IV. 4. —out, Go Get [out adv. wrig∣gling] VVrinch, vid. VVrench. VVringing. [a. Compression] sp. adv. Twisting] —from one. [From take violently] sp. by wringing] [Extort] —pain, [p. as if by wring∣ing] VVrist. PG. V. 3. A. VVrit. [Commission for arresting] [holy— [Scripture] Writing. AC. III. 7. a— [Written thing] Deed. RC. VI. 5. VVrithing, vid. VVreathing. VVrong. [Irregular] Evil] Evil (kind] a. Injustice] Injury] in the— [adj. erring] VVroth, vid. VVrath. VVrought adj. a. pret. work] adj. p. work] VVrung, adj. a. pret. wring] adj. p. wring] Y. YArd. [Stick] Sail— RN. III. 2. [3 foot] —land. [Court] Po. III. 3. PG. VI. 8. (male] Yarn, [Threed adj. p. weave (apt.] Yarrow. [Millefoil] Yawn. Mo. III. 6. Yea. affirmat. Adv. I. 1. [Rather] Adv. III. 1. Yee. Pron. I. 2. A. Yeeld. Suffer to take. TA. IV. 1. Sold for] Demised for] —account, [a. Account] —Fruit, [a. Fruit] a. Subjection] Submit] Grant] D. VI. 3. O. Assent] AS. II. 3. Confess] D. VI. 9. as Garrison. RM. II. 4. D. as Prisoner. RM. II. 6. D. as Conquer'd RM. II. 7. D. —up the Ghost, [Dy] Diminish] Remit] as in moist weather, [v. moistness] as to the touch, [v. Yielding∣ness] Yeeldingness. [Yield (apt.] [Softness] Q. VI. 1. Yeer. Mea. V. in—s [Old] adj. Mea. VI. 4. Yeest, [adj. ferment∣ing (thing) of Ale] Beer] Yell, [Exclaim] Yellow. Q. II. 2. A. the—s —hammer. Bi. IV. 2. Yelp, [a. voice as dog (young] Yeoman. RC. I. 6. A. —of the Larder, &c. [Officer of the L. &c.] Yerk, Cast (imp.] Strike (imp.] Yern, [adj. p. Motion] sp. with Pity] Desire] Yes. Adv. I. 1. Yesterday, [adj. preceding day] Yet. Nevertheless Conj. II. 2. O. Before this time] Till this time]
Yew, [Sheep Be. II. 2. (fem.] —tree: Tr. V. 3. Yex, [Hiccough] Yoke. [Neck-binding (jug.] [Together-two] Yolk, [Yellow (part) within the Egg] Yong, vid. Young] Yonker, [Young (person] —of ship. RN. V. 8. A. Yore, [Old] Sp. I. 3. O. You, Thou Yee Young. —of age, [adj. youth] —ones, [Children] [New] —begin∣ner, Learner] Beginner] Your, [adj. You] Youth. Under age Infancy. Mea. VI. 1. Childhood. Mea. VI. 1. A. Of age Adolescence. Mea. VI. 2. Youth. Mea. VI. 2. A. a— [adj. Youth (person] —full, [adj. Youth (like] Z. ZAny, [adj. Scurril (person] Zeal. AS. VI. 1. Zedoary. Herb, [Root of an Indian Iris] Tree. Tr. VI. 11. Zelot, [adj. Zeal (person] sp. (corr. Zenith, [Upper Pole of the Ho∣rizon] Zink, [Spelter] Met. III. 4. Zodiac. W. VI. 3. A. Zoilus, [Censurer (corr.] Zone. [Girdle] [Space of earth, &c.] frigid— [Space of earth be∣tween pole and polar Cir∣cle] temperate—[ Space of earth between Polar Circle and Tropic] torrid— [Space of earth be∣tween the two Tropics] Zoophyte, [Plant-Animal] Zyris.   FINIS.
