W2677 R38940 18196950 107007
AN ABSTRACT OF THOSE ANSWERS VVhich were given in the ASSEMBLY of the LORDS in the High Court of PARLIAMENT, UNTO THE NINE REASONS, SENT UP FROM THE HOVSE OF COMMONS, Against the VOTING of BISHOPS in PARLIAMENT. Printed Anno Dom. 1641.
That Bishops ought not to vote in PARLIAMENT. BEcause it is a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministeriall Function. IT is not so much hinderance as their conveening to generall Councills, Synods, Convocations, Assemblies, Classes, and the like, in all the Chur∣ches Reformed or otherwise. 2 It is propter majus bonum Ecclesiae. 3 The Apostles unnecessarily put themselves to more hinderances, to worke for their lively-hood, Act. 20.24. 1. Thes. 2.9. 2. Thes. 3.8. 4 What hinderance can it be to their calling, that once in three yeares, when they must necessa∣rily attend the Convocation, they divide some part of that short time to the attendance of Parlia∣ment? Because they doe vow and undertake it at their Ordi∣nation, when they enter into holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholly to that Vocation. This vow and undertaking in Ministers Ordi∣nation is quite mistaken: The words are in the Bi∣shops Exhortation, not in the Ministers Answer. 2 The Bishop hopes they will give themselves wholly to that, and not to any other Trade or Vo∣cation.
3 Wholly, in a Morall and not in a Mathema∣ticall sense, that will admit no Latitude: Else, there might the same exception be taken against their just care of provision for their houshold affaires. Because Councils and Canons in severall Ages doe forbid them to meddle in secular affaires. 1 Councils and Canons against Bishops Votes in Parliament, were never in use in this Kingdome, and therefore they are abolished by the Statute of 25. H. 8. 2 So are they by the same Statute, because the Lords have declared, that the Bishops vote here by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme: And all Canons that crosse with those, are there abolished. 3 So are they by the same Statute, as thwarting the Kings Prerogative to call Bishops by Summons to Vote in Parliament. 4 So they are by the Vote in the House of Commons, 21. Maii 1641. because they are not confirmed by Act of Parliament. 5 This Argument was in a sort deserte by Mr. Perpoint, and confest to be but an Argumentum ad hominem. Because the 24. Bishops have a dependency upon the Archbishops, and because of their Canonicall obedience to them. 1 They have no Dependency upon the Arch-Bishops, but in points of Appeale, and Visitation onely: And owe them no Obedience but in these two points. None at all in Parliament, where they
are Pares, their Equals: And as Bracton tels us, Parin Parem non habet imperium. What hath Canonicall Obedience to doe with a Vote in Parliament, decla∣red in this Bill to be no Ecclesiasticall, but a secular affaire? 2 This Argument reacheth not the two Arch-Bishops, discharged in the Rubrick from this Oath, and therefore is no reason for the passing of this bill. Because they are but for their lives, and therefore are not fit to have Legislative power over the honours, in∣heritances, persons, and liberties of others. 1 Bishops are not for their lives onely, but for their successors also in the Land and Honour that pertaine to their places: as the Earles and Barons al∣so are for their successors in their owne Lands and Honours: And, holding their Lands in Fee simple, may with as good Reason vote in the Honours, inhe∣ritance, persons, and liberties of others, as others may, and doe in theirs. 2 Many Peeres have beene created for their lives onely, and the Earle of Surrey for the life of his Fa∣ther, who yet voted in this house. 3 The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are cho∣sen for one Parliament only, and yet use their Legis∣lative power. Nor will their being elected diffe∣rence their Cause; for the Lords use that power, in a greater Eminence, who are not elected. 4 A Burgesse, that hath free-hold but for terme of life only, may vote and assent to a law in Parliament. 5 No such exception was ever heard of in the Diets of Germanie, the Corteses of Spaine, or the three Estates of France, where the Prelates
vote in all these Points, with the Nobility and the Commons. Because of Bishops dependancy and expectancy of Translations to places of greater profit. 1 This Argument supposeth all Kings, and all Bishops to bee very faulty, if they take the time of their votes in Parliament, from these dependences, and expectances. 2 This may be said of all the Kings great Officers, of all the noble members of both Houses, who may be conceived, as well as Bishops, to have their expe∣ctances, and consequently to be deprived by this Reason of voting in Parliament. 3 This Argument reacheth not at the two Arch∣bishops, and so fals short of the votes, which are to be taken away by this Bill. That severall Bishops have of late much encroached upon the Consciences, and properties of the Subject. And they and their successors will be much encouraged still to encroach, and the subject will be much discouraged from complaining against such encroachments, if 26. of that Order be to be Judges upon these complaints. The same Reason extends to their Legislative power, in any Bill to passe for the Regulation of their power, upon any emer∣gent inconveniency by it. 1 This Argument fights not against Bishops votes in Parliament, but against their votes in Convoca∣tion, where (if any where) they have encroached upon the Consciences and properties of the Subject: Nor yet at the votes of such Bishops there, as are not guilty of this offence. Nor need the Subject to be discouraged in complaining against the like Grie∣vances, though 26. of that Order continue Judges:
For they shall not vote as Judges in their owne cause, when they are legally charged: And if they should vote, what were that to the purpose, when the Lay-Peeres are still foure to one? The Bishops (assisted with a double number of Mitred Abbots, and Priors) could not hinder the Lawes made a∣gainst the Court of Rome, the Alien Cardinalls, and Prelates, the Provisors, the Suitors to the Popes Consistory under Ed. 3. Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. much more may those emergent exorbitances of the Eccle∣siasticall jurisdiction be soone curbed and redressed in this inequality of votes betweene the Temporall and Spirituall Lords. So as this Argument doth not so much hurt the votes, as it quailes the courage of the Bishops, who may justly feare, by this and the next Argument, that the taking away of their votes is but a kind of fore-runner to the abolishing of their jurisdiction. Because the whole number of them is interessed to maintaine the jurisdiction of Bishops; which hath beene found so grievous to the three Kingdomes, that Scotland hath utterly abolished it, and multitudes in England and Ireland have petitioned against it. 1 This Argument is not against the Votes of Bi∣shops, but against Episcopacy it selfe, which must be removed, because Scotland hath done so, and some in England and Ireland would have it so: And yet peradventure ten times as great a somme as these de∣sire the contrary. 2 There will be found Peeres enough in the Up∣per House to reforme any thing that is amisse in the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, although the 26. Prelates should be so wicked as to oppose it: as there were
found Peeres enough in that noble House, to curbe the Court of Rome, and the Revenues of the Car∣dinalls under Ed. 3. To meet with the Provisors un∣der Rich. 2. To put all the Clergy into a Praemunire under Hen. 8. And to reforme the Religion, 1. Eliz. notwithstanding the opposition of all the Bishops. Because Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it setteth too great a distance betweene them and therest of their Brethren in the Ministery, which occasioneth pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church. This is an Argument from Morall Philosophie, which affords no Demonstrations. All are not proud that vote in Parliament, nor discontented, that are not so imployed. This Argument fights only against the title of being Lords, which is not the Question at this time. And were those Brethren so wise and well affected as they might be, they would rejoyce rather that some of their owne profession are advanced to those places, wherein they may be capable, upon all occasions, of doing good offices to them, and to this whole Church. FINIS.
