W3193 17948145 106768
England this fable plainly shew's, a strong Allie no partner know's. The Bull the Goat, and patient Sheep one day, Leagu'd with the Lion, sought a common prey; A pray they took, an high and mighty hart; of which each thought to haue his equal part: Soft, quoth the Lion, I the first shaire claim, Cause Lion King o'th forest is my mane; The second you shall giue me as my due, Cause I am valiant, able to subdue: The third I take by force, and for the rest, Touch it who dares; yield it all, you had best.
Speculum Speculativum: OR, A CONSIDERING-GLASSE; Being an INSPECTION Into the present and late sad Condition Of these NATIONS; With some CAUTIONAL EXPRESSIONS made thereupon, by GEORGE WITHER, Immediately after His MAJESTIES Restauration: To preserve in himself and others a Christian Obe∣dience to GOD's various Dispensations. Hereby also are some Glimmerings discovered Of what will probably ensue hereafter. Fiat Justitia, Ruat Coelum: Rather than Justice should bee made a scorn, Let all the Planets, from their Sphears bee torn. And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When comest to Babylon, thou shalt read these words; and when thou hast made an end of read∣ing this Book, thou shalt binde a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates, and say, Thus shall Babylon sink, Jer. 51. 63. London, Written June XIII. MDCLX. and there Imprinted the same year.
To the KING'S MAJESTY, If this Considering Glass comes accidentally to his View. SIR, Blest is hee that in Gods Name doth come, In which Name I pronounce your welcome home; And, for your Health more heartily do pray, Than any one who drinks it every day. As often too, I have you in my thought As they, who with the first your favour sought; Which, if my heart you could as plainly see As what you now read, would beleeved bee. When I had first compos'd what here ensues, I wisht it, where you might the same peruse: For men unknown (or known without respect) So justly are affronted with neglect, For proffer'd Services to those, that have More Off'rings daily than they can receive, That, I commitred this to his Dispose, Who orders every thing that comes or goes. If Providence hath brought this to your hand, Give up to REASON straight, the sole command Ov'r all your Passions; Make her of your Isle, (Your Isle of MAN) Queen-Regent, all the while You are perusing it; and let it bee Read through, else it will wrong both You and Mee. (Or you like Caesar, unperus'd perchance, May leave that, which your welfare might advance) To be her Subject, but so long endeavour As till that's done, and then, be King for ever, (Reigning with her) as absolute a Prince, As ever had ov'r men pre-eminence: For, then, shall that, to you more glory add, Than hitherto from any Pen you had;
And, be to you, a true Mnemosyne, When, peradventure, none so dares to be. This Glass (though form'd it be of Common matter And, made by him, who knows not how to flatter) If, to a Prince, who needs it, it were sold, Were worth to him three times his weight in gold, If he knew how to use it as he should: Yet I had rather you for nothing had it, So that it wrought th' effect for which I made it, Than, from another, to receive that price In ready money paid mee over twice: For, then, this Book (which hath not to your praise One single Page) thereto should Trophies raise More glorious, than, your LONDONS wealth could rear If wholly, thereupon consum'd it were. Your Happiness and Honour it intends: By not commending, it much more commends, Than all their Panegyricks who bestrow Those men with praises whom they do not know; And, magnifie, when they ascend the Throne, All Kings alike; which praise is less than none; For, 'tis a Mock, deserving but returns Of sharp reproofs, or of neglect and scorns. If, wise and pious, you I had not thought, I, such like Gew-gaws could to you have brought To put out of your minde, what GOD for you Hath lately done; and what you ought to do For Him and His. But neither self-esteem, Nor verbal Attributes can perfect him By whom, here, shall bee an Establishment Of Justice in a Righteous Government. For, none else, but a self-denying King, Shall that great Blessing to these Nations bring; And, his Name will be thereby honour'd more Than all his Predecessors heretofore.
And, they, who then live shall fulfill'd behold What Britains Genius, long ago foretold: For, I beleeve, that such a one will be, And also, much desire, you may be hee. A King you are, who, now twice born hath been To Royalty; and therefore, by that Mean A Childe of honour, by Regeneration You seem to be: and in the common fashion To celebrate your double birth, it could With your condition no proportion hold; For that Cause in a path, by no man trod, I seek to do you honour in this Mode, Which if accepted, your true praise will be; And, peradventure no disgrace to mee. For as a Lady looking in a Mirrour, Puts on her Dress, and Jewels without errour, Heeding what is mis-placed, or forgot, And to her Handmaid alwaies trusteth not; So, by this Glass, you may have by reflection A sight of what pertains to your perfection. See, not with others, but, with your own eyes, Whether true Ornaments, or some Disguise, Be put upon you, which may render you Less lovely, when you come in open view. Herein, a Catalogue to you is shown Of many long-lost Jewels of the Crown; And such as add the most Essential Glory Unto those Crowns that are but transitory. A Course is offered here, whereby you may Out-do, all that, which Flatterers can say: (Or, by but so far forth endeav'ring it, As Humane Frailties will the same permit) To praise you here, I do not undertake; But, that your self praise-worthy you may make
Is my design by bringing things to minde, Which written in your own heart you shall finde. This shews the Means to make you honourable With what should alwaies be inseparable From your own person, and doth also tend To your Immortal Glory, without end: It, such an honour gives, as will increase In their despight, who seek to make it less: An honour which depends not on mens tongues, Which Envy blasteth not, nor Malice wrongs; Which neither Degradations, nor Advances, Or, any humane Changes or Mischances Can blemish: for, it will be much more clear Than that Star, which within our Hemisphear Shin'd on your Birth-day, whilst the Sun at height Display'd his beams to hide it from our sight. Somewhat, by that, perhaps, portended was; So will there be by this Considering-Glass. God grant my meaning be so understood, That, now it may an Omen be for Good. By great Afflictions you were lately prov'd, Which are in mercy totally remov'd. At present, by as great prosperities, Your Temper, and your Faithfulness God tries. And that things useful slip not out of thought, This, to your hands, by Providence was brought. Be pleased seriously to look thereon, For, you will finde it a true Lydian-stone; And, if you bide the Touch, WORDS are too poor To celebrate your Worth; who can say more? Your Majesties Loyal Subject, GEO. WITHER.
In stead of a Dedication, or an Epistle to the Reader, this Expostulation of the Author with Himself, is here inserted. GEORGE, were't not fit, ere from thy hands it pass To dress thy self by thy Considering-Glass? It hath now six months been expos'd to show And some say, Forth in publick let it go. Some, cry, Conceal it; for it may undo thee, Or at the best, bring outward mischief to thee. Say, shall, or shall I not divulge the same? Shall it be spar'd, or given to the flame? Quickly, resolve, before it bee too late, And Cautions needful, grow quite out of date. Dost thou beleeve, that many men will read it? Or, if they do, that any much will heed it? Except it be, to seek how to abuse thee, Or, finde out somewhat whereof to accuse thee; What ever thou shalt write, Self-interest No more will entertain, then shall consist With her own Principles. Thou, to the SOT Writ'st Greek: the worldly-wise regard it not; And if, among Swine, thou thy pearls dost cast, They'l tear thee, or defile thee at the least. Yet, if thy Conscience doth incline thee to it, More fear thou to neglect it, than to do it; For, from thy Duties thou art not excus'd, Although thy pains be sleighted and abus'd. And, it were better, mischief should befall Unto one single person, than to all: He perishing with an ill Conscience too, Because, hee did not, what hee ought to do. To make this, and transcribe it, I confess, Much pains requir'd not, and the cost is less.
In Ink and Paper: yet, perhaps, it may Be better worth, than to be thrown away: And though to my particular offence It may redound a tenfold Recompence, It will repay thy Country by return: And, for thy self alone, thou art not born. My Country! Why perhaps my Country-men, Think, they need not my service; and, what then? Am I oblig'd, if they be minded so, To serve them still, whether they will or no? I, fifty years, have serv'd them in my turn, To that end, for which (I think) I was born, For no reward, but injuries and scorn. They, my Good Meanings, have repay'd with ill, And, can it be expected, I should still Serve them on such hard terms? Then, so I will. Hast thou composed, without fear or wit, What, may mens discontented humours fit? Scribled enough, since here the Scoene did alter, To purchase Newgate, or, to win a Halter? If so, and that which is deserved follows, That will, perhaps, attend thee to the Gallows: There, either rail upon thee, or, else say, Thou wert a bold fool, and so go their way. And, if thou writ'st but sober Truth and Reason, Or, that, which wise men think to bee in season, They will be all the world will give thee for't, Shee'l say that, Thou, not worth the hanging art. Not, worth the hanging! Hah! that's somewhat tho; And may be worth as much, for ought I know, As to be made a Viscount, or an Earl, A Marquess, or a Duke For, great my Earthly Expectations are not, And, if they come to nothing, much I care not.
I know, which way, to make mine honour greater Than that, for which I must become a Debter To other men; and, can augment the same By that, which some do think, will do mee shame. But, hark! in policy a while delay To publish, this; thou hast a Game to play For Prelates Lands, which lately purchas'd were; Thy Claims thereto, now in great hazard are, And, thou, wilt both to borrow, and to pay, Disabled bee, if they bee took away: Thy other Lands, by Cheaters were bereft, And, if thou lose these too, there's nothing left. Their Temp'ralties, must be restor'd again, And, thou concerning them, writ'st here, such plain, Such down-right Truths, that if there should bee found Surviving (or, new made) on English Ground A Bishop who will then thy cause befriend, It may presage that all the rest will mend: And, that, here constituted, wee shall see, Such Bishops, as Saint Paul said they should bee: (Which our Scotch-Brethren, I suppose, will grant To bee within, our Solemn Covenant) But, that, is in great hazard; therefore, try Their Holiness, and their Humility: And, if, as may be wish'd, thou shalt not speed, Then, with what thou intendest streight proceed. Out! Out Upon't! this Motion is so evil, That, 'tis a meer suggestion of the Devil. This, is that foolish policy, that brings Destruction upon Nations and their Kings. 'Tis in effect, as if my heart should say, Do, as most Worldlings do; and when that way Thou proved hast, and thereby reap'st no good, From thenceforth, put thy trust alone in GOD.
No, no; I bought those Lands without offending My Conscience, or a wrong to them intending: And, either still mine by GOD's help I'll make them, Or, let the Prelates, if it must be, take them; Although I know them no Appurtenance To them belonging by GOD's Ordinance. A Covenant within his sight I took, Which, though by some it sleighted be, and broke, I dare not sleight it so, but, to this hour Have kept it (and will keep it) to my pow'r. Art thou then thus resolv'd? Yes, and till death Resolved am, whilst I have Pen or Breath, Thus, to be still resolv'd, unless GOD leaves mee, Or else to change my mind his warrant gives mee. I'll trust GOD in the first place, not the last Alone, and when all other hopes are past. If Prelates, Parliaments, and Kings bereave mee Of all I have, Hee, helpless will not leave mee. But probable it seems, that, if hereby Imprisonment, or extreme Poverty Befalls now thou art old, that they who most Thy hazard urge, will leave thee to be lost: What if they do? thou hast a better hold: GOD leaveth no man because hee is old; And never had hee firm Dependences On him, that's frighted with such Toyes as these. Recall to mind, that many years ago, When such Adventures thou wert urg'd unto It fell out otherwise. But there is yet Another fear: Therefore consider it. Thou hast Relations, who to thee are dear; May these. not suffer more than they can bear, By what may come? Alas! I'll not dissemble, My fears for them, do make my flesh to tremble;
And, when I minde their hazards and their fears, 'Spight of Philosophy I let fall tears. But why, my Soul, art thou dejected so? My Heart, why sad within mee, dos  grow? Still trust in GOD, for hee will bee th aid. Of these vain Bug-bears be thou not afraid; For they are GOD's much more than they are thine: To him therefore the charge of them resign. This needless care, is but for Three, at most, And, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, If thou commit them, bee will raise up Friends To make for all their losses large amends. But, they have said, and so do many say, That men are much estranged at this day From what they were: that, in these latter times They are grown much more hardned in their crimes, And far less sensible than they were then Of Sufferings, which befel to honest men, Who (when their pains might that way be bestown) Preferr'd the common good before their own: And that their number too, who now are griev'd, Is more than theirs, by whom to be reliev'd, They may have hope. Alas! if it be thus, GOD only can, and hee must succour us. If it be so, our case is very sad: Yet fear not, Balm in Gilead may be had. Thy Pains, and this Adventure such times need: On good Intentions, good effects succeed; And, hee at last will finde it so, who scatters His Bread, although it be upon the Waters: For God is still the same; his Truth will never Be Falshood, but continue Truth for ever. Hee, who thee hath preserv'd so many years Amid so many Dangers, Foes and Fears,
As thou hast passed through (and thy Oppressours Destroy'd from time to time with their Successours) Will still prese thee; or, else, thither take thee From them,  hee'l secure for ever make thee; And, be to Wife and Children at their need, A Husband and a Father, in thy steed. Well; I beleeve this; with my self, therefore Hereof, I will expostulate no more. I have so well, in my Considering-Glass, View'd, what my heart now is, with what it was, And, for what may befall, prepar'd it so, That, whither GOD will send it, let it go: Take it among you, Newters, Friends and Foes, And his Will be fulfilled, WIN or LOSE: Who since I am excused from the cost Of Publication (because, all I've lost) Will in the best time, some mans heart incline To add his Contribution unto mine; That, what now six months hath perused been In private, may more publickly be seen. GEO. WITHER. Decemb. 13. 1660.
SPECULUM SPECULATIVUM: OR, A CONSIDERING-GLASSE; Composed, June XIII.M.DCLX. The Contents. OUr Modern Prophet (so did Paul, A well known Heathen Poet call) Doth, in the Muses Mode relate This Nations past and present state. Shews us, in this Considering-Glass, What, shall hereafter come to pass, According as, wee do fulfil, Or, cross GOD's manifested Will. Shews by what light hee doth behold Those things that are by him foretold. Praics for the King, and minds him too, In praying for him, what to do. Some things, which to himself pertain, He intermixeth (not in vain) Which will as much advantage them Who sleight them not, as profit him. And by the number of the Beast, Bounds the last year of Antichrist. THough of my Friends, I may almost profess, As did Elias, in another case, I know not one (not one of those at least, Who friendship for meer civil ends profest)
Yet here this day, may many thousands be Who are my real friends, unknown to mee: Yea peradventure many among those Who at this present time are thought my Foes. To them therefore, I wishing Grace and Peace; Do now, where ere they live, these Lines address To fortifie their Faith, and them incline By their endeavours to help strengthen mine; And that by our Petitions joyntly made, Wee may get safety where it can be had; For, whether of a low degree, or high, To trust to men, is trusting to a Lye. I am surprized with another FIT, But what it will produce, I know not yet. Confusedly things tumble in my breast, And if confusedly they bee exprest, You must be pleas'd to take them as you finde them, (And, as begun, before I had design'd them) Since when few knew what's best for them to do, That will be done which they are forc'd unto; And may perhaps too, have as good success As that with which more freedome I express: (At leastwise) when mens manners, and the times Shall make them heed the Reason of my Rimes; For nothing I'll insist on, but what shall Tend to GOD's glory, and the good of all. Of no mens Persons whosoe're they are, Will I accept, in what I shall declare: (Not of mine own, in any thing that may Wrong Justice, or my Conscience any way) Nor be so fearful, or so over-bold, So over-hot, so luke-warm, or so cold, That any justly shall my words despise, That's honest, sober, generous or wise:
But plainly tell things as I finde they are, And then concerning them my thoughts declare; Not limited by Method like to those Who make expressions of their minds in prose; But by Digressions, as the Muses do, When sudden Raptures them incline thereto; And in such Language as may evidence The Truth, without affected Eloquence. Yet, nor the better, nor the worse effect, Whether I write, or write not, I expect As to my Self; save, as I hope to raise Thereby a Ground-work for GOD's future praise From things observ'd; with which work to dispense I dare not, neither can without offence: For GOD is much concern'd in things now done; As also, in what may succeed thereon; And if well known, and well weigh'd, all things were Which, to mee pertinent at this time are, As with those Lepers who distressed sate 'Twixt WAR and FAMINF, at Samaria's Gate; So should I seem to fare: for, whether they Continu'd in that place, or went away, Their hazards were the same; and so are mine, Whether to WORDS, or Silence, I incline. They at the last resolved were to try That course which they thought best; and so do I. Which if no man regards, 'tis but the lot That, I, and better men have often got. Assist, Oh GOD! in what I seek to do; For, when that MAZE, I wistly look into Which wee are in, I am afraid almost That I in some dark passage may be lost. Our Follies have so wrapt us in a Gin, Composed both of Righteousness and Sin,
Of Truth and Falshood, of Non-sense and Reason, Of Good and Ill, of Loyalty and Treason; And disagreeing Judgements and Affections, Have broken us into so many Fractions; Our heads inforcing into such cross Angels, Whereby the Net still more and more intangles, And fastned it with such a snarled knot, That, to unty it, if thou help them not, All humane pow'rs will be imploy'd in vain, To set us at full liberty again. But notwithstanding, here is hardly ought That, is not wholly out of order brought; Yet, if thou list, when likeliest means do fail, Thou canst make things unlikely to prevail. Thy purpose, thou as well to pass canst bring By my Goose-quill, as by an Angels Wing: And, though on all sides all have so mis-done That, I am like to give content to none; If I may do thy Will, I shall not care What else, ensues, or who displeased are. Mens Failings and their Duties being shown, Thy Justice and thy Mercies will bee known. And, hoping, to that end, thou guid'st my Pen, I'll without fear, make my Address to men. For, doubtless, I may boldly do mine Errant To Kings and Nations, when I have thy warrant. Full eighteen years and one month, very neer Since wee began to ring the Changes here Are past away; and since by often turning Wee, have been broyling, to escape a burning: But, what are wee the better, now, unless Wee shall discover what things were amiss; And when wee finde them, seriously intend Our courses, for the future, to amend?
For, how can they have ease, who bear about them, And in them, what they seek to cure without them? Or, to obtain it shall be still so mad, As to expect it, where none can be had? Or, how can possibly that Body be From great Distempers, or Destruction free, Whose Head and Members are from one another Divided? or so cruel to each other As not to let each part, enjoy that dole VVhich Nature gave them to preserve the whole? Our King's return'd: but we, to him from whom Our perfect Peace, and saving-health must come, Are not as yet return'd; and whilst we are As we now be, things will be as they were. VVe shall be cheated, if we doe suppose Wasps will turn Bees, or Doves proceed from Crows, Till GOD himself, whose proper work it is, Shall bring to pass that Metamorphosis, VVhich hath been long expected by this Nation, And, will require a longer Expectation, Ev'n till we more indeavour it, from him VVho may to us, as to Jerusalem, Cry out, How often have I sought your good, And as a Hen that's careful of her brood, Would fain have brooded you? but, you would not! His Mercies we have sleighted, or forgot: This negligence, (or, I might rather say This wilfulness) hath made us at this day So wretched, that no hope doth now remain But that which quickly may be lost again: For, we do find, whatever is pretended, That, like Sowre Ale in Summer we are mended; And, that as since we innovated first, At ev'ry Change, the last prov'd alwaies worst.
(Whether things were presented to our sight In Habits old or new, in black or white) So still, 'tis like to be, till we adhere To Righteous Actings, with hearts more sincere, By what vow, promise, or fair show soever, The Politician works on his Beleever: Yea, though the King should do the best he can, And act beyond the sphear of mortal man: For, here Hercule an labours finde he shall, And, that he's come now to th' Aeugaean-stall, Which must be cleansed (as the Poets say That was) by turning Streams another way. I, round about mee, hear a found of Peace; But I (as yet) discover nothing lesse; Although, I do not see as heretofore Swords drawn; or hear so oft, the Canons roar. That, which some dream we have, I cannot finde; Either, I see too much, or they are blinde. I see it possible; and with clos'd eyes See also, how it may be otherwise, Unless both Prince and People joyn as One In doing that, which is yet left undone. We have a King (GOD prosper him:) but hark! He, hath a people too will finde him work. He may perceive before this year wheels round, That, with a wreath of thorns, they him have crown'd; And, that among their Sweet-meats, taste he shall A little Honey mixed with much Gall. What can the Masters Art, at Helm prevail To save the Ship, that spreadeth every sail Amongst Rocks in a storm, from being sunk, VVhen all his Mariners are sick or drunk? VVhat can the wisest Single person do, Although King Solomon and David too
VVere of his Council? Joshua General, Sampson his Champion, and his Life-guard all Like David's Worthies, till men understand Their own estate, heed, what GOD hath in hand; VVhat he expects, and better can discover VVhat Grace is offer'd, and what Plagnes hang over? Or, what can any Nations do, whose Kings And Governours are heedless of such things? These Duties, few of us regarded have, But multipli'd our Feasts; made our selves brave; Neglect, as others did, our day of Trial, And sing unto the Lute, the Harp, or Viol, Ev'n whilst our Brethren sharply punish'd are For sins whereof their Judges are not clear: For I, nor You, nor any one of them, VVho with severity, their faults condemn, Could be excus'd, if GOD should be severe In questioning what hath been acted here. As therefore, GOD shall bring them to my mind To treat of those things I am now inclin'd, VVhereby, Dooms threatned may be turned from These Realms, or born with meekness when they But, I will first inform you, by what light come. I see those things, whereof I have a sight, In hope it will the better, then be known If Truth I write, or Fancies of mine own. Immodestly we must not pry into GOD's secrets: yet, what hee intends to do, He, not alone doth by his Word reveal With what to Sins, to Duties, VVo, or VVeal, Relates:  Medium's also hath bestown VVhereby, some future things may before-known; And, hee expects, that we with industry Should to the search of them our selves apply
According to that means: because, each thing VVhich Disquisition may to knowledge bring, VVill either hurt or profit, less or more, As (for the most part) it hath been before Sought, shun'd, hop'd, fear'd, and well consider'd on; And that makes me oft-times to muse upon Things that may be, as well as those that are; And, things past, with things present to compare, That I might know, as much as Reason can, VVith help of Grace, my duties as a man. And, though it be of many disregarded, GOD hath my pains, in that kind, oft rewarded VVith such Discoveries, that (if timely heeded) They might have Plagues prevented, that succeeded. VVhereof, lest you still doubt, here I will show By what means I some future things fore-know. That, you may prove, if those which I declare Either Phanaticks, or Impostures are. My Muse acts by a Glass of Speculation, VVhereto applying, what my Observation Laies hold on, I do otherwhile fore-see Some things, which either may, or may not be, As that shall be omitted or fulfill'd VVhich is by GOD, conditionally will'd. Enthusiasms, I know, most men contemn; No further therefore, I pretend to them Than POETS may; though in all Generations GOD may, and doth vouchsafe both Revelations And Visions too (for ought yet known to me) VVhich may to us Premonitory be: Since, frequently, prenotions I have had (By some Impressions on my spirit made) Of what ensu'd, which I could not have known By any Light, or Vertue of mine own.
If therefore, you shall be inclin'd unto My way of Divination, then, thus do: Withdraw your selves to some place all alone, Where you shall interrupted be of none: (The Woods, your Closet, or the fragrant Field, Conveniences for such a purpose yeeld) When you are there, place GOD before your eyes, And, minding he your deeds and thoughts espies. Cast backward, so far from you every thing (As possibly) which an offence may bring To such a Majesty; chiefly, those ends VVhose prosecution neither truly tends Unto GOD's honour, or to edifie Your selves or others; but, to vanity; To satiate your Avarice or Pride, Or such like Lusts. Thus, having sanctifi'd Your Persons, place upon the right-hand side GOD's Oracles, by which all things are tri'd. You shall in them, exprest at large, behold All Acts and Sufferings, which in times of old Concern'd Him, or his People, with all those To them relating, who were Friends or Foes, So far forth, as to you their cognizance Pertains, and as your VVeal it may advance. These, by GOD's Providence transmitted were To future ages, to be every where, (Ev'n to the very utmost end of Time) That URIM and that THUMMIM unto them, Whereto they might repair, when they of ought That needed Resolution, stood in doubt. Therein, you all Occurrences may finde, Which necessarily, in any kind, Shall unto Faith or Manners appertain, So long as in this world men do remain.
There are exemplifide, all humane failings, All Changes, Hopes, Fears, Losings and Prevadings, Of Enemies or Friends: Things Good and Evil; The Practices and Projects of the Devil; Things Metaphysical, products of Nature And Grace, with what concerneth ev'ry creature; All Promises and Threatnings, which belong To Faith or Unbeleef, to Right or VVrong, VVith all things else that pertinent may be To ev'ry Faculty, and each Degree. VVhen with this GLASSE, you are acquainted grown So that your Self, may to your self be known; (For, it will shew more plainly, than your face You ever, yet beheld in any Glasse VVhat's in your heart; and also let you see What things are wanting, which there ought to be) And, when by practice you enabled are To know to what heads, those things to refer Of which you would enquire, place opposite, What you have by your hearing, or by sight Discovered, to that Subject pertinent, Concerning which, you seek to know th' event, Or good or ill condition of the same, And what you may conjecture without blame. Then, well consider all the Circumstances That qualifie, and all Appurtenances That aggravate, to make men capable Of Mercies, or to Judgements liable; As likewise, all Essentials to that thing Whose Nature, Merit, or demeriting You seek to understand; or else what Meed Or punishment is for the same decreed According to the Rules, and Judged Cases, Recorded in that Map of common places.
This being done, be confident (if you Have not for Truths received things untrue) By parallelling Objects which you see, Upon your left hand plac'd, with such as be Upon the right, it will to you appear VVhether or not approveable they are; And, what on Humane Actions, will ensue Whereof you had an undeceived view; Except, an intervening change takes place By secret sins, or unseen Acts of Grace. Nay, otherwhile, it pleaseth Providence To hint things not deducible from thence, Concerning both the manner and the time Of future Consequences, unto them VVho seek not out of Vanity or Pride For hidden things; and they are verifi'd Accordingly, when by what's fore-discerned The welfare of GOD's people is concerned. This, meerly, is a work of Contemplation, Not practical without much Observation; And will as harshly sound in most mens ears, As Love-songs, to an aged Usurer's; And, teachable it is not, save to those VVhom GOD shall by his Spirit pre-dispose For such a search: but, 'tis attained then Assoon by mean wits, as by wisest men; And, better answers what their Queries are, Than if the Influence of ev'ry Star, VVith all their Constellations they could know, And, more confirm'd thereby their Faith will grow. Now, what of our Affairs, I pre-conjecture By this GLASSE, I intend to read a Lecture As pertinently, as my shallow wit, And those confused Objects will permit
VVhich press as hard within me to come out, As those Oppressions hemming me about Strive to break in upon me: for 'twixt these, My soul and body lye in Little-ease. Oh GOD, thine aid I once again implore, That my Design make not our breaches more, Nor quite compleat my ruine now begun; At least till I thy work have wholly done: For, I am of no Faction, but profess To King and Country with true heartiness, Both Loyalty and Love, with an intent Destruction and Disunion to prevent, By offering to mens due considerations, Some Objects of my private Observations With those Products, which may arise from thence; And which may likewise have an influence On other things, that will relation have To Thee and thine, whose interests to save I so obliged am, that I would neither Should be dishonour'd, or wrong done to either: And, LORD, as this, my chief design to be, Thou knowest, so vouchsafe to prosper me. Betwixt Mount Gebal and Mount Gerazim, At this day, to be placed, we do seem, And, 'tis yet in suspence, whether or not A Blessing or a Curse will be our lot: The strst I hope for, and the last I fear, Considering how still qualifide we are: And what a little change is in us made By all the changes we have lately had. If raging singly, Avarice, Ambition, Self will, Prophaneness, Envy, Superstition, Hypocrisie and Malice we have found, Scarce tolerable; what when they abound,
And are united, can be here expected, (Or, may be rationally then effected) But multiplied Injuries and Scorn, Not easily expressed, much less born? If here shall be with wicked Canaanites, A mixture of as wicked Israelites, Whose sins will be as many (if not more) And greater, than they have been heretofore, How can our expectations be much better, Than either former punishments, or greater? So bad, so mad, our prosecutions be, (By all that yet appeareth unto me) As if we wilfully resolv'd had been Against all spoke without us, or within, Or whatsoe'er to us Examples teach, Or Conscience, by our hopes or fears doth preach: But, if those Juglings which observed are By me, should unto ev'ry one appear, All Juglers would unto contempt be brought; They, who seem very wise, would fools be thought, And many in themselves grow doubtful whether They to be pitied were, or scorned rather. As great, as many, are the wrongs, the crimes, The cruelties and falshoods of these times, As ever; and will such continue still, Till Truth and Errour, and till Good and Ill, Have plaid their Master-prize; to which intent Their forces universally are bent Against each other. From false hearts proceeds Falshood in words, and wickedness in deeds; And whilst we talk of Righteousness and Peace, They, who concealed their maliciousness With fair deportments do anew begin So to declare what they have alwaies bin,
As makes, in many, inlets to some fear, That, till it endeth in a Massacre, No Vengeance will their projects terminate, Or set a lasting period to their hate. A bloodless Massacre here is already Begun among us, and it will be bloody When you perecive admittance of those Strangers, VVho first begun out plagues, renew our dangers; And then, they who suppos'd their persons free, VVill with the rest, in equal perils be: For, boundless lustings, mischiefs will beget, VVhich lye within the womb unheeded yet, Where Sin and Death are twins conceiv'd together, Though born a little while before each other; And, will in very ugly shapes be found In many places, ere this year goes round; Portended, and attended in strange wise, With Ominous Events, and Prodigies. VVe shall see Gown-men tread on Men of War, High Courts of Justice called to the Bar; Those, of whom no man lately stood in dread, Arraign the Living, and condemn the Dead: Make Martyrs, Saints and Reprobates of those VVhose good or bad conditon no man knows; And act such things as never yet were done VVithin this Clymate since the world begun. Yet, heed this, you, who with a sober mind Seek peace, and are not factiously inclin'd, (And you, whose principle is to repair VVhat is decay'd, with no worse Tools than Prayer) VVith Christian patience bear the Visitation VVhich is allotted to this Generation; And know, that as now Nature runs the race By her designed, so shall also Grace
Pursue her course, to purge us in these fires, For that perfection whereto Faith aspires. Strive by renewing of your self-denials, To bear with constancy your fiery trials, Which must be undergone: for they appear In shew more painful than in proof they are; As their experience found, who in times past Have into Babels Fornaces been cast, When they were seven times heated; and as wee May peradventure find, ere long 'twill be. Be not afraid of your own sins; for they On your repentance will be done away: Nor be discouraged, though your Foes at large Shall sum them up, and lay unto your charge False imputations also: for, with ease Both Saints and Reprobates of whom they please The Vulgar make: and, if prophane men shall Be Judges betwixt David and King Saul, The sins of David might be made appear As many, and much greater than Sants were; And He, upon whose side GOD sentence gave, Amongst most men, the least esteem would have. But, GOD observ'd his heart; purg'd what did slow From humane frailty, as he purgeth now VVith sharp corrections, the late crying crimes Of Saints prevaricating in these times. Judgement, in our days, at GOD's house begins, Who takes such notice of our many sins, That since we would not mend when we were chid∣den, He will no longer now let them be hidden Or go unpunish'd: but we, that each other Provok'd to sin, shall punish one another. Me blame not then, if I touch here and there, Those failings on all sides which causes were
Of what we suffer: for, GOD will be known By doing Justice; and we ought to own Our great Transgressions, and not seek to hide Those Crimes, for which he laies ev'n Kings aside, As well as other men; that all may know, He giveth equal dooms to high and low. Though, therefore, we sometimes a vail may cast O'er faulty Rulers, whilst their pow'r doth last, To keep them from contempt, lest their disgrace May cause infringement of the Common Peace, We must not counter-act what GOD will do, When he reproves them, and removes them too: But, suff'ring with them by commiseration, As being worthy of like condemnation, Give GOD the glory, with our Pens and Breath, For what's intended by their shame or death. A sickness which is Epidemical (In some degree) hath seized upon all, And, ease we cannot have, till that hath wrought, Which to procure a remedy is brought. When Cures are to distempers first appli'd, We must expect, more torments to abide Than if we felt our Maladies alone, Without a Medicine working thereupon. Of our malignant humours to be eas'd, To take some poys'nous Drugs we must be pleas'd; For our Physician, who doth truly know Their and our Natures, hath prescribed so. Diseases otherwhile need letting bloud, Though with what is corrupt, that which is good Seems also lost: Gangrenes require sometimes To save the Whole, by cutting off of Limbs. Yea, otherwhile a welfare doth redound In common, when that suffers which is sound;
And, once when sick to death the Body lay, 'Twas cur'd by taking of the Head away. GOD, who of evil things can make good uses, And, by what is unwholsome, Health produces, Vouchsafeth to make passage now and then, To signal Blessings, by the sins of men; As when the sons of Jacob, who inslaved Their Brother, were thereby, from Famine saved. VVhich teacheth us, to be contented still To let him act, both when and how he will; To search into our own corruptions nearly, And not to censure any too severely. Since unto every one it may be known, That, no mans fault, so harms him as his own: Let over-bitter Censures be suspended, VVhen you perceive a Brother hath offended By rashness, or through frailty, (though in that VVhich to our Common Welfare doth relate) Spare not the sin a jot, but spare the man (VVhoe'er) as much as possibly you can, Till some Concomitancies or th' Event Assures that malice was in his intent: And, though that may appear, assume not then, A pow'r to judge, belonging not to men: Because, for ought you know, God might bereave him, Of counsel, or unto himself then leave him, For our Transgressions past; and to let in A publick mercy, by his private sin; Thereby to humble us, and make us know That all our Weal from his meer Grace doth flow; And, that the sins of others to our peace As helpful were, as our own Righteousness. In former times and causes, it was so, Th' Aegyptian Mid-wives, Rahab, Jael too,
Did things which in their nature sinful are, Yet not alone by GOD made useful were To save his people, but he also saith, That ev'n those actions were products of Faith. And, in these times perhaps here have been such, Whereon, if I with modesty shall touch, Let me be blameless; for, with good intent What GOD permits for our experiment, I here will mention, and to make it known, That there is nothing meerly of our own, Or which is in us either good or evil, By Nature or suggestions of the Devil, That stops or furthers ought which GOD will do, Though our concurrence he requires thereto So far, as with his VVill he us acquaints, Or, bounds, by unresistable restraints: For, when we are enjoyn'd to that or this, It is for our advantage, not for his, Of us requir'd; yea though we bounded be By Precepts, Rules or Laws, so is not he. As he himself shall please he can effect His Ends, whatere we do, or shall neglect; And, when against us any Foe prevails, It is because we, not because he fails. In all our late contests, 'tis hard to say, Whether our Vice or Vertues made best way To that Design, whereby to pass were brought Those, which our best Aschievements have been thoughts; Or, whether led'by Folly or sound Reason By Fraud or Force, by Faithfulness or Treason We prospered most: and 'tis not yet agreed By all men, who our prosecutions heed, Whether that which befel us at the first, Or at the last, will prove the best or worst.
The Louse or Lion, Black Doggs, or the white, Most mischievously either fawn or bite; Which Party most needs pardon for their Sin, Upon which side there hath most Traycors been: Or, whether their Deserts are worst or best Who shall be honour'd most, or most disgrac'd; For, though we know what Causes men did own, With what heart they did act them, 'tis unknown. Prodigious Fruits in these times have been born; Crabs on the Vine, and Grapes upon the Thorn; And, Men and Causes, whether good or bad, Of Weal and Woe, by turns, like shares have had, To teach, that our late Changes have succeeded For some ends, which ought better to be needed. By one Irregularity, we see That, here in two months more progressions be In order to the Temporary peace VVhich most men are desirous to possess, Then all our Pow'rs and Vertues, Wit and Cost Had brought to pass, in twenty years almost; And we according to late promisings, See creeping Motions toward some such things As are expected: but, they to and fro, Forward and backward, in their motion go So doubtfully, that 'tis as yet uncertain What resolutions are behind the Curtain. As doubtful 'tis, whether more praise or blame To them belong, who first contriv'd the same; Whether the Consequence, or that which first Thereto made pasage, will prove best or worst; And whether want of pre-conditioning VVill bring at length, most damage to the King And his Old Party, or else unto those VVho did his Entrance heretofore oppose:
For Acts unjust, are oftwell carried on, And many righteous things unjustly done: Some things likewise there be resmebling Sand, Which he that graspeth with an open hand, May therewith lode his palm: but, if he gripe Too hard, 'twill all between his fingers slip. Concerning that proceed, which brought to pass The Change, which lately here effected was, Some scruplings have been made: But, on the Fact, Or upon them who put the same in Act, I'll nothing peremptorily declare, Though therein, an Obliquity there were; Because, means fail'd me, whereby to inspect Ought further, than into the single Act; That, by the Circumstances I might see What Motives to their hearts propos'd might be; What Spirit led them, and what straits they past To that, which was resolved on at last: For, in such Cases, what they ought to do, Wise men are oft to seek, and good men too. If they who were chief Instruments in that VVhich wrought the Change, that we have seen of late, Sought only and unfeignedly that end, VVhereto all Trusts and Actions ought to tend, And were but Circumstantially to blame, In plotting or pursuing of the same, Their fault (if any) is a Venial Crime, For which there may be made another time Amends to Sufferers; that perhaps may more Secure them, than they were secur'd before. Their Fault was but the errour of a man, VVhich well the King may pardon: for, I can; Because, I know, what ere they did intend, GOD will have glory by it, in the end;
And, all these Nations future welfare too, If they neglect not, what is yet to do. But, they whose Trust these Trustees did abuse, Them, cannot peradventure so excuse: And (I beleeve) more wise than heretofore, Will henceforth never trust Good Fellow more; Nor Peasant, Peer, Priest, Prince, or Parliament, With that which may produce a Detriment To common Int'rest (till by some condition To them secur'd, they shall secure fruition Of such Concernments) if, once more they may Recover that which they did fool away. But, that's impossible, as things now stand; And, should GOD take the pow'r out of his hand Who grasps it now, they who shall next injoy it, No better peradventure would employ it Than others did, GOd therefore, keep us from Another Change, until his Kingdome come, Except a change of hearts; and at this time, Or his probation, let his Grace, in him Be so effectual, that he may endeavour To settle here, a righteous Throne for ever. For, ev'ry man that lives (at first or last) Before a Final Doom on him is past, Hath in his life-time, once (at least) an hour Wherein our gracious God, vouchsafes him pow'r To ask and have; and to elect that path Which leads to weal or woe, to life or death: Yea, alwaies at such times, GOD, who first loves, The soul of ev'ry humane-creature proves; And, those, who then, by giving him their heart, (Though with much failing) do perform their part, Hee will enable, and assist them still By his preventing Grace, to do his will.
For they, as often as they go astray, Shall either hear a VOICE within them, say, (Or else behinde them;) Of that course beware; Return, or thou art lost; thy way lyes there, Which leads to safety. Thus the Spirit preacheth, And by means extraordinary teacheth Where common means fail: and till men contemn His Holy Spirit, God forsakes not them: But, afterward, indeed, although the same Hee sometime speaks, 'tis to encrease their shame, Or others to instruct: for, then such Voices Are so drown'd by the Whisperings and Noises Of carnal things, that all is spoke in vain, Which to their weal or safety may pertain. The King by such temptations, and so many Beleagur'd seems, as never were by any With constancy and without foil withstood, Save by him, who was GOD with Flesh and Blood: For hee stands now expos'd to ev'ry evil, (Ev'n in the Front) whereby World, Flesh, or Devil, May him assault; and with him 'twill go hard, Unless, GOD sends him in, an Angel-guard; Which (if it be his pleasure) that he may, My heart unfeignedly doth often pray, And that, at this time hee submit his will, The mind of God, sincerely to fulfil: For, I beleeve, that as it did with Saul, (On his probation-day, long since befall) These Kingdomes will establish'd be to him, As hee with GOD complyeth at this time. Fair Opportunities this present day Are offer'd, which if he let slip away, Wee have but hitherto a course begun, Whereby we may at last be more undone:
And though he should become ten times as strong In things which to a carnal strength belong, It will to settle him prevail no more, Than such pow'rs have prevailed heretofore: Nor will it, when most mighty he appears To others, from his own heart, keep out fears Of things not to be feared; but at length Make him, perhaps, afraid of his own strength: And that which by a Trifle hath been lost, Will be recover'd with as little cost As when 'twas won, assoon as their despight, Their sins and insolencies are at height, Who shall by petulant exasperations, (Beyond the common patience of these Nations) Abuse his Grace, and turn their late success Into oppression, pride, and wantonness. This seems by some endeavour'd (having ends Repugnant unto what the King intends) Who do proceed (as if that for the nonce) To make all Suff'rers desperate at once, By gelding and delaying of the Grace, For wihch the King spontaneously did pass His Royal Word: And this may an Event Produce, at last, whereof some will repent When 'tis too late; since, Mastives brook it worse To be o're-much provokt, than Fawning Curs. All vengeance doth to GOD alone belong: But, few remember this, when they have wrong. An English temper doth that life disdain Which is depriv'd of what should Life maintain: And whatso'er is menaced or follows, Some, in despight of Hang-man, Rope and Gallows, Will any thing attempt, to vindicate Themselves from scorn, when robb'd of their Estate:
And they have little prudence, who conceive Bees will be quiet, when both from their Hive And Honey they are forc'd: or, that small things (When they are many, and have many stings) Are safely slighted; for, there hath succeeded Much mischief where this Caution was unheeded: And probable it seems, that if the King Deters what's hop'd for, now, but till next Spring, Destroying many thousand Families By vacating their just Securities, (For what was bought or lent, to save these Lands From desolation, when into their hands The Supream Pow'r did slip by GOD's permissions, Who then had cast him out of his possessions) It will not be the next way to that peace Which many yet are hopeful to possess; Or have a consequent, to answer that Great Mercy, which GOD hath vouchsaf'd of late. If, for performing that which both Divine, And Humane Laws did warrant and enjoyn, (To wit, obedience to those Pow'rs that were In being) he from Innocents doth tear Their Livelihoods; and their posterity Exposeth unto scorn and beggery, For having done their duties unto them Whom GOD advanced by debasing him, (And when he so unable was to give them Protection, or from their hand to reprieve them, That at the same time, he himself was glad To seek a Refuge where it might be had) It will not seem to be an Act of Grace, That corresponds with what expected was Before Monck gave us up into his power; And made our Trustees much more his, than our.
If he shall lay an over-heavy weight On those, whom he had left in such a streight, Without their fault (except a fault it were To lose, what they to keep unable were) Or, if he shall, as other men have done, Lose those Advantages that he hath won By Angling for a Frog, till from his Net The Fishes now inclosed forth shall get; Young Counsellors may prove to him as bad As those which foolish Rehoboam had. But this is more than probable (altho The Priests and Prophets dare not tell him so, Who now most fawn upon him) that, even all GOD's Condescentions are conditional; And, that now or hereafter, their success Will to his Weal or Woe add more or less, Accordingly as he, and as these Nations Improve at this day, His and their Probations. Which Truth most men beleeve not, or forget; And, that makes mee so often mention it. GOD gave unto his people, on conditions, The Land of Promise, to be their possessions; And, for their not performing of the same, They Vagabonds throughout the world became. Upon conditions also, Solomon Had promise of an everlasting Throne; Which he neglecting, ere the third descent, Ten parts of twelve were from his Kingdome rent. Yea, wicked Jeroboam might have had A settlement on him for ever made, Upon the like conditions: and, so may This King; but never any other way. If he comes hither with the self-same heart, With which, he did, in likelihood depart;
New cover'd over with a fairer skin, And fully fraughted with Revenge within: If he shall make his Royal Word a snare, If he by hopes delayed nourish fear Instead of love; by mental Reservations, (Or by deceivable Equivocations) His promise vacates; or, if what he swore In presence of his Sov'raign heretofore; Or, if he shall confine to others breasts Those Acts of Grace, which to his Interests Will most advantage give, when it is known The pardons which he granteth are his own: If he refers his Justice to their Zeal, Who may prefer their Ends before his Weal, Until it shall unhappily destroy That new-sprung hope which many yet enjoy; And by converting it into despair, Blasts that in Autumn, whereof blowings fair Appear this Spring; we may thereby perchance, Ere many Springs, compelled be to dance Another Matachin. If, GOD so please, I wish and pray it may be otherwise; And that this might be weigh'd: for, on this BALL None are so firmly fixt but they may fall If Righteousness and Truth support them not, What other prop soever they have got. We have a sight of this days joy and sorrow, But no man knows what will befall tomorrow: And should GOD be as rigorous as men, That which is done, would be undone agen. I do beleeve, that (not excepting any) All men of great Offences, and of many Are guilty. And, I do suppose the King Hath not been free from blame in every thing.
To him there may, either by Men or Heaven, Be somewhat on the scores, to be forgiven, As well as to the People: secret crimes May be informer, or in latter times Committed, wherein either he mis-did, Or his Progenitors, which yet are hid, And must be expiated, ere that Rest Where at wee aim, willfully be possest; And have an Expiation by meer Grace, Or by that pennance through which others pass. In order whereunto, GOD now perchance Him, to his Fathers Throne doth re-advance; Either a new Progression to begin, Or else to fill the measure of their sin; And punish us, till ripen'd, he, or we, Or both, for Grace, or for Destruction be. If penitence allay not that fierce wrath, Whereto our wickedness provok'd him hath, There will impartial search be made, by GOD, As well for common, as for Royal blood; Yea, search on both sides, both for blood and treason, When equal Retributions are in season: And, as much guiltiness if he shall then In Kings discover, as in common men, Their Judges vindicate from guilt he shall, Though them we murtherers and traytors call; And, their blood, if it guiltlesly be shed, Will cry as loud to GOD as Abels did. What will it profit then, if there be none To question them on earth, for ought mis-done, When they shall know, and truly understand, On what sad terms they fall into GOD's hand; Who shall the more offend, because they were More by him priviledg'd than others are?
GOD will not then be mockt, whatever they Shall dream, who put the thought thereof away; Or whatsoe'er a Prophet in Lawn Sleeves Or Kings and their Immunities beleeves; And though their Nobles also flatter them, As Iudahs did King Joash in his time. Hereof I would be his Remembrancer, If in the place of some of those I were Who ought to do it: yea, as now I am, I had adventur'd to perform the same, But that I lately have conceiv'd a thought, These Lines will timely to his view be brought, By such a hand, as from it with respect It may be taken, and have good effect. And, if these Cautions he shall not contemn, (Expressed in true Loyalty to him) I may have hope, that Justice to obtain Which I have elsewhere sought long time in vain; And finde it to be made a real sign Of his, and publick Peace, as well as mine. For, all I shall expect will be no more, But, that, he make mee neither rich nor poor; And mee within that Grace would comprehend, Which he to some of those doth yet extend, Who both by their Examples and Command First drew mee with his Opposites to stand; And who, if I mis-acted, did thereby Contract ten times a greater guilt than I. But, so the publick Peace advanc'd may be Hereby, let what GOD will befall to mee. To make their merits and demerits even, They should love much, to whom much is forgiven: Yet, some to whom he hath forgiven least, May love as well as they who love him best;
And, better too perhaps, when they behold He executes that Justice which he should; With constancy pursuing, what, more tends To publick Welfare, than to serve his ends. How these things may concern him, he best knows Next GOD, who will (I hope) his heart dispose To chuse the way proposed at this time, And to pursue the same, enable him. Because, unless at this time, that probation For which GOD hath vouchsaf'd his Restoration, Produceth what with those ends may accord, For which he was by Providence restor'd, He'll turn the wheel, which hath so oft gone round, Till men according to his heart be found To rule his People; to direct his Sheep; To act his Will, and their own Vows to keep. Herein hath been much failing: and, I fear, Ev'n for that Covenants breach, which many jeer, And impudently sleight, GOD from this Land Will not remove his now correcting hand, Till to a true repentance he shall bring For that sin, People, Parliament and King. A Judgement at this present is begun, Which will extend to all ere it be done; Ev'n unto those who execute his doom On them, on whom it is already come; (Yea, signally, in some respect or other, To persons or estates, to friend or brother) If they whom it concerns do not amend What is mis-done; wave, what they mis-intend; And hearken to GOD's Voice in this their day Of Tryal; and as (if they will) they may: For GOD, though much provokt, still giveth space 'Twixt ev'ry Judgement, for preventing-grace:
And now, to be a Cautional to him, (As his Corrections lately were to them Who reigned last) this King, shall see them scourg'd Who scourged him, until their sins be purg'd. God having cast his Predecessors out, For their, and also for our sins (no doubt) Them, with an Iron Rod begins to strike; To shew, that sin he hates in all alike, And make it known that he will no man spare, (Though one of his own Houshold he appear) If he shall scandalously give offence In any kinde, without true penitence. A dreadful Judgement he hath brought on those, Who made of Piety the fairest shows; And they, as traytors to their King are now By those pursued, whom they did pursue As traytors to their Country; and their Laws, Yea their own Swords, turn Foes unto their Cause: And they who lately, nor to friend nor foe, But for by-ends, would either Justice do, Or Mercy show, shall finde in their distress, That others will to them be merciless. They, who were called Saints; and may be such, Although their failing hath been very much; Seem now the chief mark of GOD's indignation, And censur'd are as sons of Reprobation; Because, they often had fore-warned been, (Twice were cast out of grace, and twice took in) Are now depriv'd, a third time, of that pow'r Which they abus'd to their own harm and our: They are expos'd to such extream disgraces, Such hazards of their goods, lands, lives and places, And to such scorns, that never was there more Contempt cast upon any heretofore:
For, they, who as their Chiefs acknowledg'd them (To their own shame) their persons did contemn; And, far beyond all presidents, revile Th' Authority they owned, ev'n the while It was in being; though they did in that Make, as it were a Close-stool of their Hat. Of all esteem, they are now quite bereft, And, in so sad a plight have thousands left, Who trusted them with ev'ry thing they had, That their own selves alone, they have not made Thereby contemptible to Foes and Friends, (Lost their estates, their safeties, and their ends) And such confusions brought; that few or none Are sure, they shall not thereby be undone, Or damnified; but given cause likewise To this, and times to come, so to despise An English Parliament, that, if it get No better credit than it hath, as yet, It is in hazard to become a thing As much abhorred, as the name of King Was once in Rome; for their prevarications, Their self-ends, falshoods, and dissimulations With King and People so destructive were, And both to Round-head, and to Cavalier (As then distinguish'd) that, if there be any, Few names are left, whereof there be not many Undone, or at least damnified, either In credit or estate, or both together: And, by those many thousands now undone, That mischief, so, from man, to man, doth run, That it infects three times as many more, And may bring beggery to ev'ry door, Besides, those quarrels which it may beget, Whose sad effects lye unperceived yet.
Some, who had been most faithful to their side, They much opprest whilst they were dignifi'd; And, often when they did pretend a course To cure their Grievances, they made them worse. Then, what by such oppressed men from those Can lookt for be, whom they pursu'd as foes, But to be kickt out of the world, or trod Into the dirt? Except our gracious GOD Hath now brought home the King to be a friend To all men who did honestly intend? And who, though in some things they did amiss, Sin'd not with malice, or with wilfulness? The Kings work will be now, both to relieve And to correct, as cause, he shall perceive, Without respect to persons, or wrongs done, Before a Reconcilement was begun; Except so far forth onely, in relieving, In recompencing, honouring, or giving, As he's to those men, who with him ingaged In charity, and gratitude obliged, Without destroying any in these Nations Who were submissive to GOD's Dispensations; And, who, were mov'd to that which they have done By Conscience, or by Ignorance alone, Without malicious purpose or design, Against a known Law, Moral or Divine. And therefore, where respect is to be had To suff'rers, and to satisfaction made; The best expedient to prevent debates, And ruining of many mens estates, Will either be, if we had such Trustees, Who by this change, life nor estates do leese, (And by confederating long together With publick spoils inriched one another,
Or, may be proved guilty of a Cheat, Which formerly did friend or foe defeat Of his estate; or, to the publick wrong More power assum'd, than did to them belong) To cause, that, they to whom these gave offence, May out of their estates have recompence; For, why should great Revenues be injoy'd By them, whose guilt hath guiltless men destroy'd? Or rather, since that many among these Were intermixt (who their miscarriages Opposed to their power) whom none knows how From persons guilty, to distinguish now. Why should not for the Credit of the Nation (For Justice sake) and for the preservation Of common Peace, all parties help to bear Their heavy burthens, who oppressed are? For every man among us, more or less, Is some way guilty of this wickedness: And GOD, if this course long defer we shall, His Vengeance will divide among us all. Let therefore none, who in these suffering-times Shall scape the punishments due to their crimes, Insult o're them that suffer, or suppose Their prosp'ring from their well-deserving flows. Let them remember, and consider well, That they on whom the Tower of Silo fell, No greater sinners judged were than they On whom it fell not; and think at this day Some men may perish, who have been more free From guiltiness, than most that saved be. The King, together with his Parliament, May pardon every kind of punishment For faults against themselves; or any one, Except for what is wilfully mis-done
Against our Maker; but, nor he nor they, Can take the guilt of any sin away; And though he may connive at some offences, Or be deceiv'd as to mens innocencies, Who by their cunning have found means of late Themselves with him to re-indintegrate: Yet, thousands know so well what they have done, And felt so much of what ensu'd thereon, That, though in charity, they do forgive Their falshood, they'l remember't whilst they live. Let them remember too, what they have done, Lest GOD bring Vengeance when we call for none. Can any Peer or Commoner suppose, Who, in the supream Council sate with those Who did the late unhappy war begin, And by their Declarations drew us in, (As men oblig'd in duty, to adhere To them, in what they prosecuting were) That, they are guiltless, though now blamed less Than others, who the same Cause did profess? Can they be blameless, who did with the first Begin the Quarrel, and till nigh at worst Continue it; not leaving on Record Ought, whereby their dissent might be declar'd? Nor sought for them, a saving, or protection, Who might be ruined by their defection? Doth it not greatly their crime aggravate, That they vouchsaf'd not to capitulate, That, Innocents, by their default abus'd, Might to some safe condition be reduc'd? But rather, to their own designs made way, By leaving them, to be the Spoilers prey? Though they forgot us, I suppose it fit To minde them; lest themselves they may forget
When I am dead, and, therefore, I will here Leave somewhat to be their Remembrancer. Let them remember with consideration, With true repentance, and with due compassion, How many thousands (whilst they live at rest) Are either quite destroyed, or opprest, Either in Person, Credit, or Estate, Whose aid they did not only oft intreat, But also (thereby to promote their end) Compelled to contribute, pay and lend; Yea, to engage their Persons in their Cause, Under pretence of Piety and Laws, Whom they have now made innocently poor, And forc'd to beg, or else to suffer more; Whilst they from all those miseries are clear, Whereof their failings chief occasions were: Not onely, making that an Instrument To ruine them, which ruine should prevent; But also (probably) by their endeavour, To make, and keep the people Slaves, for ever. To write plain Truth, why should I bee afraid? By what man may it not be justly said, Our publick Faith hath been the shameless'st Debter, And throughout all these Realms the greatest Cheater That ever was; and that our Parliaments Have been beyond all former Presidents. The worst Security (and never more Will be confided in, as heretofore) If unconfirm'd they leave what hath been bought, And, what was justly sold (as then 'twas thought?) Or if they make not recompence at least To those, who by their actings are opprest? For this is the same Nation, though the Cause, The Governour, and in some part the Laws
Are changed now; GOD, who the wrong doth see? Is yet the same, the same will alwaies be, And both for what is suffered, and was done, Will prosecute the Judgement that's begun. By meer Cheats, many thousand Families Destroyed are, and with complaints and cryes, So fill mens ears, that they make all to grieve, Save those, who sense of no Afflictions have But of their own. The Children, do bemoan Their Aged Parents helplesly undone; Who, now have nothing left of what was theirs To recompence their pitty, but sad tears: And, he, who thinks Life a gratuity In such a case, loves Life much more than I, Supposing that's a Mercy, which to mee A barb'rous cruelty appears to be. Oh GOD! how are thy kindnesses requited? How in our suff'rings are our foes delighted? How justly dost thou many now condemn, And punish, for wrongs done to some of them? How are the Just and Unjust, wrapt together In one Snare, to torment and plague each other? It is beleev'd, that many men there were, When Innovations, were beginning here, Who, being in themselves malevolent, (And for some private causes discontent) Design'd and practis'd, how to bring to pass That, which their own, and our Destruction was: But, here were many moe, who did indeavour To qualifie the late infectious Fever Which had distemper'd us; and to retain The Loyalty that seems renew'd again: Yet, now an Epidemical Disease Hath brought Confusion upon some of these
As well as upon them, who fin'd perchance Much more through wilfulness, than ignorance. They, who did neither by their deeds or words, By counsel, by their pens, or by their swords, Begin those Innovations in the state, Which have been prosecuted here of late; No, nor so much as by a secret thought, Contribute to those Changes which were brought Upon these Islands, till they were effected By other men: they, who themselves subjected Either but passively, to those in power, To scape those mischiefs which might them devour; Or, meerly act vely, to help prevent An Anarchy, and Evils imminent; Which is no more than God's law doth command, VVhen he makes alterations in a Land; And hath been also, practis'd by all Nations In every Kingdom, through all Generations, VVhen either by his grace, or his permission, He brings a people into our condition. Ev'n they who did no more, are made to share VVith those, who wilfully transgressors were, And Murtherers, and Traytors be reputed; As if the Kingdom, which was constituted Before these Changes had continued on, And all which hath by GOD and men been done, VVere but a Dream, of which, now they awake, Men may at will, Interpretations make: Or, as if Actings, in a time of War, VVere bounded, as in times of Peace they are: VVhereas 'tis known, that, VVar doth silence all Laws, either Civil or Municipal: And, that, what then Necessity constrain'd, May by the Law of Nations be maintain'd,
As justly, as those contracts which are made In times of peace by Laws which then we had; Though they, perhaps, who shall have po'wr to do What they themselves please, will not have it so. But, though we get not that, whereat we aim, We thereto will continue still our Claim, And plead our cause; in hope, that truth and reason May at this present, be declar'd in season. If prudent men collect and weigh the matters Which here my Muse confusedly now scatters, (Because at once within me I retain More Notions, than by words I can make plain) They may by them, if put together well, And duly heeded, my true meaning spell. They, who with no side factiously, took part, And onely in sincerity of heart, Came to secure the Soveraign Magistrate, When call'd by those, who were co ordinate With him in pow'r; they, who had no intent To make a breach 'twixt King and Parliament, But, faithfully did serve them both together, To have preserv'd their lawful Rights to either, And cannot be by conscience, law or reason; Delinquents any way (much less for Treason) Against their Prince, for giving aid to those Whom he himself authoriz'd to be chose For his chief Councel, and whom likewise, he Made everlasting Senators to be, Impowr'd to make Laws everlasting too, Until their own Act should themselves undo: They, who did those obey, whom to withstand, (Although made active by the Kings command) Hath punish't been with Death; ev'n some of these Though acting also, with good Consciences,
For this Obedience, suffer'd with the first, And may have also Lots among the worst On both sides; which to me appears, at least Injustice, or no Mercy, at the best. GOD may correct us thus, and justly too Though to our King and Countrey we have true Continued in the Main, for, in his sight There are demerits in the most upright, Which needs the Rod; and he chastises those Whom he befriended, by their greatest Foes; Because, not seldome times they gave to them Who were his Foes, occasions to blaspheme, His grace and his long-sufferings much abus'd His timely Premnonition oft refus'd. For, very oft, and very many wayes They had Fore-warnings, of what in these dayes Is brought upon them; and, as many times As GOD forgave them, they renew'd their Crimes. When therefore they had long without dis-regard. GOD's Messengers in ordinary heard; When, such as they themselves did most esteem, And those who preacht in season unto them Upon their solemn Fasts, or feasting-dayes. They only thankt, but follow'd on their wayes. Then (as he doth, at first, with Infidels) By signs prodigious, and by miracles, He proved them; but Pagans heretofore Have by that means, been wrought upon much more To warn them, and reprove them, he sent, then A company of despicable men, Who, though despis'd and houted at, they are (And to the greatest number do appear Phanaticks) were the Messengers of God, And such, as he found fit to send abroad
To such a People, and at such a season As this, wherein, Rime works as much as Reason; And manifests, 'tis such a time with us, As when GOD's Prophets seem'd ridiculous Unto the Iews, by acting before them Such Signs, as made them more their words contemn. Among such like, he hath permitted me, Not only their Premonitor to be, But, likewise, to see, what I fore-exprest Fulfill'd; and hear it, by themselves confest: For, I took once, or oftner, ev'ry year, Occasion to be their Remembrancer; And, publickly declared what I knew To be misdone, and what things would ensue If not prevented; but most did deride My timely Cautions: Vanity and Pride Made ineffectual all my pains to be, And, not a little mischievous to me. Yet, still I persevered in declaring VVhat they were doing, and GOD was preparing. Now fourteen years ago, with small regard, My English Opobalsamum declar'd, VVhat would befall them; and, there, is recorded Among such like Expressions, one, thus worded, Opobalsamum Anglicanum, Page 20. —Which side soever shall prevail, We have a Mischief se ling by entail On us, and on our heirs: For, in heart You do unite (though corporally apart) And joyn by close Compliances in one, In hope to compass what you have begun,
Which is nor worse nor better, but to raise Your houses, both by good and evil wayes: And for that end, to ruine you would bring. Law, Gospel People, Parliament and King, But ere this hope effected you shall see, Hark, Traytors, what your destiny shall be, Heed and observe it, for it is the Doom, Will, will without all peradventure come Upon your heads, who have your trust betray'd, Oppressions on your faithful Servants laid; And multiplied your wealth with greediness, By preying on your Country in distress. And, this it is; He, that such wrongs requites, Will give you portions among Hypocrites. Your Pride shall suddenly by shame be follow'd, You shall spew up the Gobbets you have swallow'd; Your way shall perish &c. Unto that book, wherein this is exprest, I will refer you to peruse the rest. The preface to my SALT on SALT, records A Hint to that end, in these following words. Last year I sent a Flash which is let pass Unheeded, as a thing that never was; Now follows the Report, or, Clap of Thunder, Which have been seen and heard, thus far asunder, To give the longer Warning: for, the Shot, And Thunderbolts (if Grace prevent it not) Will next year flee among you. God, amend us, And then I am affur'd, he will defend us. Moreover, I, ten months, now past, foretold That nine months longer if defer they should
Their Duties, and neglect the Grace twice shown, They, and their Projects will be overthrown, As now they are; and that they should be in That Purgatory which doth now begin. The premonition published last year To that effect, shall be repeated here. See Epistolium Vagum-prosa-metricum Page 20. Let them remember, he that stands may fall, That ev'ry promise is conditional; And, that God's promises will be to them Perform'd, as they to others and to Him Perform their promises: for though a wrong He oft forgiveth, and forbeareth long, There is a set time, which now draweth near, Wherein, he will no longer so forbear. Let no man slight this Caution, though by him Divulged, who may despicable seem: For in these dayes, it often comes to pass That God speaks (as to Balaam by his Asse) To wisest men, by those whom fools they deem; To Kings, by persons that ignoble seem; And, if their Wills, as wilfully as he They still pursue, like his their ends will be. This Pow'r now ruling, reigns by God's Commission, Yet, not without a fore-premis'd condition: For, by Unrighteousness it shall not stand, Though it were as the Signet on his hand. If they themselves with outward washings flatter, And, shall not cleanse the inside of the platter: If those Defects of Justice and Compassion Which lately brought confusion on this Nation,
Be not forth with repair'd in some degree (As means by God's Grace will vouchsafed be) And if a Model truly genuine, This August sixteen hundred fifty nine, Be not conceiv'd and fully born, before The time exceeds the end of nine months more, With all the essential parts of such a thing As may receive a timely perfecting To qualifie the rage that will encrease The breaches made into the Common peace; Then all that this pow'r thenceforth can endeavour, Will either be a Nullity for ever, Or else, a furth'rance to that horrid pother Which will make facile entrance for another Oppressing Hand, that, will but Justice do So far as Vengeance doth extend unto. But lest you think it was by Accident That this presage hath had a Consequent Just at the time foretold, the same book shew'd In what mode also, that which hath ensued Should visit them; heed therefore, and compare What's now begun, with what these Lines declare. In the Book last mentioned, Page 24. To cure those Frenzies for his future glory, GOD is preparing a New Purgatory To purge what may be purged from the dross, That of the pure Gold there may be no loss; The Judgements now beginning shall go round, And through these Islands, till all those are found Who have been false in that which they profest To GOD or to the publick interest.
From house to house, from man to man, they shall Procession make, till they have seiz'd on all, All shal be proved, whether poor they be, Or rich, or of a high or low degree, By outward or by inward fiery Trials, Till they are brought to real Self-denials; 'Twixt GOD and them, through Mercy to repent Their Failings, or to outward punishment. Those who shall in this Island scape his hand, Vengeance will seize on, in a Forreign Land; The foes of Peace among the common Rout, A Pestilence or Famine shall finde out: They who have shuffled from the Souldiers fury, Shall fall into the mercy of a Jury; And, when they from the sword are in some hope To scape, shall then be hamper'd in a Rope. The Mischiefs which they shunned in the Street, Within a secret Chamber they shall meet. Those men whom nothing publickly pursues, Their Consciences in private shall accuse. They, who immoveably do think to stand, Shall fall without the motion of a hand; And when the things they fear'd, cannot annoy them, That, which they sleight, and fear'd not, shall destory them. I told them likewise that their gross neglect Of Iustice as to me would have effect Upon themselves, that, what to me and mine They suffered to befal, would be a sign Of what their lot must be; and when it should So come to pass, my SALT on SALT foretold. In these words, Page 47. That this bears date the last day of September, In sixteen hundred fifty eight remember;
And that, a Reconcilement be before We have provok'd GOD's patience one year more, Lest I my self be made another sign Of what the former Symptomes pre-divine: For, those Confusions which distract this State, Are typified in my outward Fate. And printed on me by that violation Of Justice, which defiles this Generation. They that seem to have enough in outward show, To bear their Part, and pay the Debts they ow, And for the future a sufficiency; So also, if I had my right, have I. As (notwithstanding this) with much ado They now subsist; so fares it with mee too. As at the present, their Expences be More than their Incomes, so it is with me. I have more Foes than Friends; and much I am Deceived, if they may not say the same. My Foes and troubles in another year Will ruine me, and so will also their, If he, on whose assistance I depend, Prevents not what their foes and mine intend, Before another year wheels round, I may Enjoy an outward peace, and so might they, If they embrace the means that will be shown, And follow not devices of their own. If timely Justice be vouchsaf'd to me, By timely Mercies they secur'd shall be. If I permitted am to be aestroy'd, Their power, will not long after be enjoy'd. Moreovet, my DARK-LANTERN fore-declar'd As plainly (as such things might be averr'd
In such like times) what, Cromwel had design'd, That they in power (had they been so inclin'd) Might have prevented it, when shew he made To give up that Commission which he had. And had they been so prudent to have tookt, They, his White Lion, at that time had dockt. These were my words: A homebred Lion, of a Hair unknown In Affrica, by being over-grown, And dreadful to his Keepers, shall thereby Increase the rage of smother'd Iealousie, And lose his Tail, except betwixt his paws He couch his head, and hides his teeth and claws, Or else grows Rampant; what will follow then? Ask those you credit, they are cunning men; Of me you ask in vain, for 'tis my fate Never to be believ'd, till 'tis too late. I, likewise did by parable express In that book with what servile flatteries, They fawn'd on their own Creature, whom they had Hew'd out of Common blocks, and Idols made, With what would follow it; and my intent VVas not, by my Perpetual-Parliament To make that such (as some have thought I meant) But, rather that Designment to prevent By some Diversion; for, full well I knew That my proposals they would not pursue. And, they who my Poetick fury read, VVhich was by me last winter published, May thence collect, that I did then foresee The Kings Return, and how it so would be,
Though I my preconjectures did express (As then I thought) with some ambiguousness, To be excus'd; because of that Relation Which then I had, and my Faiths preservation: For, though that Poets in the worlds first ages, Were Prophets, Priests, and Magisterial Sages, And, in all former times (as in Commendam) Have been allow'd a Quid libet audendum; Yea, though there doth to sacred poesie, Belong a necessary Liberty In Language, not so pertinent to those Who hammer their Conceptions out in prose, Yet, that Good Spirit, which directs their Muses, Therewith, a prudent wariness infuses, That Malice may not thereat take offence To do them wrong, without much impudence, Or gross Injustice; and, for which wrong he, Will take Revenge, by whom inspir'd they be, When he shall pleased be to call them to That work which he prepared them to do. And though my musings hitherto appear But dreaming Fancies, whereat many jeer; They who observe, what at the foresaid time Befel to me, and afterward to them, And also knew, that all true Christians be Kings, Priests and Prophets too, in some degree, Shall finde at last, that this Age Prophets had, And sober men (though they were judged mad) Whom God stir'd up, to set before their eyes Those needful Cautions which vain men despise, Because it pleaseth him to give them pass By Instruments more scorn'd than Balaams Ass. There are some at this day, on whom nick-names Are cast; and, whom, the Vulgar much defames;
Who (though they failings have) are by Gods war∣rants Authorized to do such needful Errants As to these times relate, and to deride Our complements, our vanities and pride: And, whatsoever Spirit them hath moved, We (not without cause) are by them reproved Of things, whereto our consciences, with them Bear witness, though their persons most contemn. Among these (as aforesaid) I am one By whom the work of GOD is to be done; And he thereto is pleased to make use Of poesie (at this time) when th' abuse Of that gift, hath prophaned it, much more By Ribaldries, than ever heretofore. It may be too, I serve my Generation Thereby (although not wealth nor reputation It gets me) and my GOD, as well as they Who seek to take my purchas'd Lands away, As sanctified to them; for, ev'n by these My scriblings (as to term them some do please) Occurrences, which else would be forgot, (And passages which many minded not) Will so remembred be, that GOD shall have Some glory by them, and men good receive. And though I take no care at all to trick My Poems up, with flow'rs of Rhetorick, A day will come, wherein with due respect They shall more heeded be, and take effect. You, who believe this, and each Dispensation Of GOD's, to merit your Consideration, Improve them as you ought, in what strange wayes, Or, in what form soe'er he them conveys: And though you suffer many persecutions, Or losses, in the various Revolutions
Which do or may befall, be of good chear; Yea, whatsoever you shall see or hear, Be not afraid of ought, which this last Turn May threaten to bring on, or to adjourn: Nor be discouraged what ere the King Permits, omits, or acteth, which may bring Harm in estate or person; for he comes To do GOD's work, and executes his dooms With, or against his will, and shall proceed No further, than hath been by him decreed. His pow'r and heart are alwayes in his hands: As well as we, accomptable he stands For all that he shall do; and, GOD of him Now proof is making, as he did of them Who reigned last. Yea, peradventure now In proving him, is also proving you And me, and all these Nations, that his Grace And Justice one another may imbrace. In which TEST, if we meekly wait th' Event, Till we behold how far this Parliament Will stretch their mercy; and then, till we see How far, the Kings Grace will extended be, (Of his meer Goodness, and Self-inclination, Beyond their narrow limited Compassion) You, either shall by him, have an effect To answer what you justly may expect Or by GOD's Providence, who, if he please; Can turn your losses to advantages. For Consequents will follow to requite Your long-long sufferings in the worlds despight. GOD will appear, for your iust vindications, Who truly sought the welfare of these Nations In order to his glory; and so do it, That, to be his own Act, most men shall know it.
And, by the King that Grace vouchsafe will he, Except his heart as hard as Pharaohs be; Or, is by such Inchanters led aside, As Jannes and as Jambres typifide. Try all things ere you counter-act, and heed Whether or no from GOD they do proceed; For, by their work if well the same you mark, Are work-men known, and work-men by their work As truly as a Tree is by his Fruit, His bark, his leaves, his blossoms, and his root. Since all is in GOD's hand, rest well assur'd That your chief interest will be secur'd In his best times, although the Royal power He more exalts, and brings the people lower. For, his way, to the highest exaltations, Is by Debasings, and by Degradations. And, whether more or less, he gives or takes, To, or from him, or them, its for their sakes Conferred or withdrawn, to whom pertains That Kingdom, within which, no Tyrant reigns. GOD is our King, and doth but him depute To be here for a time, his Substitute: We are his people, and his pasture-sheep, Whom he is sent to govern, feed and keep; Not to oppress, to fleece, or to devour, And GOD retains us alwayes in his power. What, can we have, or wish for, more than this? In whose hand are we safe, if not in his? Whether we have a Government or none, Whether it be by Many, or by One: In him External and Internal peace Must sought for be; In his especial Grace Is our Well-being, and without the same, All Governours, by whatsoever name
Distinguished, and ev'ry Government, Which all the wit of mankinde can invent, Will be destructive; and when left we be Unto our selves, such, to our selves are we. When we have Kings, & hope that they will save us From wrongs, they oft endeavour to enslave us. The more pow'r we upon them do confer, The more thereby at last enslav'd we are. For, they of wealth and Pow'r admit no measure That's not as large as their own will and pleasure. If you confine them by a thousand laws, They break those bonds as easily as straws; And oft, when large in promise them we finde, Their own advantage chiefly is design'd. When on a Parliament our trust we laid, We thereby were oppressed and betray'd; And, may set up (as things are carried on) Four hundred Tyrants in the stead of one; Or, make that which our bondage should prevent, Help to inslave us by our own consent. If rather, in an Army we confide, They'l either turn unto another side, Or else prolong their service, till it shall Effect their ends, or eat us out of all. If on the common people we depend, They heed not that which to their Weal doth tend In common; for, their individual cares Are to encrease, or keep their private shares. And to enjoy their Lusts a year or two, VVill all their own posterity undo. If to themselves they should assume their power, They could not use it prudently one hour; So scatter'd lyes, through many heads, their brain, That half a Nut-shell will their wits contain:
And fire and water, may as well agree, As they, who of so many Judgements be. The Nobles would deserve our trust no better; For, they would still endeavour to be greater, By making others less; and breed distractions Incurable, by everlasting Factions. Most men, the trust on them impos'd, abuse, As well the chusers, as, they whom they chuse: The first so slavish and so brutish are, They'l sell their birthrights for Rost beef and Beer, (As they but lately did) and, so, expose Our Lives, Estates, and Freedoms unto those, VVho look more like our tumblers and our players, Then Senators, by whom our Grand Affairs Should be determined, The Last with zeal Make shew a while, to serve the Commonweal, Till thereby some Advancement gain they may, And, then, their zeal is turn'd another way. If, our chief City, we our Trustee made, Shee, to inlarge her Charters, and her Trade, To make her self more pow'rful, and more rich, Hath ever been inclin'd so over-much: And, to and fro, her self so often windes, To this, and that, as she occasion findes, That, when in her we do repose our trust, We shall have charters written in the Dust. Yet, for the love which thereunto I bear, Or, rather for the sake of those in her, Whose prayers, faith and tears, have h'therto Preserv'd her, I shall, still, as now I do, Make my Petition for her preservation, And, that she may by Justice and Compassion
Break off from those sins, for which I discover A Cloud of Judgements to be hanging over: And, which e're since the last great plague hath been; Sometimes approaching, though by few men seen; And which, whilst she to pow'r and wealth aspires, Will be unheeded; immaterial fires, Consume her dwellings, and decay her Trade, Unless atonement speedily be made By works of mercy, and that sacrifice Which GOD hath promis'd he will not despise. These Trustees, will at last deceive us whether We trust them singly, or else all together. If then, we should to this conclusion draw, Be govern'd by the Letter of the Law; That, in it self, is grown so questionable, So like a Nose of Wax, so variable, And so uncertain made, as Lawyers please To make them speak for their advantages Who most advantage them; that, we shall there Continue as unsetled as we were, Till we are certain in what sense to take them; Which will not be as long as Lawyers make them, Who take more care to drive their own ends on, Than to provide that Justice may be done. Let me be bold to write Truths without blame, (Which I know may be written without shame) No person, persons, or that Government VVhich wisest men by general consent Shall constitute, is able to bring hither Both Truth and Peace, to settle them together, Until Almighty GOD shall to this Nation A means discover for the Regulation
Of those who for their private interests, Confine both Law and Gospel to their brests: For, from them chiefly, most of all that springs, VVhich either to this people or their Kings, Hath hurtful been; and till this be amended, Our Plagues may be adjourn'd, but never ended: For, by this means (mark if it be not so) Humane Affairs, thus, for the most part go. Councils and Parliaments do counter-act Unto themselves, in Judgement, and in Fact. And the same person, by the self-same Law, For the same deed, they honour, hang, and draw. Howe're the Pow'r in being forms the Cause, For that, straight speaks Divinity and Laws. Let but another Pow'r assume the Throne, Which quite contraries what the last hath done, Both Law and Gospel straight confirms the same, Ev'n by their tongues from whence the Judement came Which ratifide the former, and had laid Strict penalties to make their Votes obaid; So, that which was the last year Truth and Reason, Is made the next year Heresie and Treason; And, Judges act that guilt which they condemn. In others, whilst they are condemning them. Oh Impudence! how! how! is Justice lost? How are poor men, like Dogs in blankets tost? VVhat great Revenews have been yearly paid, And what vast sums bestow'd to be betray'd! Or, were at best, upon blind Guides confer'd, Who knew not, whether they went right, or err'd? GOD bless the King, and teach him what to do; GOD bless the People, and GOD bless me too;
And keep us with our several Interests, From being wrong'd by Lawyers, and by Priests; And, from Aspersion, keep them also free, Who, in those Callings, just and honest be. These things I have observ'd: let us therefore Trust to our selves, or other men no more; But, wholly leave to GOD our grand affairs, Lay by our Swords: betake us to our Pray'rs, And learn to use such Weapons which will shatter Such Fortresses, as Canons cannot batter; Lest, else, as lately, we do fight again Our selves, out of one mischief into twain; Which into twenty more may be improved, Before it shall be totally removed. A Conquest by the Sword we lately had, But, that, our sins and follies frustrate made: We were by GOD's aid made victorious then, By letting forth the bloud of other men: But the next Victory to be bestown, Must purchas'd be, by shedding of our own: Yea (mind this well) it to the Saints pertains, To bind in fetters and in iron chains Both Kings and Peers, and that these also may Break off those bands, and cast those cords away: If to assume that Pow'r the Saints begin Unseas'nably, or lose it by their sin; Or, if they shall pursue the will of GOD VVith carnal Weapons, in a carnal mode, Seeking their own ends, when they his pretended, For, with sad Sequels those ways are attended. And, they will worthily be then corrected, VVith that, which must upon them be inflicted.
But, when Repentance, and a fleshly doom, Hath purifi'd them, they shall overcome By being vanquisht, and prevail much more By loosing, than by winning heretofore. Men have their failings; but a fiery Trial VVill purge the dross, which want of self-denial VVithin them left; and when that's fum'd away, They will be Gold refin'd without allay. In our own places, let us truly do VVhat duty to Superiours calls us to. (An absolute Obedience unto none My conscience ows, save unto GOD alone; Yet, to what Soveraign power adjudgeth fit, I'le actively or passively submit) Let Souldiers fight; give Pilots room to steer; VVhen we move, let us move in our own sphear, Our safety, from henceforth, expecting, from No Mountain, but from that, whence it must come. VVe had ere while a Power, which to our cost VVe mis-employ'd, and therefore now 'tis lost. VVe, lately, active were ev'n unto blood; But, now such activeness will do no good, And, we must passive be, till GOD shall please Our sins to pardon, and to give us ease: And he will shew us then what must be done, If him with patience we attend upon. VVhat we desired, he did not deny us; And, by what we desir'd, he now will try us. We have a King again: and since God gave him Upon such terms, as most desir'd to have him, VVe ought not to repine or to receed From that which we to him have promised; For, we our duties are oblig'd to do, VVhether he keep his promises, or no.
Leave him, unto that Cov'nant which was made 'Twixt GOD and him, when he admittance had: For, GOD on our behalf, when that was done, Premised terms, though we our selves made none, (Ev'n such, as long ago upon record Expressed were, in his revealed word) And, if he keep them not, 'twill worse succeed VVith him, than if his sign'd and sealed Deed He should to us infringe (though Dispensations He had, from all the Prelates in these Nations, And Rome to boot) which, I should fear to say, If somewhat did not warrant me I may. His power now is great; yet, had been more Than ever English King had heretofore, (A onceive) had he content remain'd VVith what was providentially obtain'd Not looking backward, to hedge in the time, VVhich will be no advantage unto him. Had he not sought his Honours Reparation, By building it upon the old Foundation On which it stood; not thought it best to own, That Interest, which GOD had overthrown, (And Humane policy inclin'd him to) He might have done more than he now can do. For Conquest giveth rather more than less Than he did by Inheritance possess; And his Re-entry was equivalent To Conquest, though gained by assent: For Free Assent was given by no more Save those who were of his own side before; Until they saw he had that power supreme VVhich warranted Allegiance unto him; And that he had acquired interests In what they claim, by plowing with their Beasts:
For, where WAR is, till peace, renew'd shall be In terminis, a Conqueror is he, VVho victory by Stratagems hath gain'd As truly, as when by the sword attain'd. And his Admittance (whatsoe'er is thought) VVas by none else, but his own paerty wrought Through GOD's permission, who, befooled them VVho had been false unto themselves and him. It is a Conquest, which the Lord of Hosts Confer'd on him (although no bloud it costs) And they who do admit, without condition, A Foe profest, can challenge no fruition Of any right, which was enjoy'd before, But that which he is pleased to restore; Till for Omissions, or for things misdone, GOD takes from him again what he had won, As, but a few months past from them he did, Who in this Government did him preceed: And, this point I insist on to declare That (since of us our Trustees had no care) How much to GOD we shall obliged be, If from our Hazards he shall set us free By moving this Kings heart, us to restore To those enjoyments which we had before. When first the Norman by the Sword came in, A part of what the peoples right had been VVas by contract secur'd: when Solomon VVas dead, although the Kingdom to his son Fell by inheritance; yet, maugre that, The Israelites came to capitulate VVith Rehoboam, and (as it appears) The Kingdoms, and his Fathers Counsellers Advis'd admittance of Capitulation, As no less needful for his Confirmation,
Than to content the people: but, he leaves Their counsel, and to giddy Fellows cleaves, Companions of this youth, by whose Bravado's (Exprest with insolent Rodomontado's) He lost ten Tribes of twelve. But no man thought Our Cause (it seems) worth speaking for, or sought To save our Interests, though we had those Impowr'd, who to that intent were chose, And much confided in. And, GOD did thus For his owne glory pre-dispose of us, That we might see the vanity of them In whom we trusted, and trust more in him. It had not else been so; for through the Land, There was not sword nor spear in any hand But what we thought our own: nor pow'r appearing For Charls without it, which was worth the fearing, If Providence had not transfer'd this pow'r Into his hand, which we supposed our. So, all our freedoms, Life, Lands, goods and treasure, VVere actually to this Kings will and pleasure Resigned up: for, nothing doth appear That we of any thing secured are, Save by his Grace, though some a pow'r then had To get Conditions usual to be made In such like Cases: which, if they had done, They had not thereby well discharg'd alone Their publick Trust, and, rather more than less, Might thereby have advanc'd the common peace; But, sav'd unto the King much labour too, Which now he must be forc'd to undergo, Yet, peradventure when that he hath done The best he can, please very few or none: For 'tis impossible the blessed fruit Of perfect peace without pow'r absolute,
Should be produc'd, as we are now distracted, And as things will in likelihood be acted; 'Cause such a Flow'r (as most wise men do know) Upon a single Root, doth always grow; And that, nought perfect Unity can breed, Save that, which from one spirit doth proceed. If, as he from these Kingdoms was expel'd By Conquest, he re-entring, them had held As by Re-Conquest (which he might have done, Consid'ring how Affairs were carried on) He might have brought most things to good conclu∣sions, VVithout those interruptions and confusions VVhich will ensue; for, he obliged then By none, but GOD's and Natures Laws had been; And should have had a large means to express His Mercy, Piety, and Righteousness, By prudent modelizing and contriving (Restoring, adding, giving and forgiving) As need required, without such restraints, Or giving these occasions of complaints, As now occur: whereas he coming in By that Right, which before had claimed been, (As interrupted only) he seems bounded By those Laws, whereon formerly 'twas founded. And (as at present it appears to me) So dubious Laws and Parliaments now be, That by the course intended to be taken, The Peace we hope to settle will be shaken VVhen we suppose it fixt; by failings, found Hereafter, in some Principles unsound; Or else, because some actings will appear Not homogeneous to those Laws that are: And, as things are, with us 'tis little better Then if we conquer'd were, for, we are debter
Unto the King, for all in our possessions By his spontaneous Act, and Free Concessions; And whatsoever we can do or say, If, now he will be Absolute, he may. There be enough, who for their private ends, Will drive on whatsoever he intends, Whether it be to do us right or wrong; And thereunto, our sins will make them strong, Till GOD again deliver us, who hath Now made us, justly, Objects of his wrath. For, if they are our Trustees duely chose, Who now of us and our Affairs dispose, (And us into the Kings hand wholly gave Without Reserve) then, ev'ry thing we have Is His; and more it boots not than a Rush Now to deny it: for, within a bush, We shall our Heads but like the Woodcock hide, Whom by his Tail, the Fowler hath espide. We are reduc'd unto a conquer'd State, Though we our selves are pleas'd to wink thereat. The CUP pretended stolen to have been, (By whose device soere it was put in) Is found within our sacks; and we this day Like Josephs Brethren, to the King must say: We are thy servants: Providence Divine Hath for our sins made our possessions thine: For, we can challenge nothing as our own, But what of thy free Grace hath been bestown: Or what thou shalt be pleased to afford Upon Request: or, of thine own accord. This we must say, how loth soere vve are: And, vvithout scruple, this affirm I dare, That, till the self-same Providence, or Hee, Or both together, joyn to make us free:
(VVhich will vouchsafed be, with, or without His will, when our probation-time is out) We never shall be freed; but, without rest, Be more and more inslaved, and opprest. Then, let none think I wrong this Nation, tho I say 'tis conquer'd: nor, by being so, Fear they so much will disadvantag'd be, As, by a vain suppose that they are free; Since, by not making this acknowledgement, GOD, of due thanks and glory we prevent: For, had the King assum'd the Sov'raign pow'r, (As being made by him, a Conquerour) With no worse purpose, than to constitute A righteous throne (to which Pow'r Absolute Is so Essential, that without the same, Less Power, in great Confusions will be lame) He possibly might have effected that, Which to attempt, now 'tis perhaps too late. This, was the mind of GOD (as I beleeve) VVhen he to him did that advantage give; And, I am hopeful, he will bend that way The Pow'r that's left, as far forth as he may: For, he is neither Heathen, Jew, or Turk, Impow'red to do only his own work; Nor we, I hope, as were the Canaanites, To be destroy'd, nor those Amalekites VVith whom God purposeth a VVar for ever, Unless we in impenitence persever, To make us liable to such a doom As did on that and other Nations come. But, by this King, GOD rather doth intend Our much depraved Manners to amend: And deals with us, as he hath always done VVith his own people, since the world begun.
VVhen they by murmurings for flesh provok't him; He, in displeasure gave them Quails, & choakt them: And he with us, in some things parallel Thereto hath dealt, if we observe them well. VVhen he by Moses them from bondage brought, (To lead them back again) they had a thought To chuse another Captain; for which crime, He kept them in the Desert a long time: Ev'n till all that Rebellious Generation Was quite worn out for that prevarication. This, let us well consider of, and learn How much (and in what) it may us concern. A King like other Nations they would have, And what they askt, GOD with a vengeance gave: Yet, by his mercy from his wrath did save them, And plagues & blessings therewith mixed gave them. When by the Sword of Nebuchadnezzar, The Jews were subjugated (as we are For our transgressions) though their Conquerour Was not of their own Nation, as is our: (Or, of their Faith, so much as a pretender, Either to be Professor or Defender) GOD by Him, and by his Successors brought them, Not only to be humbled, till they sought him; But also, gave them favour in their sights; Made some of them their chiefest Favorites: Yea, to repair enabled them, at last, Their Temple and their Cities, which lay waste; And to possess again that Land, from whence They were ejected by impenitence. Why then should we not hope, since to these Nations Our present King hath manifest Relations: (The same Faith holds, and of his own accord To be propitious hath engag'd his Word)
That, GOD, by him, will, at the least, restore All that which he possessed heretofore? VVhy should we not believe, that God's intent Is to be gracious in his chastisement? And may apply unto us Lenitives By this King, when he hath with Corrosives First made us curable; somewhat I declar'd Among such other things (without regard) Now, thirty five years past, that doth appear Upon Record in my Remembrancer, VVhich now, perhaps, beginneth way to make For what my Britains Genius did fore-speak; And, GOD, in Judgement, mindeth us, as yet, In Mercy, though his kindness we forget. Yea, if our sins make not his purpose void, That, whereby some now fear to be destroy'd, Shall save us from that mischief which we fear, VVhen unavoidably it seemeth neer. For, notwithstanding, for their sins and our, Our former Governours did lose their pow'r; Though they, and we have justly forfeited Those Freedoms which we lately challenged, And did possess (when after our Appeal, VVe were impowr'd to form a Commonweal) The change which now befalls will be of use Hereafter, better sequels to produce. VVe have but onely lost, upon the wheel A broken pot, and work men without skill. GOD, hath not wholly, us of Grace bereaved, Although, to Grace, the King he hath received; Nor hath he at this present brought him home At our cost (without bloodshed) to become A Tyrant, but our King, and unto us To be as gracious, as to him, he was,
In thus restoring him with Conditions, Unto his late lost Honour and Possessions. GOD hath from Mesech lately brought him hither Not that this People should be forced thither; Or that their Burthens he should more increase, Now that's removed which did him oppress. GOD, did supply his wants, and him restore To Riches lost, not to make others poor; Nor from afflictions him redeem'd, that he Should for past injuries avenged be; Or have a Kingdome here, like one of those VVhich Satan on his Homagers bestows. But, such a Kingdome, that his people might Submit unto him, with a true delight, And worship their Creator without fear, In holiness, and in uprightness here. And, if his Pow'r be not this way imploy'd, The best mens hopes, will be a while made void: And his for ever (though he should recover Ten times more strength and gild his acting over VVith quaint pretences, and the fairest Paints Of Polititians, or dissembling Saints.) For, though the Rabble, who were yesterday His open Foes, now make professions may, Of being loyal, and to morrow should Swear to become his slaves, they frustrate would His best hopes; for, they are a flood that flows This way, and that way, as the next wind blows. The Essence of a Kingly interest Doth in, and by the Common good consist, Ev'n in the whole, and not in any part (Although as noble as the Head or Heart) And to indulge ought further then it shall Tend really unto the good of all;
Destroys the whole, turns Royalty to Faction, And breeds at length a general Distraction: For, when the limbs, the head or heart surpass Their due proportions, they make others less; And all the body will not only grow Deformed, but unserviceable too: So, likewise, Kings, if liberty they grant To any part to be exorbitant, Or in themselves be so, 'twill quite destroy That compound being, which they shall enjoy. They further should promote no interest Than with the publick good it may consist; And that each individual, without wrongs, May that possess, which to the same belongs. By Justice he should cause a Restoration; Of all Incroachments made by Usurpation; And recompence for ev'ry Injury Sustained by Supream Authority, How ere acquired, if the Sufferer In conscience, thereunto obedient were; And no way active in that innovation, Which was the former Powr's Eradication. No party or profession whatsoere, Neither the Prelate, Priest or Presbyter, Or other Sect, nor King nor Parliament Should be indulg'd to common detriment; For, that would be destructive to that end, Whereto all Constitutions ought to tend. 'Tis mercy, and performing righteous things That strengthens Kingdoms, and preserveth Kings; And they are their best Subjects who adhere To Piety, and sound in Manners are: Not they who think the glory of a Throne Consisteth in the Guilding laid thereon:
Or, in such Vanities as did begin To spring up when the King first entred in: For, though those Fools (who such enjoyment crave Assoon, as of prevayling, hopes they have) Insult, Jeer, brag, and insolently brave it, Cry, Now it is as we our selves would have it, And run out into that Licentiousness Which evidently may to all express What they desire; he, that, on such relies, Himself, with Snow-balls only fortifies; And will by their assistance be at length As old Rome was, opprest by his own strength. And, if abus'd, the Grace now offer'd be, Some, yet may live another change to see: For, One unheeded sits above our heads, Who mens Phanatick vanities derides; And Judgements in dark Clouds concealed are, Which will surprize us, ere we be aware, Unless we with more prudent moderation Shall from henceforward manage that occasion Which GOD hath given of a happy close Betwixt them, who have over-long been foes, For, to that end (though not well heeded yet) The King and we are in this posture met. If, he be now King by the Grace of GOD, (As we entitle him) sent for our good, And not in wrath: if, as his Title saith, He be a true Defender of the Faith, (VVhich is my hope) he, seriously will heed, How in his chief concernments, men proceed: And, if he then findes, that, more in despight To those whom they hate, than to do him right, Some things by some are acted: and the spoyl Of others rather aim'd at, then this Weal,
(By prosecutions over-violent To his dishonour and indangerment) 'Twill bring forth an unlooked-for effect To those, upon whom he without suspect Doth yet depend; and make him plainly see, That, from thenceforth, his confidence must be In GOD, and in those, who, with him partake For GOD's, for Justice, and for Conscience sake; And not in those who value not those things VVhich most essential are to Sov{us}raign Kings; Though they pretend to suffer for GOD's cause, And his; or, fain obedience to his Laws; Much less trust them, who did assist the Boys With Shouts, Drums, Guns and Squibs to make a noise About their bonfires, hemmed in with Dances Scarce modest, and sometimes with petulances As scandalous, as if those men had best Their Loyalty and Gratitude exprest, Who, when he was proclaim'd, most rudely swagger'd Drunk to his Health, until they spew'd & stagger'd; Consum'd that, on one beast, which to the poor Distributed, might have refresh'd a score: And, when they should have prais'd GOD, for the grace To them vouchsaf'd, blasphem'd him to his face. If such prevarications do presage A setled pow'r, or a Reformed Age, I am deceiv'd; and wholly had despair'd To see our Breaches in my time repair'd; But that the King hath given hopes of late, By some proceeds, that he doth aim thereat; And by his Proclamation startled them From that, which many did expect from him: Yea, I have feared, that I might have liv'd To see all Heath'nish Vanities reviv'd.
(With all old Superstitions) and, I pray, This fear may wholly be remov'd away: For, what some have expected all along, And, from what Root, their zeal to Kingship sprung; By many 'twas fore-shown, who did aspire To publick trust. That, which they now desire Confirms it also; and perhaps it may Be manifest to all another day, When they shall either miss their expectations, Who welcom'd him with loudest acclamations, Or else, when they enjoy them; which to see, I should be griv'd, and so, I hope would he. But if to those things, which do now begin In ev'ry place already, to flow in, He puts not stop, ere further they proceed, His power, perhaps, it shortly will exceeded; And, we shall here behold (with new additions) Prophanenesse, and exploded Superstitions, Not only countenanced without aw Of GOD, and Men, but setled by a Law: For, this (or I am much deceiv'd) is that Which is by very many aimed at. It was not (as these did pretend) to bring From his late banishment, their lawful King; Nor love unto his Person, or his Cause, Or zeal to true Religion or the Laws, Which made so many, who had active been To drive him out, make hast to fetch him in: Nor, that they could better be content With Kingship or some other Government, Or persons then with those that rul'd before: But some did hope to have enjoyed more A Liberty, whereby, without controul They might in bruitish lusts at pleasure roul.
Some had a hoping of raising their Estate; In some hope sprung from Envy or from hate, Conceiv'd against those persons who acquir'd Those honours or some profits they desir'd: And, not a few, who were at no expence In this Kings service, or to make defence Of him or his cause, hopefull were to get (By suing to him, and pretending it) Repair of those consum'd Estates, which they Had either drunk, or whor'd, or gam'd away. Some, other, thereby, hoped for fruition Of their beloved Mistriss Superstition; Freedome, to swear GOD damn them, without a we Of Magistrate, or mulct impos'd by Law; To wast, the day, and night, in drinking, gaming, In cheating, roaring, whoring, and blaspheming, Without reproofs. Some looked for encrease Of Trading, or of making Taxes less; And, othersome (another way affected) Together with a King, returns expected Of Masks and Revels, Turnaments and Plays, May-poles, Wakes, Church-ales and those holy-days, Wherein young men might have permitted been As heretofore, to dance upon the Green, With such-like liberties as may be us'd Sometimes (if soberly) and not abus'd: And, some, it may be, had an expection The Lords day should a day of recreation Be made agen; and preaching twice a day, By some new Canon would be took away; That all men (as they have internal motions) Might have time for their pleasures or devotions. These were strong motives to some late Expresses Of loyalty, as also to th' addresses
Subscribed not long before by many a one To OLIVER, and likewise to his Son, Whom quickly they deserted, though they had To live and die with them professions made Without enforcement, at the first, to make them, Or at the last, so tamely to forsake them. As much they magnifide them in their Lyricks, Heroick Poems, Odes, and Penegyricks, As they extol the King. No flattering pen Could more ascribe to any mortal men: And, though such dawbings cannot keep from shame Their persons, nor from infamy their name, (As now appears) yet this magnificat The world still sings. This common strain is that Which most men do affect and in this wise Flattry still sings to all Stars when they rise: Yea, all their songs unto this present day, Are but the same, new set another way: And, their composers do deserve no more Then begging Fidlers begging at the door. Who if it might their servile ends advance, Would, to the same tune play the devil a dance. Such are too many, who do make a show Of loyalty by their expresses now. As little worth regarding is their love; And, doubtless very fickle it would prove, If GOD should be provoked to estrange His favour, and permit another change. They who against one party lately cride, Hang, hang the Rogues; against the other side Would then cry out as loud, Hang, hang them all: And, those whom they now praise, as much mis call: For, what their chiefest expectations are, They make it evidently to appear
By Words and Deeds; and there are symptomes too, What things, if cause were given, they would do. Hornets and Wasps, begin to shew their stings. The butterflies display their pointed wings In every Garden, and there, spawn the seed which Palmer worms, and Catterpillars, breed. They, who were lately Maggots are grown Flies, In our ears buzzing, fleering in our eyes; And, up were set, the worlds Gods altogether As soon as ere the King approached hither; Who, probably, in Flanders had remain'd, If, otherways, their ends they could have gain'd, And Dick, perhaps, GEORGE, Jack, or any thing, With popular app'auses had been King. But, these Insecti, though they greatly swarm, Can do the King not so much good, as harm: Nor can those who through want of wit & courage Will sell their birth-rights for a mess of Porredge, To this establishment contribute ought, Till they be better disciplin'd and taught: It is not they in Linen Ephods, neither Those Chimerims who now conspire together; Nor those vain and fantastical baboons Who jet in Feathers and in Pantaloons, Who fix a King; but, those grave men among Our Nobles. And the civil uulgar throng, Who love the Publick peace, and do profess A Loyalty in truth and soberness, VVithout regard of any Interest, Save that, which may with other mens consist. The rest (if well consider'd) are a number Of animals, which more confound and cumber, Then settle Governments; and are to Kings But troublesome unprofitable things.
I have observ'd them well: and long ago (Perceiving what they likely were to do, VVho know the way, as often as they please To bring to pass, their own Designes by these) Upon Occasions given, was so bold, That what I pre-conjectur'd, I fore-told; And how these acting singly, or together. To publick Damage, made use of each other. This oft I did before the Parliament Became their self-destroying instrument) In plain terms, or Aenigma's; as the time Would bear it; and as well in Prose as Rimes: I did the like to him, and to his son, VVhom GOD permitted to usurp the Throne, (As two addresses, which I did prefer To their own hands, yet extant may declare) And whereby, such advantages I got As usually they get who flatter not. During the last pow'r (in an oblique way) As touching him, who reigneth at this day, I hinted that, which now is come to pass In such wise, as I might in such a case At such a time as that; with what Events, To his beginnings would be consequents, If on the Giddy Vulgar he depended, In prosecuting what should be intended: Or, if he sought a Kingship to erect Like what meer earthly Princes do effect: VVherein, although I had no worse Designe Then with the publick weal to wrap up mine, I am, for my plain dealing, as a Foe Both scandalized and oppressed so. That all the Mercy some vouchsafe me would, Is Life deprived of all things that should
In me and my relations Life uphold. Which is a cruelty, and such away, Of killing men a hundred times aday, That GOD with due avengement will repay: For, though men are not so, yet he is just; The measure, which they gave, receive they must. Yea, measure running over, and prest down, Unless God shew more grace then they have shown. I have not much deceived been, in ought Which with Pre-meditation I fore-thought, And heretofore divulg'd relating to These Nations, in the things they ought to do; Or, unto that, which would require their heed, How therein they go backward, or proceed. I, lately pre conjectur'd and fore-told, That London was a Mount whence issue should A wind, which hither likely was to blow A change, that of our greatest weal or woo, (As likewise of her own) would be the cause: And, by her aid, that change is come to passe. Let her so mind it now, that GOD may bless Her future actings with a good success; For, that to them this Caveat give I may, Thus purposely I stept out of the way. My Muse once more shall here likewise recal What I presag'd would to my self befal; Yea, though I toucht upon it heretofore, I will illustrate it a little more. Me therefore, to insist thereon permit, For as it me concerns to mention it, It may concern you to, and doth declare That poor mens wrongs by GOD observed are. Upon my heart I strong impressions had, That I, should of their fall a signe be made;
Who for my faithful service me opprest; And, they, who last the supreme pow'r possest, This day, both see, and feelingly perceive, That's come to passe which they would not believe To them I told, both jointly and apart, (But seem'd to speak to men without a heart) That, they in reason had good cause to fear, If they should offer still, a Deaf man's Ear To my complaints, a very sad reward, Would be the sequel of their Dis-regard. Yet, though with humbleness I them implor'd By ev'ry means, which those times, did afford, (Save bribes and flatt'ry they would seldome hear Ought which concerned me, except it were An accusation; or to grant an Order, Which more my Ruine, then Relief did further; Or, do me Justice during my oppressions, Nigh eighteen years complain'd of by Petitions, And, by addresses, tenter'd unto them (Not seldome, by some hundred at a time) Nor to me their Ingagements made they good; Nor those discharg'd by which ingag'd I stood For them; nor for their Debts detain'd from me Three times six years, although made due they be By Ordinance and Orders: nor would they Vouchsafe as much as interest to pay, By them allowed; (though I much did need it, Both to relieve me, and preserve my Credit.) Nor could I that enjoy, which I had bought, And they had sold, (as I in Justice ought; Till my Estate and Credit was o'rethrown By them, through their neglecting of their own; Though they were not alone oblig'd unto it, But likewise had both power and means to do it.
A single foe, could do me in one hour More injury, then all my Friends had pow'r To right whilst they reign'd, though I seem'd be∣friended Of many, who to Righteousness pretended. Though early at their dores, and also late, As at Bethesda-pool the Cripple sate) I waited on them, I went ev'ry day Both without Help, and with small Help, away; No more prevailing, then if still I had To blocks or statutes, my Petitions made. These Grievances, increasing ev'ry year, Rais'd at the length, my Damages well near To twice five thousand pounds; and so increast, My debts, by troubles, suits, and interest, That wants, thereby, still multiplying more, I was, at last, made somewhat worse then poor: From seven hundred pounds per annum, brought To be some hundred pounds less worth then nought, So loosing my repute, with my estate. (Which many new perplexities begat) To ev'ry wrong, I liable was made, When no means left for my defence I had. And, most men then perceiving that the Doom Which I fore-saw would come, was then nigh come, And likely to destroy them in whose hands Lay all my whole Estate in Debts and Lands, And, that the Title which thereinII had, Would, as they stood or fell, prove good or bad; My Creditors grew thereby so affraid, What I then ow'd them, never would be paid, That, more to pay one debt, then would pay two, Was thereby (maugre all that I could do) Streight torn away: and I, could neither set, Nor sell, nor borrow, neither payment get
Of what was due, to buy things necessary, Or save my credit till it did miscarry, By forfeitures and burthens, cast upon me, So mercilesly, that it hath undone me, As to the world; unless GOD shall prevent That, which now threats a further Detriment; For, when the CURS which did before but bawl, (As when you see a hunted Stag doth fall By alber Dogs) immediately fell in, And from the flesh began to tear the skin. To make complaints, I saw it was in vain; For, none I know to whom I might complain, With hope of help; and certainly perceived, That, though by them, I seem'd to be bereaved Of my Estate, yet GOD's hand was therein, And, that the Judgement which doth now begin At his own House, did mark me out for one, Upon whom Execution must be done: Therefore, forthwith, examining my heart, And, finding that far less then my desert Was brought upon me; to his Chastisement I humbly do submit, and will present, Ere I proceed, this my Confession, With Praises intermixed, and Contrition. A HYMNE Of CONFESSION and PRAISE. 1. LORD, Thou from dust didst raise me, When I no being had, And I in flesh to praise thee, A living Soul was made:
That, therefore, I may praise thee, as I am bound to do, Still henceforth let me praise thee, In Soul and Body too. 2. To have thy Will fulfilled, To thee, I oft have pray'd; Which, that I truly willed, Now, comes it to be tride; And, that, my Soul obeys thee, as thou thy Will mak'st known, I am resolv'd to praise thee, by laying down mine own. 3. Thy Servants are confunded, this day with shame of face, And with their Plagues surrounded for their neglects of Grace; On us therefore to praise thee a Judgement is begun, In which, my heart, to praise thee still cries, thy Will be done. 4. And, since by my Transgressions, the breach was wider made, I will by my Confessions unto thy Glory add; Oh! make thou them to praise thee so hearty and sincere; That, other men to praise thee their failings may declare. 5. Me, thou hast not corrected with worse or sharper things.
This are sometimes inflicted upon the greatest Kings: By Charity to praise thee, their wants thou then supplid'st; And, now to make me praise thee, that way for me provid'st. 6. Nought heretofore I wanted wherewith to give thee praise; But, what to me was granted, I wasted otherwayes: And, since I did not praise thee when I enjoyed most, I now am come to praise thee when all I had is lost. 7. Oft, when my Conscience chid me, I, in my sins went on; She therefore lately led me to what hath me undone; Yet, that, at last will praise thee, for which, I suffer must; And I confesse to praise thee, that all thy wayes are just. 8. The portion by thee given, I, on my Lusts have spent; Sinn'd against Thee and Heaven, for which, I now repent: And since I did not praise thee, as I oblig'd have been, I meekly now do praise thee In suff'rings for my sin.
9. Of earthly Joys and Pleasure that most desired are, To me in ample measure thou didst vouchsafe a share; But, I for them to praise thee performed not my part; And therefore, now I praise thee with sad and contrite heart. 10. An honest Reputation on me thou hast bestown, That, to this Generation thy praise I might make known. But by what I should praise thee, I sought a fruitlesse fame; And therefore now I praise thee for my Reproach and shame. 11. Of Good Men, much esteemed I rend'red was by thee; But, better oft I seemed then I could truly be: I therefore now do praise thee that my Defects were hid, And, that, some now dispraise me for what I never did. 12. To thee I am a Debter for what I most esteem; (No earthly blessing better deserving Thanks doth seem) And for the, same still praise thee, though lately for my sin,
That, for which now I praise thee, a bitter-sweet hath been. 13. But sharp and sweets together (through all my life-time past) And, single shares of either so timely, deign'd thou hast: That, I not onely praise thee for what most sweet appear'd; But, also, truly praise thee for what I shun'd and fear'd 14. Thou didst with Robes adorn me, which men of Honour weare, That Fools the lesse might scorn me when I thy praise declare: But, what thou gav'st to praise thee, I did to folly turn: And therefore, now I praise thee in Garments thred-bare-worn. 15. To, thousands, much delightful, my Youthful days were made; My Heart was blith, and sprightful thy praise the more was spread But, I with them to praise thee did not what should be done; For which, I'm left to praise thee all day and night, alone. 16. My private Faith infringed to others and to thee, Thou lately hast avenged by publique breach to me:
And therefore now I praise thee for that just doom of thine; Oh! make them also praise thee whose sins have punish'd mine. 17. Inspight of their Oppressions who my Destruction sought, Thou gav'st me large possessions, which now are come to nought: And since I did not praise thee when I enjoyed more, I justly now do praise thee in Wants, Distresse, and Poor. 18. I, heretofore, had fullness of ev'ry pleasant meat, Which brought on me a dulnesse, that made me thee forget: And therefore now to praise thee, Affliction, bread prepares; And thou dost make me praise thee, in drinking of my tears: 19. Like Baruch, out of season things for my self I sought; Missed by Carnal Reason, lent, borrowed, built, and bought But, left the way to praise thee that's taught me in thy Schools, And therefore now to praise thee I, numbred am with Fools. 20. Yet, as to sinck me lower, Scorns, wrongs, and Wants encrease;
So, dayly Faith gets power, Hope thrives, and Fears grow lesse; To move me to dispraise thee, the more my Temper tries, My Spirit, still, to praise thee, a pitch the higher flies. 21. Though I myself have nothing, in thy hands all things be: And harbour, food and cloathing thou wilt provide for me: For thou hast means to praise thee stirr'd up in every Town, Whereby each man may praise thee who hath not of his own. 22. And for Reptue or Treasures I will not thee implore; For friends, lands, goods, and pleasures enjoyed heretofore, I, rather, ask to praise thee, what most extolls thy Name, Although it be to praise thee. in Sorrow, Death, and Shame. 23. Whilst here my sins benight me, still cause thy face to shine: For what will more delight me, then Corn, and Oyl, and Wine. And though oppression weighs me quite down unto the ground, I, with more joy shall praise thee, then when wealth did abound.
And whatsoe'r betide me I will not change my Case, With any who derides me, nor shall distrust thy Grace, My soul desires to praise thee, and loves thy praise so well, That, might I there best praise thee thee, praise I would in HELL. 25. For, Thee to love thou mov'st me, which shews thou lovest Me, And doubtlesse whilst thou lovest me, ev'n Hell a Heaven would be: Since, Love enough to praise Thee, he, that could thither bear, Should make the Devils praise thee, And, quench the Fires there. 26. For LOVE all things created, subdued Hell and Death; Thy Law it hath compleated, outlasteth Hope and Faith. Thou, when that love doth praise thee, givest best respects thereto; And, till in love we praise thee. in vain is all we do. 27. Were I therefore bereaven of all that's called mine, Of Body, Soul, and Heaven, my love should live in thine: And, as I then did praise thee, when I no being had;
So I again shall praise thee, When I am quite unmade. 28. But, never comprehended Can be thy Love to me; And therefore never ended My Songs of praise must be: A Hymne wherein to praise thee I have on earth begun; And better hope to praise thee When this short life is done. 29. Then, when asleep Death lays me, LORD, let me from the Grave (Where Dead-men cannot praise thee A Joyful Rising have: Let those likewise who praise thee With me, whilst I am here, Where Saints and Angels praise thee, (To praise thee) meet me there. Two other Meditations here I'll add, Which though such Musings mean esteem have had In latter times, may now as useful be To some, in my case, as they are to me. 1. BUt are in my Riches gone? and all those fled away Whose love depended thereupon? for ever, Farewell they. Since these have gotten wings, I will not them pursue; But set my heart on better things, and bid them quite adieu.
'Tis GOD that gives and takes, whose love remains the same; And whether rich or poor he makes, still blessed be his Name. With suffrings to comply, loth was I to begin, But better thoughts of them have I, since they have proved been. 3. For, what I dreadfull thought when first the same appear'd, Hath joys to me by sorrows brought; and hopes by what I fear'd. To be despis'd and poor if in my GOD I trust, Will me at last advantage more then if I nothing lost. 4. Long time I have profest in words a Christian Creed, And now am-with occasions blest to shew it forth by Deed. We, holy men would seem, and up for Saints are cride, But now comes that Probation time In which we must be tride. 5. Whilst Riches I enjoyd, They made me but a drudge, To be on their affairs imployd, and on their Errands trudge. Me poor my plenties kept; made me engage my Friends;
And often wake whilst others slept, to wait upon their ends. 6. They fild me with Desires, whose Lusting endlesse was, And onely brought forth thorns and briers to choak the seeds of Grace. They made me fearful too Of Tyrants and of Knaves, Yea (which is ten times worse then so) Made me a slave to slayes. 7. My heart then be content, let wealth and honour go, For, better things to thee are meant then these can raise thee to. Let those who on them dote, by our deportment see, That in those Gods we trusted not which their chief Idols be. 8. Though my despightful Foes Now my Estaie is gone, (I having nothing else to lose) my body seize upon, Therefore take thou no care, for GOD thy help will be, And put on them a greater fear then they can put on thee. 9. And to encrease that load which I at present bear, Though they say Where now is thy God, of whom thy boastings were?
He will of me, of me be found, and also make it known, (When open shame shall them confound) that he my Cause doth own. 10. Thy Cross with patience take, do not there at repine, But bear it stoutly for his sake who bore his Cross for thine. Still meekly in thy way therewith proceed thou so, That others it encourage may to what they see thee do. 11. The Lot of Saints hath been Afflictions, Wants, and Scorns; And he that is the best of Men was mockt and crown'd with Thorns. No House to him they gave wherein to rest his head; Him also in a borrow'd Grave, they laid when he was dead. 12. Yea, he that's LORD of all when first with flesh arrayd, Was meanly housed in a Stall, and in Manager layd. A Guest so poor he was, that whilst he lodged there, The labouring Ox, and toyling Ass his Chamber-fellows were. 13. Yet Wisemen from the East, were guided by a Star,
To bring to this despised Guest Gold, Frankincence and Myrrhe, They fooled for his sake a Tyrannizing King; GOD'S Angels, care of him did take, and round about him sing, 14. To him, allide am I, and he will send to me, Howere obscurd, the like supply, as oft as need shall be. For timely he relieves all those that trust in him, And charge unto his Angels gives, to be a guard to them. 15. In Stables, Barns and Stalls, the poor as much he heeds, As those that are in Princes halls, to help them at their needs. Yea, unto them he comes, and will their suffrings mark, Although they lie in nasty Rooms, or Dungeons deep and dark. 16. A portion more secure then Goods or Lands is he, An Heritage that will endure when Kingdoms lost shall be. And when exposd to shame their Bodies we behold, It shall more magnifie their name, then Statues made of gold.
17. But this to them will seem who dote on outward things, No better then an idle Dream which no assurance brings. If pompously they live, and in rich Tombs may lie, Themselves they happy men believe, although like beasts they die. 18. And I am half in fear when this is sung among Those who in love with riches are, 'twill seem a Bedlam-Song: For, seldome we perceive that when his Mammon's gone, A Rich Man's able to believe, he is not quite undone. 19. It makes them almost mad to hear another preach, That joyes and comfort may be had whereto they cannot reach. LORD help their unbelief, and mitigate their fears; For, though they pity not my grief, yet, I do pity theirs. 20. Preserve in me that Grace which now infus'd I find: And let not time, events nor place, hereafter change my mind: For in them good or bad, External things have nought;
But, as Good, or ill use is made, Or else, as got or sought. Another Meditation relating to the Authors present Condition. 1. MY Foes, you have your hearts desire, a spoyle of me you make; And (as I hear) you now inquire what Course I mean to take. I now am brought so low, you say, so destitute and poor, That well assure your selves you may I shall arise no more. 2. You, naytheless may be deceiv'd, and of your aims have mist; For, in those things which are bereav'd, my wealth doth not consist: And I have that within my view which if pursude it be, May make me as much laugh at you, as you now laugh at me. 3. But, though it makes you to be glad to see my griefs encreast, I have for some of you been sad when you were less opprest. And if you shall go forward still in doing causlesse wrong, I, who now at your folly smile, may weep for you ere long.
4. The greatest harm I wish my Foes when me most wronged have, Is, that themselves they may not lose by what they seek to have. And when that they shall come to try what they have brought me to, That they nuoght else may loose thereby but what would them undo. 5. Man liveth not by Bread alone and that (should it be told) Which now my life depends upon your eyes cannot behold. You robb'd me of External Things, but what the worse am I, If I have in me Living Springs that never will be dry. 6. From that, which you debar me from, me, long you cannot keep; My Noon is past, my Night is come, and I shall shortly sleep. At first, to Wither I was born (though then a springing Tree) And now my leavss away are torn, I can but Wither'd be. 7. The Birds do live, the Lilies grow, and are well cloath'd and fed; Yet can not spin, nor plow, nor sow, to get them Cloathes and Bread: I, therefore am without despair, that he who cloaths the Grass,
And feeds the small'st Fowls of the Air, will heed my present Case. 8. But if my Lot reserve she shall untill another Life, The worst that can to me befall, will bring more Joy then Grief: As Nightingales in summer do, i'll sing all Night and Day; And so shall in a month or two, sing Care and Life away. Refreshed by these pertinent Digressions, Which fertifie my faith against oppressions, I will proceed to make an application Of what pertaineth to my last Narration. The main breach made upon me (and which drew Those mischiefs that did afterwards ensue) To me did happen some few days before That Parliament was last shut out of door, By whom those Grievances on me were brought, And, then that fell on them, which I fore thought And did foretell; perhaps that others may Be wary, how they needlesly delay That justice which to poorest men belongs, When much opressed by continued wrongs; Which GOD will execute, at first or last, Hereafter as he hath done in times past. In this Relation, I, nor Poetize; (As some may fancie) nor Hyperbolize: But, here, in simple plainnesse have set down The naked truth, that when it shall be known, GOD may be better praysed, and these Nations Thenceforth take heed of wilful provocations.
For, greater mischief then to most appears, (And very many complicated snares) Intangle thousands, who destructively Oppressed are this day, as much as I: To whom the grace intended can derive Nought else, but such a life as I would give Ten times away, to free them from Oppression, Who suffer with me, by my sad condition; And, whose complainings, end soul-piercing words, Lie pricking at my Heart, like Darts and Swords. How GOD hath fore-determin'd to dispose Of me, from this time forth, he onely knows; And, his will shall be mine: but, if this change Brings good to me, it will be very strange: For, men prophane esteem'd, would then appear More just, then they who saints reputed were; My foes much kinder, then they who profest To be my friends, and whom I served best. As yet, he hath retain'd me in their power, Who day and night, are hunting to devour; And, letteth loose upon me such a Herd Of brutes, as David heretofore compar'd To Dogs, Bulls, Lyons, Serpents, and to those From out of whose mouths, Adders Poyson flows; Whose throats are like devouring graves; whose tongues Are Mints of slanders & oppressive wrongs; In secret, on a sudden shooting words More sharp then arrowes, or two-edged swords; And were these only Foes profest, their scorn Or malice, might with much more ease be born: But, some of them, are those who many days Walk'd with me friend-like in the self same ways; And, Neighbours and acquaintance do begin To be to me, as his to him had been:
My love to them, with hatred they requite; For kindnesses, returning me despight. Of me, their scurrile Songs the drunkards make, With whom the scoffers in their jeers partake. They, who as yesterday, pretended had Some kindness, are malitiously grown mad, Combining and conspiring, how they may My Life, Estate and Credit take away; As if until I wholly were destroy'd Their expectations could not be enjoy'd: Although I know no good that can arise To them, by what against me they devise: Or why such wrongs by them to me are done, Except it be, because I did them none: Or, else, for that their wayes I look into, More, then they are well-pleased I should do. For, be it known, they who are thus inrag'd Are not of those who formerly ingag'd, In that cause which I lately did oppose; No, no, so justly, these are not my Foes: But, men, (if they deserve that name) whose base Dissembling Heart false Tongues, and steeled Face: Inclines them to make shew, as if they never Did any thing against the King endeavour: Whereas, a chief of that debauched crew, With his drawn Sword the late King did pursue; And boasted heretofore (with his own breath) Of personal assistance at his death: Another of them, that he might endear Himself to those who last inthroned were, Made Headless this Kings picture; vowing then, So to have done to him, had he there been. These are my persecutors; these are they Who help spread snares and mischiefes in my way:
And, some of those who yet in power a bide, (By playing fast and loose on either side) Are their abettors; for no cause to me Yet known; unless they know I see Their Juglings: or perhaps, because they fear I may hereafter make them to appear. Whereas, I rather (for my Countries sake) To GOD, for their Conversion, prayers make, That, timely, they their malice may repent, Their own, and our perditions to prevent; And that by our malitiousnesse they bring No Damage to these Realms, or to the King, To superfiede that Mercy, which I find GOD, te confer on us, is now inclinde, Because our weal and wo will be involv'd, Within each others, as we are resolv'd, And, as for time to come we shall persever In Union, or neglect a good endeavour. Though by our sins, and by the sins of those Who were acknowledged (however chose) For our Trustees, our late immunities Are wholly forfeited, whilst GOD shall please; There is an open Gate, through which I view A better way, then we do yet pursue, To re-obtain them, and to settle that Desired Peace which we have aimed at. There is a hope, this King will be so just (When those in whom the common people trust He thorowly hath tride) to let us see, That, he shall prove at last our best Trustee, Next under GOD, and for us do much more Then all our Parliaments did heretofore, Or will do now; for, they often do those Resemble so, by whom they have been chose,
That, we in probability shall never Accomplish that for which we do endeavour, Till GOD shall other instruments provide To do his work, and throw all these aside. He, those that are in being, doth permit To be therein with him, Co-workers yet: And there's a course that may with ease be taken To build a Throne, which never shall be shaken; For, if that be performed, whereupon The King is re-admitted to the Throne; And, if due glory to the King of Heav'n Shall for the mercy now vouchsaf'd be giv'n, His chastisement (nigh twice so many years) Continuing as Nebuchadnezzars) Will make way in this day of probation, To much more, then was by that Restoration Vouchsaf'd to him; for, he establish may A Throne to last until the Judgement day; Whereby, shall be continu'd (so far forth As may concern Christs Kingdome here on earth) The Majestracy and the Ministry, (If we loose not this opportunity) Reform'd and vindicated (in short time) From those contempts which have been cast on them. Yea, if this King neglect not now to do That, whereto providence doth prompt him to, And would assist him in; the more he found At his Return confusions to abound, The more he shall be magnifide thereby, If, by his wisdome and his industry, With GOD's assistance, he shall so restore Those Pow'rs, that they may interfere no more: For, then they shall apart, and both together, Be active and a strengthning to each other,
To those good ends for which they were ordain'd; VVhich was, that wickedness should be restrain'd; And that each other men might not oppress, But, in uprightness and in holiness Live lovingly, and serviceable here To GOD, and each to other, without fear. My Genius many times inclineth me Of these things his Remembrancer to be: But, I have neither place to undertake That Office, nor a fluent tongue to speak; And should I write, I have so often tride That course and found my writings cast aside, (Though want of will, or leisure to peruse them, Or else referr'd to those who did abuse them) That, seldome times, the good effects they wrought, VVhich by them I have rationally sought; And they have not alone been often scorn'd, But also to my advantage turn'd. Beside, Kings will not easily forgo What they resolve to act, or not to do: So wedded are they to their Policies, And so bedazled are their Carnal Eyes With that bewitching splendor and false glory VVhich Satan put on kingdoms transitory, That, as to Jeroboam it befel Though I should with a threefold miracle My word confirm; a sequel might succeed As ineffectual as at that time did. But, to neglect ought, which I think (in reason) Tends to secure the King, may be high treason: On his behalf therefore, to GOD in prayer, (To whom I can more easily repair) I will address my self, without delay, In words both weigh'd and measur'd for him pray,
And spread them on that Paper, to remain For those that will to pray them o'er again; Till that which I on his behalf have prayd, Shall some way to his knowledge be conveyd. GReat King of Kings, to whom are chiefly giv'n All praises; who, in Hell, in Earth, in Heav'n, Hast Sov'raign Pow'r: who Kingdomes dost bestow, Change Governments, set up and overthrow As thou shalt please and alwaies art both just And merciful in ev'ry thing thou dost: Since thou, by Interchanges of thy Grace And Judgements, hast a long time in this place Vouchsaf'd Experiments which do declare What Thou art, and what, in our selves we are. (Informed us of what is now at hand By signes upon the waters and the Land, As also in the aire by peace and battle By judgements upon Men, and upon Cattle) And pleased art (as we behold this day) To bring our King into a likely way Of settlement upon his Fathers Throne: Perfect, I pray thee, the work thou hast begun. Let thy vouchsafing him a Restoration, Unclog'd with aa Explicite obligation, No disadvantage to thy people bring, But rather adde more honour to the King, By manifesting that his actings be Products of Vertue, from compulsion free: And lest they fall into that great offence Which may obdure into Impenitence, (As Jeroboam and his people did When their Idolatry thou didst forbid)
Permit thou not his Failings or his Sin, To frustrate what thy Mercy doth begin. Let all these Nations on their part endeavour To make this Reconcilement firm for ever, By that Obedience joyn'd with true Affection, Which may deserve his Fatherly Protection: And let their welfare be to him as dear, As if they Children of his body were: For, no Bond of Allegiance firm abides, If equally not fastned on both sides; Nor can their mutual Ties long lasting be, Unlesse their Duties they perform to thee, Their Sov'raign Paramount who, search dost make What course thy Vice-Roys, and their subjects take: And alwaies dost a wicked People bring To be enslaved by a wicked King; Not long preserving any Kingdome clear From Rebels, where the Princes Tyrants are: For, thou acceptest no Person, as to that Which unto Common Justice doth relate; Though slowly, many times, thy Judgements come, That Mercy may have time to bring them home. Since he who governs men ought to be just, On his part let the King perform his Trust On him imposed, and sincerely do All things that really conduce thereto; Shunning such Flatterers, and such Whisperings As by degrees may tempt him to those things Which will at last divide them from each other Whom now thy Providence hath brought together, Lest they by Fraudulent Equivocations Annihilate each others Expectations. With Wisdom and with Grace, his Heart enlarge, The Duties of his Calling to discharge,
VVithout pretending more than he intends; Which practise alwaies in dishonour ends. When once the promise of a King is broken, Few afterward regard what shall be spoken By him, what probable excuse soever To vindicate himself he shall indeavour: And though in his Designs a while he speeds That's one in Words, another in his Deeds; Yet, he who by that practice gaineth most, Gets nothing at the last whereof to boast. Let him take counsel from thy VVritten VVord, How he should weild the Scepter and the Sword, Lest they may prove worse Tools, than if he had Been born to use the Mattock and the Spade. Incline him also to enure his Ear, The Voice of Truth in her own terms to hear, Lest of such things as to his Weal pertain, He may sometimes in ignorance remain. And since he is thy Steward both by Name And Office, let him execute the same, As one who knows, that he for all things done Must give accompt, and no man knows how soon. For tho, thou call'st Kings Gods, yet dye they must Like other men, and mingle with their Dust. Him, keep thou mindful, that thou didst not make These Nations for his ends, or for his sake, But him to be their Servant; and to own No Priviledges upon him bestown But for their VVelfare; and that he should do To all men as he would be done unto. True-hearted men, to serve him, let him take, Or them by his example such to make, Instruct him, LORD, for, one of these will be More useful, than of others, two or three.
What he is in Himself, let it be known By those, on whom his Favours are bestown, Though undeserved, he vouchsafe to some His Grace, that they more gracious may become; As thou dost oftentimes, when we transgress Through frailty, and not with maliciousness. Make him consider well, things lately past, With what at present thou vouchsafed hast, And what may yet ensue: Make him to mind (If thereof, him forgetful thou shalt find) Through what wants, to abundance thou hast brought him; What Lessons, by Affliction thou hast taught him; What Snares and Dangers, thou hast freed him from, To what security he now is come, Without premis'd Conditions, or engaging Himself with others; or, by what the waging Of War might have requir'd, or by complying With those, who for self-ends, at watch were lying: What Hopes, and Fears, and Doubts, he had that night In which he made escape from Woster-Fight; As also, when he Sanctuary took Within the Body of a Hollow Oak; What secret Vows and Promises were made By him to thee, when he Direction had Unto that LANE, whereby he found a pass Out of those hazards wherein then he was: Make him therewith consider, to what end That great Deliverance thou didst intend, And what thou mayst expect this day from him For all by thee vouchsafed since that time. Moreover, make him take especial heed, Why thou with him and others didst proceed As we have lately seen: wherefore, all those And their Adheres, who, most did him oppose,
Thou giv'st into his hands: why, from the Throne Thou flung'st him; why, again setst him thereon; Lest else, False Prophets, or Court-Parasites, Detractors, bold Impostors, Hypocrites, Or such like, may divert him by Delusions To that which is pursude with sad conclusions, And not so much to his Well-being tends, As to accomplish their own wicked ends: Or, lest an Over-weening may perswade him, That his own Wisdom prevalent hath made him; And that thou hast vouchsaf'd a good success To his Desires, for his own Righteousness. Let him some way, provide a Reparation Of Publick Faith, by whose late violation These Nations are defam'd; and (which is worse) Made liable unto a dreadful Curse Which may extend to him. Unsafe is he With People that anathemized be. His Person, though their suff'rings reach not to, To those, who now to him relate, they do; And, those Oppressions which are lately cast On thousands, will extend to him at last, If he endeavour not what in him lies To cure their Grievances, and stint their Cries: For well enough it doth appear to thee, That, neither all Men, nor their Causes be Such as to him they represented are; Or, as unto the World they yet appear. As mercy, therefore thou hast shown to him So let him also mercy shew to them Who now are in his pow'r: for, although thee They have offended, they, thy people be; And I desire it should by him be heeded, That whosoe'er against such have proceeded
Beyond thy Limits (to pursue their own Revenge or Ends) do so incur thy frown, That on themselves it brings at latter end Those mischiefs which to others they intend. Let him take also conscientious heed, He makes that pardon which is promised, (So far as thou allow'st) so full and free, As he expects, thine unto him should be; Else, Recknings, 'twixt you two will not be even, For, as he pardons, he shall be forgiven. Discerning give him, betwixt Rights and Wrongs, To whom a Frown, to whom a Smile belongs; Betwixt usurpt Prerogatives, and those Through whose Defects, Pow'r-needful he may lose; 'Twixt Formal and Essential Pieties, True Doctrines, and deluding Sophistries; Betwixt Nathaniel, and an Ananias, Men byassed, and men without a Byas; Betwixt thy Prophets, and the Priests of Baal, By whatsoever, Names themselves they call: Lest peradventure, some of those he takes Into his bosome, may at last prove Snakes. Give him an understanding heart, to judge Betwixt true and pretended Sacriledge; Lest such as heretofore befooled Kings, By placing Holiness in Common Things, Turn thy true Worship into Superstitions, To multiply their temporal Fruitions; Abuse his Piety as much (or more) As they abused Princes heretofore; Besainting them for their misplaced Zeal, When 'tis but such as was in Jezabel, Who fed four hundred Prophets ev'ry day From her own Table; such, perhaps as they
Who in these daies do arrogate to be Thy Prophets, or Apostles sent from thee: or, what are they ought better, who now dare To count those Holy Things which offer'd were To Devils; and, would that, as sacred hold For which the souls of men were bought and sold? Such Merchants may among us now be found, And therefore (lest ere long they more abound) Enable and incline the King to try All spirits; that, with none he may comply, Who may by his indulgence undermine His Throne, and set the MAN of SIN on thine. Thy Pastors teach him to distinguish from Those Theeves, who in at window use to come: And make him cherish those that are sincere In thy Profession, by what name soe'er They shall be call'd; since, things may be the same Essentially, which differ in the Name. LORD! 'tis thy Cause, for which I have begun This Pleading; I will therefore plead it on. Let him of Demas and Diotrephes Take special heed: for, perilous are these; And so are also they who do suppose Religion doth consist in mimick shows, Or, in those Gaudy Furnitures, with which The Scarlet-Strumpet, Nations did bewitch: Or in observing things indifferent, As if Essentially pertinent; Or in opposing or neglecting them Contentiously; or, with the mind of them Who said, What needs this waste? for, nor their use Nor their dis-use, but onely their abuse, Gives just offence: yea, 'tis not our abating, Or adding; but, 'tis our necessitating
Indifferent Things, which renders them to be Offensive to thy Saints, or unto thee. Let him take heed of those, who with pretence To Piety, affect Pre-eminence: For, those began the Quarrel whence did spring The Breach betwixt this People and the King. And these, Oh GOD! if thou prevent it not, Will re-beget what they at first begot. The King was young when hee departed hence, And could not know them then; they, ever since Were in a posture, which supprest their pride, And made them lay their haughtiness aside: But when their late pluckt wings are over-grown With Feathers, they will perfectly be known. Vouch safe him such a sanctifide discerning, That neither their Formalities nor Learning, Their Fawnings, their Dissembled Sanctity, Or their pretendings to Antiquity, Deceive him; for, by such like specious sleights The Great Deceiver brought in his Deceits. Wee Old Impostors have, as well as New, And Truth is made a baud to things untrue When men rely on men; and, by Records Of their own forging, dare arraign thy words Before their Bar; whereas, they should be try'd (When they are question'd by none else beside Thy Spirit and their Peers: which Priviledge (If they might have before an upright Judge) Would end a thousand Quarrels, which will never Till then have end; but multiply for ever. I know no prudent Christian, who dislikes The Name or Officer, term'd by the Greeks Episcopos (and wee in English call An Overseer) if Episcopal
He truly be, and seeks not to obtrude On other men a carnal servitude. All Presbyters (as by thy Word appears) Are Bishops, and all Bishops Presbyters; And thou conferr'dst precedency on none, Except it be for Orders sake alone, To prosecute such things as have relations To thy Affairs, in several Congregations, As when that we, confusions to prevent, A Prolocutor, or a President In Synods, and in Counsels constitute, To whom a double honour we impute. For such like ends (if used soberly) To some, belongeth a Precedency; Yea, thy Church, being of a large extent, Must have both Overseers eminent, And super-eminent, that so she may With speed and ease, in a well order'd way, (As need requires) those things communicate, Which either Universally relate, Or to Particulars. And, to pursue This Order, there is doubtless also due To such, proportionably, both respect And maintenance, to give it an effect, With which all persons duly qualifide For that high Calling, will content abide; Although it otherwhile amounts to less Than when Corruption sprung from an Excess; And thy Apostle hath declar'd from thee, That thus a Bishop qualifi'd should be. A man that lives an unreproved Life, The Conjugal Companion of one Wife,
One watchful, temperate, and hospitable, One well compos'd, and for instruction able; A man, that from excess in Wine refrains, That seeks not to be rich by sordid gains: That neither is malicious, nor a striker, Nor of ought avariciously a seeker, But just, no Novice; one that without blame Guides his own house, and hath an honest fame. And thou hast shew'd us, how he should be chose When Judas his Apostleship did lose. If, I mistake thy Paterns, make them, LORD, Such as may therewith ev'ry way accord; And so the Kings Heart toward them dispose, That as Matthias was, they may be chose: For, whilst for their admittance they depend Upon mens pleasures, they will more intend Their services than thine: but, when they be Elected by their Peers, and then by Thee, As heretofore; they shall defie the BEAST, And overthrow the Throne of Antichrist. Let him no Pow'r usurp, whereby these may Election have, by any other way Than is agreeable to his intent, By whom his Messengers at first were sent: For, by that means, into thy Church were brought Such Overseers, as much more have sought To serve themselves than thee; much scandaliz'd Thy Congregations, and made Truth despis'd. Such, as unlike to those Apostles be Which were ordained by they Christ and Thee. Their Pomp and Habit, Avarice and Pride, Their Language, and some other marks beside,
Are Symptomes which do make it very plain, To whom, and to what Kingdome they pertain; And that they seek not thine; unless, Oh GOD, Thy Holy word I have mis-understood. I did believe the Kingdome of thy Son, VVhich was at first in poverty begun By him, who had all Riches at command, VVith all things in areadiness at hand That might at once have made his Kingdome here More glorious than the Popedome doth appear, VVould not have left it struggling for that glory VVhich is compleated by things transitory, Nigh sev'nteen hundred years had they been so Essential, as some think they are thereto. In my simplicity, I rather thought That hee who to advance his Kingdome sought By Piety and Meekness, did intend That way to glorifie it to the end Of Carnal vanities, and should have had Such Officers and Overseers made As rather therewith suited, than with those VVhose Kingdoms Satan hath at his dispose: And that they should have had throughout all ages The self-same Badges, Liveries and Wages As at the first, not such as some do now Usurp and challenge as a sacred due, Making them seem Ambassadours to bee Sent from the great Turk, rather than from thee. Thus I believ'd, LORD, this, beleeve I still To bee according to thy sacred VVill: And thou dost know, that what I now express, Flows from no self-ends, or maliciousness. VVithout Compliances with such as these, The King may reign with honour, if hee please:
And with more safety, than if they acquir'd That whereunto they lately had aspir'd. But, I confess, a pow'r he cannot have, Both Soul and Body so much to inslave, As by their help, who in these latter Ages, Have got two Masters, and two sorts of Wages; And, by whose aid, the Throne of Antichrist Doth not a little, at this day, subsist. LORD, therefore, to maintain the Pageantry And Lusts of an exploded Prelacy, Let not the KING expose to desolation So many thousand persons in this Nation, As now are like to suffer, by a Rabble Both unto Thee and Him unserviceable. They, who are useful Officers of thine, According to that Antient Discipline, Which from thy Holy Word we do derive, And from the practice of Times Primitive, May be provided for, without that cost Which hath for many years on them been lost; Without incurring needless violations Of Contracts, or th' Ingagements of these Nations; Without exposing many Families To suddenly-destructive Miseries; And without hazarding of those Events Which to such harshness may be Consequents. The Temp'ralties and Lordships they possest, Belong'd not to the Calling they profest. When first they were conferr'd, they brought perdition To Piety, encrease to Superstition, And Mischief to the Saints; for which they are Ejected from them by that Civil War VVhich they occasion'd; and though re-possession They may have for a while, by thy permission,
I have a thought, that at their Restoration (As at new laying Jericho's foundation) Some signal thing will then be done that shall Declare, thou art not pleased therewithall; Which, from thy purpose if it disagree Pardon this babling of my thought to thee. That thus, Oh LORD! my heart is now inclin'd Concerning these, to speak to thee my mind, 'Tis not because thou need'st it should be told, But, that hereby, some other better should Consider what by their means may befall, Both in things ghostly, and things corporal. Thou knowest that it is not my estate, Which is by these in hazard now of late To be bereft: for whether unto these, Or unto mee, to give it thou shalt please, I am content; since all the world is thine, And so much as is needful, shall be mine. Thou likewise knowest, that of none of these, I judge the Persons, or the Consciences; But, that I am in charity with all, And, leave them by thy Doom to stand or fall. The various Forms of worshipping of thee; Within thy Church are no offence to mee; Because there may be possibly Salvation Through Christ, in every Christian Dispensation, To those, who with a conscientiousness, Beleeve and practise what they do profess. The Prelates, not thy Bishops, I oppose; Nor Prelates, if they nought on mee impose, For, when they less esteem Things Transitory, They may be instrumental to thy Glory; And, to thy Congregations will dispense Thy Sacred Mysteries, without offence:
When wee a little more are rub'd together, To scour away the Rust from one another. Although the Name of Bishop doth offend, Thy Son his Congregations did commend To Overseers, as well as to Preachers; (To Deacons, and to ordinary Teachers) And doubtless, though Ambition strained further That Discipline, a Primacie of Order Is now so needful, that when thou hast broke The Bile of Pride, and quite away hast took From that Imposthumation all the Core, Thy Church will govern'd be as heretofore. The Prelates being grosly led aside By their O'er-weening, Avarice and Pride, VVould have thy Church, LAODICEA-like, Her Glory, in External Pomp, to seek; Their Faction onely they conceive to bee That Holy Church, which is approv'd by thee: Like her, shee boasteth that shee nothing needs, That all Reformed Churches she exceeds, And, much triumphs now, in the restitution Of her adored Rags of Superstition: But if their Prelacy aside they lay, Therewith, will all their Trinkets fall away: The Treble, Mean, the Tenor and the Base, And Counter-tenor, to a Diapase. Thou then shalt bring, and to this people give The Grace, as well to love and to believe, As hear and do; and every differing String Shall to the Musick such a Concord bring, That, what at present doth obstruct our Peace, Shall to thy Praise hereafter adde increase. This I believe, LORD, let us wait upon Thy will with patience, till this shall bee done.
Mean-while, preserve the People and the King, From those ensnarings, which these, else, may bring Upon the Conscience; or, lest wee by them May bee withdrawn from thy Jerusalem, To Babylon; Let such before our eyes Unmasked stand, by whatsoe'r disguise They are conceal'd: For, much I am affraid, A Game is dealing now, which may be play'd To thy dishonour, and Wolves forth be sent Among thy Lambs to frust rate his intent, Who sent Lambs among Wolves: for as of old Wee were fore-warn'd, that some Deceivers would Say, Here is CHRIST, and there is CHRIST, that they Might set a false Christ up: So, at this day, That undiscern'd the Antichrist may bee, Some, tell us This, some, tells us, That is Hee: But, by such signal marks him thou hast shown, That hee to many thousands is well known. Reveal him also to this King, and shew, How they to whom there's Double Honour due, May with all Necessaries bee supplide, More to th' advance of Piety than Pride: That other Nations, by that good Example, May joyn in building thy Essential Temple With such Materials as may not confound The Parts thereof, or make the Whole unsound. And cause this King a Pattern to become Of Justice to all Kings in Christendome. To that end I implore thy Majesty (For thine own Honours sake which else thereby May bee eclips' d) that hee usurp not on The Consciences of Men, which is thy Throne; Nor suffer any other in thy Name, And with false Warrants to usurp the same.
For, by that Rule whereby intrude they shall On one indifferent thing, they may bar all; And ere they leave encroaching thereupon, Of Christian Liberties, not leave us one. Inslaving of the Conscience, to all evil Sets open Gates: and only for the Devil Or Antichrist, it maketh Proselytes, And, doth but fill the world with Hypocrites. Therefore, to all, who Faith in thee profess, Who keep thy Moral Law, and common Peace Endeavour to preserve by word and deed, Let such a Freedome bee by him decreed; That Truth and Errour, whilst within those Lists They keep themselves, may for their Interests, Contend at will; and let those punish'd bee, VVho break those Lists, as Traytors unto thee. For, whereso'er this prudently is done, The fall of Babylon is there begun; And Christ will give true Judgement betwixt them VVho yet contend, in his appointed time. For this King's likewise, and this People's sake, Both Him and Them, henceforth, so wary make, That neither Vow, nor Covenant, nor Oath, They violate: for, thou so much do'st loath Unfaithfulness, that when thy People made A Cov'nant, which thy prohibition had, (Yea, notwithstanding all Conditions were Obtain'd by fraud) a punishment severe Thou for the wilful breach thereof, did'st bring, Both on thy chosen People, and their King. A Vow likewise, by Jonathan infring'd (Unwittingly) severely was aveng'd: And breach of Oaths in ev'ry Generation, Hath been pursu'd by thee, with Indignation,
Though made to Infidels, and unto those Who were as well thine, as thy peoples Foes. Yea, though men are in durance when they make them, Thou wilt severely punish those who break them; As by that dreadful Vengeance which appear'd, (To make all future perjur'd Kings afear'd) Thou brought'st on Zedekiah; and, of late, Upon some Christians, who did violate A Contract with the Turk. Yea, said it was (As if thereof they were a special cause) For Oaths, the Land doth mourn: and much I fear That of our Mournings, they, chief causes are. LORD, Cautious also make this King to bee Of wronging Justice, and displeasing thee, By his imposing Oaths, which may give cause Of Clashings, 'twixt Divine and Humane Laws; Or, which insnare, and rarely do produce Effects equivalent to their abuse: For, to impose such Oaths as may insnare, Which, dubious in their acceptations are; Which, Ignorant Deponents may engage In, or to that whereof they cannot judge, Or which their Conscience checks at, is an end To which thou never didst an Oath intend, And is a wicked and a cursed Gin, By Tyrants and by tyranny brought in. Oh! make the King, mind and consider it; That, fast and easie, his new Crown may sit. If thou hast sent him hither in thy Wrath, 'Tis what our wickednesse deserved hath So justly, that the same wee well may fear; And that in our Corrections hee may share, 'Tis also possible, as soon as hee Hath dealt among us what our Dole must bee:
And then, our Executioners must sup The Dregs, at bottom of our Bitter Cup: As also they, who with a barbarous noise O'er us, in our Afflictions now rejoyce. Thee, in humility, I, now therefore With all th' affections of my heart implore, To let with Judgments, Mercy come along, To make our Patience and our Faith so strong, That, Hee and Wee, our Tryals may improve, To turn thine Indignation into Love; And not as Wee and our late Rulers did, Provoke thee still in anger to proceed: Or, as they did, who, when thy Wrath on them Was pour'd forth, did grow furious and blaspheme: But, to avert the danger wee are in, Joyn in repentance, as wee did in sin. Give to the King, a Spirit fit to do That signal Work, which thou hast cal'd him to; And give us meeknesse to bee wrought upon By that, which must by Thee and Him bee done: For, such and so great our Distempers bee, That they are curable by none but Thee, Or those with whom Thou shalt co-operate Our manifold Confusions to abate. It is a Pow'r to Thee alone confinde To make all in one Houshold, of one minde, Much more 'tis thy peculiar, to atone Three Nations, that, in him they may bee One. Enable him therefore with every thing Which to effect, thy purposes may bring. Assist him at this time, that hee may 'bide That Test, whereby hee now is to bee tride; Lest his Return (ere many turns about) A worse Turn prove, than his last turning out.
From Sycophants preserve him, and from those Who hide their Private Malice, under shows Of Publike Ends. From ev'ry mans unjust Pretending, who departeth from his trust, Protect him: for, he that was false to them Who gave him credit, will be false to him: Yea, he that is a Traytor to a Stranger, If he may get Reward, and scape the Danger, Will to betray his Country, Prince, or Friend, One time or other, some just Cause pretend. But, principally, LORD, preserve him from That Self-Will, which Self-Ruine doth become To all who cherish it, and maketh voyd All means which to preserve him are imploy'd. If from those Places where he lately sought His Refuge, any Leven he hath brought, Which working on the Frailties of his Youth, Hath sowr'd the Doctrines of thy saving Truth, By him professed; purge it by thy Grace. Lest it may poyson him, and all his Race. Great have been his Temptations; great likewise Have been their many Opportunities, Who sought to work upon him; and if home A Conqueror o'er all this, he is come, It will of him, to all these Nations, be A Testimonial sign'd and seal'd by thee: And, to be thy CONFESSOR he will more Deserve, then did King EDWARD heretofore. Make him consider, that, to be a King, Is not to be an Independent Thing; Two ways, at least, a Relative is He; Thou, and his People, Antecedents be: That, for their sakes in chief, not for his own, His dignity of Kingship, was bestown.
That, he hath no just Pow'r, but what they gave, Or, thou permittest him in wrath to have, To punish, when against thee they rebel; Or else in order to their commonweal, That Ordination was for Good, not Evil, Save when made by themselves, or by the Devil, Which, sometimes GOD permits (for many Ages) So pay his Executioners their Wages. This, well consid'ring, let him not intend, Or Kingship claim, to any other end Then thou design'st; nor practice to grow strong By offering violence, or doing wrong; Lest thou let loose those Mastives which will tear Those Royal Robes, which he in peace might wear. Those Beasts an ancient Hierogliphick are, Of Englishmen: By thee chain'd up they were, When he came in; and though they then were pleas'd, And fawn'd, they will be mad when they are teas'd, And fly on any thing, fearlesse of dangers, Or odds, especially, if teas'd by Strangers. This to prevent, let him not now provoke them, But rather, with a soft hand, gently stroke them; Assure him that no people can disgust, Or disoblige a KING that shall be just. Since, when a true respect to them is shown, It makes not onely their Estates his own, (And will enrich him more then if he could Turn all our Mountains into Ophir-Gold) But, also builds him in their Heart, a Throne Of Perfect Love, for him to rest upon. Make him but of this mind, and I shall seem Henceforth as worthy of his good esteem, For these Remembrances, as they that in His suffering have with him partakers been;
And much more to his honour it will adde, Then if a PANEGYRICK I had made. Make him but thus affected, LORD, to be, And in thy Name, I'll warrant this from thee, That, henceforth it shall more and more encrease His honour; settle Him in perfect peace; All present fears and jealousies remove; End all our Quarrels in an endlesse Love; Convert all that which will be found in Story Of our late failings, to thy future glory; And, make that useful to preserve from blame Hereafter, that was heretofore our shame. But, if that he and they, whom 'twill concern Now to be just and prudent, shall not learn What thou intend'st; but act as they have done Who lately were ejected from the Throne; If, yet, the King and Judges of the Land Kiss not thy SON, and timely understand What's threatned now, but prosecute their lust, And be as mercilesse, and as unjust As others were; I will once more be bold To tell them what to others I have told, Ev'n in thy Name: That, though a while they flourish, They, and the Course they prosecute, shall perish. And, this my Prayer (though they sleight it shall) Will prove at last to be Prophetical In ev'ry Branch, as well as Precatory: But be it what shall most be for thy glory. LORD, hear me, and vouchsafe that those Conditions On which thou condescend'st to such Petitions, May be perform'd, and acceptation have, (Although they cannot merit what I crave) For, Prayers can for no man take effect, Who wilfully his Duty shall neglect.
In mercy too, remember Me, and Mine: Increase our faith; keep close our hearts to thine, In all our Tryals: Be not so severe To heed the murm'rings, the distrusts or fear Whereto we tempted are, but pardon all Our Failings, that we stumble not to fall. Grant, that these Prayers may as well prepare Both me and every one who shall them hear, To mind our Duties, as be helps to crave Of thee, those Mercies which I ask to have. One word more, for my dear Relations sake, Be pleas'd to hear: Compassion on them take: And since by my Adventures they are left Quite comfortlesse, (of every thing bereft Whereby they may subsist) some Hearts prepare Of them, in their Desertions, to take care: Or, since that they are thine, vouchsafe thou rather, To be to them a Husband, and a Father: For, though they may hope well, they cannot know What Spirit 'tis, from whence my Actings flow; And therefore cannot my Partakers be, In those Refreshments which I have from thee; As well, because they see men oft bereft Of Reason, and to their own Fancies left; As also, for that by our separation We are depriv'd of mutual consolation. As for my self, I ask no more of thee, But that Grace which will all-sufficient be. Life is preserved with a little matter; And, he that with course cloath, and bread and water, Content remaineth, neither can be poor, Nor miserable, though he has no more. To this endeavour give some good effect; And, so to prosecute it, me direct,
That without fruit, my pains be not bestown Through other mens defaults, or by my own: And, pardon it, if I, my self, have sought, By minding my own Cause, more then I ought; Whereof (I do confess) I am affraid I may be guilty, by self-love o'er-swaid) But, humbly to thy Grace, my Soul appeals, Which will suffice for that, and all faults else. For what I have done well, the praise be thine: For what's amiss, let all the blame be mine. Thus in a plain petitionary mode, I have been wrestling as it were with GOD, For King and People: For whose sake I made This GLASSE, which else no being should have had. I must confess, my own sad Cause broke in, As soon as ere I did therewith begin; And would not suffer me to persevere, Unless it therewith interwoven were. Fain would I have forgot it; but I may As well, if broyling on hot coals I lay, Resolve I would not feel them, as I then Could from it totally refrain my Pen: For (as I have yet) I had then my share With such, as this day most oppressed are. Yea, mov'd I was, these Musings to compose, When Scorns, Wrongs, Wants, and multiplying Foes, Had overwhelm'd me so, that they had crackt My Brains, if this Employment I had lackt. Like Balast in a Ship, it kept me steddy, When I had else been over-set, or giddy. And, my Afflictions have permitted been, Perhaps, not altogether for my sin;
But partly, that together with mine own, The grievances of others might be known; And that for no respects I might forbear My thanklesse Office of Remembrancer, For which GOD had with Health, and Food, and Rayment Vouchsaf'd me extraordinary payment, Till I neglected it, on vain surmises, Appearing in some rational disguises. At first I lazy grew; then, fell in doubt Whether the work I was employ'd about Were GOD's, or rather somewhat, which to do, Not Duty, but my Fancy led me to. Then I began to think it might be spar'd, Because I saw that neither much regard My Musings had nor any such effect As I by them did formerly expect: And at the last, I fear'd if I went on With what I purpos'd, I should be undone. Thus, though in Conscience I was call'd unto it, I did neglect it, till GOD whipt me to it; And therefore now am justly thrust among Those thousands, who complain of helpless wrong. I dreaded, that it might encrease my Troubles; And therefore, them upon me GOD redoubles. I feared that some Losses might befal; And therefore worthily have now lost all. My Duties, I deferred to be done, Till I should have more Rest; and now have none. My Wives and Childrens ruine I did fear; And therefore I and they now begger'd are: Yea, so much more then begger'd, as my Debt Amounts unto, (for ought that I know yet.) This, by my Carnal Prudence I have got; And this in like case, will be each mans Lot
GOD, will have this work done for love or awe; And since I did it it not whilst I had Straw, I now must gather Stubble. I was fain To prosecute this (not without much pain) When I had but a very little left, And often threatned was to be berest Ev'n of that little. Scarce one man I knew Who cared for my soul; and very few To whom I my condition might relate, Or unto whom I might communicate These Lines, without a mischief or a jeer, When I conceived they most useful were; For have I where with to the Press to send them, Though I for publication do intend them; Nor have I in my power a certainty Of what should necessary things supply; Nor know from whence it shall to me be given For time to come, except it rain from Heav'n: And (which of these Afflictions is the chief) I freedom want to seek for my relief. And whilst this was composing, the despight Which long was riping, grew to such a height, That evil News like Job I did receive, As if the World from GOD had gotten leave To try my Patience as she pleas'd should be, Preserving onely Life and Health in me: For by their Censures many did assay To take my Confidence in GOD away: Objecting, That my scribling to make known The Times Corruptions, flow'd but from mine own: That, Malice, Envy, Pride, or private Spleen, The Fountaines are, whence issu'd they have been: And press'd it so, as if it were a Crime More capital, then any of our Time:
Which makes me unto GOD, sometimes to cry, Search thou my heart, and give the world the lye. She dayly seeks occasion to defame me, To make me miserable, and to shame me: She practiseth all means that may deject me, And how she by despairings, may afflict me. Yea, as if knowing I were musing now, On somewhat which her Projects might o'erthrow, Her Friend the Devil, doth afflict me more, Then all that I have mentioned before, By strongly tempting them, whose nigh relations Can most augment my inward perturbations, To be afraid, that I so much prefer My own Designes, before my Weal and their; That, what at this time I pursue, will be The total Ruine both of them and me; And, that what I resolve, doth rather flow From VVilfulnesse, then Duties which I owe; Or, at the best, from some Fanatick Fit Proceeding from a boldnesse without wit: And to convince me of what they alledge, They thereof make my greatest Foe the Judge: Which more perplext me; and my patience try'd A great deal more then all the world beside: For neither VVorld nor Devil could invent A Remora like that, to my inten. I, notwithstanding, still proceeded on To do, what I think needful to be done; As all men should, who know oblig'd they are, Their Deeds by their own Consciences to square, And not by other mens; because, that none Must answer for their faults, but they alone. If this be not my Work and that work too, Which I was principally born to do,
I know not wherefore I was born, or why I lived, but to eat, and drink, and die; Which made me in condition, at the least, As low, if not much lower then a Beast, Considering what Faculties they be Wherewith my Maker bath endowed me: And if such VVorks as these, are fit for none But perfect men, they never can be done. Was I enabled this way to expresse My mind so plainly and with easinesse, In my distracting troubles, to no end But Time, and Ink, and Paper to mispend? Are we, by GOD, so often call'd upon To heed what he, and we our seves have done, (And stir up others to perform the same) For nothing but to be expos'd to blame, Or to mis-censures, when we undertake That thankless Office, for meer Conscience sake? Is Poesie, which wise Men have believ'd A Gift from GOD, ev'n in the womb receiv'd, (And, whereby David did both Trophies raise To his REDEEMER's everlasting Praise, And leave behind him for our imitation, Reproofs of Tyrants, in his Generation) Is that now grown quite useless, in all those To whom a portion thereof he bestows, Except Lust to inflame? To cast disgrace On Vertue, or extol a painted Face? Is it in these daies, not to be allow'd, Unless it be to Idolize the Proud: Or flatter Fools? I'll wonder then no more: Why Poets are less priz'd then heretofore. No marvel they are slighted; and, perhaps, Cherish't like Parrots, or maintain'd with scraps.
Like Spaniels, & must think much honor done them, If their great Patrons please to grin upon them: For, they deserve no better need then so, If that be all the work they have to do. This way it is and shall be well employ'd By me, although I thereby am destroy'd: And, though it is an old adjudged case, That Poets must be poor, I'll not be base. My poverty is without president, For I am poor by Acts of Parliament. I was not in that condition thrown, Till they who crackt my credit lost their own; And if the King pleaseth, he may make me rich, Yet loose no honour, nor in treasure much; For, had I but mine own, my Debts to free, I should suppose my self as rich as he. From GOD, if this proceed not, I shall have The recompence I merit to receive; Which will be at the worst an outward trouble, And loss of that which I have built with stubble: But, if it flows from him it will produce Effects which to his glory shall have use; And, he will bring it forth at such a time, As, serviceable make it will to him. Yea, though in the Thames it should be thrown, Like that which being tide unto a Stone Was sunk in Euphrates (and no more seen After in Babel it once read had been) And will be made available to that Which, in composing it, I aimed at. Till that time, therefore, I will lay it by, Not doubting such a time is drawing nigh. If this King (as I hope) be hither sent, As well for Mercy, as for Chastisement,
(For, we need both) it, such effects will bring, That we in Judgement shall of Mercy sing. For my part, whatsoere my Portion be, I'll take that thankfully which falls on me, As sent from GOD, whoere he be that brings it, Yea, though at me, in rage, the Devil flings it: For (be it known and heeded) not in vain Die they, who in the forlorn Hope are slain: Nor uselesse to a Victory are they, Who are suppos'd to throw their Lives away By desperate attempts; since Providence (Whose way transcendeth mans intelligence) Acts very many times, by things which we Think may to her own ends repugnant be. They who were slain when first the Fight begun, And they who fought until the Field was won, May (whatsoere to others doth appear) In work and honour, merit equal share. Nay, signal Victories are got sometime By that which hath been punish'd as a Crime. To me and many other men beside, May, peradventure, such a Lot betide; However, I submit unto his pleasure, Who acts in his own time, by weight and measure; And, forasmuch as I have no defence Against my Foes, but naked Innocence, (Or words, which are amongst them sometimes shot, To let them understand I fear them not) I, (that my Flesh my be preserved from Dejection in her mode, till succours come) My fortresse keeping, their Affronts despise, Shoot back their stones, and durt into their eyes; Believing, they to peace will now incline, Or, be reduc'd to harder streights then mine,
As they but lately were, who did contemn The Sequels, whereof I fore-warned them. And, if by Storm, they take my life away, (Which, I as little do regard, as they) It, in their Souls may leave a Sting behinde it, Which, will with Torment, make them sometimes mind it. But, here I yet remain; and for a Close (In reference to our Antichristian Foes) I'll adde this Corollary by the way, Whilst on his Horns, the B E A S T is tossing Hay: For, if deceiv'd I am not, our Disease Chiefly proceedeth, underhand, from these. And though (a farther-off removed Cause Pretending) they bescratch us with the Paws Of other Beasts: it plainly may be seen By whom our troubles have contrived been. I, therefore, make but a Defensive VVar With such as mine own adversaries are; And (to his Captains as th' Assyrian, King Once gave command) intend no Dart to fling, To be destructive to Foe great or small, Whose hate to me, is onely personal; But, at those onely, whose hate doth extend To HIM, and HIS, on whom I do depend. To act the last Scoene which precedes their Doom, They, now new vampt upon the Stage are come; And though that with the KING, as if his Friends, They seem to side, they come to other ends, VVhich, he not yet discerning, in his grace Vouchsates them a considerable place; And, of prevailing they already boast, As if they saw the LAMB, and all his Host Quite overthrown; which, me as confident Hath made, that GOD their proud hope will pre∣vent;
And overthrow that Tyranny out-right, By what they think shall raise it to its height. But, many tryals must the Saints abide, And very much their patience will be tride Here and elsewhere, before that Act is done, Which with an Anti-mask is now begun. Our Friends inhabiting beyond the VVaters, And who were of our Tragedies Spectators Now twenty years (though they perceive it not, Or seem not to perceive it) in that Lot Which these have cast for us, designed are (Or in what follows next to have a share: For, Hamans PUR's on foot; not onely here, But, like wise almost ev'ry other where; And these think, that to take them by his Gin With most speed, is, with us, first to begin. But, ther's a Counter mine, which will be sprung, To blow up them, and all their Mines, ere long. Six hundred sixty six, draws on apace, And not one day beyond that, shall they pass: It is the number of that MAN OF SIN, VVhereto his Kingdom hath confined been By him that cannot lye: and, long ago To many, that Epocha I did shows, From whence his Reign begins; and, by a light, (As I believe) which shines without deceit, It numbers out his Reign as certainly As women reckon the Nativity Of Children in their wombs, which hath success VVithin a very few days more or less: And of that Mystery, what heretofore I have exprest, I'le here express once more; Because, those Nations which may much be needed, Cannot be too oft told, nor too well heeded.
To former times, this Mystery was dark, And lay a long while, cover'd like a spark In ashes, lest perhaps what at this time Will comfort us, might have discourag'd them Who lived then: for, men rejoyce to hear The day of their deliverance is near: But nothing save discomfort could they gain, By knowing Tyranny so long should reign. Herein, I circumstantially perchance May somewhat ere through humane ignorance; But, as to that which was essentially To us intended by this Mystery, I shall not fail of; which is, to presage That Babylon shall fall in this our Age. Sev'n Numerals the Romane Empire had, Whereby of old they Computations made; And in them was their Destiny fore-shown, (Though to themselves perhaps it was unknown.) These, placed singly, as they valued are, Do truly (though misteriously) declare How long that Empire, with what sprung there-from, Should last, when to the full height it should come: For, M.D.C.L.X. with V. and I. Do number up, in Chronogrammistry, Years Sixteen hundred sixty six; and, that Will be of Roman Tyrannies the date. No other Number either more or less, If none of these you double or displace, Can be by them exprest. If you ask when This Number did begin; I say, ev'n then When Rome declin'd first, from her height of pride, Which was, when Jesus Christ was crucifide: For, at that time her glory did abate. This Number therefore you must calculate.
From, or about, the known time of Christ's Passion, Not from the first day of his Incarnation. A silence (as it were) seem'd to have been In heaven, during th' interval between His Death and his Ascension, as if caus'd By seeing that done which had much amaz'd The whole Creation, when that they did see The LORD OF LIFE hang dead upon a Tree. The Devil, probably, at that time too, Was at a stand, and knew not what to do. But, soon perceiving that the snare he wrought Was broke, to make another, streight he sought; Which, to prevent, an Angel in a Chain, (His other pow'rs, him suff'ring to retain) Did for a thousand years restrain the Devil From setting up that Mystery of Evil, Which in Pauls time he was at work upon. But when those thousand years were fully gone, He rais'd it up; and GOD permitteth him, To manage his own Engine for a time, That, Truth and Errour might here for a space, Make tryal of their strengths; and, that each Grace And vertue of the Saints, by exercise Improv'd might be, to fit them for the prize Prepar'd for those, who shall engage with CHRIST, And overcome the Dragon and the Beast. A thousand years sharp Tryals they withstood; Yet then they strugled but with Flesh and Blood; And, for the most part, all their Combates then, Were like Saint Paul's at Ephesus, with Men Resembling Beasts: but since Iniquity Was set up vailed with a Mystery, (As in these latter Times) with greater Evils The Saints do grasp: for they contend with Devils
In shape of men, in temporall Confusion, Made terrible by spirituall delusions; And therefore GOD allotted unto him VVho tyrannizeth now, a shorter time; And to a certain day his reign did fix, VVhich endeth at six hundred sixty six: And he who knows on what day it begun, May know the day on which it will be done. VVhich I believe, will visibly appeare In, or about the sev'nteenth hundred year. And thus much onely, therefore to foreknow, (VVith how nigh to an end it seemeth now) May make us hopeful, and our faith uphold, As well, as if year, day, and hour were told: Yea, and it better serves to exercise Our Constancy, then if 'twere otherwise; And if well heeded, peradventure may Keepe some upright, who might else fall away In these back sliding daies; wherein, they see The Beasts late deadly wound nigh cur'd to be. They on a sudden are become as jolly As if they thought it to be cured wholly; And, to impose their Mark, will now begin To be more strict then ever they have been; So that ere long, few men shall live in peace, Bear Office, or a free Estate possesse, VVhere they have power, unless they marked are In hand or forehead, with their Character. But, if that, whereof some imperfect views Far-off, appear, accordingly ensues, There will, to th wart their hopes, a New Star blaze VVithin the VVest, that shall the world amaze; And Influences through the Universe So quickly, and prodigiously disperse,
That, aided by concurring Constellations, It shall have some effect, upon most Nations, And cause such Changes, as will make a stand In those Attempts which they have now in hand. Yet know, it will but a Diversion be, Not that which must from Bondage set us free. And know likewise, that this which last of all I have exprest, is but conjectural, And springs from Notions meerly rational, That possibly may, or may not befal. Those Notions, which may variously relate To me and others, in our twofold state, Are summ'd up for a General Forewarning; GOD, give my Readers spirits of discerning, And so much Grace and Meeknesse, as to heed His Truth, from whomsoe'er it shall proceed. Such Contemplations are not in my pow'r At all times; for, my Flesh oft draws me lower; And I am forc'd to please her otherwhile, By Strains, that harmlesly may her beguile With hopes of what she looks for in her mode. Till that comes, which essentially is good. And if these both together can maintain My Faith in patence, 'tis not work in vain: For, such so great, so many are my Foes, (And frailties too, more then my own heart knows) And so malitiously do they contrive My ruine (more perhaps then some believe) That, oft I'm forc'd to answer (I confesse) The Fool according to his foolishnesse; And when surpriz'd, upon my guard to stand, With any lawful Tool that comes to hand. GOD, hath in bidding to the world defiance, Preserv'd me hitherto without compliance
In any base mode (though by brining on me Great Mischiefs, she hath now three times undone me; And, I am hopeful, he is with me still As he hath been; and therefore, to his will And free disposure, I will all things leave Which may to me or mine relation have: And in contempt, of what my foes intend, These Musings, this ensuing Jigg shall end; Which blame not, if you find it somewhat long: To shorten Grief, I lengthen out my Song. The Contented Mans Morice. 1. FAlse World, thy Malice I espie with what thou hast designed; And therein with thee to comply, who likewise are combined: But, do thy worst, I thee defie, Thy Mischiefs are confined. 2. From me, thou my Estate hast torn, by Cheatings me beguiled: Me thou hast also made thy scorn; with Troubles me turmoiled: But to an Heritage I'm born, that never can be spoiled. 3. So wise I am not, to be mad, though great are my Oppressions; Nor so much fool as to be sad, though robb'd of my Possessions; For, Cures for all sores may be had, and Grace for all Transgressions.
4. These words in youth my MOTTO were, and mine in Age I'll make them; I neither have, nor want, nor care; when also first I spake them: I thought Things would be as they are, and meekly therefore take them. 5. The Riches I possesse this day are no such Goods of Fortune As King can give or take away, or Tyrants make uncertain: For, hid within my self are they behind an unseen Curtain. 6. Of my Degree, but few or none were daily so frequented; But now I'm left of every one, and therewith well contented: For, when I am with GOD alone, much folly is prevented. 7. Then why should I give way to grief? Come, strike up Pipe and Tabor; He that affecteth GOD in chief, and as Himself his Neighbour, May still enjoy a happy life, although he lives by labour. 8. Not me alone have they made poor, by whom I have been cheated; But very many thousands more are of their hopes defeated; Who little dreamed heretofore of being so ill treated.
9. Then if my courage should be less then their who never prized The Resolutions I profess (and almost idolized) I well deserv'd in my distress to be of all despised. 10. Our sad Complaints, our Sighs and Tears, make Meat nor Cloathing cheaper: Vain are our earthly Hopes and Fears, this Life is but a Vapour: And therefore indespight of Cares, I'll sing, and dance and caper. 11. Though Food nor Rayment left me were, I would of wants be dreadless: For then, I quickly should be there where Bread and Cloth are needless: And in those Blessings have my share, whereof most men are heedless. 12. I then should that attain unto For which I now endeavour; From my False Lovers thither go, where Friendship faileth never: And through a few short pangs of Woe, to Joys that last for ever. 13. For Service done, and love exprest, (though very few regard it) My Country owes me Bread, at least, but, if I be debarr'd it, Good Conscience is a dayly Feast, and sorrow never marr'd it.
14. My Grand Oppressors had a thought, when Riches they bereaved, That then, my Ruine had been wrought, but they are quite deceived: For, them the Devil much mis-taught when that weak snare they weaved. 15. If in those Courses I had gone wherein they are employed, Till such Atchievments had been won, as are by them enjoyed, They might have wager'd ten to one I should have been destroyed. 16. But, Proofs have now confirmed me how much our Vice offendeth, And what small helps our Virtues be to that which GOD intendeth, Till he himself shall make us free, and our Defects amendeth. 17. Not one is from corruption clear; men are depraved wholly: Meer Cruelties their Mercies are, their Wisdom is but Folly; And when most righteous they appear, then, are they most unholy. 18. There is no Trust in Temp'ral Things, for they are all unsteady: That no assurance from them springs, too well I find already; And that ev'n Parlaments and Kings are frail, or false, or giddy.
19. All stands upon a tott'ring Wheel, which never fixt abideth; Both Commonweals and Kingdoms reel: he, that in them confideth, (Or trust their Faith) shall Mischiefs feel, with which soe'er he sideth. 20. This Wit, I long ago was taught, but then I would not heed it: Experience must by Fools be bought, Else they'll not think they need it. By this means was my Ruine wrought; Yet, they are Knaves who did it. 21. When to the ground deprest I was, our Mushroms and our Bubbles Whom neither Truth, nor Wit, nor Grace, but Wealth and Pride ennobles, As cruel were, as they are base, and jeer'd me in my troubles. 22. And, when their hate, these had made known, new mischiefs it beg at me, For, ev'ry Raskal durty Clown, Presumed, to amate me; And all the CURS about the Town, Grinn'd, snarl'd, and barked at me. 23. Since therefore 'tis not in my power, (though oft I fore-discern them) To shun the worlds despights one hower, thus into mirth I'll turn them; And neither grieve nor pout, nor lowre, but laugh, and sing and scorn them.
24. This FIT, at sev'nty years and two, and thus to spend my hours, The worlds contempt, inclines me to, whilst she my state devours; If this be all that she can do, A Fig for all her powers. 25. Yet I and shee, may well agree, though we have much contended; Upon as equal terms are we, as most who are offended: For, I sleight her, and she sleights me, and there's my Quarrel ended. 26. This onely doth my mirth allay, I am to some engaged, Who sigh and weep, and suffer may, whilst thus I sing incaged: But I've a GOD, and so have they, by whom that Care's asswaged. 27. And he that gives us in these days new Lords may give us new Laws; So that our present Puppet-Hys, our Whismies, Brauls, and Gew-gaws, May turned be to songs of praise, and holy Hallelujahs. Thus I have added some few Ballads more To those, which my Deriders heretofore Have scoffingly so call'd: and, though I please To sing Defiance in such words as these,
(To make them somewhat wiser (if I might) Who are yet wise, but in their own conceit) 'Tis no revengeful or malitious scorn, Which back upon my scorners I return. My Jollities, my Caprings and Advances, Are not like those you see in Morrice-Dances; Nor is my mirth like their, who cheat their souls With Musick, Banquets, and o'erflowing Bowls: 'Tis no meer outward or corporeal sense Of Pleasures or Immunities, from whence My Joys do spring: nor are they such as their Who by long-Suffring stupified are: (For, few men living, of all Humane passions, Have deeper sense, or of their Aggravations) But, my Exultings flow from apprehension Of that, whereto my Faith hath an extension; And of those Objects which I make those ends To which my actings and my suff'ring tends, As doth a wounded Conquerour, who cries, Courage, my Mates, the day is ours; then dies: Or rather; like a Martyr on the Rack, Who when his Flesh tears, and his Sinews crack, Casts on the Tyrant a disdainful smile, And in GOD'S Love, rejoyceth all the while. That which is purposed by my Caresses, And sparklings from my soul in these Expresses, Is partly to preserve in my own heart Those Resolutions, which might else depart: Whereat grudge not, as if you thought I heeded That which my self concerneth, more then needed; For, moderate Self-love, is that whereby We must to others measure Charity. 'Tis partly too, for others informations That I so oft insert Pre-occupations
Relating to my self, and to prevent Annihilating of that good intent Which I pursue; by taking that away Which prejudice alleage in private may. If these Expressions no advantage be To other men, they are of use to me. 'Tis not amiss, least I forgetful grow, To mind my self sometimes of what I know, And make to others known, that they who keep Good Consciences, may sing themselves asleep Amidst their greatest Foes; and without fear Awake, when they by them alarmed are: That, he on whom God makes his face to shine, May be as glad as they, whose corne and wine Doth still encrease, and with content be crown'd, Which way soe'er the Rowling wheel goes round; For, he that acts in suff'rings what he teaches, Moves more, then when but verbally he preaches. But, most men so a bound in their own sense, And rather so incline to take offence At such Expressions, then them to regard; That much of this perhaps might have been spar'd. However, neither much more pains or cost, Can I now loose, then is all ready lost; Since therefore what she likes, the world hath got From me, I'll give her what she liketh not; For not much longer am I now to bear Her burthens, or the scorn of Fools to hear; And in my Grave, when I am laid asleep, These Mussings will believ'd memorials keep, Of things which to GOD'S glory shal pertain, Till his Trump calls me to awake again; For, though Truths will to our posterities Conveyed be among a heap of Lyes,
They will to those who love them, shine as clear As Diamonds which mixt with Charcoals are: And therefore, till death quite depriveth me Of seeing that which in the Flesh I see, And Faith foresees; to my eternall King To this effect, I'll Hallelujah sing. 1. GOD sits where he doth see and hear, Where Kings and Lords consulting are, And heeds what is intended there: Sing therefore Hallelujah. To make them better understand His Will, and what he hath in hand, He wonders acts at Sea and Land: Sing therefore Hallelujah. 2. His Mercies here were lately shown, They who abus'd them are o'erthrown, And now by Judgements he is known: Sing therefore Hallelujah. He sev'rall waies mens hearts hath tride, He fools their Wit, he shames their Pride, And by their shame is glorifide; Sing therefore Hallelujah. 3. To tryals ev'ry man he brings, He spares nor Commoners nor Kings, And of his deeds the whole earth rings. Sing therefore Hallelujah. Such marvels as in times of old, Have either written been or told, VVe did with our own eyes behold: Sing therefore Hallelujah.
4. He stirs and stils the winds and seas; Yea, Kings and Nations can appease, Things, oft, less tameable then those; sing therefore Hallelujah. He wounds and cures, he builds and breaks, He kills and saves, he gives and takes, And as he finds cause, mars or makes: sing therefore Hallelujah. 5. He by contention endeth firife; By leaving helpless, gives Relief; And, by death bringeth unto life. sing therefore Hallelujah. He for well-doing and for ill, Doth promises and Threats fulfil, And is both just and gracious still. sing therefore Hallelujah. 6. By doing Right he cureth wrongs, Turns mournful cries to joyfull songs; To all gives what to them belongs. sing therefore Hallelujah. He giveth ease, by making sore; He makes men rich by being poor, And loosers win, by loosing more: sing therefore Hallelujah. 7. To crown all this, and cure the fear VVhich doth in many Saints appear, His Kingdom now is drawing near: Sing therefore Hallelujah.
For GOG and MAGOG joyn in one, Their Gen'ral Musters are begun, And their destruction commeth on: Sing therefore Hallelujah. 8. As he foretold us heretofore, Revenge pursues the Scarlet whore, And she ere long shall be no more sing therefore Hallelujah. The Kings and Captains of his Foes Shall then be Carrion for the crows, And all who do the LAMB oppose; sing therefore Hallelujah. 9. That we more watchful might be made, We lately three Probations had; And now he doth another adde. sing therefore Hallelujah. New offers of his grace mave we; And though yet obstinate we be, Still mercifull to us is he; sing therefore Hallelujah. So, farewell Friends. I will not say for ever; For though I lately purpos'd, that I never In this mode more would write th' Event hath shown I had then work undone, to me unknown; And therefore, till he thereto puts an end Who knows my Task, his pleasure I'll attend, And prosecute it, untill he shall say, Thy Labour now is finish'd; COME AWAY. Mean while, that I my SOUL may ready make, For such a CALL, and willingly forsake
Mhis place; I'll sometimes hearten her along With this that follows, or some such-like SONG. 1. MY Soul, come let us go, In Sodom longer linger not; look not behind thee so, But call to mind the wife of LOT. Let nothing here To thee be dear, Or captive thy desires; GOD will thereon, When we are gon, Rain down consuming Fires. 2. Though with a glorious light, The SUN thereon begins to rise, A dreadfull Storm ere night, Her careless Dwellers will surprize. Come, come away, VVithout delay; Quite cast her out of mind: For worth thy thought In her ther's nought, VVhich thou shalt leave behind. 3. GOD's mercies they condemn; His Kindness with despights repay; still when he speaks to them, They turn their heads another way. VVhen he intreats, Reproves, or threats,
To heed it they disdain; Or with a scoff They put it off, And obstinate remain. 4. GOD here hath pitch'd his Tent; And here, had they his counsel took, To dwell for ever meant; But they, alas! have him forsook. This, which a place Like EDEN was, Is now defil'd with sin; Still Fruit it bears, That fair appears; But 'tis all dust within. 5. Then from this cursed Plain Flee, to those Everlasting Hills, where safe thou may'st remain, And whereon thy Redeemer dwels. here make no stay: for though there may In ZOAR safety seem, when such Storms be, secure are we No where, except in him. 6. This is their fatall day, VVhich day perhaps, may last a year; and true Repentance may Avert the DOOM approaching near. but, I much doubt, that trifled out
This Day of Grace will be. Therefore in fear, And danger here, Our stay, will always be. Now my last Publick work I hope is ended; Blessed be he that's therewith not offended: For, whatsoe'er it seems, I shall expect A CONSEQUENT, as this doth take effect. My Exercise without me, and within, Afflictions and distractions, long have been; If therefore, what in hast I did indite, When those disturbances were at their height, Confus'd appears; the better 'twill declare What mine, and other mens conditions are. And, if therein, ought seems to merit blame, They who are Candid, will excuse the same. G. W.
A POSTSCRIPT In answer to some cavilling Objecti∣ons, made against the Author of this Considering-Glass, since the composing thereof. I Heare my snarling Censurers Object, That, all I write, is to the same Effect; And, that the most part of what's here exprest, Is but cold Dishes, sent forth newly drest. Mis-censures might be spar'd, though this were true. For, where the Matter's old, th' Occasion's new: And they will here see, if they heed it more, Thrice Fifty Pages, never seen before. But were it otherwise, how much transgrest Had I therein, more then that Country Priest, VVho, having (or pretending it) a Call Such to inform, as I oft meet withall, Preach'd but one Sermon many years together, And, till they had learn'd that, would preach no other? Another of their cavilling Objections Is this; that there are many Contradictions In my Affirmatives. This true may be To those men paradventure, who can see But with one eye; Or, look but on one side Of that, whose Verity is to be tride: Yet, all my Affirmations will be true, VVhen they are heeded with judicious view.
This is the same, which often such as they Abusively, of Holy Scriptures say Because they neither heed nor understand How Circumstances, and the Points in hand, May warrantize that to be verifi'd In some respects, which ought to be deni'd In othersome: as in the Controverse 'Twixt FAITH and WORKS; or such: which to reherse Would be but labour lost, by adding more, To manifest what most men knew before. These my Detracting Readers, do moreover, A Pers'nal Vanity in me discover (As they think) which much levity implies. Good Souls! how modest are they, and how wise I seek for, and I do assume, they say, (At all times, in all places where I may) Occasions to communicate and show What I have writ, and what I seem to know, To all men, whether Friends or Foes they be; Wise Men or Fools; of high or low degree. Which I'll confesse: for, to my self alone The harm which thereby can ensue is done: Doth any Prudent Man a Book compose, Onely to teach himself, the things he knows? Or, for their sakes alone, who learned be, And better know those things, perhaps, then he? Should not the weal of every one be sought? As well the poorest, as the rich be taught? And do not the Prophane, and Fools, as much Good Cautions need, as they who are not such? Doth any one, that's noot a Fool at least, His Candle light, to lock it in a chest? Doth any, when a Town on fire appears, Call out for help, were he knows no man hears?
Or think it onely needful to repair At such times, to the Aldermen and Maior, When two poor Labourers may do as much, In an Emergency, as twenty such? If there be any of this mind, who passe For Prudent Men, let me thought an ASSE. Though in my Pocket, I no Orders carry Like those, who Preachers are in Ordinary, I have them in my heart; and, in my way, Oblig'd to preach GOD's Truths, no less then they, Take up my Auditors, where I can find them; And there, in my mode, of their Duties mind them. For I have oft observ'd (and so may these Observe it likewise often, if they please) That, they whom some count despicable men, Make better use of those means, now and then, Which to GOD's glory pertinent do seem, (Or common good) then men of more esteem; And that sometimes, the work of GOD we do, By what is thought impertinent thereto. We know, the Gospel first to them was brought Whom worldly wise men, base and foolish thought: That, very many Publicans and Sinners Were some of Christianities beginners: And that the Saints then thought it was but reason, To do their Duties in, and out of Season. These benefits are also reaped from My reading what I write, to all that come. Some things, I otherwhile, thereby collect From those who neither me nor that respect: For in discourse, before they are aware, They let slip words which cautionary are. To them who like my Lines, it Treatments makes As acceptable as Ale, Wine and Cakes:
To those who like them not, they serve my turn Their Interruptions, quickly to adjourn: For, they pretending Business to be done, Requiring hast (and that they must be gone) Straight bid Adieu; and Farewel I reply: Glad are these they are gone, and so am I. More might be said, to what hath been aver'd By such as these: But little they regard What may in reason give them satisfaction, Whose principal designment is Detraction: And fruitlesse are all rational Replies, To what, Pride, Hate, and Folly may devise.
THE Shepherd of BLEDONHAM HIS CASE. Who was lately ejected out of his Possessions, by the Successours of the Flamins, and Arch-Flamins; falsly pretending a Divine Right to the said Possessions. The said Case is truly stated, in a Pa∣storal Prosopopeia, by an intermix∣ture of Literal and Metaphorical Expressions. AT BLEDONHAM, among malitious Clowns, a Shepherd kept a Flock upon the Downs; Belov'd as well, till there he did reside, As any of his Rank, 'twixt Thame and Tweede. Not many in this Isle, were better known; He manag'd few Affairs, except his own: He was a Friend to all men, save to those Whose Vices made them his malignant Foes;
And never was his Enmity extended Unto their persons, with whom he contended. Him, their Companions, men of honour made, And he by honest means, possessions had Of such a fair Estate, that many more Suppos'd him to be rich, then thought him poor: For, he had Fields & Groves Flocks, Herds & Corn, Enough to keep him, both from want and scorn. But, that Wheel turning, which doth now & then. O'rethrow great Kings as well as Common men, It, with a quick whirl, on a luckless day, So swept his Crops, Goods, Flocks and Herds away, That he of all, was well-near quite bereft, And had but one good Ewe, and two Lambs left, Which ev'ry day at his own Table fed, And ev'ry night, lodg'd in, or near his bed. As soon as this Disaster was begun, Another forthwith followed thereupon. A petty Nimrod (as with an intent To hurtsome Beasts of prey, which did frequent The Fields where these Lambs fed) attended on By those, who, where a Mischief may be done, Take most delight, did often, with his Hounds, So much disturb their quiet in those grounds, That having thereby much affrighted been, The Lambs became unproveable ane lean. The Ewe alone, still undismay'd, held out, And being fat, well flesh'd, and very stout, Preserv'd her own, till an uncivil rout Of neighb'ring Churls, with Cur-dogs pull'd the Fleeces From off their backs, and tore them into pieces. What these Lines mean, but few of those who read them, Can know, save they who felt the wrongs, or did them
For, they were acted with more barbarousness Then we can by this Parable express; Ev'n by that Spirit, which did first engage These Nations into that unhappy rage Which is not yet allay'd; and will hold on Whilst they are cherish'd, by whom 'twas begun. When this befel, the Shepherd was from home, To stop another mischief like to come; And hearing his poor Flock was worride so, A deep figh fetcht; yet, since their wool might grow, And, Time, encrease their number to a greater, (In hope things might succeed hereafter better) Some Consolation for a while receiv'd: But, thereof also, quickly was bereav'd: For not alone decreas'd his cattle be From very many bundreds unto three, In perishing estate; but, seized now Are those Possessions too, from whence might grow Subsistence and increase: and (which is worse) Not on him singly, falls this heavy curse, But they whose Prosecutions made him poor, Will make a hundred thousands Beggers more; Whose Poverty may those Oppressions adde, Whereby that number double will be made. By these Mishaps, this Pastor in one year (And less) is made a poor Philosopher; Who now doth bear about him all his stock, And to themselves, is forc'd to leave his Flock, Expecting nothing henceforth but Oppressions From those, who have usurped his Possessions: For, they who on his Livelyhood now seize, Successours are to those old Druides, And to those Flamins and Arch-flamins, here, Who Prelates of the Pagan Priesthood were:
And, probably, will be to him and those Who serve his GOD, unreconciled Foes; Because they do pretend themselves to be Prelated above others in degree, As Supreme Priests and Pastors unto PAN, The Prince of Shepherds, and both GOD & MAN. On that accompt, those superstitious things, And Heath'nish Ceremonious Trinketings, Which in the worship of false gods were us'd By them, are without warrant introduc'd In to the Christian Church, as sanctifide; And to maintain that Carnal pomp and pride Which these affect, they claim, and take, and hold What's due to Him, as due to them of old. This, under colour of a Deodand They challenge; and therein, a Royal hand Supports them yet, because he knows them not: But, when such information he hath got, Whereby they may to him be truly known, 'Tis hop'd that each man will enjoy his own: In which hope, many thousands now undone, Take up their Cross, and patienty walk on. This Shepherd (not deluded by their folly) Who heed a Ravens croaking from the Holly Or such like Auguries: foresaw by whom And why, those which now befall, are come. He therefore, when they came, stood undismay'd, And looking up to Heaven, thus meekly said: GOD gives and takes, and blessed be his Name; Though I am not, yet he, is still the same; And on him fixt, my trust unshaken stands Ev'n whilst I am in my Oppressors hands;
Expecting my Deliverance from him, And nothing but Revenge and Scorns from them. If unto one, he shall vouchsafe to grant But so much Grace, as many of them want, I shall possess, bought at anothers cost, An Heritage, that never will be lost; And ere this Generation is quite gone, That, which hath long been hop'd for, will be done. Believing this, he wholly cast away Vexatious Care, permitting these to play Their pranks at will, till they with cruel scorn From Him and His their whole Estate had torn; Yet, he no more fears their despights to him, Then they do fear what he can do to them: And may perhaps, yet pipe them such a strain, As ere next Sheepshear will fetch back again Some part of what is lost: for, twill be found His late Possessions were but Fairy-ground, And not so sanctified, that all those Who walkt upon it, must put off their shoes; Unlesse there be a Sophistry in Schools, That's able to turn wise men into fools, If they do merit to be credited Who in that Mannor-house inhabited, From which the Shepherd's cast; they, there were frighted With Sounds and Apparitions, when benighted; And that therein (before that he came thither) Zim, Jim, with such Hobgoblins danc'd together. And these perhaps, will thither come again, As to a place which doth to them pertain By Tenant-Right, now their Old Lords are come To re-admit them to their dancing-Room.
It may be too, till by him repossest They who intrude, may there take little rest; Or, till they shall that wicked charge withdraw, That makes a sin, where none is made by Law; And impudently therewithal dare brand Not onely purchasers of prelates-land Opposed now by them, but also fling That Guilt, both upon Parliament and King, In whose defence, the Shepherd doth defie Not one alone, but all the prelacy; And if they prove, before an equal Judge, That, purchasing their Lands, is Sacriledge; Or more a sin, then marketting of Eggs, He will resign his claim, for two Tithe Piggs. Nay, if of Sacriledge he prove them not To be more guilty when those Lands were got, And whilst that they in their possession were, Then any of their purchasers now are, He will submit to be anathamiz'd By them, and of all honest men dispis'd. For, were a faithful Demonstration made Of what beginning prelacy first had; By what ways, prelates usually aspire; How, they their large Revenues did acquire; How they have been from time to time enjoy'd, How often to the publick harm employ'd; What persons owned them, and to what ends Their Constitutions principally tends, With such-like; which are left upon Records, Whose credit doubtless evidence affords; It plainly manifested would appear, That, none so truely sacrilegious are; That, few have acted more destructively To civil peace, and real piety;
Or oftner upon Kings intrusions made, By whose Indulgence they their being had. They, who now heed the posture they are in, And how pedantically they begin To act their parts, since they have been new-shelld Within those walls, from whence they were expell'd, Do wonder much, that men of their profession And parts, should fail so much in their discretion: For, their untimely Avarice and Pride, Ev'n their best friends and favourers deride, With fear, that their Ambition will not cease, Till it destroys again they common peace; And they who love the King, begin to see, That unto him they mischievous may be. Most of their Conversations are on earth; What is this Pars'nage, what that Vic'rage worth? Are their chief Queries, or which way to make Their Markets, and Advantages to take Without regard, whose right they do enjoy, How many Families they do destroy; Or what disturbance or disreputation They bring on King, Parliament or Nation. To such ends, they have bawld of Sacriledge, Til they have set most hearers teeths on edge, By their continual grating on that bone Which their own Jawes will break, ere they have done. That Scare-crow now affrighteth none but fools, Who are but lately crept out of their schools: For, that which they have charg'd the people with, Doth yet stick fast between their tongue and teeth, And will he proved by a holy Text, The Thirtieth day of Fedruary next. If those Revenues we examine shall, Which they the Churches patrimony call,
The great Diana, for which some with us Cry out, as once they did at Ephesus, Is but an Idol; and their Out-cries made, Are only to preserve a sordid Trade, Whereby those Crafts-men seek to be enrich'd, Who with their Drugs have silly men bewitch'd. The price of Dogs, and wages of a Whore, Might own'd have been as justly heretofore For holy things, if offer'd they had been; Yea, with less impudence, and with less sin: For, some of them (as in despight of Heav'n) Were Merchandizings for mens souls, and giv'n In high contempt of him, whose heart-blood bought That, which they to a worthless price have brought, Yet sold too dear; because the Buyers lost As well their own safe-being, as their cost. Meer simple and despairing Malefactors Were by the Divels Brokers and Contractors, Abused with Mock-pardons: Heirs defeated Of their Estates; Widows and Orphans cheated; And many a poor soul with a Pasport sent To Heav'n, as he thought, when to Hell he went. This way, had those Pessessions their advance, Which now are termed GOD's Inheritance; And what can be a greater Derogation From him then this? Or, what a Provocation More daring, then for men to challenge that As his, which he doth more abominate Then Dogs or Strumpets? Or, what can in reason More properly reputed then high Treason Against the King, then to engage him for And Interest which GOD doth so abhor? And which insensibly may draw him in To be a partner with the MAN of SIN
In guilt and punishment; by (to their emds) Perverting, what he piously intends. Let this be well observ'd: for, GOD doth yet Their Prosecutions hitherto permit But for Probation only, that he may Try, who will turn to him; who fall away; VVho, will not unto his Govenant adhere; VVho, for preferment, profit, or for fear, Will wave the same; how far forth those Pretenders VVill active be; and how far their Defenders Will patronize them; that those things which are Yet doubtful, may undoubtedly appear; That, those plants which God planted may bear fruit, Those which he planted not, be rooted out; And that cost may no longer be bestown On fruitless plants which he did never own: Such is the Prelacy, which did proceed From mixture both of good and evil seed: As may declar'd by their Etraction be; For, this appears to be their Pedigree. Not very long time, ofter Noahs Flood, When old Idolatries began to brood, The forenam'd DRUIDES, who from the Oak Which they much rev'renced, their name first took, In these Parts of the world, usurp'd upon Mens Consciences (as many since have done) Ev'n in this Isle (if that which may be read In old Records be true) and being spread Into the neighb'ring Continent from hence In France next settling their chief residence, Did there, an uncontrouled power retain, Until the days of Claudius Caesar's reign. The Flamin-Prelacy, which did begin Before that time; then by degrees did win
Pre-eminence and reverenced was, Till Pontifical-Prelacy took place; From that, the papal prelacy deriv'd Their being; and a Hierarchy contriv'd, Accommodated with a Discipline From Gentiles, Jews and Christians hetrogene: For, though compos'd of pieces patch'd together, From all these taken, it was like to neither. For, that the Christian worship might not seem To be inglorious in the worlds esteem; Or rather, that themselves advance they might Unto a princely and a pompous height In temporal enjoyments, they took in Such Pageantries as had affected been By carnal Worshippers, by alteration In some things; and in some by imitation: So, by degrees, they totally threw off That soberness and meekness with a scoff, Which was in true sincerity profest, Before the birth and reign of Antichrist. The Spouse of CHRIST, because she did appear In out-side poor, though rich her Linings were, With dis-respect they turned out of dore, And, in her stead, trimm'd up a painted Whore: So, meer will-worship was set up at last, And in the Throne of GOD, an Idol plac'd. From those, the prelates came; & when these Nations Intended to reform their Innovations, A carnal prudence, dreaming, that, if they, With their External pomp was took away, (Whereby some thought God's worship was adornd) Religion and Devotion should be scorn'd; The Prelacy, upon that vain surmise, Was here continu'd in a new Disguise;
Till that imposture was by Providence Made manifest; and then, it was from hence By GOD expel'd, as both dishonourable To him, and to his Church disserviceable; To those intending no affront at all, Whose Function simply is Episcopal. But, this Expulsion, being for our sin Revers'd, and Prelates now again brought in, That, and a Sacra-fames (in Excess) (Not thirst and hunger after righteousness) Hath so inrag'd them, that, they all devour, Who fall within their new-restored pow'r, With high contempt (at last without regard) Of what the KING hath graciously declar'd. And those whom they of their Estates despoil, With insolent upbraidings they revile, As meriting nor livelihood, nor place With them; and as uncapable of Grace From GOD or men: But, cry, are not these they Who lately took from Holy Church away Her Dowry? spoil'd GOD'S Houses in the Land? On sacred things laid sacrilegious hand? And vilifide his Servants? Thus, they crow: But, they injurious are, in doing so; And have as much in their blasphemings fail'd, On Hezekiah: for, GOD, did not own Those Altars or High-places overthrown, And then mis-called his; nor owneth he For Bishops, those who now so termed be; Nor those impertinent Appurtenances, Which Prelates please to term GOD'S Ordinances. And, though they should, when they see Babel's fall, Their dreadful howlings, and their weepings call The Churches sighs and tears; no whit availing
To them, would be their howling and bewailing. And, though some think this constitution brings Advantage to the Thrones of lawful Kings, 'Twill prove, when thereinto they better look, It strengthens them, as Ivy doth an Oak; And, that, of Men, no one sort under Heaven, Cause and Occasions have so often given, Of private Quarrels, Discords and Debates, And Wars, 'twixt Realms & Nations, Kings & States. The Shepherd therefore, hopes this, will by those Who can distinguish between Doves and Crows, Consider'd be; and manifest it then, That, greatest Clerks, are not the wisest men; Or, that, wise men through Avarice and Pride, By wealth and honour, may be led aside. And, though this hope should fail him in the main, It will not altogether be in vain; But, for the present, shall at least suffice To feed that part which upon Smoke relies, Till with essential nourishment suppli'd By that, which GOD hereafter will provide. Yea, though this charming should not prove so strong To fetch back that which doth to him belong, Thenceforth, content, his Ewe and Lambs, and he, To live upon the Commons then will be. However, other hopes may have success, His best hopes will be rather more then less: For, they are built on him, who best can judge 'Twixt what is, and what is not Sacrilege; And if his Judges partially shall deal, From them, to that great Judge he will appeal, Who cannot be deceiv'd. But no distrust Hath he of their Uprightness, who here must Be Judges in his Cause; for, they have seen What did befal them who unjust have been;
And hereby now, though he be much pre-judg'd, May know what on his part may be alleag'd. That which is claim'd, GOD will perhaps divide Betwixt both Parties when their Claims are tride: For, out of that which they erewhile possest, The Prelates for their sins were justly cast: The Shepherd was for his expelled too, By him, whose just doom he submits unto; As therefore GOD shall please he is content To share in Mercy and in Chastisement, Till he under that Heritage is brought, Which at anothers cost, for him, was bought; And whereto, he vouchsafes him by his Grace A better Title, in a better place. If all be judg'd, which he hath purchas'd here The Prelates due; he'll take his portion there; For, though it be a little while delaid, 'Twill prove the better share, and be will paid. This, is the Shepherds Case, and this the Course He means to take: pray, use him ne'er the worse: For, he had not exprest it in this mode, But that the Cov'nant PRELATES to explode, He conscientiously adheres unto, And dares not slight the same, as others do; Because, he can discern Truths from Delusions, And knows their late Re-entries, are Intrusions. FINIS.
