W3555 12765162 93570
A WORD of ADVICE TO THE AUTHOR OF THAT Scurrilous and Seditious LIBEL, ENTITULED, No Protestant-Plot, THe Author of that Seditious Libel called No Protestant-Plot, in it preten∣ded to perswade the World into a belief that he is a man desirous of God's Honour, and of the Safety of the King; a Zealotour for the Protestant Religion, (though an Abhorrer of Bishops;) a Lover of his King, and the present Government; yet in the same Libel he arraigns the one, and rails at the other, (a Crime not to be thought of, without horrour and astonishment;) but since he cannot be so ignorant and void of reason, as to think that any man that ever read the Libel, (except a Phanatick) can believe any such Desire, Zeal or Love can be found in, or with him, that endeavoured so much to corrupt and poyson His Maje∣sty's Subjects. It may not therefore seem strange unto him, much less offensive, (if a Protestant) that a True and Loyal Protestant do put his helping hand, to shew this Phanatical Libeller, not only the great malice of his zealous Enterprize, but also the way that may lead him to a better light, more Love and Loyalty to his King, more Reverence and Obedience to his Ministers and Government; For as between the Flint and Steel, being stricken together, Fire doth fly our, so Judgments and Wits contending, the light of right Knowledge and Loyalty must needs appear; such light once appearing, Truth, Falshood and Hypocrisie, either of them, is soon per∣ceived. Now this Godly Author, in his Seditious Libel, has taken great pains, used no Art, but Phanatical; no Rhetorick, but Puritannical; multiplied Allegations with∣out number, hunted after Common Fame beyond all Modesty, and entred into digres∣sions, not caring how or what; all not only to make a shew of Learning, but hoping thereby to corrupt, alienate and prepare the Peoples Hearts for a second Rebellion
against our most Gracious King, (who in his Clemency and great Mercy (with all due submission to him) was, and is too favourable to all Phanatical Libellers, as well as Phanatical Preachers;) and also to disgrace and weaken the Credit of the King's present Witnesses, and to deter others from appearing, with and by the most improbble, most notorious and false occasions, hatched and framed by the ungrateful Dr. TO. (and no Scholar) and also (to give you your own Phrase) by that beggerly Irish Rascal, and great Villain, E. E. which will be sufficiently proved (to his own knowledge and confusion) by some of the Greatest, and best Quality in England: How well, by what Art and Puritannical sleight this Irish Tiege begged his Bread since his coming into England, I need not inform the Libeller, nor his Party, who very well know it, to their Cost) as well as before among other Beggers in Paris, at the Back-doors of the Jesuits Colledges and Nunneries, with his Earthen Pipkin, begging for a little sup and some few Scraps for a Poor Scholar, (and a Gentleman) who was banished his Countrey for his Religion. The Libeller (whether it was out of disrespect to these two notorious False Accusers O. and E. E. or Ignorance in him∣self, I know not) throughout his whole Libel made use of Bilingsgate Language only; a Language I remember not that any other Writer, except Phanaticks, and such like ungodly people, ever used before. In this Zealous and Phanatical Enterprize the Libeller seems to take great pleasure, of it to make great Vaunts, by it to win the Credit and Perswasion, not only of the E. of S. but of all men, (I mean all Disloyal men:) On the contrary, (I say) it's sufficient alone, if truly and impartially considered, and commented upon, not only to discredit his Person, but confound his Party, and tell the World they would wil∣lingly be at the old Game of Forty and Forty One again: What can then remain, but that this Libeller is not to be credited, nor his Factious Party to be tollerated? and why? Because the Execrable and Infamous memory of the Usurpation, Tyranny, Barbarity of the Phanatical Party (or, If you will, of our late Protestant Dissenters,) is daily renewed, in one Libel or other) by our present Protestant Dissenters, besides what the Libel No Protestant Plot contains, though it self is sufficient to strike the Reader with Indignation, and horrour of the whole Sect, it being stuffed with Lyes, Threatenings, and incongruous false Notions and Stories: He therefore must needs be a man of very slender observation and experience in the World, who is not asto∣nished, as well as surprized and startled, at the unparallell'd Impudence and grand Villany of this Libeller and his whole Party; for there scarce passes a day without a Libel against either King, Church or Government; which evidently shews their wicked Designs, and confirms all men of Piety and Loyalty, that this Libeller and his Party make it their only business to raise a partition between the King and his People, and also to deprive them of their chiefest Comfort, and Earthly Felicity, The gracious Favour, and good Opinion of their King, and so create unto all Loyal People a Hell upon Earth, and bring the whole Kingdom a second time into a Confusion, under the colour of Religion, Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government. Were not these the pretended Complaints and Grievances of the old time? Yes, and this day also: We may then justly, and without blame, suspect these our present Phanaticks, who (like Samson's Foxes) are tied together by the Tail of Sedition, aim at no less Villany and Destruction than their Predecessors have acted, to their eternal shame and reproach, as well as to their Followers, who (like undermining Engineers) pretend to joyn with the Church of England against Popery; But this spetious and Phanatical Pretension, which proceeds only from a Fermentation of the old Leaven, (my Friends) will not take with any that is conversant with History, where your common Doctrine, Principles and Practice are demonstrated to be as pernicious, if not far more destructive to Monarchical Government, than the most desperate Principles of the Papists; I may justly say to the Libeller and his Party what the
Prophet said, Accursed be them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; (Isa. 5.) who call Truth Ʋntruth, and perswade Ʋntruth for Truth: And also take him to be one of them which the Apostle saith shall come in the latter days, uttering Lyes in Hypocrisie. 1 Tim. 4. For what greater Hypocrisie is there, then to charge Untruths, and to impugn the Truth with the colour of Truth, (the only thing that promoted and cau∣sed the last Rebellion) as the Libeller doth; He is then certainly one of them whom the Prophet describeth, saying, We have put our Confidence in Lying, and Lyes have been our safe-guard. This saying of the holy Prophet may also well be attributed to a certain Doctor of Physick, (a Relation as I suppose of the Libeller, at least in Religion, and in Accusing alike) who lately appeared in publick, (with an inti∣mate Friend of his now) and there gave a Pill, which he formerly with asseverations said he never knew of, nor could compose it, much less ever gave any such Pill to A. B. If I should here put you in mind particularly of all the Crimes and Lyes which I noted in your Libel, what Crime or Lye is there of an honest, discreet and upright Loyal Writer and Subject, that you have not incurred, and either ignorantly or wil∣fully committed, both against your King, Common Justice, and Christian Charity: Your over-sights touching Oates's prosecuting Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Turbervile and Mr. Smith are many and malitious, and your belief as large and as malignant as of the greatest Villain that ever sucked Phanatick Principles; all which in due time will sufficiently appear, to your eternal shame, and Oates's grand Confusion, being shame∣less, and as void of Grace as Learning, (if not in Plotting, and speaking Lyes in Hy∣pocrisie;) But you (Libeller) I confess have a Phanatical sleight in multiplying your Allegations, and furnishing your Libel with most false Accusations, and the most im∣probable Stories, not caring how, or what, or where you had them, so that so many sheets of Paper were but stuffed up with any sort of trash, and Disloyal Ex∣pressions, an action becoming a Phanatick, and a Call for silly Birds, who offer at any Bait, but see not the Hook of Falshood and Untruth, wherewith you Choke and Murder them, as your Predecessors did the best of Kings. But now, the Vizard be∣ing plucked off, what Ignorance can you pretend, or what colour of Excuse can you devise, when called upon to the Bar of Justice, for your Scandalous and Seditious Libel, (omitting your other lewd and disloyal Practices,) I am as yet to learn. Your manner of writing is besides all this so dissolute, loose and Disloyal, that in many places you are found contrary to your self; sometimes in plain terms to con∣fute your self, at other times, by the malicious force of your own reasoning, to write meer Contradictions; For a view of particular Examples in each one of these faults, I remit you to a review of your own Libel, it being but narrow; and to our Law-Books, which you pretend to know and understand. The manner of your reasoning is so beside all Reason, and so far from Loyalty and Truth, which you so much pretend to, that from thence the most illiterate (if Loyal) may justly, and without any inferenee, infer a number of of lewd and dis∣loyal Consequences, which by the force of your disloyal and corrupted Heart and malicious Inclination, must needs be concluded, no less malignant and disloyal than those which your Predecessors hatched and framed, for the promotion of the last Rebellion: Notwithstanding, I grant that those which are to be found in your Libel, are rightly yours, and of your make in good earnest. Now, what shall I call that in you, gross Ignorance, or wilful Malice, when you most notoriously, and with unheard Impudence, endeavoured to slander His Maje∣sties most Honourable and most Loyal Subjects, the E. H. L. H. Sir L. J. and Mr. S.
This your lewd and disloyal dealing, your open and manifest ill corrupted Design in scoring and charging of untruths upon such Loyal (nay to use your own Phrase, the best of Majesties) Subjects, cannot (I appeal to your own Conscience) proceed of any Zeal to Truth, or Love either to King or Government, no more than the appearing of a certain Doctor of Physick at Court out of meer Loyalty. You (Libeller) have also reflected on that Worthy and approved Loyal Gentle∣man Sir G. J. for saying that Mr. Smith was a Learned man; which I dare affirm, and promise, that Mr. Smith is ready, willing and desirous to discourse any Phanatick in any point of Learning, and especially that Phanatick whom you pretend to have written his Book. But admit he were not; hath your your observing Sir G. G. saying so, and mentioning his Name with derision in your Libel, on your part, any colour or appearance of love or zeal for the Truth, or for King and Government, which all the World seeth not? And you did it not only to lessen the Reputation of Mr. Smith, (to whom you dare not mention one angry word face to face) whom you and all Phanaticks formerly adored, but to deface and to lessen Sir G. G. whom otherwise you, nor all the Phanaticks, can with any force of good Reason, any Lear∣ning, Truth or Probability, lessen either his Credit, natural or acquired Parts, much less his Loyalty; for which, as it is too apparent, and believed by the best of men, you all Phanaticks abhor him. In this your singular device of scoring up false Accusations and Reflections upon the Kings best and Loyal Subjects, you are no way come short, much less inferiour in Villany and Malice to the worst of men; You therefore that thus so many ways have betrayed your ill corrupted inclinations, and disloyal Heart, intending to cor∣rupt and poyson the Hearts of His Majesty's People, to blemish not only great Mini∣sters of State, and the King's Witnesses, but the King Himself, and that with unheard Impudence, and with no less Crime then Subornation. I cannot but say to you, and of you, what was once said in the great Senate of Rome to a dissolute and riotous young man, declaring most bitterly against Vertue and Justice: Quis te ferat cenan. tem ut Crassus, Aedificantem ut Lucullus, loquentem ut Cato. That is. Who can abide thee, to lavish in sumptuous Building, as Lucullus, to riot in Banquetting, as Crassus, and yet to talk as bitterly as another Cato; which he certainly deserved for his great disrespect, extreme dissimulation and wretched hypocrisie: So deserve you (Libeller) in the estimation of all Loyal men, to be taken not only for a great dis∣sembler, and a Hypocrite, but also for the most disloyal of mankind, and therefore not to be abided. I conclude, and pray you to remember, that fault-finders ought of all right to be faultless; and that Accusers should always be blameless. Remember also the Holy Scripture, that speaketh thus unto you: Thou Hypocrite, cast first the Beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shalt see to pick out the Mote of thy Brothers Eye, Matth. 7. Having thus laid open before you your many and great Villanies, and disloyal per∣swasions, hoping that you will alter and amend what is amiss; which I heartily wish, and only pray you will afix your Name to the Libel called No Protestant-Plot, and your Friend will afix his to an Answer. LONDON: Printed for ALLEN BANKS. 1681.
