16955 99840656 5181
¶ A Thousand Notable things, of sundry sortes. Wherof some are wonderfull, some straunge, some pleasant, diuers necessary, a great sort profitable and many very precious. This Booke bewrayes that some had rather hide, which who so buyes, their money is not lost: For many a thing therin, if truely tride, wil gaine much more, thē twenty such wil cost. And diuers else great secretes will detect, and other moe of rare or straunge effect. It is not made to please some one degrée, no, no, nor yet to bring a gaine to few: For each therby, how ritch or poore they bée, may reape much good, & mischiefes great eschew. The paines and trauell hethertoo is mine: the gaine and pleasure hence forth will be thine. ❧ Imprinted at London by Iohn Charlewood, for Hughe Spooner, dwelling in Lumbardstreete at the signe of the Cradle.
❧ To the Right Honorable, vertu∣ous and affable Lady Margaret Countesse of Darby. AS I haue taken some paines and trauell (Right Ho∣norable) to pleasure and pro∣fit manye, by the publishing such rare, straung & excellent thinges, as many could haue byn content to hide and keepe secrete: Euen so I haue byn carefull, to dedicate the same to some worthy and meete Personage, that woulde take the same thkful∣lye, peruse the same willingly, and imbrace it accor∣dingly. And though I am acquainted with som, know diuerse, and heare of many, to whome I might well and worthely present the same: yet amongst all other, I haue chosen your good Ladishippe of goodwill and zeale (pardon my rude rashnesse I beseech you) to haue the first smell of these sweete, pleasant, straung, beautifull and precious Flowers, not growing in one Garden: but in sundry Soyles, not quickly found, but long agathering, and not all of one property, but of di∣uerse quallities. Whose Affabillitie hath allurde mee: whose Curtesie hath compelde mee, and whose Fame hath inforst me, thus boldely or rather presumptuously
to offer you the same. And though at the firste it maye seeme too simple for you, yet I am certaine, that diuers thinges therin will delight you, some will also satisfy you, part therof will peasure you, sundry from harmes may shielde you, plenty of them may preserue you, and a number besides needefull for you. Beseeching your Honor not to respect the Geuer, but the Gyft: not the Man, but the Matter: not the Skill, but the Will. Whiche if you accept as willinglye, as I offerre faythfully: I shall thinke my long paynes and trauell therein fully recompenst. Thus ceasing herein any fur∣ther to trouble your Honor, do commit you to the cus∣tody of him, whose wisdome first framd vs, whose fauor dooth feede vs, whose might dooth maintaine vs, whose goodnes dooth guide vs, and whose power dooth protect vs. Your Honorable L. most humble to commaund Thomas Lupton.
The Preface of the Author to the Reader. YF some thinke no shame to displeasure many, for the pleasuring of a fewe (gentle Reader) then I néede not blush nor feare to profit manye by hurting of none: Whiche I hope I haue done by the publishing of this my Booke abrode, not pend with∣out paine, nor drawne with∣out diligence, not ended with ease. Wherein are such and so manye notable, rare, pleasaunt, profitable and precious thinges (meaning one with an other) as neuer wer yet set forth in anye volume in our vulgar or English tongue, nay diuers of of them were neuer hetherto printed, nor written, that euer I knew: but onely that I writ them at such tyme as I hearde them credibly reported. Thinking them such rare thinges, as was worthy to be regestred. Marry I must confesse, I haue selected and pycked a great sorte out of Latine Wryters, the Authors or Wryters whereof, I haue named most commonly at the ende of the same. And some notable and precious thinges I gathered out of some olde Englishe wrytten bookes, and some also not long since prin∣ted, vnworthy to be hyd, and great pittie but they should bee knowne: which purposesly I haue placed herein, whereby I thinke verelye, manye will reade them, heare them and haue profit by them, that otherwise should neuer haue known
them. For manye (I suppose) will buye this Booke for thinges whereto they are affectioned, that neuer coulde or would haue bought, or looked on the bookes, wherein all they are. So that by this meanes, they are like to winne against theyr willes. Perhappes you will meruell, that I haue not placed them in better order, and that thinges of like matter are not ioygned together. Truely there are so many of so diuerse and sundry sortes and contrary effectes, that it could not be altogether obserued. And in my iudgement through the straungenesse and varietie of matter, it will be more de∣sirously and delightfully read: knowing we are made of such a moulde, that delicate Daintinesse delightes vs much: but we loathe to bee fed too long with one foode: And that long wandring in straunge, peasant and contrary places, will lesse wery vs, then short trauell in often troden ground. This worke might haue béene framed with finer Phrases (more dilectable to some, though not so meete for many) but that it is better to profit a great sorte, then to feede the fan∣cies of a few, well assured, that the learned and eloquent can better perceiue plaine speeches: then the slenderlye lear∣ned and common sorte can vnderstand eloquent Discourses. Therfore as I haue written it to all indifferently, so wish I to manifest the meaning thereof accordingly: especially of such as are to be conceaued. Not ignorant, that there are di∣uierse and sundry Astrologicall Aphorismes, and some other practises besides in this booke, that many both wise, learned and eloquent, cannot attaine to the vnderstanding thereof, (much lesse the common sort:) the meaning wherof I com∣mit to the learned therin. But because the Planeticall pow∣er and effect in theyr howres, (whereof I haue noted some maruelous matters in this woork) should not be hidde or vn∣knowne, I hope shortly there will be set forth such a Rule or Platforme, that they may be thought simple witted, or slen∣derly learned, that therby cannot finde out and know quick∣ly, what howre or time any planet dooth raigne or beare rule,
and at what instant the same begins, and how long the force therof dooth last: which once knowne, the thinges that I haue written herein concerning the same (well marked and obser∣ued) will not onely auoyde much mischiefe and harme: but also will procure great pleasure and profit. Untyll the pub∣lishing whereof, I referre you to a little Booke, intituled or called, A briefe Treatise concerning many proper Tables &c. Wherein is the Computacion of yeeres with the raignes of the Kinges of England: in which litle Booke, is a briefe and exact Table and Rule, wherby any may finde iustly and tru∣ly, when and how long any Planet dooth raigne, especiallye such as be of good capacitie and haue pregnant wittes. As for the duller sorte, I thinke it is too briefe and too busie. I haue deuided this into ten bookes, euery one wherof, con∣taines a hundreth of the intituled Notable thinges: which are in all a thousand. Wishing that they may be accepted as thankfully & willingly, as I haue bestowed them friendly and freely. Being bould to affirme this much, that a great deale of golde cannot counteruaile this Gyft: if but some twenty of the sayd thousand, be dil∣ligently marked, faythfullye followed, and perfectlye practised. And thus in fewe wordes, I byd you farewell. Thomas Lupton.
❧The first Booke of Notable thinges. IN the first beginning hereof, a rare & straunge mat∣ter shal appeare, worthy to be marked, especially of such as loues or vse Sage. A certaine man being in a Garden with his Louer, dyd take (as he was walking) a few leaues of Sage, who rubbing his teeth and gums therewith, immediatly fell downe and dyed: whervpon his said Louer being examined howe he dyed, she sayde: she knew nothing that he ayled, but that he rubbed his teeth with Sage: and she went with the Iudge and other into the same Garden & place, where the same thing hapned: and then she tooke of the sayde Sage to shewe them how he dyd, and lykewise rubbed her teeth and gums therwith, and presently she dyed al∣so, to the great maruayle of all them that stoode by: wherevpon the Iudge suspecting the cause of their deathes to be in the Sage, caused the sayde bedde of Sage to be plucked and digged vp, and to be bur∣ned, least other might haue the lyke harme thereby. And at the rootes, or vnder the sayde Sage, there was a great Tode founde, which had infected the same Sage with his venemous breath. Anthonius Myzaldus hath written of this maruelous matter. This may be a warning to such as rashly vse to eate rawe & vnwasht Sage: Therfore it is good to plant Rew rounde about Sage, for Todes by no meanes wyll come nye vnto Rew, (as it is thought of some.)
A Certayne Poet by the report of Mizaldus, dyd weare leaden Soles vnder his shoes, least the winde shoulde ouerblow him, his body was so light and so lytle. IF any do myldlie or softlie beate the plant or stalkes of an herbe called Mullen (some calles it Hedge ta∣per) in the morning, when the flowers thereof be∣ginnes to open, all the flowers by lytle and lytle wyl all and come to one: as though the plant were wy∣thered, or blasted, which the ignorant haue thought to be done by Magicall artes, or by some Inchaunt∣ment, specially: if he that doth stryke the same Mul∣len, doth seeme to mumble some wordes whyles he doth it. Mizaldus. THe hooues of the forefeete of a Cowe dryed, and made in fine powder, encreaseth mylke in Nur∣ses, if they eate it in their Pottage, or vse it in theyr drinke: and being cast on burning coales, the smoke thereof doth kyll Myse, or at the least doth dryue them away. This Mizaldus wrytes of the expery∣ment of a certayne Spaniarde. AQua vite being outwardly applyed, doth helpe very well the Synewes and Muscles, and all o∣ther parts of the body tormented or payned of a cold cause, with his heating strength and swift penetra∣tion. IF one vse to rubbe chapped or rough lyppes, with the sweat behinde their eares, it wyll make them fyne, smothe, and well culloured: a thing proued.
WHen Infortunate Planets be in Angles, and the Sunne or Moone applyes vnto them cor∣porallye, or by opposition, it sygnifyes that the partie then borne wyll be eyther croackbackt, or wyll halte, or it sygnifyes the destruction or losse of some member, especiallye: if the Moone bee with the Dragons tayle in these sygnes, Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpius, or Capricornus, or in the begynning or ende of the Sygne. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. EArth woormes fryed with Goose greese, then streynde, and a lytle therof dropt warme into the deaffe or payned eare, doeth helpe the same: you must vse it halfe a dosen tymes at the least. This is true. ANthonius Beneuenius an excellent Phisytion, doth glorie, that he with the water wherein  Smithes dyd quench their hote and burning yrons, geuing the same often to drinke, and with the ea∣ting of Cappares, dyd perfectly heale a Citizen of Florence, that had the griefe and swelling of the Splene seuen yeares. ADdars tongue, wrapt in Uirgin Waxe, and put into the lefte eare of any Horse, it makes the Horse to fall downe to the grounde, as though hee were deade: and when it is taken out of his eare, it doeth not onely waken him, or reyse him, but also it makes him more lyuely or quicke. Myzaldus wrytes this of the report of an Englysh man.
IF a water Snake be tyed by the tayle with a cord, & hanged vp, and a vessel full of water set vnder the sayd Snake, after a certaine tyme he wyl auoyde out of his mouth a stone, which stone being taken out of the vessell, he drinkes vp all the water: let this stone be tyed to the belly of them that haue the dropsie, and the water wyll be exhausted or drunke vp, and it ful∣lie and wholie helpes the partie that hath the sayde Dropsie. Iacobus Hollerius. OFt thunder doth turne and chaunge Wines mar∣uelouslie, but if the Wines be then in Cellers, be∣ing paued, and the walles of stone, they take lesse harme then in boorded Cellers: therfore it is good before such tempest or thunder, to lay a plate of yron with salt, or flint stones vpon the sayde vessels with Wine. Leuinius Lemnius by Mizaldus report. THey wyll haue the palsey or be so that they cannot moue themselues, or wyll be geuen to tremble, in whose Natiuities, the Moone is in an Angle with Saturne: Saturne then being vnder the beames of the Sunne combust. Lykewise if the syxt house, and the Lorde thereof be infortunate of Saturne without the aspect of a good planet. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. MAke powder of vnslackt Lyme, and mixe it with black Sope, and annoynt any Men therwith, & the Men wyl fall away, and when the roote is come out, annoynt it with oyle of Balme, & it wyl heale it perfectly. IF you wyll make wood of the cullour of the wood Hebenus, especially such as be harde, as Boxe and
Peare tree and such lyke, do as followeth: laye the wood you meane to cullour in Allam water, so that it be couered with the layde water, and let it rest so three dayes: then laye the sayd wood against the hote Sunne, or the fyre, that it may onely waxe warme: then seethe the same wood in common oyle, wherin put asmuch of Uytryol Romaine, and Brimstone, as a Hasel nutte, let it be dyssolued, the longer you seeth it, the blacker the wood wyll be, so that you keepe a measure therin, and it wyl be fayre & elegant. Mizal∣dus had this of an Italian, a professor of many experi∣mentes. THe iuice of Mullen leaues (of som called Hedgeta∣per, & of some Lungwoort,) put to any part that is brused, or that hath had a strooke, and the stāped leaues thereof: then put vpon the same, and tyed fast on with a cloath, if you let it lye so a whole daye and night vnremoued, it wyll heale it finely: yea, though it be a wounde, but the sore must be first washt with whyte Wine a lyttle warmed, and the iuice and the leaues must be put to it, and you wyll maruel at the effect. Mizaldus had this of one that proued it, and I also haue tryed it to be excellent. IF any wood or yron be deepe in the flesh, and can∣not wel be gotten out, dip a tent in the iuice of Ua∣leryan, and put it into the wound or sore as deepe as you can, and tye the herbe Ualeryan stamped vpon the same with some linnen cloath, that it remoue not away: and by this meanes, the wood, yron, or other thing whatsoeuer, wyll not onely be drawen foorth, but also the wound wyl be healed. Mizaldus writes it vpō the report of an Italian. Alexis also affirmes it.
A Barren Uine wyll beare grapes, if you cast olde and sowre vrine theron, or if you burie the leefe of Wine at the rootes therof: but you must take heede that you cast not soot that is swept from chymneys, or Lyme, to the roote of the sayd barren Uine, which with their burning heate kyls the Uine, and makes the same to wyther before his tyme. Mizaldus. IN the morning if salt be holden in the mouth, vn∣der the tongue, vntyll it melt or consume into wa∣ter, and the teeth being rubbed therewith, it wyll preserue the teeth safe and sounde: and it wyll keepe them from rotting, and that they shall not be worm-eaten: a thing often proued true. THe teeth of a Bore newly kylled, are so hotte, that if one then put them to heairs or brystles, they wyll burne them: which seemes that the Bore is so inflamed with yre against them that kyls him, that hee woulde be reuenged on them with his tuskes. Xenophon is the author, and Myzaldus the reporter therof. THere is no presenter helpe to ease the tormentes of the Gowte, both in the handes, and in the feete, then a yong whelpe, especially of one collour, if the same be put to the griefe: Leuinus Leminus. But the whelpe ought to be cut out, or clouen in two partes thorow the myds of the back: and the one halfe with the inner side hotte, to be layde vnto ye grieued place: and this I know to be an excellent thing. MAny stinking things do driue away the contagi∣ous and pestiferous ayre, as Castorum, Galbanū,
Sagapenū, Brimstone, (all which are to be had at the Apothecaries) the smoke of burned Lether, and of Hornes, and especially the smell of Gonpowder. For sayth Lemnius, the whole Citie of Tornace enfected with the plague, the Rulars of the Towre or Castel there, caused their Gons to be layde and leuelled at the Citie charged with Gonpouder, without pellets or shotte: and then morning and euening in the twye lyght, they shotte of the layde peeses or Gons, so that through the stynking smell of the sayd smoke▪ and the great and violent noyse of the Gons, the infectious and contagious ayre was quite put awaye, and the Citie delyuered from the plague. COmmon Azure is made as followeth, take of Salt Armoniack, three ounces, of Uerdigreece, syxe ounces, let them be made in powder, and mixe them with water of Tartar, so that it maye be som∣thing thick, then put the same into a glasse, and let it be well stopped that no ayre may get forth, & let it be layde in very hotte Horsedung, for the space of eyght dayes: and then when you take it out, you shall finde it excellent Azure. Mizaldus. IT is to be marueled, that a Cocke or Cockrell, which doth not feare a Serpent, or a Dragon, is so afrayde of the shadowe of a Gleade, when he is fly∣ing, that sodainlie he seekes a place of refuge, and hydes himselfe. Mizaldus. ANy kind of Aumber being sodden in the greese of a Sow that geues suck to yoūg pygs, is not only therby the clearer, but also much the better. Mizal.
IF any carye vpon him the seede of Sorrell, gathe∣red of a boye, being a virgin, his sparme or nature shall not go from him, neyther sleeping nor waking: therfore it is sayde to be good against any pollution in the night. Gilbertus Anglicus. A Certaine Citizen of Padua, hauing Cautharides, that is to saye: French Flees, applyed to one of his knees, dyd pysse aboue fiue ounces of bloud, the lyke hapned to one, to whose great toe of the foote, the same was applyed. Bartholomeus Montegnanus, a notable Phisitiō affirmes this: therfore Cautharides is perillous to be taken both inwarde & outwarde. THe leafe of the greater Burre, borne or layd on the top of the head, doth draw the Matrix vpwarde: But layd vnder the sole of ye foote, it draweth down∣warde, which is a notable and excellent remedie a∣gainst the suffocations, falling, and displasing of the Matrix. This Mizaldus wryteth. ALe sod tyll it be thyck lyke a salue, helpes all sores and aches applyed therto, maruelously: a thing often proued. ALl kind of Docks haue this propertie, that what flesh or meate is sodde therwith, though they be neuer so olde, harde, or tough, they wyl become ten∣der and meete to be eaten: herevpon it comes that they were so vsed in the olde tyme, for that therby the meate was more sooner concoct and easelyer dis∣gested, and the wombe more soluble. Mizaldus.
WHen the ascendent and the Moone are both im∣pedyte, and their Lords or Sygnifers safe, then the sicknesse is in the body and not in the minde. And if the Ascendent and the Moone be safe, and their Lordes or sygnifiers impedite or hyndered, then the sicknesse is in the minde, and not in the body. And if they all be impedyte, then it sygnifyes both sicknesse of the body, & griefe of mind. Likewise if an Infortu∣nate planet beholde the Ascendent & not the Moone: then the disease or griefe is in the minde, & not in the body. And if contrary, then the disease is in the body, & not in the minde. But if an Infortunate planet be∣hold them both, then the disease and griefe is in them both. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. IF one suspect him selfe to be infect with the Plure∣sie, let the partie holde in his breath as long as he can, and then if he can let his breath go without coughing, he hath not the Pluresie. If not, he hath the Pluresie, or is in daunger therof. WHosoeuer hath the Quarteyn ague, shall not be troubled with the falling sicknes, for if one haue the falling sycknes fyrst, & after shall haue the Quar∣teyn ague, the falling sycknes wyll leaue him. Hip∣pocrates. ONe may cullour Iuery or any other bones with an excellent greene cullour as followeth, take strong water called Aqua Fortis, wherein dyssolue asmuch copper as the sayde water is able: then let the bones that you would haue culloured, lye in the same all night, and they wyll be lyke a Smaragdine cullour. Mizaldus.
IF Oyle be powred vpon wine or any other lycour, it makes that the same shall not waxe mustie, nor be corrupted. For it excludes or driues forth all ayre that maye breede corruption, onely with the out∣ward ayre of the Oyle, as with a certaine couering. Notwithstanding, all styrpes or Plants, whereon Oyle is powred or effused, do putrifie. As Plynie re∣portes. THe Coales of a Byrch tree made in powder, & put into a wounde or great sore, healeth it perfectly without any other thing. It was crediblie tolde me that the Muscouits vse it much, & esteemes it great∣ly. A Robbyn read breast, fynding the dead body of a Man or Woman, wyll couer the face of the same with Mosse. And as some holdes opinion, he wyll co∣uer also the whole body. AN Italian, through the ofte smelling of an herbe called Basyll, had a Scorpion bred in his braine▪ which dyd not onely a long tyme grieue him: but al∣so at the last kylled him. Iacobus Hollerius a learned Phisition, affirmes it for trueth. Take heede there∣fore ye smellers of Basyll. IF the Nauell string of a chylde after it is cut, doeth chaunce to touche the grounde before it be burned: the same childe wyll not be able to keepe or holde his or her water, neyther night nor daye. A thing verie true, and well knowne. A Flayne Mouse rosted, or made in powder, & drunk at one tyme, doeth perfectly helpe such as can not
holde or keepe their water: especially, if it be vsed three dayes in this order. This is verie true and of∣ten proued. IT was credibly reported to me for a verie trueth, that a certaine Inkeeper in Ware dyed, which had a Dogge that loued him so well, that certaine dayes after he mourned and sought for his sayde Maister without eating of any thing. And when he could not finde his sayde Maister, he layd himselfe among the hotte coales in a chymney: who though he was pul∣led out of the fire, yet he went in againe & burned him selfe to death. A rare & straunge thing as hath bene heard of. I thinke it is harde to finde a seruant so lo∣uing to his Lord, as this Dog was to his Maister. ASsoone as a child is borne, (especially a boy) their ought to bee great heede taken in the cutting of the Nauell string: for the member of generatiō doth followe the proporcion of the Nauell string: and if it be tyed to short in a Wenche, it maye be a hynde∣raunce to her in bringing forth her chylde. Therfore it is meete that Mydwiues haue a great regarde therein. This is gathered out of Mathias Cornace, an excellent Phisition. FOr the helping of the Coddes or Stones that bee swolne or pained. The auncient learned did graue in a plate of copper, the fygure of a Scorpion, in the howre of Saturne, the thirde face of Aquary then ascē∣ding or rysing with Saturne, and for the Gowte, the Seale of Pisces, and also for the helping or bettering of memory, they made a Ring of pure golde: wherein
was closed a Diamonde, vnder the coniunction of Saturne and Iupiter in Aries. Hermes. EGidius Herthoge wrytes a straunge maruell of a woman which caryed a dead chyld in her wombe thirtene yeares, which was perceyued of many, that handled her bellye: but he wrytes not what successe she had therwith, for whyles he wrote the same, the woman was well, and dyd her busynes with her husbande abrode and also at home. DYtany drunke with water or wine, doth cause a woman to be easily and speedily be delyuered, yea, though the chylde be dead, or if it be turned con∣trary to a ryght course: also it bringes forth the after burthen, the lyke effect hath Peniryall, as some af∣firmes. And it hath bene proued as sayth Myzaldus. PYgeons do so loue the Castrell, that if one enclose young Castrels in a potte, and stop and couer the same close, and shall hang them in fowre corners of the Doouehouse, it wyll procure such a loue to the Pygions of that place, that for the desyre of them be∣ing so inclosed in the sayde Pottes, they wyll neuer chaunge that place, so much they loue the Castrelles their friendes after their death. Columella reports this as Mizaldus affirmes. THe Woort leafe layde on the crowne of the heade, draweth vp the Vuula, or the flap in the throate. M. Cato by the report of Mizaldus. IF a peece of fine golde, or the leaues of pure golde be put into the iuyce of Lymons, and taken out of
it after it haue leyne therein a whole daye, and the same iuice then geuen to one that is sicke of ye plague, with a lytle Wine, and the powder of the roote of Angelica, or of the decoction of the same roote: it is maruayle to bee tolde what helpe it bringes them, yea, though they be past all hope, or thought past re∣couerie. This Mizaldus wrytes as proued. IF a Man be the first that a Woman meetes after she comes out of the Church, when she is newlye Churched, it sygnifies that her next chylde wyll be a boye. If she meete a Woman, then a wench is lyke to be her next chyld. This was credibly reported to me to be true. But prayse it as it proues. A Lytle baye Salt stamped small, myxt with the yolke of an egge and applyed to a Fellon, and so vsed diuerse tymes, doth not only perfectly heale the same with speede: but also drawes out all the payne out of the arme and ceases the swelling therof, if any such be by the meanes of the same. This is perfectly proued. CHildren are not alwayes lyke vnto their Parēts, as it maye appeare in Helides, which dyd begette a Daughter of an Ethiopian, which Daughter was not of the cullour of her Mother: but after, the sayde Daughter had a Sonne, which was blacke and lyke to his grandmother. So Niceus the Poet dyd dege∣nerate in cullour from his Father and his Mother, and was lyke his grandfather being an Ethyopian. Which thing ought well to be considered of such that suspectes their Wiues when they bring forth chyl∣dren vnlyke to eyther of them: for it happens many
tymes that the chylde is lyke to the Grandfather, or great Grandfather, and neyther lyke the father nor mother. Mizaldus. A Tode stone (called Crapandina) touching any part be venomed, hurte or stung with Ratte, Spider, Waspe, or any other venemous Beast, ceases the paine or swelling thereof. Lemnius. THe iuyce of Broome myxt with the oyle of Radish or of Mustarde, is a very safe remedy for the kyl∣ling or destroying of Lyse. IF a Woman annoint often her Dugges or Pappes with the iuyce of Succorie, it wyll make them litle, round and hard. For if they be hanging or flagging, it wyl draw them together, wherby they shal seeme as the Dugges of a mayde. Mizaldus. IF you shall enclose within a peece of thinne Sylke, Galbanum made sofe, and shall laye it to the mouth of the Matrix all a night, (the head of that woman) hauing then no fowle nor stinking cloathes vpon it: but onely couered with a Caule, and a cleane or thyn Keyrchyffe, without any kinde of Odors) in the mor∣ning when the same are losed from her heade, if the crowne of her head smell of Galbanum, it is a sure to∣ken that, that woman is apt to haue chyldren. Hyp∣pocrates. IF a stone called an Hematist, wherein a man is gra∣uen with bended knees, gyrded about with a Ser∣pent, holding the Serpents head in his right hande, and his tayle in the left hande: be set in a golde ryng
with one leafe of an herbe called Draggons put vn∣der the sayde stone, it doth make the bearer thereof safe from all poyson and plague. Hollerius a notable Phisition wrytes it. THe fasting spytle of a whole and founde personne, doth quyte take awaye all scuruines, sawsfleame, or readnes of the face, Ringwormes, Tetters, and all kind of Pustules or wheales, by smearing or rub∣bing the infected place therewith. And lykewise it cleane puts away therby all painefull swellinges by the meanes of any venemous thing. As of Hornets, Spyders, Byttles, Todes, and such lyke. Mizaldus. NEw cheese wrapt or folded in the drye leaues of Draggons, preserues ye same from being mowly or from putrifying. Gallenus et Plin. IT is certaynlie and constantlye affyrmed that on Mydsomer Eue, that is the daye before the Nati∣uitie of Saynt Iohn Baptist: there is founde vnder the roote of Mugwoort a cole, which preserues or keepes them safe from Plague, the Carbuncle, light∣ning, the Quarteyn ague, and from burning, that beares the same vpon them. And Mizaldus, the wry∣ter hereof sayth, that he doeth heare that it is to bee founde the same daye vnder the roote of Planten. Which I knowe to be of a trueth, for I haue founde them the same day vnder the roote of Plāten. Which is especially and chiefly to be found & had, at noone. THe drosse, or that that is left after the pressing out of the Oyle of Lynseede, is maruelous profitable
for the feeding of Beastes, and if you shall let a hand∣full or two therof styepe a whyle in rayne water, and therwith wash your hands, it wyll not onely amend the spottes or other deformitie of the skynne: but also you shall thereby perceyue that the same and other members, if they be lykewise washt therewith, wyll be made much fayrer and more cleane. Mizaldus sayth that this is proued. ALl things that comes out of the earth wyl swym vpon Quicksyluer, though they be heauy, except golde: and golde though neuer so lytle wyll sinke in∣to it and be swallowed thereof, and his cullour wyll be turned into syluer, which can not be reduced into the forme of golde againe, but with fyre, nor can not be gotten out. And the Quicksyluer through the fyre wyll be resolued in a smoke, with a most perillous smell. Mizaldus affirmes this. SAlt fynely stamped and mixed with fasting spytle, layde on a fyllette (and applyed certaine tymes) to the place where superfluous heair is, doth cause that heair wyll growe their no more. A thing certainly proued. Pygions doong doth worke the lyke effect applyed in such sort. AQua vite mixt with whyte Sugercandy finely powdred, so that it be not too thick therof, but in∣different, and a spoonefull therof taken last at nyght for the space of three or fowre nights, doth presentlie helpe the cough, and horsenes, & breakes the feame, maruelouslye. This is a tryed thing. The lyke effect hath the powder of the roote of Enulacampana mixt
with the powder of Lyqueris and of whyte Sugar candy, if it be oftentymes vsed and eaten a spoonefull at one time. Which I haue often proued. THey are lyke to be gowtie, or to haue the Sciatica, or paines in ye ioynts, in whose Natiuitie Saturne or Mars is in the syxt house, or in the twelfth house infortunating the Lord of the sixt house. Especially, if the sygne of the sixt house be Capricorne, Aquari, or Pisces. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. WHosoeuer haue their feete smell strongly, if they put the scales of yron in their shoes, wherein they vse to goe, it takes cleane awaye the euyll smell thereof. Georg. Fabricius. YOu shall stay the bleeding of the nose, if you write with the same bloud in the forehead of the partie that bleedes, these wordes following. Consummatū est. A thing proued with many. Mizaldus. IF boyes or youngmen doo vse mylke and exercyse from the Cradle, they are thereby more hygher or taller of body, and of more cumly and bewtyfull sta∣ture. Mizaldus. THe powder of the tooth of a Bore mixte with the oyle of Lynseede, doth presently cure the Squynan∣cie, (which is a payne or swelling in the throate,) if the grieued place be touched with the ende of a fe∣ther or pen, smeared with the same mixture. Mizald. THe outwarde part of the nettle, doth styng, prickle or burne, but the inward part (being the iuice) an∣noynted
on the arters, doth mytigate & amende the feuerly heate of the harte. Auicenna. et Arnold. de Villa noua. IF the corners of the eyes bee annoynted with an oyntment of Saffern, if after the spetle doth sauer therof, the partie is not barren: but apt to haue chyl∣dren. Plynius. A Medicine made of a lytle hony and of a cole made of a Uine, which neuer bare grapes. If the teeth be often rubbed therewith, doeth so clense them, and makes them so whyte, that they wyll be iudged to be of Iuory. Mizaldus. THe bloud of a whyte Hen smered on a freckled, or a spotted face, and thereon suffred to drye, and af∣ter wyped away: doeth clearly take awaye all spots from the same. Myzaldus had this of a certaine Ita∣lyan. CAutharides wrapt in a spyders webbe, and han∣ged ouer one that hath the Quarteyn ague, it is sayde it cures or delyuers him or her thereof perfect∣ly. Mizaldus. THe decoction of Hollyocke, with hony & butter be∣ing drunke, doth maruelouslie cease the paynes of the collycke, and of the backe. I haue proued this to be verie excellent and true. A Plaster made of ye powder of burned Swalowes and of their nest: doeth helpe effectually the swel∣ling of the throate or the Sqinancie. IF the pyse of a Bul that is al read, be made in pow∣der, and a dram therof (that is, the weight of .lxxij.
bary cornes) be geuen to a woman in a draught of wine: it wyll make her loath to haue to doo with a man. (As Basis wrytes.) And the same powder geuē in meete medicines to a man, doth contrary sturre and make him haue lust therin. Marcellus Empericus. IF Dogs chaūce to finde a Cats skyn, they wyl rub and rowle themselues vpon it. And they wyll doo so lykewise where it is buried: they delyght so much of the thing dead, which they hated a liue. Cardanus. YOu shal know good & pure Azure, from sofisticate & naughty Azure. If some of it be layd vpō a hotte burning yron, & if then it wyll not be burned, neither any lytle stone is found therin, then it is pure & per∣fect. Mizaldus had this out of an old written booke. THe white of an egge wel & long beaten, mixt with quick Lyme: wyll ioyne surely broken glasses, and broken earthen cups, and make them holde fast and surely together. But it would be the better if a lytle of very olde cheese be wel mixt therwith. This is ve∣ry true, and proued. PLanten is iudged by Hermes, to bee the herbe of Mars, and therefore good against the diseases and paines of the head: because that ye signe Aries which is one of the houses of Mars, doth gouerne the head. And also Planten is very good against the griefe & diseases of the stones, and the Ulcers of the bladder: and also Gonorrha passio, and Hemerods, because Scorpio the other house of Mars, doth rule that parte of the body. Lyke iudgement maye be had of other herbes of the planets. Myzaldus.
IF the ryght knee of a Bull be very streyte tyed, hee cannot bull a Cowe, although before his eyes shee allure him therto with her moowing. Mizaldus. IF a marryed man bee let or hyndered through In∣chauntment, Sorcery or Witchcraft, from the acte of generation, let him make water through his ma∣ryage Ring, and he shalbe lowsed from the same, and their doinges shall haue no further power in him. Guilel. Varignana, and Arnoldus de villa noua af∣fyrmes the same. WHo vse to rubbe their fingers betweene theyr toes of their feete when they go to bed, especial∣ly, when they smell most, and then to smell the same at their nose: it is a perfect remedy to put awaye the crampe. This was affyrmed to me as a tryed thing. A Candle burning, holden or put to a hole or place wherein a peece of Saltpeter is put, the sayde Candle wyll soddenly be blowne out. And the same Candle immediatly put to another place wherin is Brimstone, wyll be lyght and burne againe, to the great maruayle of them that standes by, if they bee ignoraunt of the secrete. Mizaldus. But the snuffe of the Candle must not be cleane out. THat wrytings shall not burne in the fyre, take ve∣ry strong Uineger and the whytes of egges, and put them together, and put therto Quicksyluer mix∣ting and sturring the Quicksyluer well therein, and with the same mixture annoynt Paper three times, and after euery time, drye the same well: and after
that wryte what you lyst on the same paper, & then cast the same writing into the fyre, and you shal see it leape out of the fyre without burning. This Mizal∣dus had out of an olde booke. CUt or breake a whyte loafe in the myds when it comes hotte out of the ouen, and laye it to the eare of such as haue any quicke thing in their head, and it wyll bring it out, shyfting it styll with hotte breade vntyll all the quicke thinges be come foorth. This is proued to be true. THe lytle bone in the knee ioynt of the hinder legge of an Hare, doth presently helpe the crampe if you touch the grieued place therwith. Often proued. A Lytle peece of the tongue of a Foxe, being moyst∣ned and made soft in vineger, (if it be drye) draw∣eth out a thorne or any other thing deepe in the flesh, if it be layde vpon the place where it is. It is an ex∣cellent and true thing. WHen the sygne of the sixt house is Libra, & Mars in the same house: it sygnifies griefe and paines of the eyes. Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff. IVlius Vyator a Knight of Rome, (Plynie being the Author) who in his chyldhoode had the Dropsie, therfore then forbiddē of the Phisicions to vse moyst thinges: dyd so ouercome Nature through continu∣aunce or long vse, that all the tyme of his lyfe after he lyued without drinking of any thing.
THe three corned stone of a Carpe, which is to bee found in the hinder part of the head, nye vnto the necke, beaten small, and blowne into the nose, doeth staye the bleeding of the nose, by his binding faculty: which may be perceyued by the tasting therof. This hath bene proued, and I knowe it to be true. Mizal∣dus also affyrmes it. THe head of a Catte that is all blacke, burned in a newe potte, and fine ashes or powder made ther∣of, and some of the same, thrise euerie day, blowne out of a quyl into ye eye that hath eyther Web or Perle, or any other euyll or griefe in the same, is a most excel∣lent helpe and remedy therfore. But if the party feele any burning in his or her eye (especially in the night) let three or fowre Oken leaues styeped or moystned in water, be layde together vpon the sore or grieued eye, and let the same be afterwarde turned and layd on againe. The Author of this secrete, sayd: that the syght is restored with this remedy, after a whole yeres blindnesse. This was tolde to Mizaldus. THat Salt wyll helpe Fecunditie, or make women more apt to bring forth chyldren. It maye be an argument: because of the great number of Myse and Rattes that are wont to breede in Ships of the sea. And because women that are louers of Salt & Salt∣meates, are more prone, and haue mo children. Lem∣nius. ASses that are much cumbred with Melancholy, do gladly eate Cytterache, or Scaleferne, that they maye mende & helpe the diseases of the Splene: Goldinches, Eybright, and Uipers, Fennell, for the
mending of their syght. So Goates by a certayne propertie of Nature, do hate or can not abyde mans spytle, nor they wyl eate any thing wherof man hath first tasted. But the nature of Lyserdes is contra∣rie: for they lycke vp the same greedily. Plynius. Theophrast. ANnyball, made a passage for him & his Souldiers through the harde rockes of the Alpes to passe in∣to Italy. For by heating & burning the stones with fyre, and sprinckling vineger thereon, he made them so softe, that they might fall easily in peeces, and that they might be sooner broken a sunder. Titus Liuius. Plutarchus, with other reports it. HEre followes an excellent remedie for al wounds and easie to be made. Take greeke Pytch, Brim∣stone, and whyte Olybanum, which is a kinde of Frā∣kencense, of all a lyke quantitie: let them be stamped and mixt with the whytes of egges, then (the woūd being first washt, and the lyppes therof well ioyned together) laye the same mixture on a lynnen cloath, and apply it to the wounde, and tye the same fast on with cloathes, or broade bandes: and let it lye so cer∣taine dayes vnremoued. A maruelous thing, and proued sayth Mizaldus. WHyte Lyllies wyll waxe redde, as Florentinus hath taught: if warely and dilygently you open the clyfts of the rootes, and fyll the same with any redde cullour: and so then set the same in a fat dūged earth. Mizaldus. WOmen that vse to lye & sleepe on the right syde, seldome or neuer bring forth any wenches. Rasis writes this.
WHosoeuer is annoynted for the Neopolytane dis∣ease (cōmonly called the French pocks) if he hold in his mouth a Ryng of golde, or els an other peece of gold, and rowles the same about in his mouth with his tongue, the quicksyluer that is in his body by the meanes of the oyntment, is drawne of ye sayde gold, and is so wrapt about the sayd Ryng, or golde: that when the same is taken out of his mouth, it shall seeme as though it were all Syluer. And the same Ring or other golde wyll not be restored to his for∣mer brightnesse or cullour, except it be put into the fyre. Lemnius wrytes this. SNayles without their shelles, or otherwyse with their shels stamped & myxed somtimes with Ches∣leppe or Rennet, do drawe out thornes or any other thing out of the fleshe though neuer so deepe, if they be applyed to the place. And also being layde to the bellye of them that haue the Dropsie they sucke out the water. But the same must not bee lowsed from the bellye, vntyll all the humour or water bee sweat foorth, or else the same plaster of Snayles doth fall a∣way of him selfe. Iacob. Hollerius. FINIS. Lib. 1.
❧The seconde Booke of Notable things. WHen the Moone is in coniunction with the Sunne, or in any euyll aspecte with him, and in any Angle, and beholden of euyl planets with an euyll aspect, in any bodyes Natiuitie. It sygnifies that the Childe that is then borne, shal haue inseperable diseases, or griefes in the eyes. Iatromath. Guat. H. Ryff. Argent. IT is manifest by experiēce that the seuenth Male Chyld by iust order (neuer a Gyrle or Wench being borne betweene) doth heale onely with touching through a naturall gyft, the Kings Euyll: which is a speciall gyft of God geuen to Kings or Queenes. As daylye experience doth witnesse. Mizaldus. ERastratus a Phisition, dyd perceyue by ye feeling of the pulse, that Antiochus the sōne of king Seleucus, dyd so pyne for the loue of Stratonices, his mother in lawe, that vnlesse he might haue his desyre, with the good wyll or pardon of his Father, he woulde dye. These are Authors thereof. Valerius Maximus, and Galenus. Which also by the lyke, did know that Iusta the Wyfe of Boetius, a councellor of Rome, dyd lan∣guish for the loue of one Pilas daunsing in the Thea∣tre. Mizaldus. CElendine with the harte of a Woont, or a Mould∣warpe, layde vnder the head of one that is grie∣uouslye
sicke, if he be in daunger of death. Immedi∣atly he wyll crye with a lowde voyce, or syng: if not, he wyll weepe. Mizaldus. THe iuyce of Henbane, mixte with the bloud of a Hare, and sodde within the skynne of a Hare: it is sayd that all the Hares wyll gather together which be within that tract where it is buryed. As the Matrix of a Bytche wyll gather Dogges together. This was affirmed for trueth to Mizaldus. MAny women with childe of the sodaine or vnloo∣ked for, meeting, or sodaine seeing of an Hare, or for the desyre or longing to eate of the same: do bring forth chyldren with a clouen ouerlyppe, and forked∣wyse, called a Hare lyppe. Daylie experience con∣fyrmes it. Mizaldus. THat disease or sicknesse wyll be great which takes one when the Moone is in yt signe, wherin an euil Planet was in ye time of his byrth, eyther in a quar∣ryle or opposite aspect: and if an euyll planet doth thē beholde her, it wyll be very perillous. But then if the Moone be in a place where a good Planet was in the tyme of the birth, that sicknes wyl be without a∣ny daūger. Hermes. Trismegistus. Ptolomeus, & Clau∣dius Galenus. Authors. AN Egge layde in strong Uineger, three dayes or a lytle longer: it makes the shell thereof so tender and soft, that one may draw it through a Ring. Cast the same into a warme water, and let it lye therein, and it wyll be harde againe. Mizaldus.
A Flynt stone lying in Uineger the space of seuen dayes: maye be resolued into powder by rubbing betweene the fyngers. Therefore it is no maruayle though Annybal dyd dissolue the stones of the Alpes with vineger. Mizaldus. WAter wherin the leaues and seedes of Hmpe is sodden: being cast or sprinckled on the earth, wyl make the woormes to come out of the ground: if any be there. Mizaldus. THe oyle of Tartar, made of the leese of excellent Wine, doth take the spottes from yron, the yron being clensd from all rustinesse, and doth make him of an excellent bryghtnes: if the yron be rubbed ther∣with. Mizaldus. THe roote o Henbane stampt and applyed warme to the payne of the Gowte of the feete or Sciatica. It is sayde, that (it helpes maruelouslie) because this herbe belonges to Iupiter, which is onely Lorde of Sagitarie, which gouernes the huckle bone. And of Pisces which chalngeth the feete. Mizaldus had this out of an olde booke of secreetes. IF some droppes of Aqua vite, be myxt with wry∣ting ynke, the same ynke wyl neuer be frosen. Pro∣ued. WHosoeuer is apt to any thing: hath certaynlie ye Starre or Planet, by whom that thing is sygni∣fied very strong in his byrth. Myzaldus. As thus for exāple (I may say by ye way.) He yt is apt to Martial
feates, or Warlyke affayres, hath vndoubtedly Mars strong in his byrth. And whosoeuer is apt or encli∣ned to planting, drawing, wryting, syphering, or to the science of Arithmatike, or to any wyttie or no∣table inuencions, without all doubte hath Mercurie verie strong in his byrth. Which by dayly proofe is infallyble. And so you may know of the rest. THe woodde of the Sicamore tree, is neuer drye in the ayre, or hye grounde, and in the bankes of ry∣uers, and where waters runne ouer, it dryes verye quicklie. Mizaldus. THe soles of the feete annoynted with the fatte of a Dormouse, doth procure sleepe. As Actius doth saye. THey wyl haue paines in the stomack, or be weake stomackt, in whose Natiuities, Mars and Saturne are in the sixt house, or in the twelfth house, infortu∣nating the Moone, or the Lord of the Ascendent. Es∣pecially if the sygne of the syxt house be Cancer. Ia∣tromath. Guat. Ryff. THis following is an excellent remedie for them yt be broken bellyed, or brusten. Take nine redde Snayles, and put them betwene two tyle stones, so that they slyde not away, & drye them in an Ouen, so that you make them in powder: then geue to the dis∣eased the powder of one of them in whyte wine eue∣rie other daye in the morning, tyll all be done, which wyll be in .xviii. dayes. The partie must take it fa∣sting, and neyther eate nor drinke of two howres af∣ter. And if the disease be so lōg rooted, that these nine times wyl not suffice: then begin immediatly againe
with other nine Snayles, & do as before is declared in all points. I had this out of an old Booke wherin was many excellent Secretes, & I heard one affirme it to be a true and tryed thing. HEmpe seede geuen to Hens in wynter, wyll make them laye egges a pace. Cardanus. THe oyle of Tartare, doth take awaye cleane all spottes, freckles, and fylthy wheales of the face, chyn, or forehead, with his cleansing strength. This is well proued. WHen thou wylt driue away Flyes frō any place, that there shal none be seene there againe, make the image of a Flye in the stone of a Ring: or as my booke sayth Mizaldus, in a plate of brasse or copper, or of Tyn, make the image of a Flye, of a Spyder, & of a Serpent, the second face of Pisces then ascending. And whyles you are making or grauing of them, saye: This is the Image which doth cleane ryd all Flyes for euer. Then burie the same in the myds of the house, or hang it in any place of the house, (but if thou hast fowre such plates, and burie or hang them in fowre corners of the house, or hyde them within the walles, that no body take them awaye, it were farre better.) But this laying of them must be when the first face of Taurus doth ascēd. And so no Flie wyl come in there, nor tary there. Ptolomie sayth, that he sawe the tryall hereof in the house of King Adebarus: who was verie wyse, and was maruelous expert in naturall Magicke, in whose Pallace or Place, there was neyther Flye, nor any other hurting worme.
and that I might search it out, sayth he: I brought in thyther lyue Flyes, which presently dyed. Mizaldus. SIxe or seuen whytes of Egs, put into troubled or thicke Wine, and the same being well moued or styrred with a stycke: makes the Wyne ayre and cleare. IT is daungerous to stryke: especially, to cut that part of the body, when the Moone is in that signe that gouernes the same, as daily experience sheweth by many, and a thing euery where feared & doubted, through the daungers that folowes therof. And it was credibly tolde me that one that was by chaūce prickt in the finger with a thorne: the Moone then in Gemini, dyed without any remedy thereof. And I knewe a tall man and a stowt, that in fighting had a lytle cutte with a sword vnder the ancle: (as it seemd to me, seeing the same, a thing of small harme:) yet notwithstanding, he dyed within halfe an howre af∣ter the stroke was geuen. This maye be verified by many examples. So that by this, and by many other things it is manifest that the Moone and other Ce∣lestiall bodies, haue maruelous power in our earth∣ly bodies. As in this booke and in diuers and many places, the same is manifest. IF a Ratte, Mowse, or Wesell, or any other thing, so∣denlye leape or fall on the body of a Woman with chylde: or else any Cheryes, or a cluster of Grapes, or other thing whatsoeuer chaūce to fal or hyt any part of her body: by and by it haps that the chylde is mar∣ked with some speciall noate or marke on that part, wheron they did fall or hyt: (except happely the wo∣man
on whose body the same did chaūce,) wipe with her hande sodainly the parte or member therewith touched, and laye her sayd hande on some other part further of. Lemnius. There are fewe women but knowes this to be true, & many haue foūd it to true. As two or three straunge exāples in this booke doth shew most wonderfully. BUrning water called Aqua vite is of maruaylous force, in preseruing of thinges and keeping them from putrifying. For fleshe or meates whatsoeuer moystned therwith, wyl be safe from corruption and woormes. IF young Beasts eate of the leaues of an Ywe tree, they dye. But if they that chawes the cud do eate thereof, they feele no harme. This is the opinion of Theophrastus. But Plynie doth ascribe it to the Ashe tree. But the lykelyhood and neerenes of the words might deceyue him. For the Ashe tree in the Greeke tongue is, Milean, and the Ywe tree is Milon. Mi∣zaldus. A Maruelous matter, and a thing worthy to be re∣mēbred, is written by Aelinus: that a great migh∣ty Woolfe dyd come to a schoole, and dyd snatche the wryting Tables out of the handes of a Boye called Gelon of Syracusa. Whereat the sayde chylde Gelon rysing from his seate, dyd dillygently and sharplie without any feare followe the sayde wylde Beaste earnestly to pluck the sayd Tables from his mouth. But after that Gelon was out of ye schoole, the same with a sodaine ruine fel vpon ye rest of the schoollers, & kylled, and opprest with the Schoolemaster, aboue a hundreth Boyes. Only Gelon by Gods prouidence
of all his fellowes remayning alyue. And because he was not kylled of the Woolfe, but rather reserued: it cannot be without great admiration, partly by fore∣shewing his kingdome and rule, and partly that he was preserued from so imminent a peryll. WHosoeuer wyll preserue Chesnuttes, and keepe them safe and sounde▪ let them laye & mixe them with Walnuts: for they wyll drinke vp and consume such humors whereby they corrupt. And they wyll not suffer them to waxe mowly. Mizaldus. KNotgrasse is thought to be the herbe of the Sun, wherevpon it helpes greatly all the diseases of the harte, and the mouth of the stomacke. Whereof Leo, the Lyon is gouernour, which is the house of the Sunne. And it is very good against ye great griefes of the backe, the Stone and the Collicke, by drinking of it, or by infection. It was affyrmed to Mizaldus, that it was founde true by experience. AN herbe called Hoūdstonge, ioyned with ye Ma∣trix of a Bytch, being so tyed to the neck of a Dog, that he can not get it away: you shall see him turne about so long, that he wyll fall downe, and seeme to be halfe dead. Albertus. WHen the Scithians were constrayned to susteyn hunger for any certaine matter or vrgent cause: they gyrded in their bellyes with broade bands, that no emptines left in their bellye or guttes, their hun∣ger might the lesse grieue them. For through the harde bynding in of the bellye, hunger is the more
tollerable. Whervpō it is seene that they that eates much, do loose or vnbutton their dublettes, and loose their garters. Phauorinus. THe Elephant seeing a Ram, is by & by tame, and leaues his fiercenes. With which pollecie the Ro∣maines caused the Elephantes of King Pyrhus to re∣turne and go backwarde. And so the Romaines ob∣teyned a worthy victory. Mizaldus. THe paring of an Apple cutte something thicke, the insyde wherof layde to hotte burning or running eyes, at night when the partie goes to bedde, & tyde or bounde to the same: doth helpe the same verie spe∣delie, and contrary to expectation. An excellent se∣crete. A Certayne Priest hauing a louing Dogge, was kylled for his money, and throwne among bushes  or some other priuie place. Which Dog so mourned for his sayd Maister, that he would not depart from him, but howled: so that the dead body was founde. Which dead body was brought afore certayne men to be viewed, to which place diuers people resorted. Amongste whome the murtherer woulde needes shewe him selfe (lamenting outwardlie the matter, with the rest of the standers by, as though hee had bene as guyltlesse as the best,) whome when the sayde Dogge perceyued: he barkt and dyd runne at him fiercely, and by no meanes would leaue his bar∣king, howling and running at him. And following after him, and at none other: shewing (in his man∣ner) that, that was hee that kylled his Mayster.
Wherevpon being suspected, he was examined, who forthwith confessed his wicked fact: and therefore was executed. Saint Austine affyrmes this (as I do remember.) IF both the lyghts, (that is to say, the Sun and the Moone) be in the sixt house Infortunate, they that be then borne, without doubt wyll be blinde. And if but one of them be there and Infortunate: then the chylde wyll be blinde but of one eye. And lykewyse it wyll be, if eyther the sayde lyghts be Lorde of the sixt house Infortunate. And vniuersally, their eyes can not escape great hurt, in whose Natiuitie the sayde lyghts are impedite. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. THis following wyll presentlie ease the paynes of the gowte. Frye out the grease of Shoomakers spetches, or peeces of Lether: and lay some of it vpon a browne paper, warming it a lytle at the fyre: then applie the same to the griefe, and it wyll take awaye the paines in one night. I had this of them that haue proued it often to be true. IF Sheepe chaunce to eate of an herbe called Knot∣grasse, it wyll make their bellyes swell: and they wyll auoyde out of their mouthes a thynne stynking froth: therfore they must be let bloud vnder the tayle next to the buttocke. Columella. THere is many do the thinges in their sleepe, that they that be awake vse to do. For they wyl walke about the house and chamber, and wyll go to other folkes beddes, and dare do any thing without feare. Whereof there are many daylye examples. But one
among all the rest (which was credibly told me) was maruelous straunge, and almost incredible. Which was: that two men lying in bed together, the one of them being fast a sleepe, tooke the keyes and vnloc∣ked the doores and the gate of the house, and so took his Bowe & Arrowes, and went to a wood or chase aboue a myle from thence, and kylled a Bucke or a Doe, and then dyd couer and hyde the same in the wood: and then came home againe vnlocking and locking the gates and doores againe, and layde the keyes where he had them, and so went to bed. The other man that lay with him being awake, folowed him and dyd see all that he dyd. But he would not go to bed, but stayde a whyle in another place, to see the ende thereof. And assoone as the other was in his bedde, he tooke his dagger, stabbing and thrusting therwith in the bedde, where the other man dyd lye, and by and by after awaking, sayde: alas what haue I done, I haue kylled him. The other answered, nay, I am not kylled yet, thankes be to God. Then sayde he: for I was a dreamed that I kylled a Bucke in such a place, & that thou dyd see me where I dyd kyl him, and hyd him: and thinking thou would bewray me, I thought to kyll thee. But I am glad sayde he, that it was but a dreame. Then the other sayde: if it were a Dreame, thy Dreame is then true. For thou hast performed all the Dreame: except the kylling of me. Which he would not beleeue vntyll the next day: when, he that laye with him, caryed him to the place where he him selfe tolde that he dyd hyde the sayde Bucke. Where in deede they founde the Bucke kyl∣led, as he before tolde in his Dreame. A maruelous matter if it were true.
THe Greekes and Romaines dyd keepe snowe tyll Somer in caues of the earth, couered with Oken bowes or chaffe. Which made Saint Austine saye: who gaue chaffe such a colde strength to keepe and preserue snowe, or such a hotte strength, to heate and rypen vnrype Aples. WIne wyll be pleasant in taste and in sauour, and cullour: it wyll much please thee if an Orenge, or a Lymon (stickt round about with Cloaues) be han∣ged within the vessell that it touche not the Wyne. And so the Wyne wyll be preserued from foystines and euyll sauor. Mizaldus. THey wil haue paines or diseases in their Liuer, in whose Natiuitie Iupiter is Lord of the sixt house, being euyl aspected of an Infortunate planet. Iatro∣math. IF shell Snayles be rosted and dryed at the fyre, or in an Ouen, and made in powder: and a spoonefull thereof drunke in Ale at one tyme, and so taken nine or ten daies together: it doth perfectly helpe and cure the blacke Iaundies. Proued. IF you stampe earth woormes, & then streyne them through a cloath, and then put to the same as much of the iuyce of Radish rootes, and betwene the bea∣ting or framing of Swords, Kniues, or Daggers, when they be hotte: you do quenche them twyse or thryse therein, the same shall cutte yron after, as though it were lead. This Mizaldus had of a Phisi∣tion that was cunning in that art.
STinking and corrupt Wine wyll be marueylouslie mended, if according to the bygnes of the vessell, a  sufficient quantitie of cleane Wheate in a bagge, be hanged in the sayde vessell, and after be taken out of the same. For whatsoeuer is vncleane or naught in the Wine, the Wheate wyll drawe the same to it, and so wyll leaue the Wine pure and cleare. Pistorius. THe vttermost or last ioynt of the tayle of a young whelpe, after he is fortie dayes olde, being wry∣then of: the same Dogge wyll neuer be mad. Besides that his tayle wyll be thereby of a comelye lengthe. Mizaldus. IF you bore holes in Bay berries, & put into euerie hole the seedes of Artychokes, and wrap thē with dung, and so put them into the earth, thou shalt haue so sweete & pleasaunt smelling Artychokes: that no∣thing can be of a more sweete & pleasant smel. Varro. The same wyll happen, if you do styepe seedes three dayes in sweete smelling water. Mizaldus. BUtter, Aqua vitie, and Beast gall, of eache a lyke quantity mixt together. And any ache or stytche annointed therwith somthing hotte, euery morning and euening, for seuen or eyght dayes: doth perfectly helpe the same. Proued. ALl Wheate yt is sowne in continual moyst groūd, after the thirde sowing, wyll become the purest Wheate that makes the synest & best bread that can be made. Columella. GAlene saith, that he knew certain men in his time▪ yt gaue the pouder of mans bones burned, to them
that had the falling sycknesse: they not knowing of it, least their minde should stande against the medicine, and many was cured with the same. Gesuerus hath proued it with the scull. IF the lytle Nerue vnder a Whelpes tongue (com∣monly called the greedy worme) be taken away, it keepes the same sae after from being madde: and he wyl not be geuen so much to barking after. And also it is thought they wyll not be geuen to greedines af∣ter. IF you pricke the head of a Leeke, with a reede or a sticke sharped, and put within the same, the seedes of rape, or of Cucumbers, the sayd Leekes head wyl so swell: that it wyll seeme monstrous. AEtites, called the Eagles stone, tied to the left arme or syde: it bringes this benefite to Women with chylde, that they shall not be delyuered before their tyme. Besydes that, it bringes loue betwene the man and the wyfe. And if a woman hane a painefull trauayle in the byrth of her chylde, this Stone tyed to her thygh, bringes an easie & lyght birth: but you must take it away quicklie after the byrth. The same Stone as the Caldeans reportes, if it be mixt with meates enuenomed: it forbyds or lets that the same meate be swalowed downe. Euax. et Alb. THe people of Astomores (as Plynie reportes) haue no mouth: and are clad with a woolly mosse gro∣wing in India, and lyues onely with smelling of O∣dours at their nose, of Rootes▪ and of Flowres, and of Aples that growes in the woods: which they car∣rie
with them in their long iourneys to susteyne and nourish them withall, least they should want wher∣of to smell. THe powder of Stone pitch, dronke in small drinke once euerie daye, for the space of fowre or fiue dayes: is a very good remedie for them that are bru∣sed through falling, or otherwayes. WHen the Sun in the day tyme, and the Moone in the night, in an Natiuitie is corporally conuinct with any euyll Planet: the chylde that is then borne wyl be blinde. And if this be in an Angle, or if the Lorde of the Ascendent be with them, then they wyl be blinde in their youth. And if the sayd lyght so In∣fortunate be not in an Angle, nor with the Lorde of the Ascendent: then such wyll be blinde in their age. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. THree Nayles made in the vigyll of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn Baptist, called Midsomer Eue, and  driuen in so deepe that they can not be seene, in the place where the party doth fall that hath the Falling sycknes, and naming the sayde parties name whyle it is a doing: doth dryue awaye the disease quyte. Which Mizaldus wrytes of the reporte of one that proued it. IF you wyl presently turne Wine into Uineger, cast therein salt with pepper, mixt with sowre leuen, and it wyll performe it quickly. Mizaldus. THe roote of Uaruayn hanged at the necke of such as haue the Kings Euyll: it brings a maruelous
and an vnhoped helpe. Which is Venus herbe, that hath power of the necke: because of Taurus the Bull, being her house. Mizaldus. WHosoeuer falles sicke in that yere wherein there is an Eclipse, and the Signifiers of the sayd E∣clipse be in the Ascendent of the Natiuity of him that so falles sicke, or in the Ascendent of his Reuolucion, or in the place of his Hilech, or of the Signifyer of his Lyfe. That disease then taken, wyl be very perillous and deathly. Mizaldus cum alijs. GEese, Ducks, and other water fowles, helps their diseases with wall Sage, Hens with Withwind, Geese with Haryth, the Cranes with Sqynant, the Panther with Mans dunge, the Boores with Iuie, the Hartes with Arthechokes, the Dogges with Grasse. Also Plynie sayth: that the linell of Crabbes wyll kyll Bees, especially: if one seethe them nye vnto their Hiues. For they abhorre stinking smels. Ther∣fore they followe them fiercely that smelles of styn∣king oyntmentes. IF chyldren eate Rasins fasting, that haue woorms without any other meate, it wyll kyll and auoyde the woormes. For as bytter things are noysom vn∣to them: euen so is sweete thinges. For with the ofte eating of sweete thinges, it makes them to swel and brust. IF the tender hornes of young Bucks, that is coue∣red with a thyn heayrie skyn, be cut in peeces, and then put into a newe potte well couered, and set in an ouen or other place that is hotte: whereby the
same maye be made in powder, and some of the same geuen with Pepper & Myrre, to them that are tor∣mented with the Collick, in good wine: it wyll helpe them maruelouslie of the same disease. Scribonius Largus. PElletory of the Wall stamped, and so layde to the Coddes, & vnder the Nauell. And so vsed fowre or fiue tymes, helpes the collicke, and the paines of the bladder and coddes. A thing often proued. THey wyl be diseased in the Splene, in whose Na∣tiuitie the Moone is Lady of the sixt house, being Infortunate of Saturne. Or if the Lord of the Ascen∣dent be Infortunate in the seuēth house: or if Saturne be Lorde of the Ascendent, and Infortunate of Mars: or if Saturne bee Infortunate by any meanes vnder the earth. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. GOordes, Peares, Aples, Quinses, Cytrins, War∣dens, or such lyke fruite: whereon you desyre to haue some pretie, or other forme on the outsyde. If when they haue cast the flowers, & begyns to haue any forme or proportion: enclose them within some wood, or other thing of stone, or of any other thing, & within of what forme you lyst: and tye the same fast about the sayd fruite. But make not the sayd instru∣ment on the insyde bygger, then the fruite wyll be within it. And when you thinke that the fruite is ful rype: take the same with the fruit in it from the tree, and the fruite wyll be of that fashion & forme as you desyre. Mizaldus. IT is sayde that Alphons King of Castile, gaue to certaine Mathematicians a hūdreth thousand peeces
of golde: which were called or sent for out of Araby, Affricke, and other places for the making & framing of the Astronomical Tables (which shewes the con∣tinuall course and place of the Starres & Planets) which worke is to be had euery where through his great lyberality, to his perpetuall praise. GAlbanum made softer, and spread vpon a lynnen cloath, and so applyed & layde vpon a plague sore: if the disease be curable, it wyll so sticke and cleaue to ye same, that it cannot be pluckt away: vnlesse it bring away the roote of the sore with it. But if the disease be incurable, it wyl cleaue to it. Arnold. de villa noua. THe lytle Sparowe hath a strength & vertue wor∣thy of great maruaile. For if the Sparow be con∣dyte or well powdered with salt, and eaten rawe, it doth expel and driue forth the stone, by the vrine, and cures the disease so perfectly: that the same shall ne∣uer breede againe. The Sparowes may be condite very wel, if when their fethers be pluckt off: that thē they be powdred & couered wel with salt, and so dry∣ed & eaten: if you haue many sparowes, they may be sodden as other byrds be. And also they may be bur∣ned in a pot close couered with the fethers & all: and the powder of one of thē so burned with a lyttle pep∣per & Sinamon, may be geuen to them yt are grieued with ye stone. There be which do condite them (their fethers being pluckt off a lyue) with Salt, which is better. Some do eate them rosted whole, so that they cast nothing away of them, but their fethers. They that wyll know more hereof: let them take counsayle of Actius, and Paulus Egeneta. Mizaldus.
IF any wyll make theyr handes whyte, let them myxe the dunge of Sparowes in warme water, and wash them therwith: or let them seeth the roots of nettels in that water, and therewith washe theyr handes. Proued. AElianus wrytes, that the quylles or pennes of an Eagle, myxt with the quylles or pennes of other fowles or byrdes, doth consume or waste them with theyr odour, smell or ayre. THe rootes of Lyllies sodden in water, doth take awaye the rednesse of the face: if certayne mor∣nings and euenings, the same be washt and rubbed therwith. This hath bene often proued. BEastes that be stubborne or wylde, and also Hor∣ses that wyll wynce or kycke, or otherwyse be vn∣rulye, wyll suffer them selues to be drest, or else to be shodde: If you put into one of their eares a lyttle round flynt stone, and then holde the eare harde with your hand, and it wyl make them quiet, though they be fierce. But if you put into eyther eare one, you shall haue them as mylde as a Sheepe. Mizaldus had this as proued, of one of the King of Nauarres stable. ANy stones wyll easely be made softe, if you laye them all night in the hotte bloud of an Oxe, the fatte of a Wether, and strong vineger mixt together Iohan. Baptista porta, de Magia Naturali. As Mizal∣dus wrytes.
APples that are frosen, if they be put or cast into colde water, and suffred to lye therein a whyle: wyll come to their owne nature againe. For thereby all their frosen congealing wyll be resolued. Lem∣nius. WHen you see the Mulberie tree begyn to budde, then thinke that the chiefe colde is past. Plinius, as Mizaldus affyrmes. TO seperate Golde from Siluer, do thus. Annoynt the Syluer that is guilted with the oyle of Lyn∣seede, and sprinckle thereon the powder of Roch Al∣lom, and salt Armoniacke mixt together: which be∣ing well heated in the fire, quenche in water: and the seperate Golde wyll remaine therein. Mizaldus had this of a cunning Goldsmith. A Greene Iasper stone hangd at ye necke, doth helpe and strengthen the stomack, and the mouth of the stomack very wel. Which Galen affirmes by ye report of Mizaldus. If they behangd like a cheyne about the necke: so that the same stones do touch the mouth of the stomack. IF the head of a Woolfe be hangd in a Doouehouse, neither Cats, Wesels, nor any thing that wyl hurt the Pigions, wyll enter therin. Rasis et Albertus. THey are lyke to haue paynes or diseases in theyr Lyghts, or Lungs: or wyll haue the Tysick, or be short breathed: that haue in their Natiuitie, the Moone in the Angle of the earth (which is ye fowrth house) in coniunction with Mars or Saturne, or is In∣fortunate by them. And lyke wise if Venus be the La∣dy
of the sixt house, and Infortunate in a fiery sygne. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. IF you stampe Hariffe a lytle, and laye it in fayre spring water for the space of .xxiiii. howres, and then wash any sore or scabby place therewith: it wyll heale it wonderfully. This hath bene often proued to be true. A Precious and a proued medicine for the Stone. Seethe in white wine, Tyme and Parcely verye well, then streyne it, and into a good draught therof, shaue a spoonefull of whyte sope, and geue it to them that are grieued with the Stone: and it wyll make them make water with speede. THe great nūber of Spyders do foreshew, that the Somer folowing wyl be pestiferous and plaguie. Mizaldus. THere were seene two Brethren at one byrthe in Austria, that if they dyd set ye sydes of their bodies towards gates or doores that were lockt, the lockes would then open. Iohannes Langius. CArduus benedictus stamped, and then well sodden with snet or Swynes grease, wine and wheate  flowre, vntyll it be lyke an oyntment: is an excel∣lent medicine for sores and vlcers whatsoeuer. Yea, though the bones there with be bare, but you must annoynt the sores twyse euerie daye: washing first the corruption from the sores, with white wine. Ar∣noldus. SAint Austine reportes that he dyd heare whyles he trauelled in Italie, that certayne women was
transformed into young Beasts of certayne trauel∣lors, by the the eating of cheese, that they might car∣rie their burthens. TAke one handfull of Mugwoort, and seethe it in sweete oyle Olyffe, vntyll the thyrde parte of the oyle be consumed: then annoynt there with any part that is tormented or pained with the gowte, and the paine therof wyl be quickly gone or put away. This is an experiment of a Kinges Surgeon, against the gowte of the feete and the handes. Mizaldus. IT is founde by obeseruation, that Rats and Dor∣myse, wyll forsake olde and ruinous houses, three monthes before they fall: for they perceyue by an in∣stinct of nature, that the ioynts & fastening together of the postes and tymber of the houses, by lyttle and lytle wyl be lowsed: and so therby that all wyll fall to the grounde. Plinius, et Lemnius. IF one bleede on the right syde of the nose, bow and presse hard the parties right lytle finger yt bleedes: if on the left syde, then the lytle finger in lyke case, for therwith the bleeding wyll cease. This is a common and proued remedie. Mizaldus. IF you geue halfe a scruple (which is the weight of xii. barly cornes) of pure corrall, made first in fyne powder, with the nurse mylke, to a childe yt is newly borne, before it taste any other thing: the same chylde shall neuer haue the falling sycknes. Arnoldus de villa nou. ONne Baldus of Trydent, Doctor of both Lawes, as hee was playing with a lyttle Whelpe of his
owne, the same dyd byte him a lytle in the nether lyp, who being ignoraunt that his sayd Dogge was in∣fect with madnesse: he himselfe within fowre mon∣thes after, became mad, and at the last being past re∣medy dyd dye miserably. Andreas Matheolus, in dias∣coridem. Which let them marke & consider that haue such pleasure in lytle Puppyts. Mizaldus. WHosoeuer is tormented with the Sciatica, or the gowte: Let them take an herbe called Spere∣grasse  and stampe it, and laye a lytle therof vpon the griefe: but put vpon it a cockle, or a walnut shll, and tye something on it, that the herbe be not remoued: and within sixe or eyght howres at the most, it wyll make a great blyster on the same place. Then laye a Clot leafe, or else a Woort leafe on the same: but first let the water out of the blyster with a pynne, and it wyll drawe out all the water that causeth the paine or griefe. This helpt one that was payned there∣with twentie yeares. BOetins after Oppianum doth affyrme, that Belles couered with the skynne of a Woolfe, do drownde the sound of other Belles that are couered with the skynne of a Lambe. PUt two or mo quicke Myse in a long or deepe ear∣then potte, and set the same nye vnto a fyre made of Ashe woodde: and when the potte beginnes to waxe hotte, the Myse therein wyll chyrpe or make a noyse: whereat all the Myse that are nye them wyll runne towardes them, and so wyll leape into
the fyre, as though they shoulde come to helpe their poore imprisoned friends or neyghbours. The cause whereof Mizaldus ascribes to the smoke of the Ashe wood. IF you seethe the dregges or mother, or fome of Oyle, to the halfe: and therewith annoint the bot∣tome corners and feete of any chest or presse, the cloa∣thes that you laye therein, shall neuer be hurte with mothes. So that it be drye before you put therein your cloathes. M. Varro, and Cato. IF one aske the Astrologian, which parte of his lyfe is lyke to be the most fortunate. Let him geue the fyrst quarter of his life to the Ascendent: the seconde quarter of his lyfe to ye tenth house: the thirde quar∣ter to the seuenth house: and the fowrth parte of his lyfe, to the fowrth house. And marke in which of them there is fortunate Planets, and the parte For∣tune, and the Moone free frō Infortunate Planets, and not combust. Iudge that, that part of the lyfe is or wyll be most fortunate. Haly Abenragel. IF you woulde not haue heairs to growe, plucke them first vp by the rootes, then vse to rub ye same place with Aqua fortis dyuers times, a lytle at once: and it wyll staye the heair from growing there any more. A woman tolde me this for a great secrete. MAke a plaster of potters clay mixt with vineger, & the whyte of an egge: and apply it to the cods of him that bleedes at the nose, and streight way his bleeding wyll stay or ceasse. This is a sure proued medicine, and an excellent secrete.
GEue to a woman, that suspects her selfe to be with chylde, at nyght when she goes to bed, a cloue of Garlyke to eate: and if she feele any sauor thereof in the morning when she ryseth, then shee is not with chylde. If she feele no sauor thereof, then she is with chylde. This I had out of an olde written booke. THey wyll haue weake or feeble hartes, or wyll be much geuen to sounding: In whose Natiuitie the Sunne is Lorde of the sixt house, or Lord of the part of infyrmitie, being impedite, or Infortunate. Iatro∣math. Guat. Ryff. AN excellent & approued thing to make them slen∣der, that are grosse. Let them eate three or fowre cloues of Garlyke, with asmuch of bread and butter euery morning and euening, first and last: neyther eating nor drinking of three or fowre howers after their taking of it in ye morning, for the space of foure∣tene dayes at the least: and drinke euery daye three good draftes of the decoction of Fennel, that is: of the water wherein Fennell is sodde, and well streyned, fowretene daies after at the least, at morning, noone and night. I knewe a man that was maruelous grosse, and could not go a quarter of a myle, but was enforst to rest him a doosen tymes at the least: that with this medicine tooke away his grosnes, and af∣ter coulde iourney very well on foote. FINIS. Lib. 2.
❧ The thirde Booke of Notable things. FYue Egs layde in the euening, in strong and tarte Uineger, and taken out of the same the next morning: so that you perceyue theyr shels therwith to be somthing sost, else let them lye longer therin: and then put or thrust them downe into the throate of a Horsse that hath the coughe, hys tongue being holden all that whyle out of hys mouth: wyll helpe him perfectlie of the same. THe Turtle Dooue hath such a loue one to another being makes, that when one of them is dead: the other wyll neuer after haue any other make. Aristot. IF one aske the Astrologian, which part of the lande or countrey is best for him: Or if one would go out of the place he dwelles in, to dwell in another, and doth aske into what quarter or parte were best for him to go. Marke in what part of the Heauens, the good Planettes bee, from his Ascendent, and iudge that, that part where they are found is best for him: but consider that from the degree ascending, to the beginning of the tenth house, is for the East part: and from the Cuspe of the tenth house, to the beginning of the seuenth house, is for the South part: and from
the Cuspe of the seuenth house, to the beginning of the fowrth house, is for the West part: and from the Cuspe, or begynning of the fowrth house, to the Cuspe of the Ascendent, is for the North parte. Haly Abenragel. And as these quarters and partes are good to remoue vnto, where the good Planets are placed: euen so those quarters where euyll Planets are placed, are euyll to dwell in. A Certayne woman, a Florentine, was so pulled and gryped in her stomacke with such torments, that no Phisitions coulde helpe: which woman of a suddaine, dyd vomytte long and croked nayles, needles of brasse, with waxe, and lumpes of heair: and at last shee auoyded out of her mouth, a great fleshie peece, such a one as a Gyaunt coulde not swa∣lowe. The Author hereof is Beniuenius de admiran∣dis morborum causis. But hee sayth, that the sayde woman was possest of a wicked spyrite. Mizaldus. (Which I beleeue was done by the deuyl.) PLynie reportes, that men in auncient tyme, dyd fasten vpon the gates of their Townes, the heads  of Woolues: thereby to put away Wytcherie, Sor∣cery, or Enchauntment. Which many hunters ob∣serues, or do at this daye: but to what vse they know not. A Mowle or a Woont enclosed in an earthen pot: If you set then the powder of Brymstone on fyre, she wyll call other Mowles or Woonts to helpe her with a verie mourning voyce. Mizaldus.
IF you take an Oake Aple from an Oake tree, and open the same: you shall finde a lytle woorme ther∣in, which if it doth flye away, it sygnifies warres: if it creepe, it betokens scarcenes of Corne: if it run a∣bout, then it foreshewes the plague. This is the countrymans Astrologie: which they haue long ob∣serued for trueth. Mizaldus. IF a man be sicke, marke his eyes when he sleepeth, for if any whyte thing appeare betwixte the eye lyddes, and the patient haue no great laxe, nor recei∣ued any purgation before: it is a terrible and dead∣ly sygne. Aphor. Hippocr. WHosoeuer is troubled with the coughe, or short∣nesse of breath: let them drinke a good drafte something warmed, of this folowing, thryse euerie daye fyrst and last, and one howre after dynner, for the space of seuen or eyght dayes: and it wyll helpe them (God wylling:) for it is an excellent and often proued thing. Take of the rootes of Enulacampa∣na, cut in small peeces, of Hysop and Peniryall, and also of good scraped Lyqueris, of each two handfull. Seethe them all in a gallon of pure and fayre water, vntyll the water come to one pottell, then streyne it well, and keepe it in a cleane vessell, close stopte or co∣uered, and vse it as is before sayde. SOpe myxt with a lytle salt, healeth perfectly a Fel∣lon, Uncome, or other sore or swolne fynger, with speede. I knowe that this hath bene well proued.
THe whyte of an egge wall beten and mixed with the powder of Masticke, helpes chapt handes: if  they be annoynted therewith. MOwseare, any manner of way ministred to Hor∣ses: bringes this helpe vnto them, that they can∣not be hurt whyles the Smith is shooing of them. Therefore it is called of many, Herba clauorum, the herbe of nayles. Mizaldus. IF a Fyrre tree be touched, wythered, or burned with lyghtning: it sygnifies, that the maister or mistresse therof shall shortly dye. Seruius. GAlen sayeth, that he hath founde by experiences, (folowing the opinions of many) when any shall  fall sicke, and the Moone then be in the sygne wherin a good Starre (or planet) was founde in the tyme of his byrth, without doubte he shall escape from such sycknesse. If in the place of an euyll Starre (or Pla∣net) he wyll not escape. Iohannes. Taysnier. SEethe the leaues of an Oake, and the mydle rinde therof in water, and wash the head that is sore, or full of Pustules therewith: and it wyll helpe it pre∣sently. This hath bene often and well proued. GAniuetus sayth, that in the yeare of our Lord. 1418 the .xxiiii. daye of August, before fowre a clocke at after noone, in the howre of Saturne: A certaine priest called Iohannes Morterius▪ dyd aske him for a certaine brother of his, which was sicke: what shoulde be the ende of his disease, death or health? Who after he had
erected the celestiall fygre therefore, espying Mars within one degree of the Ascendent in a moueable sygne, beholding also the parte fortune of a quartyle aspect, with dyuers other testymonies and euyll sygnes. And also Mercurie being the Lorde of the house of the Moone, in the eyght house, both Retro∣grade and Combust. Iudgde that the party woulde be madde, and so dye within a daye after: which the messenger dyd declare vnto his friendes, and to the Maister of him that was sycke, being his brother. Which happened so. For about fowre of the clock the next morning, he was so franticke, that he had lyke to haue kylled his Maister and others. But they were preserued through Gods speciall gyfte. And after being close in a chamber, dyd breake a post, and so cast him selfe headlong downe, and dyed. THe roote of Pelleter of Spaine, chewed betwene the teeth a good whyle: wyll purge the heade and gummes verie well, and fasten the teeth. So that it wyll helpe the head ache and toothe ache: if it be vsed fowre or fiue times in a day, two or three dayes together. It is very true and often proued. MAke that, that is shorne from Scarlet, into pow∣der by drying it at the fyre, or in an Ouen, and then geue to the partye that hath the blouddye fluxe to drynke: halfe a spoonefull thereof in redde wine. Use this fiue or sixe tymes, and it wyll helpe him, or her shortlie: and certaynlie (God wylling.) This is well proued.
THe gall of a Partriche, annointed once in a month on the Artyres of the temples of the heade: So that it may penetrate and syncke in, doth profyte ve∣rie much for the confyrming of the memory. Simeon Sethi. IF the tayle of a woolfe be buried or put in the groūd of any Towne or Uylledge: no woolfe wyl enter in that Towne or Uylledge. Rasis. ALbertus makes mencion of a Well, that whatsoe∣uer is throwne into the same: is turned into a  stone. Whereof proofe was made by Frederick the fyrst, who: because he woulde not be deceyued, he threw into the same one of his gloues, wherto fyrst: he put waxe and sealed it with his owne Ring, and the one halfe of the gloue which was vnder the wa∣ter, became stone: the other part aboue the water remayned as it was before. IF one go to any body, and doth aske them, being learned in Astrologie, whether he shall fynde him or speake with him or not. Marke the Lorde of the seuenth house, whome if thou finde in an Angle: saye that he is at home. If in a Succedent house, then he is nye home. And marke if betwene the Lorde of the Ascendent, and the Lorde of the seuenth house, there be any applycation, or if there be any Pla∣net beholding the seuenth house, and carryes the lyght of the one to the other, or that doth ioyne their two lyghts, and it be thus: then tell him that he shal finde him. If not, then he shall not▪ Haly Abenragel.
Which is true, so that the partie doth go to his Wife, or to his enemie, or to any other common person, But according to Guido Bonatus: if he go to a king, or to his maister: then you must take the tenth house, and the Lorde thereof: if to a Priest, a Prelate, or a By∣shop: then you must consider of the ninth house, as Haly byddes you. Do by the seuenth house: if to your sonne or daughter, then the first house: if to your Fa∣ther, the fowrth house: if to your brother, then you must iudge as before, by the thirde house. And so of the rest, according to ye significations of euery house. Wherefore the learned in Astrologie are not igno∣raunt: and this is a verye true rule throughly▪ and many times obserued. And if the Lord of the seuenth house, or the house, that the partie trauels vnto, doth signifie, be in a Cadent house: then the partie is farre from home, so that hee is not lyke to speake with him. MAny haue proued that a Saphire tied to the Ar∣tyer, doth put away the heat in an ague. And the same stone borne against thy hart, doth preserue the bearer thereof from the plague, and from venemous thinges. Rasis, et Albertus. And other. IF one that hath eaten Garlyke or Coomynfeede, breath on the face of a woman that is paynted, the cullour wyll vanish away strayght, if not: then her cullour remaynes as it dyd before. Lang. THe leaues of an Elme tree, or of a Peach tree, fal∣ling before their time: doth foreshewe or beto∣kens a murrian, or death of Cattell. Cardanus.
TYberius Caesar, (who was Emperour of Rome when Christe suffered,) when he awaked out of sleepe: dyd see in the darke as Cats do. Suetonius. WHosoeuer eateth two Walnuts, two Fygs, twē∣tie leaues of Rew, and one graine of Salt, all stampt and mixt together, fasting: shalbe safe from poyson and plague that daye. Which Antidote King Mithridates had vsed so much, that when he drunke poyson purposely to kyll him selfe: it coulde not hurte him. Plynius. IF you shall enclose seedes of diuers kindes, eyther in ware, or in some other fast matter, made some∣thing thyn or small, shooting out of length, (that is:) as long as you woulde haue the same to growe, and then putting the same in the grounde well dunged: a marueylous hedge wyll spring therof. This is the workmanshyppe and experiment of the Kings Gar∣dyner. Mizaldus. THe Elephants haue sence and vnderstanding next vnto man, and it seemes they knowe, and keepe the course of the Starres: for at the chaunge of the Moone they breake downe bowes from the trees, & holdes them then mouing them vp and downe, and they are maruelous docible. Gellius, and Plynie hath left it wytnessed by Mutianus that was thryse Con∣sull, as also Plutarch: that an Elephant dyd wryte the Greek Letters. And Aelianus sayth, that an Elephāt dyd wryte all the Latten Letters in order, with o∣ther thinges incredible▪
GRinde Mustarde with vineger, and rubbe it well and harde on the plants or soles of the feete: and it wyll helpe and quicken forgetfull personnes. Petrus Hispanus. A Most notable and proued Water, to claryfie the dymnes of the eyes, or syght, doth followe. Take the iuyce of Fennell, of Celendyne, of Rewe, and of Eybright, of each two ounces: Honny one ounce and a halfe, Aloes, Tutie, and Sarcacol, of each halfe an ounce: the gall of a Capon, Chickin, or Cocke, two drams: Nutmegs, Cloues, and Saffern, of eache one dram, Sugar candie, syxe drams: Put all into a Lymbeck of glasse, and dystyll it: and put of this wa∣ter into your eies once in the day, two or three drops at a tyme: And there can not be a more precious thing for the eyes then this. I knowe it by proofe, and therefore I am the bolder both to prayse it, and publysh it abroade to the great comfort of other. THe three score & thyrde yeare of ones age, is coun∣ted to be a daungerous and peryllous tyme: for that it doth passe seldome without daunger of lyfe, or without some other great mysfortune. As it is obserued in many examples. Hereof Augustus Caesar, (as Gellius reporteth) was maruellous glad, that he had escaped that yeare of his age. The cause may be, that the seuenth yeare, and the nynthe yeare (being Anni climacterici et critici, which are Iudicial yeares) multyplyed together: makes the sayde num∣ber of .63. This Mizaldus describes.
SEethe Iuie berryes in vineger, or in whyte wine: and when they be well sodde, suppe of the same hotte lyccour: and when it is colde spytte it out, and suppe more therof. Whosoeuer doth thus, it helpeth the toothe ache. THey in whose Natiuitie Venus is impedite or In∣fortunate of Saturne: Are lyke to haue paynes or griefes in theyr stones, especially, if she be in the As∣cendent. And lykewise, if Venus be with Mars in the eyght house: or if the Moone Venus and Mars be con∣iunct, or in the euyll aspect of Saturne. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. WHosoeuer is lame, and can neyther go nor styrre their ioynts: Let them take of good Aqua cōpo∣sita, and oyle of Roses, of eyther a lyke much, myxe them both together, and annoynt the grieued place therewith morning and euening, vntyll he be well. (Which wyll be within a whyle after) but rubbe the place with warme cloathes well before. A thing of∣ten proued. WHosoeuer hath Mars in the Horoscope, or the As∣cendent, at the tyme of his byrth: certainly, he wyll haue a speciall scarre or marke in his face. Pro. Which I haue tryed in many, and yet neuer haue founde it false. THe cyrcles of cart wheeles, emptie cartes, and the combe on a Cocks head: do maruelouslie feare a Lyon, (being a most hardy, or fierce beast:) but of all things he feares fyres, torches lyght, or fyrebrands. Plynius, Aelianus et alij.
THat Pygions be not hunted or kylled of Cats, at the windowes & euery passage, and at euery Py∣gions hole, hang or put lytle braunches of Rew: for Rew hath a maruellous strength agaynst wylde Beasts. (As Didimus doth saye.) IF the tayle of a Woolfe be hanged in a house, no Woolfe wyll enter therein: neyther any Flyes wyll flye into the same. Rasis et Alb. IF a mad man vse to laughe, it is a laudible sygne: but if he be verie sadde, it it is peryllous. Aphor. Hippocratis. THis medicine folowing, wyll procure a good sto∣macke to meate. Take three drams of good Sy∣namon, one dram of Mastick, one dram of ye parings of Pomegranets, and halfe a dram of Galingale, and stampe all these together, and temper it with clary∣fied Honny: and then vse to eate as much of thereof, as a Nut euery day, during ten dayes, fasting: and it wyll procure a good stomacke, and also preserue and keepe the same from any euil humors to breede ther∣in. This is an excellent medicine, and often proued, and easie to be made. IF you marke where your right foote doth stand at the fyrst tyme yt you do heare the Cuckoo: and then graue or take vp the earth vnder the same, wherso∣euer the same is sprinckled about: there wyll no fleas breede. Plynie by Mizaldus report. And I knowe that it hath bene proued true.
TO make the counterfeat Mandrag, which hath bene sold by deceyuers, for much money: Do thus  as foloweth. Take the great double roote of Bryo∣nie, newly taken out of the grounde, and with a fyne sharpe knife, frame the shape of a Man or Woman of the same, with his stones and cods, and other mem∣bers therto. And when it is cleane done, pricke all these places with a sharpe steele, as the head, the eye browes, the chyn, and the priuities, and put into the sayde holes the seedes of Myllet, or any other that bringes foorth lytle small rootes, that doo resemble heayrs: (which leeke seedes wyll do very well) or els baly, after this put it in the ground, and let it be co∣uered with earth, vntyl it haue gotten vpon it a cer∣tayne lytle skyn: and then thou shalt see a monstru∣ous Idoll, and heairie, which wyll become the parts well: if it be workmanlie, or cunningly made, or figu∣red. Mizaldus. Another trym waye for the lyke, is in the naturall and artificiall conclusions, Englished by Thomas Hyll. WHosoeuer annoynts his feete or hands, with the grease of a Woolfe: he shall not be hurt with a∣ny colde of his handes, or feete so annointed. Mizal∣dus. FIue leaued grasse, through Iupiters force, doth re∣syst venym or poyson. Wherof, if one leafe twyse  euery daye, morning and euening be drunken with wine: It is sayde to put away the Quotidian gue. Three leaues the Tercian ague. And fowre leaues the Quarten ague. Marcilius Ficinus. IF in the beginning of the sicknesse, or at the tyme of asking of the question for the sicke: the Lorde of the
Ascendent and the Moone, be in the fowrth or eight house, Combust or Cadent, or conuinct with ye Lord of the eyght house: they geue a certaine testimony of death. And if one of them onely, that is the Lorde of the Ascendent or the Moone be so, it is a testimony of death: as is before sayde. Iohan. Ganiuet. VArueyn stampt and streyned with wine, water, or vineger, and then geuen to a woman that tra∣uels, or is in her labour, and can not be delyuered: it causeth speedy delyueraunce. Trotula de passionibus mulierum. And Gysbertus affyrmes the lyke, if it be drunke with water. A Straunge medicine and a rare secrete, for consu∣ming the webbe in the eye: oftentymes proued. Take nyne lytle woormes with many feete, of some called Swyne lyse, (if they be touched, they become rounde as a button, they are to be founde betwene the barke and the woodde of olde tymber or trees:) stampe them with a lytle iuyce of Woodbynde, or Betony, then streyne the same well: and let the par∣tie that hath the webbe in his eye, drinke it in a mor∣ning something warmed. Do thus three mornings together, and it wyl cure it perfectly, (God wylling.) This was tolde me for a very trueth, by one that had proued it dyuers tymes. THis that followeth is a speciall medicine for them that swoonds, or are faint at the hart. Take Rose∣marie, Sage, Betony, and Margerom, of ache one handfull, and seethe them in a gallon, or more of
fayre water, tyll halfe the water be consumed: then take awaye the hearbes, and put to the sayde water a good pynt of Honny, and then skymme it well, and then put thereto an ounce of Stycados, tyde in a fayre lynnen cloath, and let it seethe a lytle whyle, and then take it out of the sayde water, and then put thereto one ounce of Synamon, three quarters of an ounce of Nutmegges, and as much of Gynger in powder: And vse to drinke a good draught thereof twyse euery day something warme, fyrst and last: for the space of syxe or seuen dayes: And then it helpes perfectlie. THat Chylde wyll be deaffe, that is borne when Mercurie is Lorde of the syxt house, and Infortu∣nate  by an euyll aspect with Saturne, chiefly: if he be in the syxt house. Lykewise, they wyll haue great impediment in their hearing: in whose Natiuitie, Iupiter and Saturne be both impedite or Infortunate aboue the earth. That is: if they be Retrograde, or Combust in euyll places. Iatro. THey yt haue any paynes, or swelling in the throate: let them take a Iewes eare, (which is to be had at the Apothecaries) & lay it to stiepe in Ale, a whole night, and let the party drinke a good draught ther∣of euery daye, once or twyse, vntyll they perceyue them selues amended. A proued thing. A Straunge matter, and a thing followeth wor∣thy of memorye. Whosoeuer hath the Kinges Euyll, and lookes vpon a certaine Byrde, called Gal∣gulus, of a maruelous shape and quicke sight, by and
by the same byrde doth drawe to her the yallow va∣pors of choller, & heales the party perfectly through a certaine great benefite of nature. But where as through a secrete gyfte of Nature she doth perceyue or smell the diseased party to come towarde her, shee wyl close her eyes, & hyde her head vnder her wings, not that she doth enuie the parties health, or lothe to helpe him of his disease: But because she doth great∣ly feare the sharpnes of the humor, which the nearer the party infected comes to her, the more it wyl pain her, & he ye more eased. Therfore they were wont to sel this Byrd to such as had this disease, in some close thing, or couered: least the party should be healed for nothing. The Authors hereof are Hilodorus, Plutar∣chus, Aelianus, Suidas, and Plynie, with other. And Kirannides, and after him Albertus reportes: that if this Byrde refuse to looke vpon the diseased party, it is a token that he shall dye thereof. But if he looke euen vpon him, she drawes the disease to her self, and then by and by or soone after, (she flying against the Sunne,) doth vomit it out of her. And thus she doth both cure the sycke party, and delyuer her selfe from the same, through a certaine maruelous benefite of Nature. But learned men do much dyscent in taking of this Byrde. Plynie contends that it is Icterus, some do thinke that it is Chloreus, or Chlorio, which the French men calles Lorion and Loriot. The best part of the Phisitions defends that it is Charadrius: some affyrmes that it is Oriolus: others say that it is Gal∣bulus, or Galbula, or Chloris: which Gesner lykes not. And Mizaldus leaues it to the iudgement of ye Doc∣tors or learned vntyll experience shal trye the trueth throf. Mizaldus in  Mirabilibus seu arcanis.
ORpheus and Archelaus , by the report of Plynie: that if the  of them be smeared with mans bloud, that are fallen of the falling sycknes, by & by they wyll be delyuered from the traunce or yt: or if their great todes be then next pulled or pincht. THe mydle rynde of a Cherie tree, stamped & strey∣ned, & the sayde iuyce put into a lytle whyte wyne warmed, and then geuen to drinke to them that haue the stone: or can not make water, it auoydes the gra∣uell or stone, and makes them to make water presēt∣lye. Use it three or fowre tymes. ONe may make beyond sea Azure, as followeth, & counterfeyt it very well. Take common Azure, and beate or stampe it well with Uineger, & annoynt therewith a thyn plate of pure syluer, and put ye same ouer a vessell full of vrine: which set ouer hotte ashes and coales, and let it be moued & sturred, vntyll it be lyke beyond sea Azure. This is the best way. Mizal∣dus affyrmes that he had this out of an olde written booke. IF you do put quick syluer into a potte amongst see∣thing or hotte pease, the pease wyll leape out of the potte: except the brym or mouth of the potte be to hyghe, or the fyre to small. Mizaldus sayth, that this is proued. BArly halfe sodde, geuē to Hens to be eaten, makes them laye often, and their egs to be greater. This is affyrmed for trueth. IF any doubt, or feare any thing whatsoeuer it bee, and asketh thee hauing knowledge in Astrologie
thereof: marke and consider the Lorde or Almuten of the Ascendent, whom if thou dost finde pure and safe from infortunes, and he be holding the Ascendent, the feare is needeles. For no harme shall happen accor∣ding to the feare. Haly Abenragel. SAuery beaten and sodden in vineger, and layde in manner of a plaster, to the hynder part of the head: doeth merrelye awaken those that are heauy with sleepe. HEre followeth the making of a pleasaunt oyle of Cloues. Take of Cloues one pound, which beate to powder in a brasen morter: then adde thereto three pounde of Almondes scraped and beaten in a morter: and when they be well myxed together▪ sprinkle theron fowre ounces of the best white wine: letting it so lye in a masse, for the spare of eight dayes at the least▪ after that stampe the whole ouer againe, & then put it into a new earthen panne, which heate ouer the fyre so long, that you cā not suffer your hand in it: then put it vp into square bagges, and wring the same harde in a presse, vntyll all the whole sub∣staunce of the oyle become. TAke a Frogge, and cutte her through the myddes of the backe with a knife, and take out the Lyuer, and foulde it in a Colewoort leafe, and burne it in a newe earthen potte well closed: and geue the ashes thereof vnto him or her, that hath the falling syck∣nesse to drinke with Wyne, and it wyll helpe him. And if the partye be not healed at once: then do so
by another Frogge, and so doo styll, and without doubte it wyll heale him: if he vse it. This was tolde me for a sure experiment: And it is also affyr∣med by Petrus Hispanus. A Wonderfull thyng, passing all credite, chaunced in the Byshopricke, or Dyoces of they of Eistet∣tence, in Germany: but that it was seene of dy∣uers credyble wytnesses. A certaine husbandman there called Vlricke Neucesser, being tormented with cruell paynes, in one of his sydes, soddainly tooke holde of a nayle that was vnder the skynne vnhurt: which cutte by a Surgion, he tooke out the nayle: yet for all that the paynes dyd not cease. Wherefore the myserable man suspectinge that there was no remedye to bee had for his payne, but by death: hee tooke a knyfe and cutte his throate. And the thyrde daye after he being arryed to burying, there was three present, one Eucharius, Rosenbader, of Wessem∣burge, and Iohn of Ettenstet▪ Surgions, in the pre∣sence of many, which dyd cutte or open the bellye and Mawe of the sayde dead Husbandman. Wherein was founde (being maruaylous and prodigious) a long and rounde peece of woodde, fowre knyues of Steele, partlye sharpe, and partlye nyckte lyke a Sawe, and two sharpe instrumentes of yron, that was longer then a spanne: and they had therin also, heair rowled together as it were a round Bowle or Ball. This was layde or put in his Mawe, by none other arte, but onely by the crafte and subtyltye of he Deuyll. This hath Iohannes Langius wrytten
in the fyrst parte, of his medcinal Epistles. Epistol. 38. de prodigijs et prestigijs demonum in morbis. Mizal∣dus reportes it also. IN many Pondes, all the water & wood taken out, by and by Eeles do breede: if rayne water come in∣to them, for that with the dewe, they do lyue and are nourished. Aristo. Plutarch. And other. IF the ryght knee of a Bull be tyde with a broade bande, it wyll make him tame. Aelianus. LEt the partie that bleedes, chawe the roote of a Netle in his mouth, but swallowe it not downe: and without doubte the bloud wyll stanche: for if one keepe it in his mouth, he can lose no bloud. Pe∣trus Hisp. IF a mad man finde ease in sleeping, it is good: but if his rage encrease, it is to be feared. Hippocrates in suis Aphor. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent or the Moone, or the Lorde of ye syxt house, be Combust, or Retrograde, & the Lord of the Ascendent be in the eyght house conuinct to Mars, or Saturne: the sicke must dye of that disease. Iohannes Ganiuetus. (But God can re∣store health past all hope.) THis medicine folowing doth maruelouslie breake winde in the bellye. Take Coomyn seede, Fennell seede, and Annes seede, of each a like much: beat them to powder, then seeth the same in wyne, and drinke a good draught therof fyrst & last, fowre or fyue dayes together, & you shall finde a great helpe thereby: for
it hath bene often proued to their great ease & com∣fort that tooke the same. TAke a spoonefull of Aqua vite, and two spoonefull of the water of Arsemarte, and annoynt any ache therwith twyse euery day, morning and euening: for the space of fyue or sixe dayes at the most, and it wyll heale it for euer. I had this out of an olde wrytten booke. HE wyll be weake in ye act of generation, in whose Natiuitie Venus is ioyned with Saturne, especi∣ally in the tenth or eight house: or that the Moone is ioyned with Saturne, in an euyll aspect of Venus: or if Saturne be in the syxt, or twelfth house, in a moyst sygne Infortunating Venus. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. THis folowing is an excellent medicine for ye stone. Seethe an handfull of Holly berryes, in a pynt of good Ale, tyll halfe the Ale be consumed: then streyne it, putting then a lytle butter to it, and let the partie drinke therof fiue or sixe spoonefull: and within halfe an howre after, the party wyll make water: (if euer any medicine wyl cause it.) This was tolde me for a very true secrete. THe learned and wise men among the Persians af∣fyrme, that if Sage be putrefied or layde to rot in horse dung, whyles the Sunne and Moone do both occupy the seconde face of Leo: thereon wyll breede a Byrde lyke an Owsell, or blacke Byrde: the ashes wherof being burned, and strowed or cast into a bur∣ning Lampe, wyll make the house seeme to be full of Serpentes. Hermes.
IF the eares of Cattes be stowde or cutte off, it wyl make them keepe home the better. For that, then the water (which they can not abyde) wyll drop in∣to their eares being open. And if they be gelded, e∣specially the male Catte, they wyll not onely be more tamer and fatter: but also thereby they wyll raunge abroade the lesse. Mizaldus. IT is sayde that Cockles & Oysters, in great thun∣ders, do vomitte and cast out then Pearles. Wher∣vpon many are founde in the sandes. Mizaldus. WHen any drawes nye towarde their death, and that their members lackes bloud & vytal heate: Then Fleas and Lyse leaues them quyte, or else drawes to that parte of the bodye where the sayde heate tarryes the longest: which is in the hole in the necke vnder the chyn. &c. This is a token that death is at hande. Lemnius. THe leaues of Walwoort sodde with Wine, doth maruelouslye mytigate the paynes of them that are tormented with the gowte: if they be applyed to the place where the griefe or payne is. There be that preferres and extolles with maruelous praises: The iuyce expressed out of the leaues & rootes ther∣of, sodden with Wine and May butter: and in the steede of a Lynyment, annointed styll on the grieued member. That is three or fowre tymes euerie daye. Mizaldus learned this of one that proued it. A Ryshe dryed, and put into Wyne, if there be any water therein, it drawes it to it. The Wine left a∣lone,
or together:) Which is good and profytable for trying of Wine. Mizaldus. A Notable medicine to heale lame members, doeth folowe. Take of oyle Olyffe, Aqua vite, ole of Ex∣etor, and of a Beasts gall, of each a lyke much, myxe all together, and annoynt the lame members there∣with twyse euerie daye, morning and euening, the space of a fortnight, being well rubbed before: and it wyll helpe the same of a certayntie. An olde Woman in Worcester shyr, dyd helpe many there∣with. IF out of one pounde of excellent Wyne, with as much Salt as you can holde in your hande, and the leefe of pure Wyne, you do distyll a water: You shall finde that it wyll be the whottest water of all o∣ther. Mizaldus had this of a certaine Alchemyst. IT is sayd that Hartes in Crete, being stroken with Dartes enuenomed: do eate of a certayne hearbe called Dyttanie: and thereby the pricke or any o∣ther thyng that styckes in them is dryuen foorth. Mizaldus. THere was a certaine Woman great with chyld in Pago, not farre from Andernacus, a Towne of the Byshoppe of Cullen: Desyring or longing to eate, or to feede on her Husbandes fleshe, and although she loued him intirely, she killed him in the night, & being satisfied with the halfe of his flesh, she powdred ye rest
with Salt: but after when her great longing dyd cease, and that she dyd repent the deede: she dyd con∣fesse it to her friendes that sought for her husbande. Iohannes Langius, in his medcynall Epistles. Ther∣fore it is good for the husbands to take heede, whiles theyr wyues haue such inordinate longyng vppon them. MAny haue bene helped that haue had fowle and leprous faces, onely with the washing the same with ye distilled water of Strawberies: the Straw∣beries fyrst put into a close glasse, and so putrifyed in horse dung. Conradus Gesnerus. IF, at the time of the byrth of any, Mercurie be Oc∣cidentall from the Sun, not vnder his lyght, or his beames: (except in Aries, or Leo) nor Retrograde: being then in any of the fowre Angles, strong, & well affected: doth shew that the chylde then borne, shall be hye minded, strong, and famed for his strength, & lyberallity: and shewes also that he shalbe an Astro∣nomer. For Mercurie Occidental in Leo, is woont to make Astronomers. And Mercurie Orientall of the Sun, and strong, doth shew, great knowledge, wise∣dome of handy workes, chiefly: if hee be with the Moone, or in the house of the Moone, that is Cancer: and if he be in a moueable sygne: it sygnifies incon∣stantnesse both of deede and minde. But in a fyxed sygne, inconstancie. Taisnier. PRymrose leaues stampt, and layd in the place that bleedeth, stancheth the bloud. This hath bene proued.
TAke black Sope, and almost as much of Ginger in powder, and mixe them well together: then an∣noynt therwith any Tetter or Ringwoorme euerie day, for the space of fowre or fiue daies together, and it wyll heale it certaynly. Proued. TAke Aloes Epatcū fowre drams, Briony, Mastick, Myrre, Asarrabaccha, Scamony, of each a dram: myxe ye same made in powder, with ye iuyce of Fēnel, and a lytle clarifyed Honny to preserue them: Take a dram therof, which is ye weyght of .lxxii. barly cornes at the most, earlie in the morning, & neyther eate nor drink of three or fowre howres after: If they be geuē nine dayes together, they help maruelously: and they are very excellent for all maner of head ache, appro∣ued (though neuer so lōg rooted.) They purge al hu∣mors, they bring gladnesse, they are good for the eye syght, they preserue the mind, letting or hyndring the horenes of heayrs, they helpe the swymming of the head, and the migrim, and heales the sounding of the eares. But to the weaker persons▪ geue ye lesser quan∣titie. Make it in fiue or sixe lytle round pyls or bals, and swallowe them one after another at one tyme. They are proued to be very good. I founde this in a very olde written booke. IF Mercurie be impedite of Saturne in a chylds Na∣tiuitie, it doth hynder the tongue. But it is woorse whē they be corporally coniunct together, especially, in the Ascendent, or in the seuenth house, and in the same sygne with the Sun, (Mercury being then occi∣dentall:) or if Mercury be aboue the earth corporally coniunct with Saturne, or els in an euyll aspect of Sa∣turne,
and in a dum sygne called Signum mutum, and also is Infortunate, that is to saye: in an euyll place. Retrograde or combust, and peregrene: That party then borne, wil haue great impediment in his tōgue, or else wyll be dum, and cannot speake. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. IOhannes Langius an excellent Phisition sayth, that he hearde it reported of certayne Horsemen of the countrey Palentine, that they dyd see in Austria, a man, which with barking, and with swyft running, contended and stryued with Dogs, and was hunted of them vnhurt in the woods. THe eyes of young Swallowes being in the nest, prickt with an needle or a pynne, & so made blinde: within fowre or fiue dayes after, they wyl see again. Which is very true, for I haue proued it. But howe they recouer their syght I knowe not: But dyuers wryte, if their eyes be hurt, the olde Swallowes re∣stores their sight againe with the iuyce of Celendin. WHite Poppie and Henbane seede, a litle stamped, and tempered with the whyte of an egge & layd to the foreheade: prouoketh sleepe. This hath bene often proued. THis following wyll heale lame members. See the Rew, & Rosemary, of each two handful, with com∣mon Oile, & Malmesey, of either one quart together, for the space of halfe an howre: Then let the lame members be washt and bathed therewith, (but be∣fore the sayde member or geieued place must be well
chafed with a hotte cloath,) then when it is well ba∣thed (which wyll be within halfe an howre) wrappe & keepe the member or place so bathed with a lambe skynne (the wooll syde inwarde,) and do thus euerie night before, or at his going to bedde, three weekes at the least, and he wyll be hole and sounde thereof. Doctor Owen helpt one herewith, and with none o∣ther thing, that could neyther stand nor go: but was very lame. They that sawe the proofe therof tolde it to mee: which was and is a man of good credite. IT was a heynous offence with the Egiptians, ey∣ther wyllingly, or by chaunce to kyll a Catte. And Diodorus telles a pretie story therof, least it might be thought to be a fable. In ye time of Ptolomie, a league or amity being begun betwene him & the Romains: A certaine Romaine then against his wyl, had killed a Cat: whervpon the Egiptians gathered together, and dyd beset the house where he was, requyring to haue him to be executed for his great offēce, (no whit regarding the power of the Romaines, nor yet their lague or friendshippe with them:) When, had not the King and Rulars bene, they would haue drawn him out of the house, and kylled him. Diodorus. TO keepe Harnes, or any other thing made of yron or steele from rusting. Let the same be rubd ouer with Vineger mixt with Ceruse, or the marrowe of a Hart, (which is farre better then Oyle,) and it wyl keepe them fayre and bright. IF the Lord of the second house, be in the first house, & Fortunate (the chyld then borne,) shal possesse Ry∣ches without labour. And by the nature of ye Planet
thou maist know wherby ye ryches wyl come. As if it be the Sunne, it wyll come to him by power, that is, the rytches wyll happen by helpe or fauour of great men: if Mars, then by warres, or by theft: if Saturne, of the enheritaunce of the dead: if Iupiter, of fayth (rely∣gion) or of Masters of fayth, (or of the lawe, and such lyke) appertayning to Iupiter: if Venus, by women: if Mercury, by learning, wisedome, or marchandize: if the Moone, by the workes of hands, or by iournyes▪ but if the Lorde of the seconde house (so placed) be not fortunate, and an euyll planet beholding him, he shal lose all his goodes. Taisnier. A Notable oyle or medicine for the Gowte, & ioynt aches, very true and often proued. Take the iuyce of Sage, of Aqua vite, of oyle Debaye, of Uineger, Mustarde, and of a Beasts gall, of each a lyke much: put them all together into a great blather, and chafe it well vp and downe with your hands, for the space of an howre and a halfe, and keepe it then to your vse, and annoynt the grieued place therwith, euery mor∣ning and euening: and you shall finde your selfe hea∣led within a short tyme. This is a sure and often proued thing. THis precious medicine following, doth preserue & keepe them yt takes it, safe from poyson or plague. Take of Iumper berryes two drams, of Earth of Lemnie, called of the Phisitions, Terre Lemnie, as much, and one scruple more, which i the weyght of xxiiii. barly cornes. When you haue made them in fine powder, mixe them with Honny, and keepe it o your vse in a cleane vessell: geue as much thereof at
one tyme as a Hasell nutte, in three ounces of Aqua Mulsa (which is made with water and Honny, that is of one pounde of Honny, and eyght pounde of wa∣ter sodden and skimmed ouer an easie fyre: vntyll the fowrth parte be consumed.) This excellent Antidote dyd King Necomedes vse, when any dyd byd him to banket, or any other cheare, that he dyd suspect. If there be no poyson taken before it, it wyll remayne quietly in the stomacke: but if there be any poyson, it wyll procure vomyt: so that thereby the poyson and medicine wyll both come forth. Myzaldus. A Notable thing to cause one to sleepe immediatly. Take of the iuyce of Henbane, of Lettes, of Plan∣teyn, of Poppie, of the leaues of Mandrag, of Iuie leaues, of Mulbery leaues, and of Humlocke, of each one dram, of Opium, and of Iuie berries, of eather as much: stampe the Iuie berryes and the Opium toge∣ther, and myxe the iuyces & them well together: then dyp a spunge into the same, and let it drinke it all vp, and then laye the same spunge in the Sun to drye: af∣ter laye the sayde spunge to the parties nose whome you woulde haue to sleepe, and he wyll sleepe quick∣lie. And when you wyll awake him, dyppe another spunge in Uinegar, and holde it to his nose, and hee wyll awake within a whyle after. This is an excel∣lent thing and true. BEware that nothing bynde thy body harde, when thou bleedes, and then holde thy handfull of shep∣heards Purse, and stdfastlie looke vp to the Sunne, and the bleeding wyll cease. This is proued.
TO make a powder that wyll drawe out a toothe without any instrument. Take Spurge, Pellyter of Spaine, Smalledge, the dunge of a Rauen, or of a Crowe, Galbanum, the brayne of Partreches, and also a Frogge, of each a lyke much: burne all these together in a newe earthen potte, all to powder, and with a lytle of the same powder, touch the tooth that you woulde haue fall out: and doubtles within a quarter of an howre it wyll fall out. But you must take heede that you touche none other teeth there∣with. This I had out of an old written booke, wher∣in was many excellent true things. SEethe Mallowes and redde Nettles together in fayre water, and let the partie that is costyffe, or can not go to the stoole, sytte close ouer the same, and receyue the fume thereof vp into his fundement: and it wyll helpe him certaynlie, and spedely, (God wyl∣ling.) A thing often proued. FINIS. Lib. 3.
❧The fowrth Booke of Notable things. MAke Dwale as follo∣weth, which makes one to sleepe, whyles he be cutte or burned by Cawterizing, as followeth. Take the gall of a Barrowe swyne, or the gall of a Bore, the iuyce of Hum∣locks three spoonefull, of the iuyce of wylde Neppe, three spoonefull, of the iuyce of Lettys, of ye iuyce of Poppie, of the iuyce of Henbane, and Asell, of each three spoonefull: myxe them all to∣gether, and boyle them well, and doo them in a gla∣sen vessell well stopped, and put three spoonefulles therof in a quart of good wine or Ale, and mixe them well together: And let him that shalbe cut or Caw∣terized syt against a good fyre, and geue him drynke thereof tyll he fall a sleepe. This I had also out of an olde wrytten booke. Use it warely, and proue it ad∣uisedly: if you begyn with a lytle quantitie▪ you maye encrease it when you wyll: but if you geue too much at once, you can not dyminish it when you lyst. THey wyll be hyndered in their smell, or wyll haue diseases or griefes in theyr noses: In whose Na∣tiuity Mars and Venus are impedite aboue the earth. Iatromath. DRye the rootes of  tles, and make them in powder, &  of the powder therof
in a draught of whyte Wine somthing warme, and it wyll breake the stone though it be neuer so great, & that with speede. Use it euery daye vntyll the stone and grauell be all broken and consumed. A thing of small pryce and great vertue. A Combe made of the ryght horne of a Ram, doth take away the head ache, being on the right syde of the head: if the pained head be combed therewith. If the paine be on the left side of ye head, then a combe made of the left horne of a Ram, doth take it awaye: if the pained head be combed therwith. This I had out of an olde booke. THebit the Philosopher, doth teach that to get the vertue of any Starre: you must make a ryng whē the Moone doth behold happily by a Tryne or Sex∣tyle aspect (the same Starre placed in the myddes of the Heauens, or in the Ascendent:) but the matter or substaunce of the Ryng must be made of that mettal, that belongs to that Starre: and lyke wise an hearb ascribed to the sayde Starre, must be included or put vnder that Ryng. DYppe a sylken thread in the bloud of a Mowse, and then let the patient swallow it that hath the Squynancie, or swellinges, or paines in the throate, and it wyll helpe him. THis folowing is a notable medicine for the gowt. Take the roote of wylde Neppe, and the roote of the wylde Docke, fyrst sodden by them selues: then pare of the skyns, and cut them into peeces & stampe
them both together, as smal as can be: then put ther∣to a quantity of soote of a chymney, and temper them with the mylke of a Cowe that hath the heair of one cullour: then take vrine of a man that is fasting, and make a plaster therof, & boile al together, and as hot as the partie can suffer it, laye it to the place payned or grieued, and a daye & a night without remouing, and then lay another plaster of the same to it, and let it lye therto as long as the other. And do thus nine tymes, and it wyll helpe him on warrantyes (God wylling.) Proued. IF yron (that is made cleane or polished) be tyncted or rubbed ouer with Aqua fortis, wherein the fy∣linges, or scrapings of brasse is dyssolued: That yron wyll haue the cullour of brasse. Bap. Porta. A Horse that castes, or holdes his cares backward, for the most part is deaffe. And that Horse that doth not ney in the company of a great number of o∣ther Horsses, is doom. Simoneta Cardinalis. THe best thing of all other to keepe Harnes, or any other thing made of yron or steele from rustines, is this. Stampe the fyling or dust of lead, finely in a leaden or yron mortar, putting thereto a lytle oyle of Spyke, (which besydes makes it smell trymlie) and therwith rubbe ouer the Harnes or any other thing as is beforesayde made of yron or steele. By this meanes you may carry your Harnes or other things so rubbed therewith, in watery places, and in moyst ayres safe from rusting. Mizaldus had this of a cun∣ning Armaror.
IF one come to geue thee counsayle, and thou would knowe whether hee meane well, or be a deceauer: Mark ye tenth house, and if a good & fortunate planet be found there, his coūsayle is good, and true: But if there be an euyl or an vnfortunate planet ther, he is a deceyuer & a lyar. Which I (sayth Haly, as one yt haue proued it) do confirme, & do say: if one come to coūsayl thee, & the Ascendent be of cōmon signes, or the Lord of the Ascendent, & the Moone be in common signes: do say, that he is then a deceiuer, & wyl deceiue thee. Therfore hearken not to him. Haly Abenragell. ONe knot of the roote of a Mullen, geuen to drink, doth binde the losenes of the bellie. Proued. HE that waxeth deaffe through an ague & bleedeth at the nose, shall recouer his hearing. Hippocrate in Aphor. THis medicine following, is proued by experience, and as a certayne diuine thing, doth cure euerie plurisie, and doth relieue the sicke from death: which ought not to be applyed vnto the sicke partie, vntyll the fowrth daye be past. Take of Dealtha two oun∣ces, (which is to be had at the Apothecaries:) the oyle of sweete Almondes halfe an ounce, myxe them together: with which oyntment (being warme,) let the grieued place be annointed: then sprinkle vpon ye annointed place half an ounce of powder of Coomin, finelie fearced, (which done:) take a Colewoort leafe, made hotte vpon burning ashes, and annoint it with olde butter (not salted,) and laye it hotte vpon the an∣noynted & powdred place (tying it on with cloathes that it remoue not,) and a maruelous affect wyll ap∣peare
vnto you in the ceasying of the paine of the plu∣rysie: and in resoluing of ye matter of the impostume. This remedie wyl bring honor vnto thee, and great profyte vnto the sicke person. And knowe that this remedie is good in any other great payne, in all the body, frō the head vnder. Emperica benedicti victorij. And also I haue seene this proued, which helped one of the plurisye without letting of bloud. IF a Woman with chylde haue her smocke, that she weares, slyt at the neather ende or skyrt thereof, or not sowed there rounde about, but that one syde or seame thereof, be a lytle left vnclosed, or vnsowed to∣gether: the same chylde that she then goeth withall, shalbe safe from hauing a clouen or hare lyppe. Yea, though she chaunce to meete suddenly a Hare, or though a hare doth leape ouer her, or suddenly touch her. Which happens to many Chyldren by such meanes, as is mencioned in an other parte of this booke. This was very credibly told me for a trueth. Therfore I haue placed it here, as worthy the name of a notable thing. WHosoeuer shall vse dayly to take in a draught of small Ale, a spoonful of the powder of Matfellon or Scabius: the same wyll destroye any impostume within them. It hath bene often proued. And Antho∣nius Musa doth praise it for the lyke effect. IF the Lord of ye sixt house be in ye Ascendent, or tēth house, it showes yt the disease is open & manifest: if in the seuenth or fowrth house, then ye disease is priuy or hyd: if in the ninth or eleuenth house, then it is opē & manifestly knowne: in the other places, the disease is priuy hyd, or vnknowne. Iatromath. Guat. Gryff.
CLeopatra, the last Queene of Egipt, and Wyfe to Marcus Antonius Consull of Roome, (a prowde Princesse, and too dainty a Dame) dyd drinke one so voluptuous draught, as neuer any dyd before, (nor I thinke wyll hereafter:) for she dissolued in Tarte and strong Uineger, the greatest and beutifullest Pearle that euer was seene in the East parte of the worlde: and drunke the same at one draught, to satisfye her prowde presumptuous pleasure withall. Which Pearle was woorth two hūdreth and fifty thousand crownes. Plinius, Macrob. And other. OUt of the Figge tree, there comes such a sharpe vapor, that if a Hen be hanged thereon, it wyll so prepare her, yt she wil be soone and easily rosted. Plut. And the lyke wyll be if the fethers be pluckt off from Fowles or Byrds, & the skyns pulled off frō Beasts, and then layde or couered a day or two in a heape of Wheate. It is confirmed by experience, sayth Mi∣zaldus. THe professors of naturall Magicke, affirmes, that Uarueyn being taken vp or gathered, when the Sunne is in Aries, the Ram: and stampt with the seedes of Pyonie, and streyned with whyte Wine & drunke: doth maruelously heale them that haue the falling sicknesse. Oftentimes proued sayth Mizaldus. Which he had out of a verye olde booke of the seuen hearbes of the planets, written to Hermes. WHen any of the three higher planets, & the Sun, is in any of the Angles, the chyld then borne (be∣ing a boye) shalbe chiefe of his brethren. Or if there
be any borne before him, they wyll dye: and he shall holde the chiefe rule in his fathers house. Taisnier. SAlt dyssolued in water, or brine, presently with his strength, doth both put away the paynes, and the heate of any burning, whether it be with Gunpow∣der, or with oyle, pytche, scalding water, burning coales, burning yron, or by any other meanes what∣soeuer, especially: if it be bathed with lynnē cloathes, wet or dypt in the same, and a lynnen cloath therein wet, layde or applyed to the place burned. Lemnius. TAke Salarmoniacke, Roch allom, Allom plume, Sal gem, Tartar, and Romaine Uitriall, of each equall partes, all which seuerally made in fine pow∣der, myxe together, and dissolue it in fayre cleare wa∣ter: then put syluer or syluer plate therein, and let it lye, and set it ouer the fyre that it may be very hotte: and you shal see that your siluer or plate wil be mar∣uelous whyte and fayre. Mizaldus. THe roote of Zedoary (but be sure it be perfect and good) mixt with Reysons, and a lytle Lycqueris, champed with the teeth and swallowed: preserues them that doo so, vnhurt or without daunger of the plague: if they go to any that are infected with the plague, or that are constrayned to speake with them that haue the plague. Mizaldus. THe roote of Pyonie, (which is the hearbe of the Sun) being pulled out of ye earth on a Sonday, in the howre of the Sun, the Sunne then being in Leo, called the Lyon: and the Moone encreasing in light,
(which is from her chaunge to the full,) delyuereth them of the falling sycknesse, that beares it vppon them. Marcilius Ficinus. IF at the tyme of the fyrst falling sycke of one, or at the time of the question for the sycke, the Moone be in the fowrth house, with Mars, and good Planettes be Cadent: It is sygne of death. Iohannes Ganiue∣rus. LEt the Woman that trauels of her chylde, (or is in her labour,) be gyrded with the skynne that a Serpent or Snake castes off: and then she wil quick∣lye be delyuered. Trotula. A Maruelous rare Secrete, to drawe out the oyle of Cynamom after an easie manner: which oyle preserueth the stomacke from corruption, by taking of it by the mouth, and applying of it to the stomack. Take of Cynamom one pounde, which stampe and beate finelye: then myxe and impast it with the oyle of sweete Almondes, vnto the forme of an oyntment, then heate the same in an earthen panne somewhat, which after let stande (close couered) for fowreteene dayes or twelue at the least: At the ende of which tyme, heate the whole againe sufficiently, (that is, vntyll it be very hotte:) then put it into a bagge, and wryng out the oyle in a presse, vntyll the whole Cy∣namom remayne through drye in the bagges: and then that which is come foorth, wyll be of the cul∣lour, sauour, and taste of the Cynamom. A Secrete, and knowne to fewe to bee wrought in thys or∣der.
THe powder of Pellyter of Spaine, mixt with the mylke of Wartwoort, or Spurge, and Galbanum, and a lyttle thereof applyed to any rotten or aking tooth: wyl breake it, or plucke it out: and so the paine thereof wyll cease. This I had out of an olde wryt∣ten booke. IF you wyll knowe whether one shall escape or not, that is infected with ye plague, (hauing the plague Sore,) geue the partie some excellent Treacle with whyte Wyne, (so that hee be not troubled with an ague, for then geue the Treacle with Scabyus or Planten water,) and also annoynt the plague Sore with the lyke Treacle: and if the same be dryed or burned, and remayne fyxed, (the partie thereby not relieued or eased) it is a verie euyll sygne: but con∣trarie, if the partie be eased, it is a great sygne that the party shall escape. Arnoldus. IN the common place where the Censors of Uenys syttes, there neuer enters any Flyes. Gandeut. Merula. And in the fleshe Shamble of Toledo, a Cittie in Spayne, is not seene but one Flye in all the whole yeare. As Leo Paptist. sayeth And in Westminster Hall, in the Tymber worke there, is not to bee founde one Spyder, nor a Spyder webbe. Because (as it is thought) the Tymber where∣with the rooffe is buylded, was brought out of Irelande, and dyd growe there. In all which Countrey of Irelande, I haue not onely hearde it credibly tolde, that there is neyther Spyder, Tode, nor any other venemous thing: but also that some of
the earth of that country hath bene brought hether, wheron a Tode being layd, she hath dyed presently. Though this be maruelous & strange: yet it is true. IT is proued (sayth Taisnier) if Iupiter be in the fift or the twelfth house, whether hee be Orientall, or Occidentall, of the Sunne, or whether hee be in a Masculine sygne or Femynine sygne) the fyrst chylde of him or her then borne, wyll be a boye. THe iuyce of ground Iuie, snuft vp into the nose out of a spoone, or a sawcer: purgeth the head marue∣louslie, and takes away the greatest and eldest paine therof, that is. This medicine is worth gold: though it be very cheape. I haue knowne them that haue had maruelous payne in their head, almost intolle∣rable, for the space of a dosen yeares: and this hath helpt them presently, and neuer had the paine synce they tooke this medicine. THis medicine following wyll kyll woormes in the bellie. Take the gall of an Oxe or of a Cowe, and so much of the flowre of Lupynes (which are to be had at the Apothecaries) as wyll thycken the same, myxe them well together, and laye it on wooll, and so plaster it to his bellie where the griefe is, and a∣bout the nauell: and after twelue howres lay theron another plaster. Do thus fowre or fiue dayes, and it wyll helpe him. HOw greatly is the sicke party to be feared (or iud∣ged) not to escape, i in the tyme of the question, or the fyrst beginning of the sycknesse, both the Lumy∣naryes
are vnder the earth. &c. Iatromath. M. Guat. H. Ryff. argent. IF hotte burning golde be quenched in pure Wine, (the same Wine being drunke) it procures strength to the chiefe members, and to the vytall partes. And it makes strong the natural faculties, and doth helpe the diseased parte, with strength and vytall spyrite. And this lycquour is thought to be very good in the tyme of Plague. And if the same be mixed with a lytle Tarter, it doth quyte put away from any part of the body, all spots though they be neuer so fowle. Yea, it helps a leprous face, a red nose, and any other deformity of the same: If the place infected be washt and rubbed often tymes therwith. Lemnius. THe water that drops out of the Uine, or the goom that is founde there, (being drunke with whyte Wyne:) doth breake & expell the stones in the reynes maruelously. And also being rubbed vpon Ryng∣woormes, Tetters, and leprous places, it doth cure them. But they must be rubbed before with Niter. This was tolde to Mizaldus, as a proued thing. IF his spyttle which hath a consumption, (being cast vpon the coales) doth styncke, and the heair fall from his head: It is sygne of death. Hippocrates in Aphor. THere is a certayne Electuary of lyfe, of Arnoldus de villa noua, in a lytle booke of his, of the putting back of olde age: described of the fiue kindes of Myra∣bolanes, made for ye conceruing or keeping of health,
and prolonging of lyfe. And it is a perfyt & approued thing. For it doth not onely comfort, but also it doth purge superfluous humors remaining of nutriment past: And the vse thereof doth let or hynder graye heairs, and it makes one come to the last olde age: It strengthneth the stomacke, and the vse therof ma∣keth a good cullour in all the body. And this is the description therof. Take of great Reysons cleansed of their stones and stalkes, two pounde, Lycquerys made cleane and beaten, one ounce: Let these be put into two pounde and a halfe of fayre water, and let them seethe well, and let them then be strayned well: And in that that is streined, let there be put of Mira∣bolanes, Kebule, Citrine, and Indy, beaten in a Mor∣ter, their stones taken away, of each two ounces: of Embelyck, & Bellerick, of either of them two drams: Let them be sodde, streined & pressed, or wel wroong, then put therto whyte sugar, one pounde: and seethe altogether to the thycknes of a Syrup, and in the ende adde therto of good Cynamom halfe an ounce, Cloues & Galengaye, of each two drams, two Nut∣mugs, Maratrum, and Annes seede, of eyther one ounce: and make therof a Lectuary, and keepe it in a pure vessell. In this Electuary, be medicines of the principall members (that is to say:) of the hart, head, stomacke, Lyuer, Spen. And of the generatiue members: and it is fyrst hotte, after moyst, then cold: and the last drie. Iohannes Ganiuetus lykewise de∣scribes it. CErtaine woormes that shines in the night, called Glo woorms, being wel stopped in a glasse, & co∣uered within hootte horse dung, stāding there a cer∣taine
time, wyll be resolued into a lycquor: which be∣ing mixt with lyke porcion of quicksyluer, first clen∣sed & purged: (which wylbe with halfe a dosen times washing in pure vineger, myxt with bay salt, which after euery washing & rubbing, must be cast away, and then hotte water put to the quicksyluer, & there∣with washed) and then put & closed in a fayre bright and pure glasse, and so hanged vp in the myddes of a house, or other place, or rowme: wyl geue such a light in the darke, as the Moone doth: when she shines in a bright night. Iohannes Baptist. A Peece of a chyldes Nauell string, borne in a ring, is good against the falling sicknes, the paynes of the head, and of the collyck. Mizaldus. BAptista Fulgosus reports, that nie to Sirminū, a Ci∣tie of Pamony, sometymes there hath bene Ten∣drals of Gold found in the Uines: wherof there hath bene money coynd. Which many haue seene sayth Gandeut. Meruba, in his tyme. And Alexander Neapo∣litanus sayth: that he hath founde in Germany, with∣in Daunby, Uines, that dyd beare lytle nayles, and leaues of pure golde: which was geuen for presentes to Kings and Dukes. Mizaldus. IF any doeth aske thee (hauing knowledge in A∣stronomie,) whether that place where he dwelles, is better for him, then that to which hee meanes to go: beholde, and if thou dost finde the Moone seperate from Infortunes, (that is from an euyll Planette, or from an Infortunate Planette) tell
him that his going is better then his tarying: But if you finde the Moone seperate from a good or fortu∣nate Planet, then it is better for him to tarry there styl: then to go from thēce to dwel. And to be briefe, if one shall aske thee, saying thus: I must needes doo a certaine thing, (or I haue certayne busynesse to doo,) whether maye I doo it or not: then marke thou the Lorde of the Ascendent, and the Moone, and if thou finde them seperate from euyll Planets, or euyll for∣tunes, applying to good or fortunate Planets, byd him do yt, that he is determined to do, and spare not. But if thou finde them seperate from good Planets or fortunate, and applying to euyll Planets: byd him that he doo it not, neyther take it in hande. Haly A∣benragell. THat Woman is lyke to be barreyn, in whose Na∣tiuitye the Moone and Venus being in barreyne signes, are Infortunate of Mars and Saturne. Or if Sa∣turne be in the seuenth or tenth house, Infortunating  and the Moone: or if Venus be with Saturne, and the Moone then in the syxt, or twelfth house In∣fortunate. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. THe seedes of Roses with Mustarde seede, and the foote of a Wesell, all together tyde in some thing, & hangde among the bowes or branches of a tree that beares but lytle fruite: It is sayde, that it wyll make that tree to beare well, and to be maruelous fruit∣full. Mizaldus. PAre the nailes of one that hath the quarteyn ague, which being put into a lynnen cloath, and so tyed
about the necke of a quicke Eele, and the same Eele put into the water: thereby the ague wyll be dryuen away. Geber et Alb. IF any lyst to sleepe, and laye by him the braunches of moyst Hempe: Gnats wyll not trouble him, nor come neare him. Myzaldus. IF the Lorde of the twelfth house, be in the twelfth house: many debates and enemities wyll happen vpon the day belonging to that Planet: to the childe then borne. Taisnier. COoluer dunge stampt, and vsed for a plaster with strong Uineger, and applyed to the Nauell: byn∣deth incontinent all Fluxes of the belly. Macer. THe roote of a Goorde, tyed to the reynes of the backe of Women, that is in labour or trauell of chylde: doth cause speedy delyueraunce thereof. But let it be taken away as soone as the chyld doth come foorth: least the Matrix go out, after the chylde. Trotula de passionibus mulierum. HEre foloweth an Electuary of a wonderfull ver∣tue in the tyme of Pestilence: this Electuary is of so great a vertue, in them that do receyue it once in .xxiiii. howres, that they may be sure from all euyl infections of corrupt and contagious ayres, all the daye after. But in them that are infect already, and are taken with the Pestilence, if they drinke of it but one spoonefull, as shall be sayde hereafter, (espe∣cially after letting of bloud, if it be conuenient to the
patient,) and laye him downe and sweate vpon the same, if the venyme hath not vtterlie ouercome the hart: he shall vndoubtedlie recouer. It hath bene lately proued, that after drynking of the same medi∣cine, when the patient made his water in an vrinall, the glasse hath burst in peeces, by reason of ye venime that it purged out. This is the making of the sayde Electuary. Take Cynamom elect one ounce, Terra sigillata, sixe drams, fyue Myrre, three drams, Uny∣cornes horne, one dram, the seede & rynde of Cytron, rootes of Dyptanny, Burnet, Turmentyl, Zedoary, red Currall, of each two drams, yellow Saunders, fowre scruples, red Saunders, two scruples, whyte Been and red, flowres of Marygooldes, of each one dram, Yuery rased, Scabius, Veroincitunici, seede of Basyll, the bone of a Stags harte, Saffron, of each two scruples: make a syne powder, and ad vnto it, of bole Armoniacke preparate, two ounces, whyte su∣gar three pound, and with a syrrup of Acetositate ci∣tri: make a goodly Electuary, and keepe it in a glasse. If the Pestilence commeth with great excesse of heate, drinke it in Rose water & Uineger: but if you feele it colde, take it in a draught of Wine, and couer you with cloathes, so that you maye sweate as long as is possible: for without doubt it is a present reme∣dy, as I my selfe haue nowe of late proued. Thus much Thomas Phayre in his Treatyse of the Pesty∣lence. THe teethe of a mad Dogge, that hath bytten a man or woman, tyed in leather, and then hangde at the shoulder: doeth preserue and keepe the par∣tye that beares it from being bytten of any madde
Dogge. Diascorides, by the report of Mizaldus. THe Seedes of Carduus Benedictus stamped, and drunke, doth helpe the griefe, paynes, prickings, and stitches of the syde: and the gryping in the guts, and the lower parte of the belly. This is proued for trueth. IF any doth sprinckle his head, with the powder of the skinne that a Snake doth cast off: gotten or gathered when the Moone is in the ful, being also in the fyrst part of Aries, the Ram: he shall see terry∣ble and fearefull dreames. And if he shall haue it vn∣der the plant of his foote, he shal be acceptable before Magistrates and Princes. Cardanus. WHosoeuer beginnes theyr iourney, in the howre of Venus: he shall haue good and profyte on the behalfe of Women, or some such lyke thing. Haly Abenragell. IF Woormes gnawe vpon, or hurt the mouth of the stomacke: put Honny combes into the mouth fa∣sting, and holde them there: and the Woormes wyll draw vnto the Honny, and so voyde by the mouth. It hath bene proued. IN the fyrst beginning of any sycknes, or at the time of any question for the sycke: if the Moone be Ori∣entall, nye to the Sunne within twelue degrees: it is sygne of death, and the nearer to the Sun, and in Combusyon, the woorse. Iohannes Ganiuetus.
WIth this Secrete following, Benedictus victori∣us, had alwayes good successe, in passions and griefes of the harte. Take of the iuyce of Buglosse, cleansed or putrified at the fyre two ounces, of white Sugar two drams, myxe them together, and let the pacient (or diseased party) drinke it euery night go∣ing to bed: and there wyll not ten dayes passe, but the patient wyll be cured of the passion or griefe of the harte. THis following is a notable tryed medicine for the gowte, and for the swelling of ioynts, & for knobs or knots comming of the French pocks. Take May butter a quarter of a pound, halfe a pound of coomyn seede, beaten in fyne powder, a quarter of a pound of blacke Sope, one handfull of Hearbe grace, halfe a handfull of clarifyed sheepe suet: stampe all these to∣gether in a morter, then take the gall of an Oxe, and a spoonefull of bay Salt, and frye them all together, tyll it be thycke: then laye it on a woollen cloath, and so apply it to the ache, as hotte as it maye be suffred, and let it lye vnremoued a whole weeke: and then laye another plaster thereof to it, and let it lye vnre∣moued as long: then lay the thyrd plaster therto, and let it lye therto as long, as the other, (which wyll be in the whole three weekes:) and without doubt it wyll helpe him. I haue seene it proued. This I had out of a verie olde booke. THere be (and truly with proued successe) that doo hang the rootes of Sorrell, at theyr neckes, for the Swyne pockes: and also in lyke case, of Planten. Mizaldus.
WHosoeuer hath the bloudy Flyxe, (be it neuer so great nor greeuous:) let them drinke the wine, wherin the rootes of Hollyocks cut in peeces, is sod∣den and streined, (if the party haue an ague:) for then let the rootes be sodde in water with some Planten leaues, and so streyned, which is an approued & sure medicine for that disease: whether the party haue an ague or not. A Ring made of an Oxe, or Cowes horne, & worne or carryed vpon them that haue the crampe: It puts the same away. This is proued to be true of many. And Mizaldus affyrmes it. IF the Lorde of the seuenth house, be in the thyrd or nynth house, and any euyll Planet beholde him: (he that is then borne wyll fall from some buylding, or else hee wyll dye of some thing that shall fall vppon him. Ptolomeus. IF you seethe Bryonie in water, and vse to drinke the same: It helpes and cureth them that haue the Dropsie. Proued. MAruelous and notable vertues of the Eybright, do followe. Let the leaues, stalkes, and flowres, with the whole substaunce, be distylled, when it bea∣reth flowres, the water wherof stylled, dropped, and streaked about the eyes, causeth cleare eyes, & sharp∣neth the syght, and seaseth the paynes of the eyes. The water dropped into the eyes an howre before night, and stryked about them, and drunke to the quantitie of three ounces at one tyme: comforteth,
strengthneth, and preserueth the syght, especially, in aged persons, and in stematick complections. The hearbe dried, and brought to powder, & eaten euery day in a poched Egrere, for a certain time together: restoreth sight lost, ye water mixed with half a dram of the powder, and drunk euery euening, for a month or forty dayes together: recouereth a weake syght. THis precious medicine folowing, wyll bring forth a Canka, and plucke it vp by the rootes, out of a∣ny sore where  bee, eyther in man or woman. Take Bosalger, and make powder therof: then take Brrowes, or Hogges grease, that is new and fresh, (fyrst melted and ater colde) then mye the powder there with very well: then put therof vpon a peece of whyte lether, which may couer the ore: thē sprinckle on the sayd plaster, fyne flowre of pure wheete: then vpon the same spreade Honny, and then put vpon the sayd Honny, womans mylke: and whn all this is done, put the sayde plaster vpon the sore, where the canker is, and put the neather crust of a new whyte loae vpon the sayde plaster, and tye it fast vpon the same, that it remoue t: And in the morning, thou shall finde the cankar dead, on the said plaster: this is most true. This I coppyed out of an olde wryt∣ten Booke. LEt a woman make water, in an Urinall that is ayre and cleane, or rather newe, vppon certaine cornes of Barly: and set the same in a colde place for the space of eighte dayes, and if te sayde Barlye cornes wyll growe agayne, or bring foorth newe corne: then the fault is not in the woman that shee
conceaues not, but rather in the man. Yf other∣wyse, then the lette of conception is in her. STampe Crystall in a stone Morter of Marble, and make thereof a very fyne powder, then put thereto so much of the white of an egge that you may write therewith, mixte them well together with a little goome or goome water, then write therewith in pa∣per what you wyll, then rubbe the same Letters with what mettall you wyll: and the wrytynge wyll bee of the coullour of that mettall wherewith you rubbed them. This I had out of an olde booke and Mizaldus affyrmes it withoute the Goome water. THe iuyce of Lylly Rootes, and Uynegar, of eyther lyke much mixed togeather, and the sawse feame or redde pympled face annoynted therewyth euerye euenyng for the space of nyne or tenne dayes: dooth helpe it perfectly. YOu shall knowe whether the dropsye be hotte or colde, by this that followeth: Yf the swellynge beginne fyrst at the feete, and go vpwarde, then it comes of a hotte cause: If the swellynge begynne fyrst in the face, and goe downewarde, then it comes of a colde cause. This lykewise I had out of an olde wrytten Booke wherein were many things credyble. CAst the water of any sicke person newly made at night, on red nettels, & if the nettels be withered
or dead in the morning after: then the sicke party is lyke to dye of that disease, if they be greene styll: then he is lyke to lyue. A Certayne wicked fellowe that kylled his Father, dyd syt in cōpany with his companions, eating & drinking: ouer whose heads, there was a swalowes nest, with young swallowes in the same: at which time the sayd swallowes made a great noyse, & chit∣tering: when, suddenly the sayd wicked fellow, got a long powle, & brust the swallowes nest: wherby the swallowes fel down, & he trode on them, and crushed them in peeces. Being asked of one of them, why he dyd so: I haue good cause so to doo, sayde he: for dyd you not heare, sayde he, how they tolde that I kylled my Father. Whervpon he was suspected, examined, and so confessed, and therfore executed. Plutarchus. DRye a Gotes, Sheeps, or Neates blather, & make powder therof, & let them drinke therof with Ui∣neger or water, whē they go to bed, that cannot hold their water: and it wyll helpe them. Galen affyrmes this. IF the Sun, the Moone, the Alumten, or the Lorde of the Ascendent, be all safe, and not with the Lord of the eyght house, or in his aspect: without doubt the sicke person shalbe ryd of his diseases, and reco∣uer the same. If two of them be so, he is like to escape lykewise. If contrary, then he is lyke to dye thereof. Iatromathematica. M. Guat. Ryff. TO kyll Serpents in your dreame, sygnifies victo∣rie: to see sayles of shyppes, is euyl: to dreame that
all your teeth are blouddy, it sygnifies the death of ye dreamer: but, that the teeth is drawne out, signifies the death of another: that byrds enters into a house, sygnifies losse: to weepe, betokens ioye: to handle money, sygnifies anger: to see dead horsses, sygnifies a lucky euent of thinges. Artemidorus. YOu shall make a Swoord, Knife, or any other In∣strument, to haue an excellent edge: if you doo as followeth. Put into a pounde of the vrine of a young Man, as much soote as you may take in your hand, putting thereto fowre ounces of the oyle of Lynne seede: All being mixt together, let them seethe on the fyre, & betwene the beating, or stryking of the sword or the knife whiles it is red or burning hotte, quench it in this myxture: and according to arte, let it be wel tempered. Mizaldus. IF you stampe Lupynes (which are to be had at the Apothecaries,) and therewith rubbe round about the bottome or lower part of any tree: no Antes, or Pyssemyres, wyll go vp and touch the same Tree. Mizaldus. IF Mercury (being Lorde of the syxt house) be impe∣dyte of Saturne, doth threan to the chylde then borne, continuall blyndnesse: and so much the more, if the Moone beholde the Sunne and Saturne in that sort. Taisnier. RUb the leafe of a Marygoold betweene your fyn∣gers, and put the same into your nose, and let it staye there a pretie whyle: and it wyll bring forth a∣boundaunce
of humors out of your head, and it wyll help the rewine, within a little whyle if you vse it. This I had of a friende as an excellent secrete. THe eating of two drams of great Reasons (the Stones taken out) in the mornyng fastyng, doth profyte for conceruing of youth: because they make better dygestion, and fleame is dymynished by them, they comfort the Lyuor, and makes it fatte, because they are friendes of the stomacke, and of the Lyuor, and they encrease bloud, and makes it thycke, and when they are taken after meate, they strengthen and moystens the belly. Iohannes Ganuctus. THe eyes be not onely instrumentes of Inchaunt∣ment, but also the voyce and euyll tongues of cer∣taine persons. For there are found in Africke, as Gel∣lius sayth: Families of men, that if they chaunce ex∣ceedingly to prayse, fayre Trees, pure seedes, goodly chyldren, excellent horsses, fayre and well lyking cat∣tell: soone after they wyll wyther and pyne away, & so dye. (No cause or hurt knowne of their withering or death.) Therupon the custome came, that when a∣ny do praise any thing, that we should say God blesse it or keepe it. Aristot. in Probl. By the report of Mi∣zaldus. STop both your eares with your fyngers, and the hyckop wyl go away within a whyle after. Pro∣ued. MAny that are borne at that tyme, when the earth doth quake, are alwayes fearefull: in the tyme of
thunder, they are for the most part saynt & fearfull: in the time of the change of the Moone, eyther they liue not long, or else they be weake: And oftentimes as Aristotle sayth, haue Melancholicke diseases, or els are out of measure Melancholicke: which makes thē to be wayward, reating, & seldome mery. Mizaldus. THere is a maruelous strength in Sperma ceti, for if it be pure & right: it wyll penetrate & go through the boxes or things wherin it is kept, with a certain moysture or sweating droppes. Mizaldus. IF Mercury be coniunct with Saturne, or in any euyll aspect of him, & neyther Iupiter nor any other good Planet doth beholde Mercury. it doth note, that they then borne, shal haue an impediment in their tongue, or shall stut: chiefly, if he be founde aboue the earth. Taisnier. THe rootes of Eldern sodde and streyned, & drunke thirtie dayes together, thryse euery daye, at mor∣ning, noone, and night: doth cure the dropsy perfect∣ly. Proued. IF the pappes of a woman, which is with childe of two, do waxe lytle, she shall lose one of them: and if it be the ryght pappe, it is a man chylde that wyll be lost: and if it be the lest, a woman chylde. Hippocrates in Aphor. TAke Garlyck, and Houslyck, of each lyke much, & stampe them both together, and plaster the same eyther to a hotte or colde gowte: and it wyll helpe
or ease it maruelously. This was reported to me to be excellent therfore. THe Flower of oyntments, called Flos vnguentorū, is made as followeth. Take of Rosen, and Perro∣sy, of each halfe a pounde, Uirgin waxe, and Olyba∣num, of eyther a quarter of a pounde, Masticke one ounce, Hartes tallowe, or els Sheepes tallow, a quarter of a pounde, Camphere two drams: make your gooms in fyne powder, and searce them: then melt the waxe and tallowe, and myxe the powders there with well, and boyle them well together, then streyne it through a canuas bagge into a pottell of white Wine: then let it keele vntyl it be bloud warm, then put thereto the Camphere, and a quarter of a pounde of Turpentyne, by lytle and lytle, euermore styrring it well, tyll it be through colde: Then make it vp in rowles, & keepe it to your vse, for the best salue for all things following, that euer was made, by the sufferaunce of God. Wherfore esteeme of this salue a∣boue any other, for it hath bene put in experience and substantially proued: It heales wounds, olde & new, it cleanseth very well, and gathereth good fleshe: It health head ache, & impostume in the head, or in the body: Swolne eares or cheekes, sawsfleame in the face, Synewes cutte, starke or sprayned in trauell: It drawes out yron and thorne: it helpes venemous by∣ting and pricking: it heales all manner of botche: all swelling and ache in the coddes, and all other mem∣bers: it sases the fluxe of the Emrods, and it is spe∣ciall good to make a seare cloath, for all manner of griefes. This was wrytten and cast into the Recluse or Anker, at the Red hyll in Almaine: wherewith he
wrought many maruels, and neuer vsed any other medicine but this. This I copied out of a very olde booke: and I haue proued it many tymes to be preci∣ous. WHen the Alumten, or the Lorde of the Ascendent is Infortunate, in his fall or combust with three other testimonies, or else two: It sygnifies that the sick person shall dye. And it is so much the worse, if he be vnder the beames of the Sunne. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. WHosoeuer hath ye griefe or swelling of the splene neuer so much, & hath had it of a long tyme: and doth heate the endes of a payre of tonges in the fyre, vntyl they be glowing and red hotte, and then quen∣cheth the same in halfe a pynt of white Wine, & drynk the same Wine: It wyll helpe them therof perfectly. This was credibly tolde me for very trueth. But it is more certaine, if they be so heated and quenched fiue or sixe tymes, and then drunke: and to take the same fowre or fiue morninges together. Which I know to be excellent: the lyke vnto this is affyrmde to be most true, and proued by Anth. Beneuenius. IT is a great token of health, when the stones or coddes begyns to ytche: though the other parts of the body be weake. But then take heede of Ueneri∣us actes, least you pay for your pleasure. This out of Mizaldus. COryander seede made in powder, and mixt with Honny, and unplastred vpō a Carbuncle, or other
grieuous byles: destroyes the same quite. Arnold. de villa noua. THe black Sea coale, mixed with oyle: wyl be made soft. Wherwith if one annoynt Uines, it wyll de∣stroye the woormes: which destroyes or eates the buddes of the Uines. Seuerinus Gebelius. THe goom of a Chery tree dissolued in white wine, and so geuen to them that are grieued with the stone: it wyll helpe them maruelously. Mizaldus af∣fyrmes that it is certainly proued. IT was credibly told me for a very truth, that there was a very poore woman, being brought to bed of a chylde, hauing many chyldren before, to whome a syster of hers (being rytch, and that neuer as yet had any childe) came to see her: who sayd vnto her as fol∣loweth. Ah syster syster, here are many mouthes and lytle meate. To whom her poore syster answered, cō∣tent your selfe syster: God neuer sends mouth, but he sendeth meate. After it chaunst the rytch syster to be with chylde: which, when it was borne, had neuer a mouth. So that, ther was much meate, & no mouth. A worthy & rare example to make al couetous gree∣dy & carefull worldlinges to cast their whole care on the Lord. And not so to depend on their own prouisi∣on or worldly wealth. If it were not for the great goodnes of God, we should haue no more meate for our mouthes, then this womans chyld had a mouth for meate. But if we haue both mouthes and meate, and lacke good stomacks for the same: what are we the neare? So that both mouth meate and stomack,
are not in our wylles to haue when welyst: but are Gods gyfts to bestowe as he wyll. HErmes sayth, (if in the Natiuitie of the Husband,) Venus be Combust: the wyfe shall dye before the husbande. If in the Natiuity of the wyfe, Mars be Combust: the husband shall dye before the wife. WAter or wine wherin Walwoort is sodde (if a good draught thereof be drunke euery day fyrst and last, for the space of twentye dayes at the most,) doth perfectly helpe them that haue the dropsy. It is an excellent medicine for the same. CAst or instyl certaine drops of Baulme into cleare water, and then with a stick labour well the wa∣ter, and if the water then be troubled, the baulme is not perfect. But if the water abyde cleare: then the same is good and perfect baulme. For the good and true baulme, doth gather it selfe, alwayes into one place. And thus you may trye a true & good baulme: from a false, and sofysticate baulme. IF the roote of Pyony (especialy, of the male Pyony) be hangde at the necke of a chylde or a boye, that hath the falling sycknes: it doth helpe very much. Lykewise, doth Pellyter, and the heaire of a Dogge that is all blacke. Lemnius. FINIS. Lib. 4.
❧ The fyfth Booke of Notable thinges. A Mare wyl bring forth a Fole of diuers cullours: if she be couered with a cloth of dy∣uers cullours, whyles she is taking the Horse. For such cul∣lours as be before the eyes of of the Horse, whyles he doth horse her: without doubt the Fole wyll be of the same cullours. The same may be proued with Dogs and other Beasts. Mizaldus. THe berryes of Halicacabus (called wynter Cher∣ries) being stampt, and the iuyce, prest or wroong out of the same, and then dryed in the shaddow: the same, (if it be geuen to such as haue the stone, or can∣not make water, and also to them that haue ye Drop∣sie,) it wyll prouoke vrine, or dryue forth the water, and also expell the Hydropycall humors. Mizaldus. HOrus Apollo doth saye, that a Woolfe doth feare greatly stones: therfore when he is constrayned, to go by stony places, he treades very demurely or softly. For being hurt with a very lytle stroke of a stone: it breedes woormes, wherof at length he is consumed, or brought to his death. Therfore he doth flye from a trauellor: that layes wayte to stryke him with stones. IF the Moone and Venus be ioyned together, and both be Combust: He that is then borne, shall
lacke a wyfe, (or neuer marrie.) Ptolomeus. IF the leaues of Elderne, fyrst made hotte between two Tyle stones, and then applyed hotte to the forehead and the temples, if any painelye there: It helpeth the ache of the head maruelously. This is very good and well proued. HEre followeth a maruellous water to prouoke sleepe. Take of Opium thebaicum, and Garlicke heads pylled, of each two ounces: beate the Garlicke heads in a morter with a woodden pestel, & put ther∣to the Opium grinded: incorporate these well toge∣ther: that it maye be lyke a Sawce: Distyll this in a Retorte, with a most soft & slowe fyre in ashes. With this water distilled when neede shal require, annoint the temples, the forehead, and pulses of the wrestes. And beware you mynister nor vse this, but vppon a great necessity, as in franticke persons, (as you shall thinke it good.) THe iuyce of the buddes, leaues, inner rynde, or of the young braunches of Elderne, (something warme) put into the eare: doth not onely breake the impostume thereof, within sowre or fiue tymes: but also doth maruelously helpe the deafnes. This was tolde me for a great secrete: and I haue tryed it to be an excellent thing in such a case. TO see Moonks in ones dreame, doth portēd death or calamity: to see fatte Oxen, betokens plenty of thinges: to loose an eye or a toothe, sygnifies ye death of a friende, or of a kynseman, or some other euyll
lucke: to dreame to be dumme, foreshewes speedie gladnes: to see Oxen plowe, betokens gaine: to en∣ter into waters, betokens euyll. Artemidorus. THis following makes a soft beard, and doth beau∣tifie the chynne with a fyne heaire. Take butter witstout salt, the iuyce of a redde Onion, the grease of a Gray or a Badger, ye roote of Bryony, of Beetes, of Radysh, and of whyte Lyllies: whereof make a Lynyment, and annoint the chyn often therewith, being shauen. Mizaldus. PUt vp an olde Gander into a house, and let him be there three dayes without meate, then cast vnto him peeces of an Eele newlie kylled, then gather the dunge that comes from him, after he hath eaten the peeces of the Eele: which dung being layde to any impostume or swelling: Is a present remedy ther∣fore. HE that sleepeth in a sheepes skynne: shall see true dreames, or dreame of things that be true. Mizaldus. THe brayne of a Wesell dryed, and drunke with Ui∣negar: doth helpe them that haue the falling sick∣nes. Mizaldus. IVpiter and Venus, or the one of them in the eyght house, not Combust, nor Retrograde: doth sygni∣fie the chyld then borne, shall dye a naturall, (and no violent death.) Taisnier.
TAke a lytle sticke, and tye about the ende thereof olde Oken leaues, then cutte them something rounde, and holde the same leaues in your mouth as deepe and as farre in as you may suffer it well, (hol∣ding the stycke betweene your teethe,) & so hold your mouth ouer a porrenger or a dysh: and there wyll great aboundaunce of humors auoyde out of your mouth: and within a whyle, washe in fayre water the sayde leaues on the stycke: and then holde it in your mouth so againe. Doo thus for the space of halfe an howre, and vse this three or fowre tymes a daye, for three or fowre dayes together: or vntyll you haue auoyded as much waterie humors as you thinke good. This is the best and the presentest re∣medy for helping of the rewme, that euer I knewe, or hearde of. I had it of a Gentleman, that esteemed it as a Treasure. And whosoeuer proues it, shall fynde it an excellent thyng. MIrabolanes chebuli, preserued with his syrruppe, vsed daylye, and eaten: preserueth youth ex∣cellently well. THis followinge is an excellent Gargarisme, to purge the head and the brest. Take of Stauesacre, three drams, Pellyter of Spaine, and mustard seede, of eyther two drams, long Pepper, Gynger, and A∣lomgem, of each one dram: Make powder of them that are to be powdred, and stampe the rest, & myxe all well together, and put as much therof as a beane
in a little lynnen cloath, and tye the same fast with a threde, that it may be rounde: then houlde the same in your mouth, & champe it softly betweene your teeth: and it wil bring forth water and fleame aboundant∣ly. Use this dayly vntill you thinke your head be wel purged. YF the Lord of the Ascendent be in the eight house, receyued of the Lord of the eight house, so that he receyue not the Lorde of the eight house: It sygnifies that the sycke party shall escape, without all hope. Ia∣tromath. Guat. Ryff. EArth woormes slyt, and cleansed, and washt from their slymye and earthye matter (halfe a dosen of them, at the least) and cut in peeces or chopped, and a good messe of pottage made thereof with otemeale and water, and so much euerye daye eaten by them that haue the black Iaundies, for the space of twelue dayes or longer: no doubt it will perfectly cure them therof, though it be neuer so long rooted, or thought to be past cure. Or else a spoonefull of the powder made of them in March, or any other time, when you can get thē, taken euery day so long in a litle draught of any drinke: doth likewise perfectly cure the same. This is very true, and hath bene often tymes pro∣ued. It hath helpt some in fowre or fyue dayes. OLbanum (which is a kinde of Frankencence) in powder mixte with as much of Swines grease, and boyled together, wherewith if childrens heades that are full of Lyce, or that are geuen to breede lyce, be annoynted: they shall afterwardes be free
from Lyce. This is better and more safe, then to vse oyntments mixt with quicksyluer, which is very daungerous: therefore let Mothers or Nursses, ra∣ther vse this. WHereas euery Beast (the act of generation ended or done) is woont to be sadde: onely the Cock re∣ioyseth, for he sheweth his gladnes then by crowing. IF Mars be in the eyght house, & in a humaine signe, or in the seconde face of Taurus, or in the first face of Leo: It doth shew the child then borne, shall dye of yron. Taisnier. IT is proued by experience, that to vse customablie in the dynner, and immediatly before the Supper, halfe an ounce of the flowre of Cassia newly drawne: doth forbyd the engendring of the impostumation of the stomacke. Truly I saye vnto thee, that who doth vse, such taking of Cassia, shal be preserued from eue∣ry euyll affection of the stomacke. Emperica bened. WIne of the decoction of Tormentyll, drunke day∣lye without any other drinke, and the hearbe thereof sodden, and euery euening plastred ouer the eyes, the space of three or fowre monthes or more: re∣storeth the syght, yea, to those that haue their eyes as though they dyd see, and yet are blinde, and sees nothing at all. Petrus Hispanus. ANdreas Mattheolus, knewe a Woman, that euery daye for a whole yeares space, was greeuously troubled with ye paynes of the moother, which was
helped verye well of that disease, by drinking once a weeke at her going to bed, o white Wine, wherein an ounce of the roote of Bryony was heated: and she vsing this medicine a whole yeare in such sort, she felt no more harme therof. IF you wyll destroye or put away Warts, cut of the head of a quyck Eele, and rubbe the Warts all ouer well with the same bloud, then as it runnes from the Eele: then bury the head of the sayd Eele deepe in the ground, and when the head is rotten, then they wyll fall away. I thinke the Author hereof is Iohannes Baptista Porta. Mizaldus. ABout the rysing of the lytle Dogge, (being in the Sommer:) an olde Cock doth lay an Egge, round, speckled, and of dyuers cullours: where of many doo thinke that the Basylike, or Cockatryse doth come, (which is a most pernicious and venemous serpent,) especially: if that egge be syt vpon and hatched by a Tode. Which whether it be a fable or not, let other iudge. Mizaldus. MArs in the eyght house, with the head of the Dra∣gon: betokens that the chylde then borne, shal die of a roape, (or be hangd.) Taisnier. THe iuyce of Colewoorts, put or snuft into ye nosth∣rylles: doth purge the head maruelous well, and helps the auncient payne of the head. Often proued. BLacke sieges lyke to fylthy bloud, are wonderfull euyll. Whether they be with an ague, or without
an ague. And the darker cullour they haue, the woorse they bee: but if these sygnes come through a Purgation, they be more laudable. And al∣though they be of dyuers cullours, they be not euyll. Hippocrates. THis following is an excellent, and often proued thing for the Collycke, Strangurie, and the stone. Take the seedes of Careaway, Fennell seede, Spick∣narde, Annes seede, Coomyn seede, Cynamom, and Galyngale: of eache halfe an ounce, Gromell seede, and Lycores, of eyther of them an ounce, and beate them all to powder, and drinke halfe a spoonefull of the same powder in Ale, a lytle warmed, and walke vppe and downe one howre after, before you eate or drinke any other thing. Doo thus fiue or sixe dayes together at the least, and you shall finde it of a no∣table operation. This was taken out of a learned practysers booke: besydes synce it hath bene many tymes proued. YOung Chyldren, whose gummes are annoynted with the brayne of an Hare, doo breede their teeth easylie. Mizaldus. And it hath bene proued with the brayne of a Conie. A Walnutte put fast into a Chycken, that it fall not out in the roastyng thereof: It makes that the same Chycken wyll be the sooner roasted. Mizaldus. IF a rounde large vessell, with one hole in the toppe thereof, be fylled full with quicke Lyme and Brim∣stone,
of both equall porcions: and then the hole well stopt, that no ayre nor any thing may go out, and so put into some standing water, or a litle pit of wa∣ter, or into some cesterne full of water: it wyll keepe the sayd water hotte a long tyme, or for many daies. Proued of many, sayth Mizaldus. And I founde the same also in an olde written booke. HEns dunge mixt with meate that is geuen to be eaten of madde Dogs, wyl take away their mad∣nes from them: (As it is thought.) Mizaldus. IF a Woorme, that is founde in the grasse, before it touch the grounde, be hanged alyue at a womans necke that is with childe: it is thought she shal keepe the chylde vntyll the due tyme of the byrth. Plinius. As Mizaldus sayth. IF one geue any thing for Warts, to them that haue them, be it neuer so small a thing, as three or fowre heayrs (a rag of a lynnen cloath, or some other thinge of no value the sooner it wyll rotte, so much the bet∣ter,) and let the party that would be ryd of ye warts, wrappe the same in some thing, and put it into the ground, and couer the same with earth againe: tru∣ly, as the same thing doth rotte in the earth, so wyll the warts weare and consume away. This is per∣fectly proued. IF Mars be in Gemini, and the Sunne in Pisces, in a quartyle aspect, in the daye tyme: or the Moone in the night tyme: (it doth sygnify that) the chylde then borne wyll be hangde. Taisnier.
THey that vse to receyue three Pyls made of Aloes De succo citrino, made in powder, (which is to bee had at the Apothecaries,) and mixt with the iuyce of Colewoorts, of the bygnes of a beane: shall neuer be troubled with paine in the head. Petr. Hisp. A Straunge medicine for the gowte. Take a good handfull of Arsemart, and wrap and tye the same  in a Burre leafe: and laye it first in olde ashes, then compasse the same with hotte embers & coales, & so rost the same wel: thē apply the same rosted Arsmart to the grieued place, and do thus euening and mor∣ning for two or three dayes: and thou shalt fynde a present helpe thereof. This was tolde me for a great secrete, and as a proued thing. IF you put or stop fast within a Nutte, quicke brim∣stone, Saltpeter, and Quicksyluer: the same being put into a loafe of bread, and then the same loafe of bread put into some hotte place, where it may heate: as soone as it waxeth hot, you shal see ye loafe of bread so leape, that it wyll bee a very pretye sport to them that sees it. Mizaldus had this of one that proued it. A Most excellēt oyle of Saint Iohns Woort, is made as followeth. Infuse or stiepe for the space of three dayes, the toppes of Saint Iohns Woort, in pure and excellent Wine, then in a double vessel let them  easily ouer the fire, and then straine them easily: then agayne put as many of the toppes of Saint Iohns Woort in that strayned lycquor, as you had before: and let them stiepe therin three dayes & three nights as before: then heate & strayne them as before, then
adde thereto three ounces of Turpentine, and syxe ounces of olde Oyle, and of Safferue the weyght of xxiiii. Barly cornes: myxe all together, and then seeth all together in a double vessell, vntyll the wyne be consumed: and that that remaynes put it into a gla∣sed or leaded vessel, & keepe it safely for your vse. This Oyle is of a maruelous vertue and propertie, as wel chieflye against venemous Ulcers, as many other diseases and colde griefes: Well knowne to many women. Mizaldus. IF you rubbe sleyghtly any kinde of Beastes or Cat∣tell, with the iuyce of goordes, in hotte wether: no kinde of Flyes wyll then hurt or molest them, nor yet come nye them. A thing desyred of many, and very necessary for such as rydes in the hotte wether. Mi∣zaldus. IF Mars be opposite to Iupiter, and the one of them bee the Lorde of the eyght house: (it is lyke) the chylde then borne, shall dye by the commaundement of the Iudge. Taisnier. THe leaues of wylde Iuie sodde in wine, and layde vpon any Cankar: doeth kyll and heale the same. Trotula. THis water following is very precious for frantick and madde men: proued very often. Take of the flowres of Rosemarie, of Burrage, and of the rootes of Buglosse, of each halfe a pounde, of Saffern two drams, of Quinces fowre ounces, of the best whyte Wine, two pintes: mixe them all together, and then
let them stande so the space of a naturall daye: after that bury the glasse body wherein all the same is, in horse dung for fifteene daies: and then take it out and distyll a water therof, according to arte, two or three times ouer. Keepe this water as the Aple of your eye, for it is very precious and well proued in all Me∣lancholy sicknesses very effectuously: and in the paine and trembling of the harte, the quantity to be geuen at one time is a dram. (Which is the weyght of .lxxii. barly cornes.) If you proue it, you wyll prayse it. And this is in the new Iuell of Health: with many other mo excellent thinges. THey are not lyke to lose their senses, nor their vn∣derstanding: in whose Natiuity the Moone doth apply to Mercury, eyther by coniunction or by aspect. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. Argent. SEt a rounde glasse full of water against the hotte Sunne, that it maye stande fast: and then holde something that is very drie, and wyll take fyre ease∣ly, nye to the same glasse, betweene the glasse and the Sunne: and it wyll set the same thing there holden, on fyre. Which is very straunge to beholde. And the rather, because fyre a hotte and drye element, is pro∣cured out of water, a colde and moyst element. Iohan. Baptist. Porta. DIdimus wrytes, that Sheepe are woont to follow them: that stoppes their eares with their wooll. IF any doth aske thee (hauing knowledge in Astro∣logie) what he dyd see in his dreame: marke the
Ascendent, when the question is made: And if thou doest finde Saturne in the Ascendent (or fyrst house,) tell him that he dyd see in his dreame Religious per∣sons: as Fryers, Heremytes, or such lyke, or places of Prayer, &c. But if thou finde Mars in the Ascendent, saye that he saw in his dreame, Captaines, Knights, Murtherers, Theeues, Harnes or Battelles, or such lyke. If the Sunne be in his first house: he dyd see Gardins, Trees, with fruites, Golde, or a King. If Venus be in the Ascendent: he dyd see a fayre Uirgin, or some eating or drinking, or one lying with a Wo∣man, or that haue things wherin they are delighted, or else to playe, or to walke abroade, or whyte or red garmentes. If Mercury be in the first house: then he dyd see handsome & eloquent men reasoning, or Pal∣laces decked with Curtens, and rytch hanginges or cloathes, bookes or wrytings of salutation, or of ac∣coumpts. If the Moone be in the first house: he dyd see ryuers, or water, or precious stones, or some that dyd eate or drinke, or his Mother, or his Awnt, or his Mothers Syster. This sayth Haly Abenragel. But Messahala, and Alhayhat, and Abrier Farsal, haue sayde: looke in the sygne of the ninth house from the Ascendent, and if thou doest finde in the same house, any of the seuen Planettes, iudge that the vision or dreame was of them, as is before, when they are founde in the first house. And adde to the sygnificati∣on of the Sunne, (that is, if the Sun be in the ninthe house,) that he dyd see him selfe flying betweene hea∣uen and earth, or that he dyd see a great lyght: and if there be no Planets in the ninth house: then marke him that is in the first house: if none be there: then marke who is in the thirde house: if none be there:
then looke in the fowrth house: if none be there: looke in the seuenth house: if none be there: then looke in the tenth house. And iudge according to the sygnification of euery Planet: and thou shalt be certified, God wyl∣ling. Haly Abenragell. AGainst the quarten ague, take the vrine that the partie makes at one tyme in his fytte, and kneade flowre therewith: and when the same is baked, then geue it to a Dogge of the same house. And when you haue done thus thryse: the partie wyll be whole and ryd of the disease. And in his steade the Dogge wil be sicke. But for a man that is sicke, a Dogge must be chosen. If a woman, a bytch must be had. This was taken out of an often proued experiment of an Itali∣an, by the report of Mizaldus. WHosoeuer desyres to see the Sun eclipsed with∣out hurting their eyes: Let them beholde the shadow therof in a vessel, wherin oyle is put: Where, they may beholde and see it without daunger. For a fatty humor is not easely troubled. And what shapes or fourmes it doth receyue: It representeth the same truely. Mizaldus. A Lamen, or thyn plate of Gold, borne on the seame of the brayne, doth strengthen the brayne. The  same hanged against the region or place of the harte: doth helpe the beating of the harte, and encreaseth gladnes. And if it be put vpon the reynes of the back: it strengthens the reynes, and cooles the same, and ceaseth the paynes of the backe. But Mizaldus wysh∣eth that the same plate be beaten and made of pure
and fyne Golde, when the Sunne is in Leo, called the Lion: And Iupiter & the Moone beholding each other happely. Hermes. Arnoldus Villa nouanus. &c. Alij. IF the Lord of the Horoscope, be in the seuenth house Combust, and the Sunne hath no essentiall dygni∣tye in the same: then he (that is then borne,) shall pe∣rish by the handes of many, which wyll ryse against him. But if the Sunne haue then any power in the seuenth house: he shall dye by the Kings commaun∣dement. Taisnier. IT is proued and a secrete: that if three graynes of Masticke be geuen to the patient to be swalowed, euery night at his going to bed: it doth preserue him from the paynes of the stomacke, and doth cure him. Emperica benedicti victorij. I knowe by proofe, it helpes the stomack maruelously. THis water following, breakes the Stone in the bladder, and in the reynes. Take of the iuyce of Saxisrage, two pyntes, of Gromell, and of the iuyce of Perceley, of eyther one pynt, of the best Uinegar of a pleasaunt Wine, eyght ounces: dystyll all these to∣gether▪ and let the lycquor distylled be kept in a glasse with a narrow mouth: Of which mynister in the morning one ounce at a tyme, as much at noone, and as much at euening going to bed. This is a proued water, as sayth Fumanellus. TO dreame that Eagles flyes ouer your head: doth betoken euil fortune. To dreame that you see your face in ye water: sygnifyes long lyfe. To follow Bees:
betokens gaine or profyt. To be marryed: sygnifies that some of your kynsfolkes is dead. To dreame that you worshyp God: sygnifyes gladnes. To looke in a glasse: doth portende some yssewe, or a chylde. To haue oyle powred vpon you: sygnifyes ioy. Michael Scotus, et Artemidorus. IF you would haue Copper to melt quickly, and run easely: put the hooues of a Horse into the same, be∣tweene the melting and powring out therof. Mizal∣dus had this secrete of an expert Italyan. GOates wyl not stray, or wander: if you cut of their beards. Florentinus Geoponicus, and Zoroaster. IF you put a Tode in a new earthen potte, and the same be couered in the grounde: in the myddes of a corne fyelde: it is sayde there wyll be no hurtfull tem∣pestes or stormes there. As Archibius dyd wryte to Antiochus King of Siria. Plinio Authore. IF the Lorde of the eyght house, be founde in the twelfth house, with an euyll Planet, or in his euyll Aspect: (it showes,) the chylde then borne wyll dye a captiue, (that is) in pryson, or as one that doth flye a∣way. Taisnier. WHosoeuer annoynts their belly with this oynt∣ment folowing, it easeth the paine of the head, it purgeth the stomack, it comforteth ye appetyte, & cla∣rifieth the eyes. Take of ye iuice of smallach two oun∣ces, of the iuice of Mercury, fowre ounces, of goose grease & Hens grease, of either of thē a pound, of Rosē
two ounces, of Masticke, and Frankyncence, of either fyue drams, of Cassia Fistula, two drams: and put therto iuyce of Walwoort, and of the inner rynde of Elderne, and myxe them all well together, and make therof an oyntment. This if it be well made, is a ve∣ry good thing. THe Squyncie, or any other payne of the throate, wyll be helpt with this following. Marke where a Swine doth rubbe him, and then rubbe your hand on the same woodde, post, or stone: with which hande rubbe your sore or swolne throate. And as some saye that haue proued it: cut of a peece of the same wood, where the Swine dyd rubbe himselfe, and rubbe the swolne or grieued place therwith. But the rubbing of the Swines necke, is the best for the necke: the legge for the legge: and so that part of the Swine, for the lyke part of the personne grieued or diseased. This is a very true and often proued thing. TAke a pynt of whyte Wine, one handfull of wood∣binde leaues, or two or three ounces of the water of Woodbinde, and a quarter of a pounde of the pow∣der of Ginger, seethe them all together vntyll they be something thycke: And annoynt a red pympled face therwith fiue or sixe tymes, and it wyl make it faire. This is proued. LVdonicus Viues doth wryte, that within the me∣mory of his Auncestors, or Fathers, there was a Sepulchre or Toombe pluckt vp: wherin a burning Candle was founde, made (as was wytnessed by wryting) fyue hundreth yeares before. And when it
was touched or handled: by and by it was resolued into powder. Iohannes Langius. IF you woulde haue a deepe Well made, it is best to dygge the same when the Sun is in the last partes of Virgo, before the Autumnall equinoctiall: (which is about the beginning of September, or immediat∣ly after,) for then through the great heate, and dry∣nes of the Sommer: the earth wants rayne. Mizal∣dus had this of one that was skylfull in such thinges. Which was a maister Carpentar. IF any be bytten or stricken of a Scorpion, which shall eate Basyll the same daye: he shall be made whole therof. Aphri. reports it. IF any fall sicke in the howre of the Sunne: he wyll haue a strong Feuer or ague. And many times shall be vexed in his minde: which wyll bring no small hurt vnto him. Haly Abenragel. THe iuyce of Coryander, geuen to them that haue the falling Euyll to drinke: wyll not suffer the hu∣mor to ascende into the head, and it worketh great helpe to the diseased. This was written in an olde booke. WHosoeuer is brought weake, either by some gre∣uous sicknes, or disease, of long continuaunce, or by woundes receyued, or any other waye: and ther∣vppon haue a syege of Melancholy, lyke to blacke bloud: he shall doubtles dye the next daye after. Hip∣pocrates in suis Aphor.
A Sausfleame or redde pympled face, is helped with this medicine following. Take Enula Campana, fowre ounces, and seethe it with vinegar, tyll the vi∣negar be sodden in: then stampe it small, and then put thereto quycksyluer and brymstone, of eyther fowre drams, and Barrowes grease, fowre ounces: & beate them all together, and make therof a plaster, and laye it to the enfected or spotted place in the face, all night: and on the morrowe wash it of with warme water. Doo thus sixe or seuen nightes, and it wyll helpe it without doubt. THe fyrst seedes, that ye Hee, or Male Pyony brings forth (being round and black,) do maruelously re∣create or helpe them that haue the fallyng sycknes: If some therof be stampt and taken with Oximel scil∣litick, which is to be had at the Apothecaries: and with the syrrup of Sticados, & a lytle Nutmug: which Lemnius doth wytnes for a very trueth. WHosoeuer is stricken or hurte of any venemous woorme, or other thing: or else bytten of a madde Dogge. Let them take heede dillygently that the same thing that dyd hurt them, see them not, vn∣tyl they be perfectly whole. For the Hebrew Phisiti∣ons saye, that the party hurt, shall then dye, or els be in peryll afresh: yea though they begynne to waxe whole when they see them. Mizaldus. ONe handful of Basyll, with ten sea Crabs, stampt or beaten together: doth make all the Scorpions to come to that place, that are nye to the same. Aphri. as Mizaldus sayth.
IF the Lorde of the eyght house, be afflicted in the fowrth house, (it sygnifyes,) the chylde then borne, shall dye in pryson. Taisnier. WIne wherin the rynde of an Ashe tree hath bene sodden, drunke fasting, sixe or seuen morninges together: doth perfectly helpe thē that are tormented with the paines of the splene. (Which makes one to haue a great payne in the left syde, & there most griefe is after meate.) And if you annoynt the grieued place so long with an oyntment called Deathea, euery mor∣ning and euening. It is an excellent thing lykewise. BEholde a syngular Oyle or Baulme drawne out of waxe and Turpentine, which dryeth and mighte∣ly perseth where the same is applyed: taken out of the secretes of Fallopius. Take of the purest and clearest Turpentine that can be gotten, one pounde and two ounces, of new yellowe waxe that is odori∣ferous, twelue ounces, of Nutmugges and Cloues, of eyther one ounce, of common ashes, syxe ounces: beate all these wel together, then put the same into a Retorte, fenced with Lute of Wisedome, and set in ashes, and distyll it with a slowe fyre at the fyrst, and after encrease the fyre vntyl all be distilled: which ga∣thered, distyll the seconde tyme in a glasse body with an heade & receauer, putting vnto it before the distyl∣ling fowre ounces of the powder of brycke or Tyles. Which dyllygently luted in the ioyntes, maynteyne fyre vnder it, vntyll no more wyll come, then haue you purchased an Oyle of a rubyne cullour, which worketh myracles in woundes, especially: where synnues be harmed. This also helpeth any manner
of rewme proceeded of a colde cause, it helpeth be∣sydes the cough, by annointing the region of ye breast therewith: and it is also of great importaunce vnto many other griefes, inuented and proued by the a∣boue sayde Author many tymes. This excellent oyle I had out of that worthy Booke, called ye new Iewell of Health: which many perhappes should neuer haue read in this my booke, that neuer shall heare tell of that which makes me describe herein some notable thinges therein vttered. A Notable and often proued plaster, to destroy any impostume, swelling, and stytche, in what place of the body soeuer it be: is now described as followeth. Take of the roote of Hollyocke, (cleane washed and cutte in peeces,) two good handfull, and seethe the same in fayre water, vntyll the sayde roote be some∣thing tender. Then take out the sayde roote, and put into the same water, of Fenecreeke, and Lyn seede, of eyther one handfull, (something stamped or brused,) & seethe them together vntyll the water be ropeing like byrdlime: then stampe the sayd roote of Hollyock before sodde. And put it therto with an handfull of Barly meale, and frye them together with Bores grease, or Barrowes grease: (and if neede be, you maye take sheepe suet,) then laye a plaster thereof to the sore, or grieued place, as hotte as the party maye suffer it: and let the same lye twelue howres vnre∣moued at the least, and after applye another plaster of the same therto, in such order: and within nyne plasters it wyll worke the full effect. It hath helpt & dyssolued the Pluresy, with the applying of three or fowre plasters. A thing of smal cost, and great vertue.
WHen the Lord of the Ascendēt is impedite or In∣fortunate of the Lord of the second house: It syg∣nifies  that the syck shal not be healed, but with great expences of money, or els dye. And vniuersally, marke what Planet doth Infortunate the Lord of the Ascē∣dent. The sycke is lyke to haue harme or hynderance by such things, as that house doth sygnifie, whereof that Infortunating Planet is Lord, or Sygnifyer. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. EGge shelles dryed and beaten to powder, and ge∣uen in whyte Wine: breaketh the stone. It is a tryed medicine, as one affyrmed to me. SUgar (especially, Ualencia sugar,) made in pouder, and put into a wound or cutte: doth not onely clense all corruption from it, and consumes all superfluous flesh or matter in it: but also heales it maruelously. If you lyst you may mixe a lytle fresh butter therewith: wherby it wyll not be of the lesse vertue. This is a sure, excellent, easye, and a ready medicine: who lyst to trye it, shall finde it a syngular thing. A Certaine Wench was borne within sixteen miles of London: who within a yeare and a halfe after  her byrth, dyd begyn to eate earth, stones, bricke, and grauell. And so continued therin, (hauing all her de∣lyght in eating of such baggage:) also she dyd eate the woollen sleeues that were on her armes, besydes that she dyd eate a gloue. And on a tyme as her mo∣ther dyd feede her with mylke: there chaunst to fall a great peece of soote out of the chymney, into the sayd mylke: which soote, the sayd chyld tooke out of ye dysh
with her fyngers, and dyd eate it most greedly. She abhorred then bread & butter, and other such natural foode. Wherby she was maruelously consumed with a fluxe, and she yet lyueth, hauing nothing on her but skyn and bone. I sawe her in Iune. 1577. She was borne in Chayrsey, within two or three myles of Stanes, at which tyme she was full three yeares of age. IT is sayde that Myse dung, with the ashes of bur∣ned Waspes, and of hasel Nuts, and a lytle vinegar of Roses put therto: doth trymly decke a bauld place with heayrs: if the same place be often tymes rubbed or annoynted therwith. Mizaldus. IF any Beast of the female kinde, doth pisse vpon the vrine of a Woolfe newly made: the same Beast shal neuer conceaue. Pithagoras. AEtius geues counsayle, that that Dogge be buried or put into the ground in any wyse, which is dead by taking his disease frō a man: for it is certain, (saith he,) that daungerous and many effects, (the man be∣ing escaped,) are turned, or ouerpowred into him. THe troublesome, or vnpleasaunt noyse of Frogges in the night, wyll cease: if you set a Candle bur∣ning on the bancke syde nye the water where they be. Or els many lyghtes, according to the greatnes of the place where they be. Africanus Geopon. And this was proued at Parys, by the meanes of a Pre∣sydent there, that therewith was troubled. Mizal∣dus.
IT is the opinion of many, that an hearbe (called Leucacanthus,) that is Whyt thorne: (euen as the Bay tree,) is neuer strucken nor touched with lyght∣ning, nor is not touched with any euyl from heauen. Mizaldus. ZAel sayth, that he hath proued in many Natiui∣ties, where the Moone is in Virgo, opposite with the Sun: that the chyld thē borne, hath ben drownd. SIxe cloues of Garlycke, stampt and strayned into a draught of Rennish Wine, & so drunke: is a present remedy for the collyck, stone, & the strangury. An ex∣cellent tryed medicine: if you take it three dayes. MAke powder of the flowres of Elderne, gathered on Mydsomer daye, being before well dryed, and vse a spoonefull therof in a good draught of Burrage water, morning & euening, fyrst and last, for the space of a month: and it wyl make you seeme young a great whyle. This I had out of an olde wrytten booke, as proued. TAke Horseleaches, and burne thē to powder, and myxe it with Eysell, then vse to rubbe the place therwith, where you would haue heaire to grow no more: and there wyll no heaire growe in that place. This was a secrete of a notable Practyser. WHosoeuer vses to drinke butter mylke, they wyll be laratiue, although they be very much bound, and can not go to the stooe. Proued.
THey are lyke to haue the falling sycknes, in whose natiuities the Moone and Mercury do not behold the one the other. Or where neither of them do be∣hold the Ascendent: and wheras in the day tyme Sa∣turne is the sygnifyer of the qualyties of the mynde: and being then in an Angle, and Mars in natiuityes of the night. THat young Beasts be not hurt of their fetters, or that being hurt of them, they may be cured: Tye vnto their necks a Date stone bored through. Mizal∣dus. IF you geue to them that haue the falling sycknes, this medicine or Antidote following three dayes, whiles the Moone is coniunct to Iupiter: it wyl helpe him. Take of Mase, the seedes of Pyony & the rootes of the same, halfe a dram, the leaues of Gelyuors, and of Prymroses, (which some takes to be the Daysie) one dram: stampe them, and geue it to drinke with whyte Wine. (The party being fasting.) Mizaldus. AS a certayne countrey man, dyd sleepe open mou∣thed in ye fieldes: a Serpent crept in at his mouth, and so into his body: but after the sayde man cured him selfe therof, with the eating of Garlyke. But he enfected his wife with poyson: by hauing to do with her carnally: wherof she dyed, which was very rare and straunge. Volateranus. POwder made of the stone of a Swallow, geuen in drinke to them that haue the falling sycknes: hea∣leth them without doubt, for it is a sure experiment. Petrus Hispanus.
IF thou would know whether a Woman be concea∣ued with chyld, or not: geue to her two spoonefuls of water, and one spooneful of clarified Honny, mingled together to drink, when she goeth to sleepe: and if she feele grypings and paynes in her belly in the nyght, she is with chylde: if she feele none, she is not. This is very true and often proued. HE wyll neuer be poore, of whose Natiuity Iupiter is rular, or Lorde. Celi enarrant: The Author of which worke is vnknowne. THis following wyll take spots out of the face, and bewtify the same. Put seuen whole Egs, in most pure and strong Uineger, and let them lye therein so long, vntyll theyr shelles be as soft as theyr inwarde skynnes: and myxe therto fowre ounces of mustarde seede, before made in powder (or stampt:) then stampe or grinde them together, and therwith let the face be often annoynted. This hath bene proued: and Trotu∣la affyrmes it also for the lyke purpose. GReene nettels layd in the vryne of one that is sick, and so stieped therin for ye space of .xxiiii. howres: if after the same tyme they be taken out greene and fresh: it betokens that the syck party wyll recouer of that sycknes: if they be wythered: it is a great token of death. Mizaldus. FINIS. Lib. 5.
❧The syxt Booke of Notable thinges. IF you would haue a∣ny Beast, or any parte of the same, (of what cullour soeuer he be) to be turned into white, shaue of the heairs, & smoake the same that is shauen, with the fume of Brymstone: and whyte heayres wyll growe there. You may proue the same in flowres. Mizaldus. THe berryes of Whyt thorne, taken with whyte Wine: is of great force, for destroying or expelling of the stone. It is knowne by the practise or experi∣ence of the countrey men. Mizaldus. (IN a question of a vision, or dreame:) marke the Lorde, or the Alumten of the Ascendent, and the Moone, and consider if thou findest eyther of them in the ninth, or the thyrde house: but if you finde none of them there, then marke, if you finde eyther of them in the Ascendent or fyrst house, or in any of his Angles: and if you so finde eyther of them, and the same be se∣perate from a good Planet, & applyed to a good Pla∣net: It sygnifyes that the dreame is good & pleasant, and of a good sygnifycation, and is of the condition of that good Planet, to whom he applyes: and the pro∣fyt or cōmodity of his dreame, shalbe of the condition of the house where he is in the figure, and of the con∣dition of ye house which he doth beholde with a good Asspect. But if he be seperate from an euyll Planet, and applyes also to an euyll Planet: Then the vision
or dreame, is euyl & to be feared, and is of an euyl sig∣nification. Which euyll & harme shal be, according to the nature of the Planet, to whom the same applyes, and according to the nature of the house wherin he is in the fygure, & according to the nature of that euyll Planet. But if he be seperate from a good Planet, and applyes to an euyll Planet: saye that the vision or dreame was good and pleasaunt, but he hath an euil sygnification. But if he be seperate from an euyl Pla∣net, and doth apply to a good Planet: say that the vi∣sion or dreame was fowle & euyll, but it hath a good sygnifycation, and the profyt or successe thereof, wyll be according to the nature of the Planet, to whom he doth applye, and according to the nature of the house wherein he is, in the fygure. (As we haue sayde.) Therefore according to this waye and rule, consyder the visions or dreames: and confer one to another, & thou shalt be certified, (God wylling.) Haly Abenra. IT is proued, and a secrete: that if you geue to them that haue the hyckop, euery morning three howres before meate, one roote of greene Gynger, and im∣mediatly after drinking two draughts of Malmesey: you shall see that he wyll be soone cured. Emperici be∣nedicti victorij. AS word wherwith a man is kylled, ye bloud being cleane wypt from it, & put into a hotte fyre, which being taken out of the same, doth manifestly shew the murther, for so farre as the sword was in the woun∣ded person: so farre it wyll be of a contrary cullour to the sword. It was told me that a Byshop dyd trye it to be true, by one of his men.
IF the bloud of a Cocke be dryed, and made in pow∣der, and myxt in Wyne, wherin there is water: it makes the water swym aboue. This was of the re∣lation of a learned Moonke. Mizaldus. PLanteyn hath a maruelous vertue, to deliuer them of the Plague, that are infected therwith: geuen any manner of way. Proued. THe more lyuely and quick that a Horse is, the more deeper he wyl thrust his nose into the water, when he drynkes. Plinius. SWyne and Elephants doo hate whyte garments, Bulles and Oxen hates maruelously garmentes that be of purple cullour: which many vnder such ap∣parel haue some tymes proued to theyr great griefe. Plinius. IF the Lord of the eight house, be in the eyght house, or beholde the same happely: the chyld then borne wyll dye in his countrey, or nye the same. Taisnier. THe white of an Egge, and the iuyce of Perytory of the wall, well beaten together and scummed, and then one droppe of that lycquor put into the eye: doth heale the webbe in the eye. This is true, and pro∣ued. A Proued Oyle which is very good for the dropsie, called Ascites, if all the belly or paunche be annoin∣ted therwith. Take of Turpentine one pounde, of Frankynsence, Mastick, Myrre, of each two drams,
Landanum, one dram, Nutmugs, Cloues, Galenga, Zedoary, of each one dram and a halfe, of the iuyce of Walwoort, and the iuyce of Cucumber, (called Cu∣cumis asinimus) of either one ounce: Let them be pou∣dred that are to be powdred, and let thē be all myxed together, & put them in a Lymbeck, and let an Oyle be distylled therof, and it is a most secrete thing, not onely to take awaye the swelling of the bellye in the dropsie, called Ascites: but also any flegmatyke swel∣ling of any other member of mans body, & it is mar∣uelous for the paynes of ioyntes and members, of a colde cause. Emperica benedicti. A Certayne Butchers wyfe being with chylde, as she was sturring the bloud of a Beast newlye kyl∣led, a lytle therof dyd chaunce to sprinckle or spurt on her face: which, she with her hād suddenly wiped off, & then wyped the same hande on her left thygh: Who after being brought to bedde of a boy, the same boy had and hath the lyke marke, or bloud spot on his left thygh. They that knew both the Father, Mother, and the chylde, tolde this for a very trueth. Therfore it is not good to hyt a woman suddenly, being with chylde, on the face or otherwyse: least the chylde she is with all, be so marked, as is declared in other pla∣ces of this booke. THe sycke person can not escape, when the lyght of the tyme, (that is,) the Sunne in the daye, and the Moone in the nyght, and the Alumten of the Ascendent, are both impedyte, or euyll affected of the Lord of the eyght house, or of the Lord of the fowrth house. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.
IF you wyll take the heair from any place of the bo∣dy, and woulde haue it to growe there no more: stampe Antes egges with the iuyce of Henbane and Humlockes, or with the bloud of a Backe, or Rere∣mowse: and annoynt the place therewith. Mizal∣dus. IF you cutte the Lyuer of a Beast, in peeces: and put into the same peeces, the powder of Nux vomica, called the Spuing Nutte, (which is to be had at the Apothecaryes,) the same peeces being strowed or layde in an open place, where Rauens or Crowes maye resort thereto: the Crowes or Rauens that eates thereof, can not flye away: whereby you maye take them easelye. This I knowe to be certayne and true. THe lytle Byrde, called Linaria, begynnes to leaue synging, and also to be sycke, when the Starre cal∣led the lytle Dogge, doth ryse, and wyll plucke off her fethers. Which chaunceth about the myddes of Iuly: as we haue proued by one and other, (sayeth Mizaldus) the space of tenne yeares. And therevpon haue shewed to many, that then that Starre dyd surly ryse. And in a Larke we haue obserued the same, (sayth hee:) in the rysing of Arcture wyth the Sunne. And it is not to be doubted, but that other Byrdes, and lyuing thinges, haue theyr peculyar Starre, wherby they are mooued to syng, or to hold theyr peace, to sadnesse or gladnesse: which I desyre the dillygent searchers of secretes to obserue. Thus much Mizaldus.
THe Lorde of the Ascendent in the twelfth house, in a humaine sygne, without the beames of good Starres: the Chylde then borne wyll be imprisoned. This is true and often proued: and also Taisnier af∣fyrmes it. THis following is a sure and proued medicine for the toothe ache. Take a handfull of ground Iuy, as much of Spere Mint, and as much of Salt, stamp them all a lytle together, then put all the same into a pynt of vynegar, and seethe all wel ouer the fyre: then streyne it well, and put the same into a close glasen vessell, or bottell: and when you wyll occupy it, take a spoonefull thereof, and put it into that syde of the mouth that aketh, and holde downe your cheeke that it may descende to the rootes of the aking teeth: and it wyll take the ache and payne away presently. This was taught mee by a woman, to whome ma∣ny resorted for helpe: who vsed onely this medicine therfore. AN oyntment made of the oyle of bytter Almonds, Honny, the rootes of Lyllies, and of waxe: Is an excellent thing to annoynt the face withall,to get awaye wrinckles, spottes, and other deformyties of the face. Mizaldus. YOu maye take Foxes with this wyle following. Annoynt the soles of your shoes, with a peece of fatte Swynes fleshe as broade as your hand, newly tosted, or a lytle broyled at the fyre, when you go out of the wood homewarde. And in euery of your stppes cast a peece of the Lyuer of a Swyne rosted,
and dypt in honny: and drawe after your backe, the dead carkas of a Catte, and when the Foxe folowing thee, comes neare vnto the steppes: be sure to haue a man nye thee with bow and shafts to shoote at him: or by some other meanes to hyt him. Mizaldus had this of an expert Hunter. WOmen that haue double apples in theyr eyes, or strales: do euery where hurt with their looking. (Which is called of some ouerlooking.) Cicero. BOdyes that are strucken with lyghtning, doo re∣mayne vncorrupt: therfore in auncient tyme they dyd neyther burne nor burye the bodyes of such as were strucken or kylled with lyghtning, whervpon it is playne to all men, that the same bodyes are not corrupt as others. Mizaldus. IF the Lorde of the eyght house, be in the thyrde or nynth house: (it sygnifyes) the chylde then borne, shall dye among Straungers, or out of his natyue soyle. Taisnier. WOormewood newly stamped with the whyte of an Egge, and layde ouer the eyes, taketh awaye the bloud and readnes therof: of what humor soeuer it come. This hath bene often proued. IF one do take this confection following fasting, he shall neuer fall into the paynes of collycke nor Ily∣acke. Take the outwarde ryndes of Radyshes, being taken or pared thycke, two pounde, whyte Honny, fowre pound, let thē boyle together vnto ye consump∣tion
of halfe the Honny, then put therto of the pow∣ders of Cynamom, Cloues, Nutmugs, Mace, blacke Pepper, of each two drams, mixe them together, and let them be put vp in a cleare vessell, and let the pati∣ent take & eate euerye morning halfe an ounce of the sayde ryndes of the Radishes. Benedictus victorius Fauentinus. IF you take the powder of Brasell, & myngle it well with mylke, but so that it be very red, & put therin eyther staffe, wood, or bone, letting it lye therin eight dayes: it wyll make the same wood or bone red, for euer. I had this out of an olde written booke. TO dreame that you go ouer a broken Brydge, be∣tokens feare: to haue your head cutte off for a hey∣nous offence, sygnifyes the death of friends: to make cleane the handes, betokens trouble: to see hands fyl∣thy or fowle, doth sygnify losse and daunger: to feede Lambes, sygnifies griefe, or payne: to take flyes, syg∣nifyes wrong or iniury. Mizaldus. A Garlande made of Iuy leaues, and layd vpon wo∣mens paps, or dugs, that hangs flagging down: it gathers them together, and makes them rounde. Iuy leaues stampt and applyed thereto, workes the lyke effect. Mizaldus. A Tode being strucken of a Spyder, or of a Serpēt: doth helpe herselfe by eating of Planten. Plinius. For confyrmation whereof, a Tode being on the ground hard by a wall, a Spyder dyd suddenly strike the sayde Tode on the backe: Which when the Tode
felt, begynning to swell, dyd eate of Planten nye vn∣to the place. Wherof being well, the Spyder againe, dyd poyson the Tode, with her venome as before. Which done, the Tode preserued her selfe with the sayde Planten as before. But one that chaunst to beholde the same, dyd then cutte vp the sayde Plan∣ten, and tooke it away from that place. Which Tode the thyrde tyme being strucken, or rather poysoned of the spyder, as before: Immediatly searching for the sayde Planten, (for as it shoulde seeme there was no more Planten nye to that place:) which when she coulde not fynde, dyd swell so sore, that soone after she dyd burst withall. The party that dyd take away the same Planten, and dyd see this straunge & mar∣uelous matter, dyd tell me this for a verye trueth. Whose credyte I knewe to be such, that I am bolde here to place the same hauing such good occasion. And I hearde that a noble man of this Realme, dyd see the lyke. WHosoeuer is sore grieued with the stone, and can not make water, let them drinke a spoonefull of the powder called Puluis duiriticus, in a draught of whyte Wyne: (which you maye haue made at the Apothecaries,) and vse it three or fowre morninges together, or something lesse, if you lyste. Geue halfe so much to a chylde, and without doubt, it wyll make them auoyde the stone, and to make water presently. I haue proued it often tymes to be a souereyne thing in this case. And there was one from whom I had it, that got therewith aboue an hundreth pound by the yeare. If it be truely and well made. You wyll praise it as wel as I haue done, and because it is such
a notable thing, I would haue it better knowne, and more vsed. MAke oyle of Paper, by burning fayre cleane Pa∣per on a cleane pewter dyshe or sawcer: or holde a peece of fayre Paper folded on a knyues poynt, and set fyre on the nethermost ende thereof, and holde the same nye vnto the sawcer: and out thereof wyll come a lyttle moyst Oyle, and be on the sawcer. Take a lyttle thereof on a cleane fether, and put it into the eye that is sore or dymme of syght: and it wyll helpe the same maruellouslye. It hath bene proued in ma∣ny to be excellent. And Euonimus doth prayse it therefore. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent be in the eyght house Infortunate, it sygnifyes that the sycke party wyll kyll him selfe through euyll guyding of himselfe. Ia∣tromathematica. Guat. Ryff. A Spryte came nye vnto M. Brutus, leading an ar∣my of men from Asia: when, Brutus asked him who he was: he aunswered, I am thy euyll Angell, whom thou shalt see in the fieldes of Philoppis in Thessaly, and there Brutus dyed in conflyct. Plutarchus. A Grymony sodden in redde wyne, wherewith if woundes be washt, it cleanseth all fylths and cor∣ruption from them. And the leaues of Agremony beaten, or stampte, and tyed vpon woundes that bee euyll ioyned, or knytte together: by and by it doth open them. A certayne Spanyarde tolde this to Mizaldus.
HE that receyues a summe of money, in the howre of Venus: he wyll spende the same with women, in pleasures and wantonnes. Haly. THe iuyce of Rew myxt with Honny, that hath ben skummed, & a lytle therof put into the eye at once, ryddeth them that vse it, of an auncient dymnes of the syght. Proued often. IF a Woman hath not conceaued, and thou wylt knowe whether she shall conceaue or not: let her be well couered with cloathes, and beneath let a fumy∣gation be made of hotte thinges, and odoriferous, or sweete smelling: for if the smell come vp through her body to the nose, and mouth: be sure that she is not barren of her selfe. Hidpocrates Aphor. WHosoeuer is greued & tormented with the stone, let them take one ounce of the rootes of Radishe, cut in slyces: and lay the same to stiepe in halfe a pint of good whyte Wine all night, then streyne the same well, and put therto of the Electuary, called Lithon∣tripon, of the description of Nicholas: and also Iusti∣num, one dram: myxe them with the sayde whyte Wine, wherein the Radish was infused, and let him that is grieued with the stone, receyue all the same at one tyme: and you shall see a maruelous woke thereof. If neede be, let him receyue the lyke quanti∣tie thereof three or fowre dayes together. This is proued to be a sure & an excellent thing, for breaking and auoyding the stone, and grauell. Be sure that the Apothecaries make it of good stuffe.
A Head of Garlycke, (the skyns pulled off, and a lytle brused,) layde by equall partes, to the hollowe partes of the soles of theyr feete, that are grieuously tormented with the toothe ache: especially, if it come of a colde cause, and be on the neather iawe: it wyll helpe them with speede, by drawing the humors out of the soles of the feete. I haue knowne them that haue taken this medicine, and haue not ben troubled with the tooth ache of seuen yeares after. THat man is lyke to haue fewe Chyldren, in whose Natiuity Saturne is in the Ascendent, opposyte to Venus: or if Venus be in a barraine signe, infortunate of Saturne: or if Venus be in the house of Saturne, espe∣cially, Infortunate of him. Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff. IF you rubbe or touch Wartes with the leaues of a Fygge tree, the Warts wyll consume and vanish a∣way: so that the sayde leaues be buryed within the earth or grounde. Some ascribes the same to the harte of a Pigion. Mizaldus. ELephants of all other Beastes, do chiefly hate the Mowse. So that if they shall see or perceyue, that a Mowse hath once touched their meate that is be∣fore them, they loathe the same, and wyll not eate a bytte therof. Plinius. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent, be Combust in the twelfth house, he that is then borne, wyll dye in pri∣son, or in captiuitie. Taisnier.
THe powder of the berries of Bryony▪ drunke in the water wherein water Cresses are sod: doth mar∣uelously heale the Strangury. IF any Woman great with chylde, shall take this drinke following, euery other day in the morning, three howres before she eate any meate, begynning the same about tenne dayes or a fortnight before the tyme of the byrth: the byrth shall not onely be made more easye, but also she shall bring forth her chylde without payne. Take of the great Treackle, one scruple, (which is the weyght of .xxiiii. barly cornes,) the powder of Lycquerys, and the powder of Cyna∣mom, of eyther three graynes, of good whyte Wine, one ounce and a halfe, myxe all together, and make there of a drynke, and let it be geuen to the Woman with Chylde, in such manner as is before sayde. Benedictus victorius fauentinus, in his Booke called Emperica. THis following wyll stoppe the bloudy fluxe. Take Yarrowe and Planten, of eyther a lyke muche, stampe them well together, and put thereto redde Wyne, and streyne it well, and drinke a good draught thereof, fyrst and last, three or sowre dayes together: and certaynly it wyll stay it. It is an easy and preci∣ous thing. IF you wyll prooue whether a Woman bee with chylde or not, let her make water in a copper, or brasen vessell, and let a Needle lye therein a whole nyght, that is bryght and cleane: and if she be with chylde, the Needle wyl haue redde spots on it. If not,
then it wyll be blackish or rusty. It is proued as Mi∣zaldus was enformed. IF a Crowe chaunce to eate of the rest of the fleshe wherof a Woolfe hath eaten before: the same Crow wyll dye soone after. Aclianus and Philes. NEyther falling sycknes, neyther deuyll, wyll infest or hurt one in that place: wheras a Bay tree is. The Romaynes calles it the Plant of the good An∣gell. &c. Mizaldus. WRyting Inke tempered with water, wyne, or vinegar, wherein Woormwood hath bene stie∣ped: Myse wyl not eate the Papers or Letters writ∣ten with that Inke. And also cloathes wherein Woormwood is layde or wrapt, is safe from mothes: and if there be any there, it wyll driue them awaye. Diascorides. THe howre of Mars is to be abhord, in all thinges, bothe in the begynning, and when the thing is done. Haly Abenragel. Therefore you were best to take heede, that you take no notable thyng, or great matter in hande, or beginne any long iourney, in the howre of Mars: if you can by any meanes knowe when it is. But whosoeuer puttes theyr whole trust in GOD, and guides theyr lyfe by the rule of his holye woorde: (be they neuer so symple and vn∣learned:) hee wyll so guyde them, and so instructe them, that they shall auoyde all such daungers, and prryllous tymes. And contrarye, the wyc∣ked, learned, (yea though they know the tymes, shall
not haue power to auoyde them. As I haue seene in many: which afterwarde they dyd well consyder, though to late. And as I haue sayde of Mars: so I say of Saturne. For there is neuer a good of them both. Yt I doo not thinke, that Saturne or Mars shewes such harme to them, in whose Natiuities they are Sygnifyers, or beares rule in the Ascendent: but chiefly to such in whose Natiuitie they are Lords of the .xii.vii.v. or .viii. house. But surely I haue markt it long, and yet I neuer sawe any notable thing be∣gunne in the howre of Mars or Saturne: that came to a good ende. Which they shall well finde, that begins to set forwarde towards the Sea, in Saturnes howre. I speake by tryall as well as Haly doth: which I shoulde not haue consydred so much, but by his coun∣sayle and proofe. OXen, Kyne, Bullocks, or Horsses, shall not be trou∣bled with any disease: if you hang a Harts horne vpon them. Absyrtus. IF you ioyne a Lyons skyn, to the skyn of a Woolfe, of any other Beast: it wyll make them without heayre, or cause theyr heayre to fal or consume away. Mizaldus. COewoorts, and Rew (called hearbe Grace,) are so contrary in nature the one to the other: that they ought not to be sowne nye together. Fracasto∣rius. IF any Sheepe, or else heayry Beasts, or els Man or Woman, be full of woormes in any wound or sore:
take of the wooll of the same Sheepe, or heair of that Beast, or some of the heair of that Man or Woman, and hyde the same before the rysing of the Sun, vn∣der the barke of a tree, called Trembla, (which is a kinde of black Popler tree.) Do thus certayn dayes, and thou shalt see the woormes fall out of the wound or sore myraculously: or else they wyll dye, or leaue that place. There be that ascribes the same to the Byrch tree, and also to the roote of wylde Succorye hanged at the necke, in manner of a Crosse. Which Mizaldus saw obserued in a Dog, one of whose eares was almost eaten off with woormes. IT is proued oftentymes by experiment, that many being borne in the coniunction of the Sunne and Moone, doo dye in the opposition: (that is in the full Moone:) and they that bee borne in the full of the Moone, are dead in the coniunction, (that is in the new Moone.) Taisnier. PUt two or three of the seedes of Oculus christi, into your eye: and within a whyle after you shall not feele them. Whereby you wyll thinke they are not there. But at the last they wyll droppe or fall out of them selues: compassed about with slymye matter, which hynders the syght. Which if you vse, thy wyll cleanse and cleare your eyes maruelously. This I knowe to be very true. IF one doth buye Wartes of them that haue them, and geue them a pin therfore: if the party that hath the Warts, pricke the same pyn vpon some garment that he weares daylye, or commonly, the Warte or
Wartes without doubte wyll demynish and weare away priuely, and be cleane gone in short time. This was tolde me for an often tryed and prooued thing: yea, and by such a one as had seene the experyence thereof. Also Wartes rubbed with a peece af rawe Beefe, and the same Beefe being buryed within the grounde: the Wartes wyll weare and consume, as the Beefe doth rotte in the ground. Proued. SAlt Armoniacke stampte, and myxt with water, doth make whyte Letters nothing dyffering from the cullour of Payer. But if you holde the same Pa∣per to the fyre, the Letters wyll waxe blacke. Mi∣zaldus. A Thing to be marueled at, and woorthy to be re∣membred doth followe, declared by Iouianus Pon∣tanus. A certaine Caietane Woman, (sayth he) was marryed to a Fysher, whome he dyd vse as his Wife, according to the order of Marriage, many yeares (as Anthonius Panthormita, being a friende of the same Fysher, was woont to tell to the sayde Iouianus Pon∣tanus, when he was young:) which Woman after she had bene marryed fowreteene yeares, dyd be∣came to be a Man, and suddenly, there sprung out the members of a Man, in the naturall place of the Wo∣man. Which being so ashamed of her condition, as one that thought she shoulde be mockt or laught to scorne both of Men and Women, became a Religi∣ous Woman, and lyued in a Monastary, where he knwe her the rest of her lyfe. And she was buryed
at Rome, in the Temple of Marie to Minerua. And an other Woman called Aemilia, was marryed to one Anthony a Citizen of Ebula, and after she was marryed twelue yeares, shee was chaunged into a Man, and was conuersaunt with Men: vsing then the artes and trades of men, in that Countreye, and marryed a Wyfe. This wrytes he in the tenth booke De rebus celestibus. &c. Mizaldus. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent, be Combust in the Ascendent, or in the fyrst house: it sygnifyes short lyfe to the chylde then borne. Taisnier. TAke the inner rynde of an Oake tree, and seethe it well in fayre water, and then bathe any sore, olde or newe therewith, halfe a dosen tymes together, twyse euery daye: and at euery tyme when it is thus bathed, then annoynt it with Butter and Brymstone myxt well together: and within nyne or ten dayes it wyll be whole, (God wylling.) A true and tryed me∣dicine. THis following wyll helpe the yallowe Iaundies with speede. Take a Burre roote, the greater, the better, scrape it cleane: then take a potte of new Ale, and put your roote therein, and the Ale wyll boyle, and let it be therein one daye and one nyght well stopped, then lette the patient drynke a good draught, two or three tymes: and he wyll be whole certaynly. Proued.
THe sycke is much to be feared, if in the Ascendent, or in the eyght house, or with their Lordes, there be euyll Starres or Planets. But if good Planets be there: It is safe inough. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. ARystotle and Auycen do affyrme, that of the round and short Egge, the Cocke chycken doth come: of the long and sharpe Egge, the Henne chycken. Mi∣zaldus. YF you put yallowe Amber, into hotte melted waxe, (before well skymmed:) it wyll be then as softe as claye, so that you may make thinges therof, in what forme or fashion you wyll: it wyll be so trac∣table and soft. Mizaldus had this secrete of a certaine cunning Lapidary. THere is nothing better to driue away Serpentes, or Snakes, then the smoake of olde Leather, or olde shoes burned, or else to bring them out of ones body, before crept into them by sleeping open mou∣thed. Wherof Marc. Gatinarica (an excellent Phisiti∣on) doth wryte, that the lyke dyd happen to a certain man in his tyme: to whome when many medicines were geuen in vaine, the sayd man receiued ye smoake of olde leather at his mouth by a funnell, (so that it went into his body,) and as soone as the venemous thing in his body, felt the sayd smoake: he came out at his fundament. Which was a maruelous great Uy∣per, to the great maruayle and feare of all them that were present. SEethe the inner rynde of the young braunches of a Hasell tree in small Ale, vntyll halfe be consumed,
and let them that haue the Strāgury, drinke a good draught thereof fyrst and last, for the space of eyght or nyne dayes together: and it wyll helpe them certain∣ly, for it neuer fayles. Therefore proue it, and prayse it. IN the fyrst beginning of any sicknes, or at the time of a question, for the state of the sycke person, if the Moone be corrupt (or afflicted) of Saturne in the three fyrst degrees of Scorpio: it betokens death. Iohannes Ganiuetus. A Notable medicine for the Sciatica, doth followe. Take Oxe dung, and Pigions dung, of eyther one pounde, and myxe them well together with one pot∣tell of white Wine, and let them boyle together vntyl halfe the Wyne be consumed, then streyne it through a lynnen cloath, then put thereto halfe a pounde of Honny, and twelue yolkes of Egs, and halfe a pound of melted waxe: and myxe all together with as much barly meale as wyll suffice for the making of it in a plaster, and put it hotte to the paynfull place. This was proued by King Henry the fyft, as the wryting dyd wytnes, out of the which I had this. Besydes, it hath bene synce proued. LEt the Phisition take heede of his fyrst visiting of the sycke in the howre of Saturne, and Mars, if he come to him in the howre of Saturne: eyther the sicke wyll dye, or else the Phisition shal haue great labour, doubtes, and slacknes in the curing of him. Neyther shall he helpe him, except it be euen to desperation, or out of all hope. And if he be sent for, or go to him fyrst
in the howre of Mars: there wyll be hydinges and brawlings betwixt him and the sick party, and small gayne. The howres of Iupiter and Venus are much praysed. The howres of the other Planets are in∣dyfferent. Iotromathematica. Guat. Ryff. A Greene Lyserd hath a great delyght to beholde a Man in the face, for he wyll louingly fawne vpon him as a Dog, with the mouing of his tayle. And as much as in him lyes, wyll defende him from a Ser∣pent, that lyes lurking in the hearbes to hurte him. Lemnius. THe iuyce, or water, streyned out of Radish rootes, (before stamped) myxt with whyte Wine, and the powder of Turpentine burned, or dryed in the Sun, and so receyued: is an excellent medicine to breake and dryue forth the stone. And it is geuen with hap∣py successe. A thing proued, much better then golde. Mizaldus. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent, be founde in the nynth house: he that is then borne, shall of his owne free wyll go farre and long iourneyes. And if there be a good Planet in the same nynthe house with him, or else doth beholde him with a happye Aspect: then it shall happen well to him in his iour∣neyes. If an euyll Planet, then contrarye. Tais∣nier. LAye a thynne peece of rawe Beefe, to the forehead of them that haue lost theyr voyce, and let it lye thereto all nyght vnremoued: and it wyll helpe them
presently, or at the least within three or fowre seue∣rall applications. TAke the bones of Beastes which be founde in the fyeldes, and chiefly of Horsses, (because they be best therefore,) and let them be well washed: after let them be dryed at the Sunne, then put them into a great Cawdren with water, & let them seethe long, and gather the fatte that swyms aboue, wherewith annoynt the gowte or palsey, of whatsoeuer cause they come: and it wyll be helped. SEethe Iuie, Mugwoort, Walwoort, and the inner rynde of Elderne, in water with much Salt, and bathe therewith any Sciatica, twyse or thryse a day, for eyght or nyne dayes together: and the partye grieued wyll be made hole. This I had out of an olde wrytten booke, wherin was many excellent thinges. IF you sprynckle the powder of Saffern, rounde a∣bout the weake, vpon the Oyle in a fayre greene and bryght Lampe of glasse, and let the same burne, (so that there be none other lyght in the same Cham∣ber:) it wyll beawtifye all thinges in the same place, with a fayre yallowe cullour. You may proue it by o∣ther cullours lykewise. THe dung of a Woolfe, being hydden in a Stable or house, where Cattell be, especially Sheepe: It wyll not onely make them leaue from eating of theyr meate: but also it wyll cause them to sturre vp and
downe, and to blate, or to make a noyse, and also to quake and tremble, as though their deuowring ene∣mye the Woolfe were thert present. Neyther wyll they cease from doing thus, vntyll they feele or per∣ceyue, that the sayde dung is taken away. Mizaldus. THere is nothing better to drawe forth Thornes, prickes, or any other thing whatsoeuer, in any part of the body whersoeuer it be, then blacke Sope applyed to the place: letting the same lye▪ thereto twelue howres without remouing of the same. A Certaine noble Matrone in the parts of Spaine, had a strong Imagination of a great Etheopyan, paynted in her Chamber, with other, in the tyme of the act of generation. Which Lady afterward was delyuered of a Boye, lyke to that great Etheopyan paynted, before named. Which chylde being borne, e∣uery one beleeued, that she had leyne with some one of the slaues of the Sarseyns. For that the chyld was like none of his Parents. Whervpon the ministers of Iustice, with consent of her Husbande, and other, dyd decree, that she shoulde be burned after the monthes ende. But before the mynistration of this Iustice or execution: certaine wyse men were called, whereof one desyred, that he might see the place where the chylde was begotte: which when he had seene, he consydred, that that generation was, by the strength of the Imagynatiue vertue. And then he sayde, that that great Etheopyan was the father of the chylde. Brynging forth for the confyrmation thereof, that place of the Byble, where Iacob put speckled Roddes before the Sheepe: by which Imaginatiō, the Ewes
brought forth speckled Lambes. Which when he had spoken, the Lady was delyuered from burning. Wherfore as I haue wrytten in other places of this Booke, men ought not rashly to mislyke their Wiues, (hauing none other occasion,) because theyr chyldren are vnlyke to theyr Parentes. For as you see here, and in Iacobs Lambes, Imagination is of maruel∣lous force in the tyme of generation. Which doth not onely worke in men, but in Beasts. Ganiuetus writes this Hystorye, who as it should seeme, hath it out of Lyra. THe flowres of Marygooldes, as also of Succory, and of certayne other hearbes, do begyn to open at the rysing of the Sunne, at noone they are fully and wholy opened: But they are closed, or are shutte, when the Sunne doth sette. Therfore some calles it, and such other, Sponsus solis, the Spowse of the Sunne. Because they sleepe, and are awakened with him. &c. Mizaldus. And the dayly tryall thereof, affyrmes it. IF Asses do eate much of Hemlockes, they wyll be cast thereby into a deepe and dead sleepe, that they wyll seeme to be dead. Which hath deceyued the countrey men being ignoraunt therof: for as they haue bene fleying of theyr skyns, (thynking that they were dead,) the sely Asses haue sturred and wakened out of their sleepe: to the great terror of them that dyd flea them, or cutte of their skyns, and to the great laughing of them that dyd behold them. As Andreas Matthiolus, (that learned Phisition,) hath wrytten in his commentaries vpon Diascorides.
PUt the ashes of a burnt Snayle, vpon the spotte in the eye: and within three dayes it wyll take it a∣waye. Barth. IF one come to aske or enquyre the Astrologian, for any thing in the howre of an euyll Planet, that is: of Saturne or Mars, it is a suspicion rather to euyll then to good. And chiefly, if that euyll Planet be any where impedyte, Retograde, or Combust, or in his fall, or Cadent from an Angle. And this is to be vn∣derstanded lykewise of the comming of any on the behalfe of any that is sycke, or brynging the vryne of the sycke, or of any that doth aske counsayle, or en∣quire of the estate of the sycke, (though the vryne be not seene,) it is a suspicion of euyll for the sick: though it be not a full testimony therof. Ganiuetus. IF a Woman, that is too much weakened with her monthly course, doth cast the same, or let the same runne into a hoale, made in the grounde with a three squared stake, (the same stake immediatly after be∣ing put or driuen into the same hole, and so remayne therin vnremoued:) her sayd fluxe wyll staye or cease, being thought before to be vncurable. An honest Woman reuealed this straunge secrete to me. Which proued the same to be true: and she learned it of a poore Woman, that requyred almose of her at her doore. IN the Lake called Larius, (which nowe is called Comensis,) certayne Fyshers in the wynter, dyd drawe with theyr nettes to the drye lande, a great sort of Seamewes, (seeming to be dead,) which were
ioynde together with theyr bylles or nebbes in ano∣thers tayle or fundament: and being warmed with theyr guttes, were founde a lyue. Garuas. Tibellesius. THe leaues of Dockes do lowse the belly, & makes one laxatiue: But the seedes being taken, do binde and are restryctiue. Galen. IF Wyne haue gotten any tartnes, or sowrenes: take a potte fylled with good water, and let it be well couered, then set the same potte with water in the vessell with Wyne: (so that the potte stande vnder, or within the Wyne,) and at the three dayes ende, if the Wyne haue gotten his former strength, the water wyll smell, and then the Wyne wyll lyke thee. Tarentinus. A Peece of raw Beefe, (not too thyck nor too thin,) being layde or stieped all the nyght before in good Aqua Composita, and applyed to the temples or the foreheade, without remouing all the nyght: (and thus doing three or fowre nyghtes,) doth helpe the watring and paynes of the eyes, and all distyllations and rewmes that comes from the heade or brayne. One tolde mee this which had often proued it to be most true, as a great secrete. WHen Mercury is in the tenth house not impedyte: the chylde then borne, wyll be mighty, wyse, and a great Philosopher. Celi enarrant. ANnoint young Swallowes with saffern, & soone after the old Swallowes wyll bring a stone vnto
them: wherwith the Dropsie wyll be cured. This I had out of a booke of Secretes. AN Egge layde on a Thursdaye, and emptied, and fylled with Salt, and lo set in the fyre, remayning there vntyll it maye be made in powder, and then cankred teethe rubbed with the powder thereof: it both kylles the cankar, and the woormes that eates the teethe, and destroyes them. Proued for trueth. THis following wyll destroy Ringwoormes, Tet∣ters, and Scales in the hands. Take whyte Cop∣rose, the quantity of two beanes, & put it into a pynt of cleare water, tyll it be resolued, or melted: and with that water washe the place or handes, tyll they be whole. Proued. STampe Pearceley in whyte Wine, then streyne it well, and drinke a good draught therof: and it wyll cause thee to make water, and breake the stone, vse it fyue or syxe tymes. This hath bene well proued. THe wyse and learned men in olde tyme, dyd think, that a Tode put into a new earthen potte, and set within the ground, and so couered with earth, in the myddes of a fyelde: wyll dryue away Crowes or Byrds from Corne that ts sowne there. But about Haruest tyme, they wyll that it be dygged vp, and to be cast forth of the lymmyts of the same fyelds, least the Corne be bytter therby. Plin. A Lytle peece of the Nauell string of a Chylde, that is newly borne, enclosed in a Ryng, and so borne
that it maye touch the flesh, or bare skynne: is a most sure helpe and remedy, against the great paynes and tormentes of the collycke. Mizaldus. THey whose heaire of the eye browes doo touch or meete together, of all other are the woorst. They doo shewe that he or she is a wicked personne, and an intyser of seruauntes, and geuen to vnlawfull and naughty artes: which Iohannes Indagnies sayth, hee hath obserued in olde Women being Wytches, which were ledde to be burned, whose eye browes were such. As Thaddeus Hageccius hath also noted. SAturne in the nynth house, doth sygnifye feares in iourneyes: but more in the Sea, chiefly, in a wate∣rye sygne: and in Cancer the house of the Moone. Taisnier. FINIS. Lib. 6.
❧The seuenth Booke of Notable thinges. THe water wherein the leaues of Planten, (that gro∣wes close to the grounde, and neare the roote) is sodde, be∣ing droonke twyse euery day, morning and euening, fyrst & last, halfe a pynt at a tyme, for ye space of fowre or fiue dayes: helpes perfectly all griefes and diseases of the blad∣der. A true medicine and often proued. A Notable water for breaking of the stone. Take of the iuyce of Saxifrage, two pound, of the iuyce of Gromell, and of the iuyce of Pearslye, of eyther one pounde, of the iuyce of Bettony, of the iuyce of Net∣telles, and of the iuyce of Ramsens, of each halfe a pound, of strong whyte Uinegar, ten ounces, of the flowres and seedes of Broome, and of the rootes of Radish, of each two handfulles, stampe the last re∣hearsed well: then myxe the same with all the iuyces before mencioned, and therof destyll a water, with a gentle fyre: of which water geue to them that haue the stone, one ounce at one tyme, with Oxinell Diu∣retycke, (which you may haue at the Apothecaries,) vsing the same nyne or ten dayes, (if neede be:) and it wyll breake & auoyde the stone wonderfully. There can not be a better medicine for the stone: proue it when you wyll.
IN the Ilandes of Irelande, and Orcades, in cer∣tayne places there, there be certaine Trees there, much lyke vnto Wyllowe trees, out of which coms forth certayne lytle heayres, encreasing by lytle and lytle into Byrdes, hauing shape of Duckes, hanging vpon the bowes by theyr nebs or bylles: and when they are comd to full perfectnesse, they flye away of themselues, and falles into the next Seas, (which Byrds we call Barnacles.) This is related by the people that dwell there. Mizaldus. YF one be bewytched of any, put quycksyluer into a quyll and stoppe it, or els into a hollowe Nut shel, enclosed fast with waxe: and laye the same vnder the pyllowe of the partye bewytched, or vnder the threshold of the doore where he enters into the house or Chamber. Iohannes Weckerus. HE that shall delyuer a summe of Money in the howre of the Moone: he shall haue much a doo to get it againe. And at last he shall mystrust of the re∣couering therof: but at the length he shall recouer it, but not all. Abablez filius Zaed. BEttony stampt and made in a plaster, and layde to the eye, healeth a strype in the eye. And if the eyes be washed wyth the water wherein Bettony is sodden, they wyll be hole without dymnesse, or other blemysh. And if you drynke a dramme of the powder of Betony, with the water of Be∣tony, it wyll brynge downe and heale the clowdy∣nesse, and blouddynesse of the eyes. And if
Betony be eaten, it dryeth vp the teares of the eyes. All this and more hath bene proued of Betony. MArke on what day any doth fall sycke, and num∣ber the dayes from the syxt Calendes of Iuly, (which is the .xxvi. day of Iune) vntyll the day when the party dyd fyrst beginne to be sycke: and deuyde that whole number by three, and then if at the last, one remayne, he wyll quickly escape, if two remayne, he wyll be long sicke, if one remayne, then it is to be feared he wyll dye of that sycknes. This I had out of a booke of Secretes. A Maruelous cure of a Woman, that was swolne, done by one Iohn Ardern, whose wordes thereof were these. I Iohn Ardern dyd see a certaine Woman at Newarke, whose whole body was suddenlye swolne, and also the face, necke, and legges, who dyd lye, as though she were halfe dead: to whome I gaue the rootes of Daffadyll stampt, and myxt with wa∣ter and saffern, which being drunke, she was quickly hole. I wrote this ut of an olde written booke. TAke heede in letting of bloud or geuing of Purga∣cions, or strong medicines, that the Lorde of the eyght house be not with the Moone, or with the Lorde of the Ascendent. Lykewise that the Moone, nor the Lorde of the Ascendent be in the fowrth or eyght house, nor that the Lord of the eyght house be in any Angle, and it is not good that the Moone be in the Ascendent. Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff.
A Winde rysing in the North, in the begynning of the nyght, or in the twye lyght, by and by he cea∣seth and leaueth his place. Therfore it is, that the Shypmen or Marryners (hauing iust tryall therof,) wyll not set forth in that wynde, vnlesse it hath con∣tinued three dayes. The South winde is contrary, which if it ryse or begyn in the beginning of the day, it bringes hope to the Marryners that it wyll conti∣new, and not quickly depart out of that place. Mizal∣dus. THe skynne of the ryght heele, of a Uultar layde to the ryght foote, and of the lefte heele, to the lefte foote, of them that are payned with the gowte: It is sayde that it doth mytygate the griefe, and ease the paynes. Mizaldus. LUte stringes or Harpe strynges cutte in lytle pee∣ces, and cast vpon flesh newly sodden or rosted: wyl seeme to be woormes. Whereby they that knowes not thereof, wyll refuse the same meate. Mizaldus. IF the Yarde doth swell and be grieuously payned, myngle Waxe, Oyle, and the iuyce of Purslane to∣gether, and apply it to the swolne Yarde: and it wyll helpe it. It is often proued. IOhannes Ganiuetus wrytes, that in the yeare of the Lorde .1431. the seuenth daye of August (being  Tewsday,) about seuen of the clocke in the morning, one Maister Henricus Amici, a Doctor of Phisicke, borne at Bruxelles in Brabant, dyd aske him for the Lord Deane of Viennens. then being sycke, whether
he should dye or recouer of that sycknes. In the fy∣gure of which question, he founde that the Moone was going in coniunction to the Sunne, vnder the beames of the Sun, which was a testimony of death. With dyuers other lykelyhoods of the same. But espying Mercury beginning to be Retrograde, with∣in one degree of the Ascendent, (corrupting the de∣gree ascending,) dyd iudge that he woulde shortly fall into a frensye, at the furthest, within a naturall daye: although he was a very wyse man. And so it came to passe. For within lesse then a naturall daye, he became franticke. And so dyed within two dayes after. TAke cloues of Garlycke, and burne them in a potte all to powder, and if you vse to eate of that pow∣der in your pottage: doubtles it wyll procure you to make water, if you are troubled with the stone. This I had out of a very olde booke. IF you put the powder of Allom in water, whatso∣euer you wryte therwith, the wryting or Letters wyl not appeare: vnlesse you put ye same paper in wa∣ter, and then you shall reade it perfectly. Bapt. porta. THis that followeth, is a most excellent, true & sure proued medicine, for a great and olde griefe, and payne of the head. Take of bay Salt stamped by it selfe, as much of Coomyn seede stamped lykewyse by it selfe, as much browne Fennell, and then stampe or beate them all together then with as much pure vy∣negar & also a lytle Rosewater: mixe & sturre them all together in a dyshe ouer a  dyshe with hotte
coales, and then laye some of the same hotte vpon a cloath, and apply it so to the hynder part of the heade at nyght, and tye it fast thereto, that it fall not away. And also laye an other plaster therof hotte therto the next nyght, and so do nyne nyghts together, one after another: and it wyll not onely helpe the same, (per∣haps within three or fowre tymes so doing:) but also it wyll cleare the syght, and draw the humors cleane away, that runnes out of the head into the eyes, and drye vp the same. This medicine neuer fayles. Ther∣fore it is a precious thing, and worthy to be estemed. A Good waye to get the stone called Craupaudina, out of the Tode. Put a great or ouergrowne Tode, (fyrst brused in dyuers places) into an earthen potte, and put the same in an Antes hyllocke, & couer the same with earth, which Tode at length ye Antes wyll eate: So that the bones of the Tode and stone, wyll be left in the potte. Which Mizaldus and many other (as he sayth) haue often tymes proued. IT is sayde, that the female Uyper doth open her mouth, to receyue ye generatyue sparme of the male Uyper, (which he doth, by putting his mouth into her mouth,) which receyued, she doth byte off his head. This is ye maner of the froward generating of Uipers. And after that, the young Uipers ye springs of the same, do eate or gnaw a sunder theyr mothers belly, therby  or bursting forth. And so they, (being reuengers of theyr Fathers iniurye) do kyll theyr owne mother. Galen. de Theriaca ad Pionem. You may see, they were a towardly kynde of people, that Christ called the eneration of Uypers.
SEethe Sage and drinke it, eyther stampe it, and lay it to the Matrix, for both wayes it prouoketh the flowres and after burthens. Petrus Hispanus. THe gyrdle worne of a Chylde, being vnder seuen yeares of age, (some sayes twelue yeares of age,) taken and tyde about the mydle of one that hath the fallyng sycknes: and then presently taken from the sayde party, and cutte in nyne peeces, and euery peece throwne nyne seuerall wayes, is a present and per∣fect remedy to heale and helpe the same party therof, without saying of any wordes. They that tolde it to me did see it proued: a thing no doubt very straunge, and almost incredyble. Some thinkes that this wyll not preuayle, but at the fyrst falling of the party. THe tongue of a Dogge layde vnder the great toe within the shoe: doth cease the barking of Dogs at the party that so weares the same. Mizaldus. THe skyn of an Asse being tande, and shooes made of that part of the hyde, wheron the burthens dyd lye that the Asse caryed: they wyll neuer teare nor be worne. No, although you go continually among stones and thornes, and with the oldnes therof, they wyll waxe so harde, that one can not suffer to weare them: as Cardanus hath written. TO stoppe the bleeding of the nose: take nine or ten fresh new Leekes, and put a threede thorowe the myds of them, (but cut of the toppes of the leaues,) then hang them about the parties neck that bleedes,
so that the leaues be vpward to the nose, & the heads of them downward. It is good also to smell to Cam∣phere dyssolued in vynegar, and also to put the roote of Pyony vnder the tongue. Iacobus Holleris. IF you take of Mouth glue & Allom, equall pates, myxing them together, and then powre vinegar to them: what thing soeuer you shal cast into the fire, being rubbed, or all ouer annoynted therwith: it wyl not be burned. Mizaldus. MArs in the nynth house, doth threatē in long iour∣neyes, chiefly on the lande, feare (and euyll hap or successe:) but not in Capricorne, seeing it is his exalta∣tion. Taisnier. IT is credibly reported, that whosoeuer is sycke, and at the poynt of death, (though they be marue∣lous olde,) lying or being in a certayne place in Ire∣lande: the same partye can not dye, vntyll he or she shall be remoued out of that place. And many that haue bene there, (being very olde and weary of their lyues,) haue earnestlye desyred to be remoued from thence: who as soone as they haue bene out of the same place, haue dyed presently. A very straunge thing, if it be true. STampe Rew with oyle of Roses, and laye the same some thing thycke vpon the crowne of the head, of one that is sycke, (the same being fyrst shauen,) and if the same partie do neese within syxe howres after, hee wyll escape that sycknesse. If not, he wyll dye thereof.
TO make a greene that wyll not vade away. Take the flowres of Flowredeluse, stampe them and streyne them, then put the iuyce thereof into goom water, and drye it in the Sunne. TO make Letters of gold: Take goom of Almonds and temper it with Uermylyon finely grounde, let the goom be dyssolued in the whyte of an Eeg, then wryte therwith, and it wyll be lyke golde. Proued. IF you wyll knowe in what yeare Wheate wyll be deare or cheape, and what tyme of the yeare, and what month the same wyll chaunce: Elect or thuse twelue fayre cornes of Wheate, in the kalends of Ia∣nuary, (which is ye first day of Ianuary,) then sweepe the fyre harth cleane, and make a fyre: then take a yoūg wench, or a boy of the house, or els one yt dwels nye you, and byd the same boye or wench laye one of the sayde Cornes on the same harth, being hotte and made cleane: and when that is done, marke dilligent∣ly, whether the sayde Corne abyde styll in the place, or leape: If it be styl, then saye that the price wyll con∣tynew: If it leape a lytle, the pryce wyll abate a lytle: If it leape much, then perswade thy selfe, that it wyll wae very cheape: If it leape towards the fire, it wyll be dearer in the fyrst month, and so more or lesse, for the greater or lesser accesse of the same to the fyre. Doo so with the seconde Corne, and it wyll presayge for the seconde month, that is, for February: And so you maye iudge of all the rest. That is, the thyrde Corne for March: the fowrth, for Aprill: and so of the other. Mizaldus hath heard that it hath bene proued of many.
THe Lyon is more fierce against Men, then Wo∣men: for Nature hath taught him that Women are to be more myldlye vsed then Men: as Pliny af∣fyrmes. And Aristotle sayth, that it is more wyc∣ked to kyll a Woman, then a Man. &c. And the Poet sayth: Quód faeminea in pena nullum est memorabile nomen: Which is true. A man also can get no prayse nor honesty by beating of a woman. Which let but∣cherly beaters, and cruel tormentors of theyr wiues, marke well and consyder. Mizaldus. A Spoonefull or more of the powder of the Nettell seede, droonke in good Wyne: doth asswage all paynes of the Matrix, and takes away the wynde∣nes thereof, or the griefe of the Moother. Petrus Hispan. BY this meanes following, you maye put an Egge into a narrowe mouthed glasse. Laye an Egge in strong vinegar, tyl it be tender: then fyll the glasse al∣most ful with water, then put the wyndie Egge into the glasse: and anon it wyll be harde. Thys is proued. TO roaste a dyshe of Butter. Take fyne grated whyte breade, and myxe the same well with Su∣gar, then put a lumpe of Butter vppon a spytte, and turne the spytte at the fyre, and styll cast the grated breade and the Sugar vppon the Butter, and it wyll be a fyne and trymme dyshe of meate. Pro∣ued.
IF a certaine Woorme with many feete, (which wyl become rounde lyke a pease, if she be touched, of some called a swyne lowse,) be prickt with a needle, & then any aking toothe touched with the same needle: the payne therof wyll cease immediatly. This I got hardly out of an olde booke. THey are possest with diuels, that haue not in theyr natiuities Mercury, with ye Moone in some aspect, if neyther of them beholde the Ascendent. Which is the more certaine, if Saturne be there in the Natiuity of the daye, and if Mars be there in the nyghtly Nati∣uity: and if eyther of them be in an Angle, such is the natiuity of Diuelles. Albohazen. And they are or wyl be madde, that haue Mercury and the Moone in this sort, except that Saturne contrary must be in an angle in the Natiuitie of the night, and Mars in an angle in a Natiuity of the daye. Iatromath. THere is a certayne Well at Gratianapolis, which although it hath not hotte or warme water ther∣in: yet oftentymes there coms out of the same toge∣ther with the water flames of fyre. Two contrary Elements at one tyme, out of one place flowing out together. Mizaldus wrytes this of the report of the Inhabytaunts of that place. IF you stampe Hollyocks with the whytes of Egs, and therewith annoynt your handes, and throwe then vpon the same the powder of Allom: you maye handle fyre without any harme. Albertus. Prayse it, as it prooues.
DRinke no medicine in the howre of Saturne: ney∣ther enter or begyn then any iourney on the Sea. Haly Abenragel. WHyte Wine, wherein Lapis Calaminaris is seuen tymes quenched, (fyrst made very hotte in the  fyre,) doth maruelously stop the running of the eyes, and cleareth the syght: if you put a few drops therof into them, and vse to wash them therwith. This is a tryed thing. IF you would allure or bring Pigions to a Dooue∣house. Take a fatte Dog and flea him, and fyll his bellye full of the seedes of Coomyn, then rost him dry, wash also the Pygion hoales in the Doouecote with water wherwith Coomyn is sodde: but fyrst cleanse the sayde hoales from all fylthynesse, then laye the rosted Dog vpon a broade stone in the Doouehouse, and hang a great glasse in the top of the Louor, and three or fowre lytle looking glasses within ye Dooue∣house, by some of the hoales. Also take good claye, and myngle it with bay Salt & Coomyn, and make therof a great lumpe lyke a Sugar loafe, then put it into an Ouen & bake it harde, and set it by the deade Dogge. Beware of Owles, Buszardes, and Star∣lynges, see the house be close that no vermyne come therein, as Pollecattes, Weselles, or Ferryttes, and you shall haue Pygions enowe. Also make a shrape by the Doouehouse, strawe chaffe there, then laye therein a good quantitie of Barlye, (but it must fyrst be laide to stiepe in Honny three dayes,) and then cast it among the chaffe, and then a great sort of Pygiōs wyll resort to that Doouehouse.
LYn seede put into the rootes of Radyshe, and by and by put into fatte or dunged earth: it wyl bring forth an hearbe lyke Dragons, whose taste wyll seeme lyke vynegar and Salt: therefore it is marue∣lously desyred in Sawses: for hauing this, you neede neither vynegar nor Salt: as one that is chiefe of the Kings gardens tolde me, sayth Mizaldus. FOxes being sodde, and cutte in peeces, and then geuen to Hens or Geese amongst theyr meate: it makes them safe from being hurt of any Foxes after, for the space of two monthes. Mizaldus. THe seedes of Docks, tyde to the left arme of a Wo∣man, doth helpe barrennes, or sterilyty. Africanus. THe Moone and the Ascendent, are generally Sig∣nifyers of the hole shyppe, & of the state therof: and the Lorde of the Ascendent is the Sygnifyer of them that sayles in the same: wherof if all they be Infortu∣nate, the Shyp is broken, and they that sayled in her are drownde, vnlesse some one of them be receyued, (that is of the sayd Sygnifyers,) and then the Impe∣dyment wyll chaunce in the drowning, and some clymers of the Shyppe, wyll escape: but if all they be Fortunate, all shall escape and be saued, (that is both Shyp and men) chiefly: if there be any reception. Fur∣thermore: if the Ascendent & the Moone be both for∣tunate, & the Lord of the Ascendent Infortunate, the Shyp is safe, & the Saylers in her are destroyed: but if the Ascendent & the Moone be Infortunate, and the Lord of ye Ascendent fortunate, the shyp is ouerwhel∣med, (or lost,) & the saylers in her are safe. Haly Aben.
GOates dung mingled with Uynegar & bran, and applyed as a plaster to a sore breast, looseth won∣derfully all swellings of the breast. It hath bene pro∣ued. BEttony stampt and applyed to any wounde of the heade, doth not onely draw out the broken bones: but also doth heale the same with speede. A Speciall medicine to strengthen the back. Take a quart of whyte Wine, and the pythe that runneth in an Oxe backe, and halfe a quarter of a pounde of Dates, and of Marygooldes, Planten, Bettony, Pearsley rootes, and Fennel rootes, of all two hand∣fulles: boyle all these together, vntyll the Wyne bee halfe wasted away: and then streyne them through a cloath, and drynke nyne or tenne spoonefull thereof euerye morning and euenyng, for the space of nyne or tenne dayes: and it wyll strengthen the backe maruelouslye. FYue leaued grasse sod in water, which water if it be droonke, and gulpt vp & downe into the throte: is an excellent helpe for sore throtes. THey are diuellysh or possest with Diuels, in whose Natiuityes Saturne is Lorde of the place of the Moone, and the Moone then vnder the beames of the Sunne: or if Mars be Lorde of the place of the Moone opposyte to the Sunne, especially in Sagitary. Haly Abenragel. TO keepe Beastes safe that the blynde mowse, cal∣led a Shrew, do not byte them. Enclose the same
Mowse quicke in chalke, which when it is hard, hang the same about the necke of the Beast, that you woulde keepe safe from such byting. And it is most certayne, that he shall not be toucht nor bytten: as is before sayde. Vegetius. I Heare (sayth Mizaldus,) that it is obserued & pro∣ued, that a Cowe, an Ewe, a she Asse, a Bitche, a she Catte, and such other domesticall and tame Beastes of the Female kinde, wyll cast theyr Calfe, Lambe, Colte, or that that they go withall: if the Male, by whome they conceaued, be kylled, whyle they went with the same. Such a strong and vehement concord or agreement, (of nature) is betweene, or among them. IF the nynth house begynne in a fyxed sygne, or if Sa∣turne be founde in the same, (except it be Aries, (they that be then borne,) shall for the most parte see true Dreames: but if in a moueable sygne, his Dreames wyll be without effect. &c. Taisnier. A Notable oyntment for the head ache, comming of any cause, wherwith you must annoynt the pulses of the temples, and all the forehead. Take of the iuyce of new or fresh Camamyle, fowre ounces, of the iuyce of new and fresh Roses, two ounces, of the iuyces of fresh Rew and Bettony, of eyther one ounce and a halfe, of the iuyce of the rootes of Hollyock, two oun∣ces, of oyle Rosate Omphacine, one pound and a halfe, of the best and purest Alablaster, three ounces, pow∣der the Alablaster finely, and put it into the sayd oyle, and let it lye therein a daye, and a nyght, then myxe
them all together, and with sufficient whyte waxe, make it into an oyntment: which oyntment is good for any payne of the head, proceeding of any matter, or cause. And it may be vsed at any tyme of the fytte or payne, except the begynning. Emperica benedicti victorij fauenti. AN excellent distilled water for hearing, foloweth. Take of the iuyce of Bettony, of the iuyce of Oni∣ons, of eyther of them syxe ounces, of the leaues of Rosemary stamped, one handfull, of the oyle of bitter Almondes, three ounces, and one whyte grosse Eele chopt and cutte in small peeces: myxe them all toge∣ther, and destyll them, and the lycquor which cōmeth therof, keepe in a cleane glasse, droppe two or three droppes therof into your eare, fowre or fyue nyghts together: and it wyll helpe and amende the deaffnes. IT is much to be marueled at, that the lytle Byrde, called a Wren, being fastned to a lytle stycke of Ha∣sell, newly gathered: doth turne about and rost him selfe. Cardanus and Mizaldus. THou mayst make fayre Pictures, Uesselles, and many other fyne thinges with small coast, and expences, as followeth. Seethe the barke of the Elme tree, and the toppes of the Populer tree, and whyles they are very hotte, put thereto most pure and fyme Lyme, vntyll all the same be lyke cruddes of milke. Afterwards put therto the whytest marble that is, well and fynely beaten into powder and sear∣ced: and then cast the same in what fourme you wyll: then drie them in the shadow. Hieronimus Gardanus.
HErmes doth saye, that an euyll Planet in Gancer: doth threaten short lyfe, and continual sycknes to the mother of the chylde then borne. BRymstone stampt with Wyne, and plastered ouer the Dugs or Paps of Women: breakes the hard∣nes of them. Isac. WAter Myntes stamped and layde to the myds of the browe, and to the nape of the necke of one that is madde: wyll much helpe and relieue him. But fyrst tyckle him on the browe, and it wyll dyspose him to sleepe: and then apply it to him as is beforesayde. But if he be farre gone, that it wyll not helpe him: then take a Tenche, and cleaue the Tenche in the myddes, and so warme, lay the one part to his brow, and the other to the nape of his necke: and without doubt it wyll helpe him, if euer he shall haue helpe. This I tooke out of an excellent written booke. FOr burning with syre. Take oyle Olyffe, and put it into colde water, and sturre it well together, tyll it be well myxed: then annoint the burned place ther∣with, and laye a woort leafe vpon it, and it wyll helpe it speedely. Proued. STampe Mallowes and Garlycke together, and myngle it well with whyte Wyne, then streyne it well, and drynke a good draught therof nyne tymes: and it wyll make thee make water, of what occasion soeuer the same is stopte. Thys is affyrmed for trueth.
IF you wyll bring forth or hatch Egges without a Hen, couer your Egges in hotte Horse dung: (so that the bygger part of the Egge be vpwarde,) but euery fyft or syxt daye, shyfte them with newe Horse dung, with a temperate heate, as the heate of a Hen. But remember that the Egs must be turned: and a∣bout the tyme of the hatching, or when they shoulde come forth of the shell: put them vnder a Hen. Mizal∣dus. ALthough the fruite of a Medler tree by nature be restryctiue or bynding, neuerthelesse the powder of him doth vehementlye breake the Stones in the reynes, and dryues them forth. Which Anthonius Musa an excellent Phisition doth wytnesse, that hee hath proued with most happy successe on him selfe. Mizaldus. THe bloud of an Hare dryed & made in powder, and throwne vpō flesh newly roasted or sodden: makes the same flesh seeme to be blouddy and corrupt. So that they that be present, and sees the same, (vnlesse such as knowes the secrete therof,) wyll loath to eate therof. Mizaldus. THe auncient Wyse men haue sayde, that he that is taken prisoner in the howre of the Sun: shal escape within the space of one month: and in the howre of Venus, he shall escape at the ende of forty dayes: and in the howre of Mercury, he shal haue long imprison∣ment: and he that is taken prisoner in the howre of ye Moone, his busines & state shalbe changed, according to ye applicatiōs which ye moone hath with fortunate
and Infortunate Planets: whereby the easynes and slownes of his delyuering shall be esteemed. Also, he that is taken prisoner in the howre of Saturne, he shal endure long imprisonment: and he that is taken pry∣soner in the howre of Iupiter, he shall be delyuered quickly. And they that be taken prysoner in ye howre of Mars, many sorrowes and troubles shall happen to them during theyr imprisonment. For he shall be put in setters, and shall be beaten, and he shall suffer great sorrowes and labours. Haly Abenragel. THis medicine following, wyll surely heale a scalde heade. Take oyle Olyffe, and put it into a dyshe with fayre water, and beate or sturre them well to∣gether, as you woulde make butter: then take it vp, and put it into a vessell, and put powder of Brimstone and May Butter thereto, & make an oyntment ther∣of: wherwith annoynt the sore head, and doubtles it wyll heale it. WOodbinde leaues stampt, and layd vpon Warts, (vsing the same halfe a dosen tymes,) wyll quyte destroye them. FRaunces Marques of Mantua, did so instruct or teach a Dogge, that he vsed him as a very good seruant, in calling of such of the Court as he would. Blondus. A Benzoar, an excellent Phisition among the Arabi∣ans: declares that once there was such a famyne in his countrey: that the people was dryuen to pluck out the dead bodyes out of theyr graues, & dyd sucke the marrowe of theyr bones. A thing horrible to be
heard, but more horryble to be done: from which neede or hunger, I beseech God keepe vs. IF the seedes that are founde in the round knobs, of the lesser Burre leafe, be made in very fyne pow∣der, and so geuen with a lytle good and pure whyte Wyne: it purgeth the sande maruelous effectually from the reynes, but more speedely: if it be droonke with Aqua vite. Mizaldus had this of one that pro∣ued it. IF you seethe Mugwoort in water, and plaster it hotte vpon the Nauell and thyghes of a Woman labouring with chylde: it causeth both chylde, byrth, and the after burthen also: but if it tarry long there, it wyll cause the Matrix to follow. Rogerius. FOr scalding and burning that it be not seen. Take sheepes suet, and sheepes dung, and the inner rinde of Elderne, and boyle them all together, then streyne them through a course canuas cloath, and so keepe it in some cleane vessell: which, when you do occupy, you must melt it in a sawcer, or some other thing, and laye it on the burned place with a fether. proued. TO drawe out a toothe: fyll an earthen potte with Emets or Ants, and theyr Egs, and set the same potte in hotte embers so long, vntyll all be burned in to ashes: and when any toothe doth ake, which you would drawe forth without paine: then take of the same Ants and theyr egs made in fyne powder, and touch the tooth therwith: and it wyll fall out.
ANnoint the freckled face with the bloud of a Hare, or of a Bull: and it wyll do them away, and make the skyn fayre. Proued. THis following wyll helpe the hardnes of the syde, called the Elfe cake. Take the roote of Gladen, and make powder therof, and geue the diseased par∣ty halfe a spoonefull therof to drynke in white Wine, and let him eate so much thereof in his Pottage at one tyme: & it wyll helpe him within a whyle. This was tolde me for a very trueth. MUgwoort stieped in Rose water, doth helpe trēb∣ling or shaking hands: if they be washt therwith. Mizaldus. YOu shall knowe whether the Tode stone called, Crapaudina, be the ryght and perfect stone or not. Holde the stone before a Tode, so that he maye see it, and if it be a ryght & true stone: the Tode wyll leape towarde it, and make as though he woulde snatch it from you. (He enuieth so much that man should haue that stone.) This was credibly tolde Mizaldus for trueth, by one of the French Kings Phisitiōs, which affyrmed that he dyd see the tryall therof. GArlycke being sowne when the Moone is vnder the earth, and pluckt vp when the Moone is a∣boue the earth: it is sayde, that then his stynking smell wyll be gone. Sotion Grecus. And Palladius re∣ports, that Garlicke wyll be made the sweeter: if in the planting therrof, you do set the stones of Olyues round about it. Or els if you set the Garlicke brused.
LAye a Spunge vpon any ache or gowte, dypte in warme wyne of the decoction of Coomyn: and it wyll drawe out the hurtfull humors. It hath bene proued. Petrus Hisp. IF in the degree of the Ascendent, or nye vnto it, within two degrees, there is an euyll Planet: It is an argument of the death of the party that dyd fal sycke at that tyme: or for whome the question is then asked, for the state of his sycknesse. And if it be in a moueable sygne, it betokens that the sycke shall dye within so many dayes, as the sayde euyll Planette is degrees, from the degree of the Ascendent: if in a fyxed signe, then it sygnifyes a long tyme: (that is, as I haue tryed, euerye degree a month,) if in a com∣mon signe: it signifyes a meane time betweene both, (that is as I haue founde, euerye degree a weeke.) Iohannes Ganiuetus. But you must beware, (if the sayde Planet be dyrect) that he doth apply to the de∣gree ascending. IF you take the outward rynde of the Radish roote, and the hearbe Marcury, of eyther one ounce, of Saffern three graynes, of Cassia Lignea, fynely pow∣dred, one dram, the iuyce of Sauine, two drammes, and then myxe them, and let them all be beaten toge∣ther, and then tye the same in a fyne lynnen cloath, that is thynne, and then ioyne it to the necke of the Matryx of a Woman that is in her trauell, and in the howre of the byrth: (which els should bring forth her chylde with dyffycultie,) by and by shee wyll be brought to bedde. It is a secrete. Benedictus victo∣rius fauent.
HE in whose Natiuity Venus is coniunct, or ioynd with Mercury, and they both being vnder the beames of the Sun, shalbe gelded. Iotromath. Guat. Ryff. YF you plucke out one of the eyes of a blacke Dog, whyles he is lyuing, and wyll carrye it with you: it wyll make that no Dogs shall barke at you: yea, though you walke among them. But it wyl be more sure, if you put therto a lytle of the harte of a Woolfe. Sextus Platonicus, and Albertus. THe iuyce of Knotgrasse, drunke with the powder of seuē Pepper cornes, before the fytte: doth quite put away the quarten ague. But it is sayde, that the hearbe must be gathered vpon a Thursday, and the iuyce then lykewise there of must be gotten and strey∣ned, (the Moone discreasing, which is betweene the ful Moone and the change.) Mizaldus had this out of an olde booke of Secretes, wrytten with the hande of one called Ianus, or Faunus. A Bathe wherein Emets, or Antes and theyr Egs, (being stampt) haue bene sodden: doth quycklye heale an olde, and almost incurable ioynt sycknesse. Proued. YF they that haue the fallyng sicknesse, do vse to re∣ceyue twyse or thryse in the weeke, at theyr going to bedde, one of these lytle pylles following: without doubt they wyll be hole thereof howsoeuer it coms. Take of the best Castoreum, Assafetida, of eyther halfe a dram▪ of the roote of Pyony fynely powdred, one
dram, Aromaticum Rosatum, two drams, myxe them together with the syrrup of Mynts, and make therof seuen pylles, (you may haue al this at the Apotheca∣ries.) This is a proued secrete. Emperica benedicti. AN excellent oyntment for the gowte. Take three pound of Walwoort, and stampe it well, then melt one pound of May butter, & put therto: and let them stande so nyne dayes together, then boyle the same halfe an howre on the fyre, then streyne it through a canuas, and so annoynt the payned place therewith. It is a notable and proued thing, not much vnlyke to one in this booke, to that effect, discribed by Mizald. THis medicine following wyll destroy the ytche in any part of the body. Take of oyle Debay, one ounce, and one ounce of quicksyluer, fyrst kylled with fasting spettle, which must be a kylling therein with sturring of them together, halfe an howre: Then therwith annoint the palmes of your hands, and the soles of the feete, and within three or fowre tymes so doing, it wyll kyll the ytch. Proued. IF you wyl make a Candle, that wyl not be put out: Fyll a Cane with the powder of brimstone, & with lynnen cloath broken in very lytle peeces, then couer the same with waxe, and so set it on fyre: and then it wyl not be put out, neyther with bellowes nor wind. OYle wherin Frogges be sodden, vntyll the flesh be gone from the bones, doth maruelously helpe all affectes of the synewes, and the ioynts, and also all parts of the body that is colde or benumd: If the pla∣ces
affected be annoynted therwith, being fyrst made warme. This is gotten out of the secretes of Ianus. IF you wyll bring into one place, or else kylle all Woormes, and Beastes that are hurtfull in a gar∣den. Take the bellye or paunch of a Wether newly kylled, with all the fylth or dung that is in it, and bu∣ry the same in the place where they be, and couer it a lytle with earth: and then within two dayes thou shalt see all the Woorms and vermyne gathered the∣ther: if you do thus twyse or thryse, you shall make all the hurtfull Woormes and thinges to gather to∣gether there. And then you maye cast earth vpon them, or else kyll them as you lyst. Mizaldus dyd vn∣derstand that this was proued. AN euyll Planet in Leo, doth shewe or betoken short lyfe, of the Father of that Chyld then borne. Taisnier. THe iuyce of Bettony, put into the eare something hotte, or lew warme: wyll both put away paynes and the draffnes of the eares, (if there be any,) and also other impedymentes of the same. I haue proued this diuers tymes, and founde it excellent good, in this case. THis water folowing is both proued, & precious a∣gainst Fistulaes: and also it so hardneth yron, that you maye cutte an other peece of yron therewith, as easely as if the same were wood. Take of earth woormes, and draw of them a water by distyllation, and lykewise drawe water of Radishe rootes, both
which waters myxed together, then put therein an edged yron knyfe, made redde hotte: the same thus heated and quenched for three or fowre tymes by an equall quantity, vsed at each tyme, and the knife tem∣pred with an edge: then dyp it redde hotte againe in∣to the sayd water, and then after you may cutte any yron safely, and easely therewith: and this water is also maruelous in Fystulaes. IT is sayd, that if Horsses be shodde with that yron wherewith any hath bene before kylled: it makes the same Horsses very lyuely and quicke. And if of the same you make a bytte or a snaffle, that Horse yt hath it in his mouth, wyl be made tame & easy to be hand∣led, yea: though he be neuer so wylde, stubborne, or geuen to byting. Rasis et Albertus. IF a Horse can not stale or pysse, or else doth the same hardely, or with much griefe or payne: beate his body all aboutes, easely, myldly, or gently, with the bowes of Elderne full of leaues: then after couer his head, neck, and all the body with the same leaues, and it wyll helpe him very much. Simoneta Cardinalis. A Water whereby the Phisicion doth maruelles, and is reputed as a Prophet. Take the fylinges of Syluer, of Brasse, of Yron, of Leade, of Steele, of Golde, of Spume of Syluer and Golde, of Sto∣rax, according to the rytches and pouerty of the pa∣tient: fyrst of all let them bee put in the vryne of a Boy that is a virgin, the second day in warme white Wyne, the thyrde daye in the iuyce of Fennell, the fowrth daye in the whytes of Egges, the fyft daye
in Womans mylke, that geues sucke to a boye, the syxt daye in redde Wyne, the seuenth daye in seuen whytes of Egs, and put that onely into a Styll at an easy fyre, and that that shall distyll, keepe in a vessell of Gold or Syluer. Sylens is to be kept of the prayse of this water: because it may not be bought. For his vertue doth pallyfie leprous persons: it heales and destroyes a pure leprie: it wypes away, or takes a∣way euery spot, it conserues youth, it makes the eye fayre. I cease to speake of the secretes of this water: for because I feare, least they that haue it, should be puft vp with pryde. Trotula de pass. Mulier. THis following is a proued thing, for the sounding of the eares or wynde in the same. Take Almonds and the kernelles of Peches, and let them be cleane pylled in hotte water, then stampe them, and get oyle out of them, and put of the same oyle with tents wet in the same into the soūding eares, or otherwise grie∣ued, which tents must be made of fyne lynnen cloath, and do thus with new tents euery daye once, for the space of nyne or ten dayes: and it wyll put away the sounding, and other paines of the eares. This I lear∣ned of one that came out of Spaine. And I proued it to be very true. FINIS. Lib. 7.
❧The eyght Booke of Notable thinges. YOu shal make Vi∣negar by and by, if you powre pure & good Wine halfe sodde, into a newe earthen vessell, then well couered and stopte: and so the same Potte set in hotte scalding water. A Woolfe fyrst seeing a Man, doth lyfte vp his voyce, and as a vyctor, doth despyse him. But if he perceyue that the Man hath espyed him fyrst, he laies away his fiercenes, and can not run. D. Ambrosius. Virgil. Plato. Sextus. Platon. And other. THere is deadlye warre betweene the Hawke and the Eagle, who, sometymes are so fast together in theyr fyght: that they are both taken or catcht ther∣by. Plynius. TO take the Byrdes that eates the seedes that are sowne. Seethe Garlicke, that it may not growe againe: for it is sayde to profyte maruelously, if it be throwne vnto them: for they that shall eate of it, wyl be taken with your hand. Mizaldus. HE that takes his iourney on the Sea, in the houre of Saturne: he shall haue many waues, and diuers  wyndes, which wyll cast him to vnknowen places. Haly Abenragel.
YF you geue one of these Pylles following euerye nyght going to bed, to him that hath the palsey: it wyll helpe him, for it is proued. Take of hearbe Iue, Cowslops, Bettony, of the flowres of Sticados arabi∣ci, of each one dram: let them be dryed in the shadow, and make them in fyne powder, then take good Tur∣byth, one dram, of the best Agarick, two drams, Co∣loquyntyda, halfe a dram, Gynger, Salgem, of eyther ten graynes, good and chosen Rewbarbe, one dram and a halfe, Spykenarde, seuen graines, the powder of Hiera simplex galeni. halfe an ounce, Scamony pre∣pared, one dram: let them all be made in fyne pow∣der, and with the iuyce of hearbe Iue, make a masse of Pylles. The weyght to be geuen at one tyme is, one Pyll of one scruple. And marke, if he that hath the palsey, take this ordinary Pylle, (not once euerie day, but) twyse in the weeke at the least: you shall see a sudden helpe in the palsey. These Pylles maye worthely bee called gloryous Pylles in the palsey. Emperica benedicti victorij fauentini. A Certaine man fynding or catching a Mowse, dyd hyt his wife therwith on ye left cheeke, being with chylde, who after was delyuered of a Wench: which Wench had, and yet hath, the marke of a Mowse on her left cheeke. This was tolde by a credible womā, who sayd moreouer, that the name of this Wenches Father was, Thomas Bucknam, dwelling at ye tyme in Northfolke, in a certayne Towne called Dysse. This affyrmes my other wryting hereof. YOu may turne white Wine into redde, without a∣ny hurt or detryment, by and by, if the powder of
Honny, (that is fyrst sod vnto a stony substaunce, and then dryed, & so made in powder,) be cast into whyte Wyne, and myxing it well in the same with rowlyng it vp and downe together. The rootes of any kinde of Dockes, eyther new or dryed, put into the Wine: wyll perfourme the same with lesse busynes. GArlycke being stampt with Hogs, or Barrowes grease, and made something thycke lyke an oynt∣ment: doth maruelously helpe them that haue the coughe, and haue taken colde: if theyr soles of theyr feete, and theyr backe bone before the fyre, be annoin∣ted therewith. WHosoeuer hath any fyxed Starre of the fyrst ho∣nor, or magnitude, in the degree of theyr Horos∣cope, or in the degree of theyr Cuspe of the tenthe house, or in the degree of the Sunne by day, or in the degree of the Moone by nyght: he shall possesse great rytches, and honors, then his Auncestors haue done: of the Nature of that fyxed Starre. In deede this is true, if that fyxed Starre be of a small Latitude: but if it be of a great Latitude, his strength wyll smallie appeare in the Natiuitie of the Chylde. Thus much Taisnier. THis water following is excellent good to cleare a dym syght, if two or three drops therof be put into the eyes at a tyme, vsyng it certayne dayes together. Take of the water of Uarueyn, the water of Ro∣ses, and the water of Fennell, of eache fowre ounces, whyte strong wine, three ounces, Tuty preparate, &
Sugar candy, of either three drams, Aloes Hepatick, two drams: let al them be beaten in fine powder that are to be powdred, and put them into the waters & Wine, mixing all together, and let them remaine and stand a whole day, then streine them easely, and keepe that lycquor in a fayre glasse, & vse it as is before said. This is a precious thing for the syght and the eyes. A Maruelous medicine for woundes & sores. Take a handfull of Arsmart, wette in fayre water: then laye it in the wounde or sore. After burye the same Arsemart in some moyst ground: and the said wound or sore, wyll afterwarde myraculously heale, as the same hearbe doth rotte, and consume. This I had of one that affyrmed it to be true. I thinke it is writ∣ten by Paracellus. THe bodyes of drownd or dead men, do fleete on the water with theyr faces and bellies vpward: but dead Women, do fleete on the water grouelyng, or with theyr faces downward: cōtrary to theyr pro∣creation. But they do not fleete or swym aboue the water: out of whome the Lunges is taken. &c. Mi∣zaldus. THe water of Marygooldes doth helpe all diseases of the eyes, and takes away all paines of the head. And the smoake of the flowres therof taken or recey∣ued by a Fundyble into the secrete partes of a Wo∣man, or else otherwyse taken: doth bring forth easelie the after burthen. This secrete, Mizaldus dyd get of an olde Mydwyfe, which had neede of his helpe o∣therwyse.
THe heade of a Gleade vnfeathered, burned, and so much thereof taken with water, and droonke, as you maye take vp with three fyngers: helpes them that haue the gowte. Galenus. IF any come or send to thee in the howre of Iupiter, it is for no harme: but rather for good. Therefore doubt it not, and though it should seeme to be some harme or losse at the fyrst: yet at length it wyll turne to good. The oftner one tryes it, the truer he shall fynde it: so that he be not Retrograde or Combust. OKe ferne, (called Polipodium,) stampt and pla∣stred vpon the feete of the Woman traueling of chylde: causeth the byrth of the chylde, eyther a lyue or dead. This was tolde me for a great secrete. TAke the grease of a Swyne or a Hogge, and rubbe therewith the body of any that is sycke, against the harte, or ye soles of his feete: then geue that grease to a Dogge, which if he eate, the partye wyll escape: if not, it is a token that he wyll dye thereof. THis following, wyll helpe them that be deaffe. Take a peece of greene Elme, or Ashe, and laye it in the fyre, and receyue the water that commeth out of the endes thereof: and take also a spoonefull of the iuyce of Syngreene, and a spoonefull of Aqua vite, and a spoonefull of the grease of an Eele that is redde beneathe the nauell: boyle all these together a lytle on the fyre, and put it into a glasse, and when he goeth to bedde, put some thereof into his eare luke warme,
and in two or three dayes, he wyll be hole, and heare well. This is proued. TO drawe out a toothe without any payne. Take the goom of Iuy, and greene Iuy leaues, of each a lyke weyght, and burne them to powder, in a newe earthen potte, and when it is made in fyne powder, myxe it together with the mylke of Spurge, and put some thereof into the toothe that you woulde haue out, if it be hollow, if not, touch the toothe therwith, and it wyll fall out: but beware you touch none other toothe therwith. AElianus dooth report, that no sycke person of the Locrenses, should vpon payne of death: drynke any Wyne without the consent & knowledge of the Phi∣sition, or any other geue it them, without the com∣maundement of the Phisition. IF you wyll proue whether there be any water mix∣ed with Wyne or not, put an Egge into the Wyne: and if the Egge synke into it, there is water myxt with it: if the Egge swym, then it is pure Wyne. IF the scull of an aged man, be hanged in a Dooue∣house: Pygions wyll be encreased there, and wyl lyue quietly. Albertus, as Mizaldus doth wryte. THe iuyce of Baye leaues distylled into the cares: doth not permytte deafnesse, nor other straunge soundes to abyde in the eares. Petrus Hispanus. A Question was asked of ye state of a certayn person being sycke, & of what condition the disease was,
and whether they should recouer therof, or not. &c: It seemed at the fyrst syght, that the party was hole for whome the question was made, because the Sunne was in the tenth house, and the parte Fortune in the Ascendent, but many other testymonies shewed the contrary: And also Mars dyd corrupt Venus, Lady or Alumten of the Ascendēt, and Venus also was vnder the beames of the Sunne, and began to be Combust, distaunt from the Sun ten degrees: for Venus was in the .xxviii. degree of Sagitary, and the Sun in the .viii degree of Capricorne: which two degrees in Sagitary dyd sygnify two monthes, (being a common sygne,) and the .viii. degrees in Capricorne being a moueable sygne, dyd sygnify .viii. dayes: therfore it was to be doubted of the death of the sicke personne, about two monthes and .viii. daies after the questiō was made: as God would ordaine, and so it hapned ryght by the appoyntment of God, to whome it belonges onely to cure, infyrmities & griefes, to raise vp the dead, and to moderate the earthly bodies, by the heauenly bodies: and to dispose inferyor thinges by meanes: to whom be glory. Amen. Guilelmus Anglicus in suo tractatu de vrina non visa. AN excellent medicine for the ache in the bones, or armes, or any other place of the body. Annoynt the place where the payne or ache is, with good and pure Aqua Composita by the fyre, and let it drinke in: doo thus three or fowre tymes together, then at the last tyme whyle it is wette, cast vpon the wette place where the ache is, the powder of Olibanum, (which is the fairest and the whitest of the Franken∣sence,) and so laye a lynnen cloath vpon the powder,
and sowe it fast, and so let it lye three or fowre dayes, vntyll it be well and whole. (Which wyll be by that tyme, God wylling.) Proued. ENuches, (that is, they that be gelded,) be neuer balde nor gowtye. Hippocr. IT is a thing worthy of memory, that Lampridius wrytes of Heliogabalus, the Romaine Emperour: who sayth, he had fowre Hartes in his Charret that carryed him: and so many Dogges, calling him selfe Diana: and fowre Tygers, calling himselfe Bacchus: and fowre Lyons, calling him selfe Cibel: and he ioygned fowre Women to his Charret, as Sesostris King of Egipt, dyd with fowre Kings. O prowde, presumptuous Prince: he might ryde a good whyle in that Charret, ere it woulde bring him to heauen. IT is not good to burye any too hastely, especially: such as haue had the Apoplexy, the falling sycknes, and that are suffocate with the Strangulation of the wombe, called the moother. For such may seeme to be deade, and yet reuyue againe within three dayes: for it was the fowrth daye after Lazarus dyed, ere Christe dyd rayse him from death to lyfe: least any should falsely report, that Lazarus had had the Apo∣plexy, or the falling sycknes, or such lyke, and therfore but in a traunce, or not perfectly dead: whereby the iust meryte of Christes maruelous myracle thereof myght be darkned. This is the meaning of Lemnius in his seconde Booke of the secrete myracles of Na∣ture. Therefore it is very meete to know, whether any such be perfectly dead or not, which you may doo
by holding a lytle burning candle at the parties nose, whose mouth is open: or else by setting some lytle cuppe or glasse full of water to the brymme, vpon the sayde partyes belly or nauell, for by the mouing of the flame of the candle, or of the vessell with water: you shall perceyue his secrete breathing, and whe∣ther there be any lyfe in him or not. Camillus. AN approued medicine dooth follow for the short∣nes of breath, & doth maruelously helpe the same: for if halfe an ounce thereof be geuen to the patient, thryse in a naturall daye, that is three howres before dynner, two howres before supper, and about myd∣nyght: continewing the same three or fowre dayes and no moe: you shall see the diseased healed. Take of Manna elect or chosen, called Manna Granata, two ounces, the flowre of Cassia newly drawne, halfe an ounce, Penyedes three ounces, oyle of sweete Al∣mondes being new, one ounce, the Lyghts or Lungs of a Foxe, fynely beaten and powdred, two ounces, (make the rest in powder that are to be powdred,) then myxe all together, and make therof a Lectuary with the syrrup of Hysop. Emperica benedicti victori fauent. You maye haue it well made at the Apothe∣caryes. I haue tryed it to be an excellent thing in this case. YF you wyll breake the great heate of Wyne in the vessell, cast into the same a lytle peece of cheese: and then you shall see a maruelous thing. And why that is, Georgius valla placentinus, doth teache. YF you annoynt your hands, or other parts of your body with a Linement made of Nettels, oyle, and
a lytle Salt: it wyll defende the party therwith an∣noynted, from the bytterest colde that is. Mizaldus. THere be braunches of a Bay tree, wrapt vp or layd among cloathes and bookes: wyll keepe the same safe from mothes, woormes, and other corrupcion. Dioscorides. IF you stampe Ants egges, & strayne them through a cloath, and put therevnto the iuyce of Swynes grasse, or Knot grasse, and distyll it into the eares: it helpes a long continewed deafnes. A Powder to conserue the syght. Take Bettony, Rewe, Celondine, Saxifrage, Louache, Annyse seedes, Cynamom, Eyebryght, of each one handfull, Cardamomum, Gynger, Fennell, Petroselyne, Hysop, Organy, Syler mountaine, of each one dram, Galin∣ga, one ounce, Sugar, one ounce: Let a powder be made of these, and let it be taken continually with meate, and the syght wyll be restored and kept. This powder was ordeyned by Maister Geralde: whose tryall an olde man dyd proue, which vsed spectacles twelue yeares, so that without them he could not see great letters: but after he had vsed this powder onely one forty dayes, he was free, in so much that all the tyme of his lyfe, he dyd see, and read the least let∣ter that was. This Trotula hath written in the later ende of his Booke, De passionibus mulerum. AN excellēt way to get out ye water out of swolne legges, wherby to make them as slender as they were before. Seethe Otes in water vntyll they be
tender: then let the party diseased, hold his legge that is swolne ouer the vessell, that it maye receyue the fume or smoake of the sodde Otes, and couer the par∣tye with some thing that it may go downe rounde a∣bout the vessell, and then blysters wyll come vpon the legge or swolne place: out of which wyll runne much water and corruption, then after annoynt the place with butter. Doo thus fowre or fyue seuerall tymes if neede be. This is well proued. TWo or three drops of pure Aqua Composita, put into the eyes, morning and euening, euery other daye, for the space of fowre or fyue dayes: wyll cleare the syght, and helpe the eyes, of a colde cause marue∣lously. An olde Gentlewoman that tryed it on her selfe, dyd reueale it to me. THe hearbe Dandelyon, well sodde in water, is counted to be a chiefe helpe for the ioygning, or knytting of woundes. It is good for Ruptures, or for them that be broken or brusten. &c. Mizaldus. A Maruelous Water that soone and easily may be prepared, more precious then Golde, is made as followeth. Put fayre and cleare water into a vessell wherein there was neuer before any lycquor, or be∣fore neuer occupyed: and when the water is verye hotte, powre it to quicke Lyme, being before in ano∣ther newe and cleane vessell: and let it remayne, and rest so long, vntyll you haue taken all the fowle spume that fleetes aboue from the same: and that all the Lyme bee settled to the bottome, and the wa∣ter verye cleare: then powre out the water very
softlye, without mouing the Lyme in the bottome, and keepe the same water in a fayre cleane glasse, or some other cleane vessell well couered, or stopt vntyll you vse the same. It wyll scantly be beleeued, what a myraculous vertue and power it hath in all kynde of Ulcers, and chiefly, such as springes of the Frenche Pockes: For the same being bathed or moystned with a lynnen cloath dypt or wet in the sayde water something warme, a prety whyle: and then a lynnen cloath well wet in the same, and so layde vpon the Ul∣cer or sore in manner of a plaster, and after renewed againe: it wypes cleane away all the fylthe or cor∣ruption: it ceaseth the paynes: it fylles the Ulcer with flesh: and it quyte quencheth the heate or infla∣mations in a small tyme. Not without a great my∣racle, for otherwyse quicke Lyme dooth burne with vehemencie of his heate. Let them enioye this most excellent secrete: which for great prayer and pryse to many, I haue refused to vtter. Thus much Mizaldus. MYrre geuen to drynke in warme Wyne, the quan∣tity of a bygge Nut: causeth the delyueraunce of the the chylde, eyther quicke or dead. Petrus Hispanus. HEre followeth a blessed water for the Gowte. Take of Romaine Uitryall, two poundes, of di∣stylled Honny, fowre pyntes: distyll these together, (making the Uitryall fyrst in powder,) and when it is distylled, adde to the same the thyrde part thereof, of Aqua vite rectifyed: which dillygently myed, keepe to your vse, and annoynt the sore or grieued place therwith: Doo thus morning and euening, vn∣tyll you feele your selfe well, which wyl be (God wyl∣lyng,)
within seuen or eyght dayes at the furthest. I wrote this out of an olde Booke. I thinke it be also in the new Iewell of Health: which is a worthy booke and full of many straunge and excellent things. THe smoake of Iuy burned, doth driue away Backs or Reremyse, from that place, where the same smoake is. Anatolius. IF any doth aske thee, (hauing knowledge in Astro∣logie) for any thing wherin he hath a hope to haue: marke if the Lorde of the eleuenth house, apply to the Lorde of the Ascendent, or the Lord of the fyrst house, to the Lord of the eleuenth house: Iudge that he shall haue the thing, which he hopes to get or haue, and he shall come to it. And if the Aspect be of a Tryne or Sextyle, he shall quickly and easilye, and by a good meane obtayne it: but if it be by a quartyle or oppo∣syte Aspect, he shall get it with tediousnes and labor. Furthermore, if thou doost fynde the Lorde of the ele∣uenth house in an Angle & receyued: then iudge that he shall haue the thing which he so hopes to haue, e∣uen as he desyres. Haly Abenragel. A Peece of the roote of Craw foote, eyther put into the hollowe toothe (if there be any,) or applyed to the toothe that aketh: wyll helpe the same presently. A sure proued, and often tryed medicine. WHosoeuer hath a sorenes in the throate, or else a∣ny harde swelling there, called the Squinancie, or Angina, and perhappes thereby doth hardly draw his breath: let them apply this following often times
in a day, and it wyll soften it and resolue it. For it is proued. Take of the rootes of Hollyock cut in small peeces, and made cleane, Camamell, the flowres of Uyolets, the flowres of Mallowes, with the rootes, of each one handfull, let them boyle all in a sufficient quantitye of water, vntyll the water be consumed: then put to the same, the flowre of barley, Lynseede, and Fenecreeke, well stampt and beaten, of each one handfull, the grease of a Hen, one ounce, oyle of Ca∣mamell, and oyle of sweete Almonds, of eyther a lyke much: which wyl be inough to make the plaster atte. This I knowe to be an excellent remedy in this case: which I learned of Benedictus victorius auentinus, in his booke called Emperica benedicti. THis medicine following, wyll helpe any paynes or weaknes of the backe. Take a quart of Malm∣sey, of Balme, Neppe and Maydweede, (which Maydweede is a stynking hearbe, hauing a flowre lyke a Daysie,) of eache one handfull: stampe the hearbes well, and strayne them well into the Malm∣sey, or put some of the Malmsey in the stamping, to them, and strayne it into the rest of the Malmsey, and drinke a good draught therof euery morning fasting, and at night when you go to bed: and within three or fowre dayes, it wyl helpe you perfectly, (God wyl∣ling.) A notable and often proued medicine. DRinke the iuyce of Centorie, once euery morning, fowre dayes together, and it wyll make thee syng cleare, and speake with a good voyce. It cleanseth the breast maruelously. Often proued.
MYntes doth abhorre yron, as Rew doth Basyll: for if Mynt be geuen to one that is wounded, he wyll not easily waxe hole: if Myntes be myxt with mylke: and after taken from the same, and the Ren∣net or Cheslyp put to the same mylke, the same mylke wyll neuer gather together, or come to crudde. Flo∣rentinus in suo Georgico. WHosoeuer falles sicke in the howre of Saturne, his infirmity or disease wyl be prolonged, (or he wyll be long sycke,) and after wyll dye: (of the same syck∣nes.) Haly Abenragel. FYll a hollowe toothe with Crowes dung: and it wyll breake the toothe, and take away the payne. Petrus Hispanus. GVido Bonatus, wrytes a straunge thing, which he founde out by the science of Astrology, in the Re∣uolution of Henry the Emprour: who had of the sayd Emprour a yearely stypende, for that he was a man of famous knowledge: which Emprour had many Astrologyans, as well Phisitions, as other in his owne house. Who for a certayne yeare dyd trauell for the Calculation of the Reuolution of the sayde Nati∣uity of the sayde Emprour. And euery one of them dyd draw out a Fygure therof a lyke, and they found Mars in the same Fygure of the Reuolution in the Angle of the earth, which is the fowrth house vn∣der the earth: and they iudged Mars then to be of an euyll influence, and thereby they iudged that the Emprour that yeare shoulde haue hotte Feuers of the nature of Mars. And they agreed all in that
opinion to the Emprour. Guydo Bonatus being there, had drawn the Emprours Reuolucion lykewise, & he foūd Mars going towards ye fourth house, being then of an euyll influence: iudged thereby ye poyson should be mynistred to the Emprour to kyll him. Therfore he counsayled the Emprour, that if any dyd whysper, or had any priuie talke together, or were found mee∣ting or hauing conferēce together in his Court, they should be apprehended: Or if any should come to the Kytchin not woont, or appoynted, that some faythfull man of his Court should watche the same. Which charge, was commytted to the Maister of the Em∣prours housholde: which being very dillygent ther∣in, espyed and founde two Knights of the Emprours Court, that were very busye in talke together, and had not only mutuall conference together, more then they were woont: but also oftentymes requyred to come into the Kytchin. Whervpon the Maister of the housholde committed them to prison, and then one of them called Iohannes Franciscus, was sore tormented: but yet he would confesse nothing. So that they de∣uised a letter in the name of the sayde Iohannes Fran∣ciscus, confessing therin the matter, and shewed it to his fellowe: which when he saw, strayte way sayde, that the sayd Iohannes Franciscus was the chiefe pro∣curer therof, & entysed him to it. Which vttered, they had theyr desyre: wherfore they were secretly execu∣ted. Iohannes Ganiuetus, lykewise discribes it. A Certaine Womā that vsed Mizaldus for her Phi∣sition, had a belly dyd so swell, that it seemed shee was not able to carry her burthen: from whome (a∣bout the ende of nyne monthes,) there came an euyll
shapen masse or peece: wherevnto were two eares lyke the handles of a cuppe fastned, lyke armes, with feeling: after that there dyd fall from her wombe, a monster with a crooked byll or beake, with a long & rounde necke, with brandishing eyes, a sharpe tayle, maruelous quicke of foote: and as soone as it sawe any light, it filled the Parlor or place with noyse, and so it dyd runne from place to place: but at the last, the Women following it, dyd smoolder or chooke it to death with pyllowes. After the woman almost wer∣ryed, not without great daunger of her lyfe, did bring forth a Boye, which was so tormented of the Mon∣ster: that they had much to doo to christen it with lyfe. Leuinus Lemnius is the Author. IF Saturne be in the tenth house, in a watry sygne, and hath any dignity in the Ascendent: the Chylde then borne wyll be a Shypman, or a Sayler, or else he wyll abyde gladly on the water, and wyll delyght in fyshing. Taisnier. CUluer dung sodden in Wyne, tyll the Wyne be cō∣sumed, and then emplastred hotte to the gowte: healeth the same perfectly. Use it morning & euening fowre or fyue dayes together. Petrus Hispanus. TO restore the deaffe to hearing. Take the roote of Houndstung out of the earth, and make a hoale in the roote, as long and deepe as you can, and fyll the same hoale with Salt, and couer it wel that nothing can come within it: then set it in the earth againe as it was, and couer it with earth, and let it be there so three dayes: and at the thyrde dayes ende, take it vp,
and that which you finde therein, keepe it in some cleane glasse, and put some therof into the deaffe eare. Let him vse it euery euening at his going to bedde, vntyll he heare clearly: which wyll be within a fort∣nyght at the furthest, (God wylling.) And when you do it into his eare, let him lye in his bedde, that the lycquor may enter. This I had out of an olde wryt∣ten booke. Prayse it as it proues. TAke two lytle peeces of good Lycqueres (the bark scraped awaye,) of the length of a pyn, and of the bygnes of two barley strawes, & put eyther of them into your mouth, betweene your gooms and your cheekes, that is on eyther syde one, and so let them lye all the whole nyght. Use this euery nyght for a fort∣nyght at the least: and without doubt it wyll stop or stay the rewme. For it conieales the thyn rewme in∣to thyck fleame: so yt you may spyt it out. This helpt one that was without all hope to be helpt. TO helpe the Pocks in the eyes. Take Saffern, and lay it in a awcer with fayre water, and let it stande whyles it be yallow, and then droppe some of it into the eye with a sether: and it wyll destroye the Pockes, and saue the sight. This I had out of an olde booke. WHen thou doost fynde the seuenth house, and the Lorde of the same to be afflicted or Impedite, in the tyme of the question for the sycke: chaunge the Phisition, for he shall not profyte the sicke party, ey∣ther through his owne error, or through the necly∣gence of the sycke person, or through them that be a∣bout
the sycke body. The house is afflicted, if Saturne or Mars be therin, or being beholden of theyr quartyle or opposyte Aspect: and contrary, if the seuenth house be well affected, as if Iupiter or Venus is there, take ye Phisition to whome you make the questiō, or whome you are determined to take: for he shall profyt the syck much, and he wyll quickly cure the sycke to his great prayse. Therfore marke ye fyrst, or soddayne calling or sending for the Phisition, for if at yt tyme the seuenth house, and the Lord therof be euyll affected, the Phi∣sition then called, or sent for, wyll not profyt the sicke: But it followes not therefore that the sycke shall dye. But the Phisition if he take him in hande, shall go a∣way without honour. Therefore as soone as thou art called to go to the sycke, take counsayle of thy E∣phemerides, and the celestiall Fygure being erected, marke where the seuenth house be well or euyll affec∣ted: and so thou mayst eyther refuse, or take the sycke in hande. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. PUt the powder of redde Corrall, in the hoale of the toothe: and it wyll fall out by the roote. Petr. Hisp. AN excellent medicine, and a noble restoratyue for Man or Woman, that is brought very lowe with sycknes. Take two pounde of Dates, and washe them cleane in fayre Ale, then cutte them, and take out the stones, and the whyte skynnes, then cutte them small, and beate them in a morter, tyll they begynne to woorke lyke waxe: then take a quarte of claryfyed Honny, or Sugar, and halfe an ounce of the powder of long Pepper, as much of Mace, of Cloaues, Nutmugges, and Cynamom, of
each one dram, as much of the powder of Lignum A∣loes: beate all these spyces together, and seethe the Dates with the Sugar or Honny with an easy fyre, and let it seethe, and as it seethes, cast in thereto a lytle of the powder, by lytle & lytle: and sturre it with a Splatter of wood, and so do vntyll it come to an E∣lectuary, and then eate euery morning and euening therof, one ounce at one tyme, and it wyll renew and restore againe his complexion: be he neuer so lowe brought. This hath bene proued, and it hath done good to many a man and woman. A Noble Receyte for the blacke Iaundise. Take a gallon of Ale, a pynt of Honny, and two handful of redde Nettelles, and take a penny worth or two of Saffern, and boyle it in the Ale, (the Ale being fyrst skymmed,) and then boyle the Honny, and the Net∣tels therin altogether, and strayne it well: and drinke euery morning a good draught thereof, for the space of a fortnight. For in that space (God wylling,) it wyll cleane and perfectly cure the black Iaundyse. WHosoeuer in the fyrst nine dayes in May, drinks euery morning fasting, a lytle dyshe full of the iuyce of Bettony: it wyll doo him maruelous much good for the gowte. Which he shall perceyue the next yeare following, (if he lyue so long.) YF any that hath the Pluresie, or is stuffed in the stomacke, with tough or harde fleame: Let him take a srule, (that is the weyght of .xxiiii. barlye  of the powder of the seeds of Nettels, with the  of Uyolets, and swallow the same, as by
lycking it by litle & lytle: and he shal spyt out the Uys∣cus and tough humor easily. A secrete of a Parisian Phisition. GOates wyll geue much mylke: if you tye Dyttany about theyr bellyes. Africanus. IF Saturne be in the tenth house, in an earthy sygne, and hath power or dygnity in the Ascendent, and is Orientall of the Sunne: he that is then borne, wyll be a Maister Carpenter, or else he wyll delyght in Carpenter shyp: but if he be Occidentall, he wyll be a cleanser of Welles or pyts, or else a dygger. Taisnier. IF the griefe of ye gowte, or ache be too outragious, Take of Opiū, one dram, of Saffern, three drams, myngle them with fowre or fyue yolkes of Egs, and plaster the same vpō the griefe: for it mightely asswa∣geth the paines, and restrayneth the corruption. A Most approued medicine for ye Emrods or Pyles. Take two or three brycks, and burne them redde hotte, and put them in some pan vnder a close stoole, and sprinckle them with vineger, & let the party grie∣ued syt vpon the sayd stoole, that the fume therof may ascend vpward to his fundament. Doo thus three or fowre times if neede be: and certainly it wyll helpe it. IF you wyll make Byrdes drunke, that you maye catch them with your hands. Take such meate as they loue, as Wheate, or Beanes, or such lyke: and laye the same to stiepe in leese of Wine, or in the iuyce of Humlocks, and sprinckle the same in ye place where the Byrdes vse to haunt: and if they do eate thereof,
strayght wayes they wyll be so gyddy, that you may take them with your handes. I wrote this out of an olde wrytten booke, wherein I knowe many true things was written. A Present helpe for a Woman yt trauelleth of chyld. Take Hysop, Uerueyn, and Dyttany, of eache one handfull, stampe them small, and temper them with olde Ale, then straine it, and wryng out the iuyce, and geue a good draught therof, to her that trauelleth of chyld to drinke: and she wil be deliuered with speede, and the chyld saued and she both: so that the chyld be alyue when she drynkes it. A True medicine for the gowte. Take the iuyce of ye flowres of Broome, and the iuyce of Scali celi, and Honny, as much of one as of an other, and seethe it all together, tyll it be of the thycknes of Honny, and an∣noynt the gowty place therwith. I knew (sayth the wryter hereof,) a good Priest in London that healed all men and women therwith: for the most part that came to him. And truely I wyst it neuer fayle. This, for the great good lykelyhood of the medicine, and for the faythful affyrming: I thought good to regester it among the rest. IF one pound of Waxe, two ounces of quicke Brym∣stone, and as much of quicke Lyme, (putting therto a lytle ounce of the oyle of Nuts:) a Candle be made with a week of Bumbase, & so put into the water, as soone as euer the quick Lime begins to burne: it wyl moue the rest of things apt for the fyre, to burne, euen in the myddes of the water. Mizaldus.
A Ram wyl not put or runne at one: if his hornes be boorde through, nye vnto his eares. Mizaldus. WHo soeuer falles sycke in the howre of Iupiter, he wyll recouer his health quickly. Haly Abenragel. This haue I proued to be true many tymes: and the howre of Iupiter is an excellent howre to doo any thing, or to take any good thing in hande. A Lytle Gunpowder put into a peece of fyne lynnen cloath, and the same put into the hollowe toothe, or holden betweene the teethe, so that it touch the aking toothe: It puts away the toothe ache present∣ly. This is very true. IF you distyll hearbe Iue, and geue the water ther∣of to be drunken of them that are grieued, or tor∣mented with the gowte, annoynting also therewith the gowty or grieued place: it wyll heale or helpe them assuredly. Great warrantyse was made of this medicine: where I had it. A Speciall medicine for all suddayne sycknes, and especiall of the stomack or breast. Take a spoone∣full of Aqua vite, and put therein halfe a spoonefull of the powder of Lycqueres, and let it remayne ther∣in three howres, & drynke it fasting, or at euen when you go to bedde. It is a soueraigne thing for the sto∣macke, or breast. LAye Saffern on the Nauell of them that haue the yallowe Iaundyse: and it wyll helpe them. This was affymed to me as proued.
THis following is an excellent medicine to purge the head of naughty humors, & to helpe the head∣ache, the swymming of the head, and the mygrym. Washe the rootes of Beetes, and cutte away the vp∣permost backe, then stampe the same, and wryng out the iuyce therof, then snuffe some of it out of a spoone into your nose: and a maruelous effect wyll followe, and a speedy remedy therof. A Gentleman a friende of myne tolde mee this, as a most sure and proued thing in this case. COckes that eates Garlycke, are made stoute to fyght: therefore trauellors do often byte thereof, and also such as followes warres: because it encrea∣seth agylytie, strengthneth them, and makes them bolde. It is geuen to Horsses with bread and Wyne, at the howre of the battell or conflyct: to make them more fierce, lyuely, and to suffer more easily theyr la∣bour and trauayle. Mizaldus. THere were young Mise found with the Persians, in the bellyes of Myse, that had young Myse in theyr bellyes. Aristoteles, as Mizaldus wrytes. IF the feete of a great lyuing Tode be cutte off, the Moone voide of course, that is aspecting none, and hastens towards the coniunction of the Sunne, and hangd about the necke of him or her that hath the Kings Euyll: it so profytes, that oftentymes it dely∣uers the party from the disease. Hieronimus Cardan. IF Iupiter be in the eleuenth house well affected, and not Retrograde, nor Combust, nor in his fall, (as in
Capricorne) but in Cancer, Sagitary, or Pisces: it syg∣nifyes (the Chylde then borne,) shall be fortunate, happy, and haue a common loue in all thinges, chief∣ly: if he haue any dignity in the Ascendent, or in the place of the Sunne, in the Natiuity of the daye, or in the place of the Moone in the Natiuitie of the night. Taisnier. THis maruelous Water following, wyll recouer the syght againe, hyndred of any cause: wherwith Constantine the Emprour receyued his syght. Take three drams of Tutie, made in very small powder, as much of Aloe Epaticum in powder, two drams of fyne Sugar, syxe ounces of Rosewater, as much of pure whyte Wyne, myxe all together, and put it in some cleane vessell of glasse, and being well closed and stopt, set it in the Sunne a month together, sturring it together once euery daye: Then take of the same water fowre or fyue droppes in your eyes morning and euening, and with thus continewing a certayne space: it wyll cause the syght to come againe as fayre as euer it was before. This I knowe is proued for an excellent water for the eyes, for it cleareth them maruelously. I knew one that coulde not threede a needle without spectacles, which put not past two or three drops of the same into theyr eyes at nyght: and the next morning, the same partie dyd see well to threede a needle without spectacles. TO make a lyght that neuer shall fayle. Take the Woormes that shynes in the nyght, called Gloo∣woormes, stampe them, and let them stande tyll the shyning matter be aboue: then, with a fether take of
the same shyning matter, and myngle it with some quycksyluer, and so put it into a Uyall, and hang the same in a darke place: and it wyll geue lyght. This I had out of an olde booke, which is not much vnlike to the discription of Mizaldus. IF the Lyuer of a Mowse be geuen in a Fygge, to a Swyne: that Swyne wyll follow the geuer ther∣of. Mizaldus. THe sounde of an Eccho, is thought to dryue away Bees. Therefore theyr Hyues ought to be plaste, where the Eccho or the voyce doth not sound againe. M. Varro. WHosoeuer takes his iourney, in the howre of Iu∣piter, he shall haue good gaine in his substaunce, and in his busynes: and he shal haue profyt and glad∣nes in things vnlooked for. Haly. IF a Spider be put in a lynnen cloath a lytle brused, and holden to the nose that bleedes, (but touch not the nose therwith, but smell to the same,) by & by the bloud wil stay, and the nose will leaue bleeding. This is very true. For the venemous Spyder is so contra∣ry, and such an enemie to mans bloud, that the bloud drawes backe, and shunnes the Spyder presently. A maruelous thing. WRyte what you wyl, on fayre whyte paper, with the iuyce of a redde Onion, well myxed and tem∣pered with the whyte of an Egge, which being drie: wyll appeare as though it were onely playne paper,
without any wryting. But if you holde it against the fyre, you maye then easilye reade it, or perceyue the letters. TO gylde Yron or Copper. Take the gall of a Bull, and rubbe the Yron or Copper well therwith, (so that the same before be well burnished) all about, that you woulde haue gylded, and let it after drye in the Sunne, foreseeing that there come no dust therto: and when it is drye, gylde vpon it as you would doo vpon Syluer. SEethe an Egge in strong Uinegar vntyll it be very harde, then let the same Egge lye three dayes in U∣rine, then drye it: and it wyll be maruelous harde. Or let an Egge lye three dayes in Uinegar, then drie the same at the Sunne three dayes, and it wyll be ve∣ry harde. CAst Brymstone into a Chafyngdysh, with hotte burning coales, and holde a redde Rose ouer the smoake therof: and it wyll be whyte. TO seperate Golde from any thing gylded. Seethe pure Sulphurevyue, (called quicke Brymstone,) in water, vntyll halfe the water be consumed, then wette the parte gylded with that water, then drye it at the fyre, then stryke the same gylded place, with a lytle Yron: and the Golde wyll fall from it. This I had out of an olde wrytten Booke: but howe true it is, I knowe not. Therefore as you trye it, so take it.
TO proue or finde out the euent of any that is sycke. Count the daies from the beginning of his, or her sycknes: and take the roote of an hearbe which hath so many leaues, as the number of the same dayes be: tye it, or hang it vp, and if the disease be curable: the partye wyll be much recreated. If not, then the party wyl be sadde. But if you can not fynde an hearbe that hath so many leaues, put the rootes of diuers hearbs together, the leaues whereof together doo perfectly make vp the number of the sayde dayes, from the be∣gynning of the partyes sycknes, and vse them as be∣fore. This Mizaldus had of a certaine Italyan, which profest that it is true. THe bloud of a Hare dryed, dooth helpe and stay the blouddy fluxe, or any other laske: though it be ne∣uer so sore or extreame. So doth the bones of a Man or Woman made into fyne powder, and taken in red Wyne. AN easye plaster for the Gowte, but not a lytle ef∣fectuall, because I, sayth Iohn Arderne, haue often tymes applyed it as well to Women as to Men, and haue taken away theyr great paynes, with once ap∣plying it as well in the feete as in the knees, & other ioyntes. But take heede it be not perceyued of the patient, nor of any other: but it ought to be kept more secrete, and deare: and let it be reuealed to none: but to thy sonne, or to thy wel beloued friend. I do thinke it preuailes aboue all other medicines for the gowte, & easeth the paine sooner: and it ought to lye fyue or sixe daies without any mouing of it: if it can be so ap∣plyed. It is made thus. Take of blacke sope as much
as is sufficient, wherevnto adde of the yolkes of raw Egges, halfe as much as the Sope, and myxe them well together in a dyshe, vntyll the Sope hath lost his proper cullour: which done, laye thereof vpon fyne flaxe, and spreade it lyke a plaster, and then apply it to the grieued place, then take the whytes of Egs myxed with Wheate flowre, and wet a lynnen cloath well in the same, & lay the same vpon the sayd plaster, and tye it well vpon it, that the plaster remoue not a∣way of all the sayde tyme: vnlesse there be some great occasion. This I founde in an olde wrytten booke. Which synce I haue oftentymes proued true, for a∣ches. YF you seethe Barlye, drye Beanes, and Lycqueres cutte in peeces, of each a lyke much, all together in fayre water, and drynke a good draught therof with some Sugar, euerye morning fasting, and at nyght when you go to bedde, fyue or syxe dayes together, or more: It wyll destroye any Impostume, and shall thereby auoyde or cast out the same. This was taken out of a Booke of a learned man that had often prac∣tised the same to be true. A medicine of smal coast, and easie to be made at all tymes. HE wyll be a good Phisition, in whose Natiuitye Mars and Venus are corporally: or by any good Aspect coniunct. Euen so if Venus and Mercury be ioygned, or in coniunction together. Also he wyll be a perfect Phisition, in whose Natiuitie Mars & Venus are coniunct in the syxt house. Iatromath.
A Uery lytle Byrde called Aegithus, doth marue∣lously dysagree with the Asse, who in thorny pla∣ces doth scratche or rubbe his vlcers or sores: wher∣by he doth destroy or breake the nestes of this Byrd: wherevpon it comes, that as soone as this Byrde heares the voyce of the Asse, she doth not onely cast the egges out of her nest: but also her young ones (if she haue any,) do fall from the same, astonyed wyth feare. So that the said Byrde flyes vnto the vlcers or sores of the Asse, and pryckes or thrust at them with her byll: that she maye dryue him away from thence. Aristotil. Plin. et Oppianus. IF the Lorde of the Ascendent be Combust in the fowrth house, or in the eyght house: it sygnifyes, that he that is then borne, shall dye in pryson. And if he be Combust in the fyft house, in a watry sygne: it shewes he wyll be geuen to be droonken. In the syxt house (it showes,) that he wyll dye of a long sycknes. Taisnier. FINIS. Lib. 8.
¶ The nynth Booke of Notable thinges. FYll an Egge shell full of the iuyce of Egremony, and geue it vnto ye patient to drink, whome you suspecte to haue droonken poyson: and it wyll myghtely purge vpwarde all the poyson, and with a won∣der facilytie healeth the byting of Serpentes, and other venemous Beastes. Petrus Hispanus. THis Oyle or Balme following is of a maruelous vertue against trembling, and the palsey, and it helpeth the memory: annoynting the hynder part of the head therwith. Which a most syngular Phisiti∣on kept priuie to him selfe for a tyme, as a most preci∣ous secrete: which in the ende reuealed it to the Au∣thor, wherof the making followeth. Take of Galba∣num, one pound, (in another place I haue read it half a pound,) of gum of Iuye, three ounces: these fynely beaten a parte, myxe together: Which after put into a glasse body with an head, and distyll it in Balneo Marie. After it is distylled, myxe therewith one ounce of the oyle of Bayes, and one pounde of good Tur∣pentyne: then let the whole be distylled, and seperate the water from the oyle, and keepe the oyle as a pre∣cious Balme. The vse of this is, that the patient vexed with the Palsey, conuulcons, the crampe and trembling of members, be layde vpryght, and the oyle temperatly hotte, must be powred vpon the
the belly, into the hollow and bottome of the Nauell, & you shall see after a maruelous working, that may rather be coumpted diuine, then naturall, and very much helpeth the palsey, and strengthneth the me∣mory: vsed as before. A certaine Practysioner apply∣ed one droppe of this Oyle on the patientes forehead that had the Palsey, and another on his Nauell, and he incontinent arose as amased: and was after one howre delyuered of the greuous payne of a wounde, in a certayne place of his body, and the shrunken sy∣newes he annointed with this Oyle, and the patient was suddaynly healed. &c. This Oyle helpeth deafe∣nes, and any sycknes proceeding of a colde cause: and helpeth besydes the losse of smelling. Arnoldus de villa noua, I take to be the Author hereof. THe Hoofe of a Beast called Alces, (which is a wyld Beast lyke a fallowe Deere, hauing no ioyntes in his legges,) hath a maruelous vertue and strength against the Falling Euyll: for a lytle peece therof en∣closed in a Ryng, and so the same Ryng put vpon the fynger next the lytle fynger: so that the same peece of the Hoofe be turned towarde the palme of the hand: it doth recreate them maruelous much, that are fal∣len, and immediatly makes them rise vp. A lytle peece of the same bare, and put in the hand, by and by closed into a fyst, suddainly it dryues away the disease, and rayseth the party that is fallen therewith. Which Lemnius sayth he proued once or twyse. And Mizal∣dus sayth that he proued it: putting in a lytle peece of the same in the left eare, (mouing it, as scratching a lytle,) of one that had the falling sycknes, and it had very good successe, & it was coumpted for a myracle.
Iohannes Agricola dooth say the lyke is done, if a lytle peece of the same Hoofe be hanged vppon one that hath the same disease: so that it may touche the skyn. I doo heare sayth Mizaldus, that the scrapings or fy∣lings therof, is geuen in Polonia for the same disease. The Hoofe of the ryght hinder foote is to be chosen. But you must take heede of false deceyuers, which sels the Hoofes of Oxen or Kyne, for the true Hoofes of Alces. IT is a most sure and proued remedy, as well in cu∣rying of spitting of bloud, as also in preseruing from the same: euery day in the morning fasting, to eate a scruple (which is the weyght of .xxiiii. Barly cornes) of Rubarbe tosted at the fyre. Emperica benedicti fa∣uentini. BAye Salt well beaten into powder and syfted, and incorporated, or myxed well with the yolke of an Egge, and so layde vpon any Carbuncle, plague sore, botche, byle, or impostume: assuredly (by the grace of God,) it wyll drawe to it selfe all the venome of the plague, or the sore: and breake any byle, or other thing. So that in short tyme the same wyl be healed. A tryed thing. IF the foreheade of the sycke, waxe redde, and his browes fall downe, and his nose waxe sharpe and colde, and if his left eye become lytle, and the corner of his eye runne, if he turne to the wall, if his eares be colde, or if he maye suffer no bryghtnes, and if his wombe fall, if he pull strawes, or the cloathes of his bedde, or if he picke often his nosthryls wich his fyn∣gs,
and if he wake much, being a young man: or ing an olde man sleepe much. These are most cer∣ayne tokens of death. POttage made of the leaues and rootes of Straw∣beries, being eaten fasting, certayne dayes of them that haue the Iaundise: doth helpe them perfectly. This was the secrete of a certayne Moonke, wher∣with he got maruelous much money. A Serpente doth so hate the Ashe tree, that she wyll not come nye the shadowe of them. And therefore shee goes farre from them, both morning and eue∣ning: because then they geue the longest shadowes. And Pliny sayth, that he hath proued it, that if one compasse a place about with ye braunches of an Ashe tree, so that there be a fyre, and a Serpent enclosed in the same, the Serpent wyll rather go into the fyre: then she wyl seeke to escape ouer, or through the sayd Ashen braunches. &c. Mizaldus. YF the Lord of the Ascendent be found in the twelft house: he that is then borne, shal procure his owne enemity. Taisnier. IUmper berryes are medicinable against poysons: for there is none of lyke operation vnto it. And Dioscorides sayth also, that they do helpe against poy∣sons, and styngings of Serpents. Petr. Hispanus. TO trye whether precious Stones be pure or not. Heate a plate of Yron on the fyre, then annoynt the
same with Oyle, and cast or strowe on the same, the powder of glasse, wherevpon saye qucke buning coales, and then holde the stone that you would trie, a good whyle ouer the same coales: (that the stone maye be hotte, not touching the fyre) and then i the stone lose his cullour: he is not good or pure. But if he keepe his cullour: he is then perfect and right. AS principall a medicine as euer was ordained for the bone ache, eyther in Woman or Man, in what place so euer it bee. Take a penny woorth of Aqua vite, and an other of oyle Debaye, and myxe them well together, and annoynt the grieued place there∣with, (not by the fyre,) and it wyll doo awaye the payne for euer: vsyng it often. But you must warme the Oyntment a lytle in a Sawcer before you laye it on, and chafe it well vntyll it be dryed in, and couer it warme at all tymes, vntyll it be hole. Thus I founde it wrytten. EGremony, Mugwoort, and Bettony, both leaues and rootes stampte with olde grease and vynegar or veriuyce, and a plaster thereof applyed to the grie∣ued or sore payned backe: wyll quyte put away the paynes and griefe therof. So that you vse it three or fowre tymes. A sure and proued medicine. IF you wyll catche Mowles or Woontes, put Gar∣lycke, Leekes, or an Onion in the mouthes of theyr hoales, or in theyr entringes into the grounde: and you shall see them come, or leape out quycklye, as though they were amased or astonied. Albertus.
IF the Fystula be outwarde, put into it the iuyce of Culuerfoote: for it healeth it. If it be inward, drink it: and it healeth also. This is true, for it hath bene proued. FOr them that haue surfeyted, or eaten too much, let them stampe Bettony, and temper it with hote water and a lytle Wine, then strayne it well, & drinke a good draught thereof morning & euening, fyrst and last three dayes together: and it wyl throughly helpe him (God wylling.) This was told me for a trueth. THe two hornes of a Snayle borne vppon a man: wyll plucke away carnall or fleshly lust from the bearer thereof. I had this out of an olde wrytten booke. But howe true it is I knowe not. FOr all euyls of the stomacke, and for them that can not eate. Take an hearbe called Centory, & seethe it well in stale Ale, & when it is wel sodden, then stampe it, after that seethe it againe in the same Ale, let there be two handfull of Centory, to three quartes of Ale, and let them seethe as is before sayde, to three pynts: then put thereto one pynt of pure Honny, and boyle them together, and keepe it in some cleane vessell, and geue to the party grieued, three spoonefull therof fa∣sting euery daye, tyll he be hole and well: for it driues away all the fleame & corruption from the stomacke, & makes him haue a great desyre to his meate, with∣in fowre or fiue dayes. Often proued. THe powder of Bettony put in Wyne, (that is a spoonefull of the powder to a draught of Wyne,) a
lytle boyled on the fyre, being drunke: doth presently helpe such as haue drunk poyson before. And whoso∣euer drinks the same in a morning fasting, no poyson taken after the same day, can hurt him. This is a proued and tryed medicine. THe dung of a Catte dryed, & so myxed with strong vynegar, that it may be something thycke, & ther∣with any heayrye place rubbed often tymes, or an∣noynted in a day: it wyll cause that heair wyll grow no more in that place. Proued of a countrey man. Mi∣zaldus. IF the Lapwing doo syng before the Uynes doo budde: it is sayde that it foreshewes great plentie of Wyne. Mizaldus. WHosoeuer deliuers a sum of Money in the howre of Iupiter: he shall receyue it againe well, with gayne. Haly Abenragel. THis pocyon or drinke following is wonderful, and very often proued of me sayth Petrus Hispanus: for it kylleth the Fystula, in what place so euer it be, and draweth out the corrupt and broken bones. Take the rootes & leaues of Planten, Strawbery leaues, the leaues or seedes of Hempe, the leaues or seedes of Mustarde, the tops of sharpe Docke, red Colewoort leaues, and Tansey, let them all seethe in a good quā∣tity of whyte Wine: after strayne all the whole, & put into ye streyning, as much Honny as shall be thought meete: geue therof vnto the patient early & late, vntil such tyme as the cleare pocyon or drynke come forth
by the mouth of the Fystula: which must alwayes be kept open with a syluer Pype put into it, and keepe vppon it alwayes a redde colewoort leafe. It is of a wonderfull operation. Petrus Hispanus. And I my selfe haue proued it: and it healed in such manner as is before declared. It is a precious thing. DRagans bounde to the priuities of a Woman in labour: causeth her to be delyuered incontynent. But there must be heede taken that it be quickly re∣moued, least it drawe forth the Matrix with all. Pe∣trus Hispanus. HEre followeth an excellent Oyle, which maketh a fayre cullour in the face. Take of Almonds scra∣ped, ten poundes, of redde Saunders in powder, sixe ounces, of Cloues, one ounce, of whyte Wyne, fowre ounces, of Rosewater, three ounces: these after they be groslye beaten together, let them lye in a marble Morter close couered, for eyght or nyne dayes, bea∣ting the same ouer once a daye: then heate it all in an earthen vessell, vntyll it begynne to fume and be through hotte, and after that put it into a newe square bagge of lynnen cloath, then put the same bagge into a presse, betweene two smoothe plates of Yron, something hotte▪ for out wyll come a redde oyle wherewith Women maye annoynt theyr faces: for it causeth a comly redde, and bewtyfull skynne. A secrete, and practysed of fewe. This is in the newe Iewell of Health: a Booke of muche value, and small pryce.
THe grease of an Eele, and the iuyce of Syngreene mixed together, of each a lyke much, boyled a lytle, and a lytle therof put into the deafe eare, nyne nights together: wyll bring the hearing agayne, as well as euer it was. TAke Salt Armoniacke, Allom, and Salt Niter, of eache a lyke quantitie, with a lytle fylings of Syl∣uer, let all be myxt together, then put them vnto the fyre, that they maye be hotte: and when they shall cease to smoake, then with the same powder, alone, or else myxte or moystened, with the spettell of your mouth, let Copper or Brasse be rubbed therewith: and strayght way it wyll haue the cullour of Siluer. SErpentes being within a cyrcle made of Byttony: they can not go out of the same. But rather wyll dye with beating them selues. Plinius. IF the Lorde of the seconde house, be in the twelfth house: enemyties wyll come many tymes to him that is then borne: for money, or through money. Taisnier. PLanten stampte, and the iuyce wroong out, & put into the hollownesse of an Ulcer, with a spowte: healeth the same. So doth Bettony stampte, and applyed to a Fystula, healeth it. Petrus Hispanus▪ The iuyce of Cinquefoyle, doth heale the Fistula lykewise: if it be put into the same with a spowte. TO seperate Golde from any thing that is gylded. Take Borace and temper it in water, thē boyle it
ouer the fyre, and with the same water, annoynt the thing that is gylded, & cast theron a lytle of the pow∣der of quick Brymstone: after put it into the fyre that it may be made red, then quench it in running water, & you shall finde the gold in the bottome of the vessell. FOr any paynes of the eares, and for them that can∣not heare. Take a great Onion, cutte a hoale ther∣in, and set it in the embers to roast, then fyll it full of oyle Olyffe, and euer as it dryeth, fyll it vp againe, tyl it be roasted well, then take away the vppermost skin therof, then strayne the Onion through a cloath, and keepe it in some close glasse: and when you wyll occu∣py thereof, put some of it into the hole eare, and let him lye on his sore eare when he goes to bedde: and if he vse this nyne nyghts, at the furthest: it wyll helpe him. Proued. FOr the fundamēt that goeth forth. Take the tops of redde Nettelles, and stampe them in a morter, then put it into an earthen potte, then put thereto a good porcion of whyte Wyne, and set it ouer the fyre, and let it seethe tyll halfe the lycquor be con∣cōsumed, and geue the party diseased a good draught thereof something hotte to drinke, morning and eue∣ning, fyrst and last: for the space of ten dayes. And al∣so apply the hearbes something warme to his funda∣ment: and it wyll helpe him perfectly. Proued. FOr eyes that be chafed, and the lyddes turned vp, or bleared eyes. Take Arnement, Honny, and the whytes of Egges, of each a lyke much, temper them well together: then take flaxe & laye the same theron,
then applye the same vpon the sore eyes, and it wyll draw the euyll bloud out of them, and perfectly heale them. This medicine hath bene proued. IT is sayd that a Hart doth so abhorre a Ram: that he can not abyde the syght of him. Aristotil. Plin. And other. WHen fowre or fiue Planets be cōiunct or ioygned together in the Ascendent, or fyrst house, of any chylde yt is borne: that chyld wyll not lyue long. Ex∣positor doth say, the King of our Cittie dyd cal me, be∣cause one of his Women had borne a Son, & the Ascē∣dent was ye eyght degree of Libra, the terme of Mer∣cury, and Iupiter was in the same, & also Venus, Mars & Mercury: and the company of the Astrologyans dyd meete together there: and euery one of them dyd tell his opinion, and I heald my peace: The King sayde vnto me, saye what thou can: why doost thou not speake? To whome I aunswered, geue mee respyte for three dayes, for if your Sonne shall passe the thyrd daye: you shall see a great myracle of him. And after xxiiii. howres was ended, the Chylde dyd ryse vp to sytte, and he spake, and gaue sygnes with his hande, wherof the King was greatly afrayde: And I sayde, that he woulde speake some Prophesie, or some my∣racle. Then the King went to the Chylde, and wee with him, to heare what he would saye. And the In∣fant sayde, I am the Infortunate borne Chyld, and I am borne to shew the losse of ye kingdome of Azdexit: and the destruction of the people of Almanaz. And strayght way the Chylde fell downe, and dyed. Haly Abenragel.
THis following is a Secrete, and proued thing for the Palsey, whereof if you geue thryse in the daye to him that hath the Palsey, halfe an ounce, that is in the morning three howres before meate, and two howres before supper, and at his going to bedde: it wyll helpe him thereof. Take of the new and fresh brayne of an Hare, broyled or fryed, one pounde, the iuyces of Sage, of hearbe Iue, and the iuyce of the roote of Acorus, of each three drams, of pure Cyna∣mom, Cloaues, blacke Pepper, of each halfe a dram, Turpentyne washt with the water of hearbe Iue, three ounces, Sugar dyssolued in the water of hearb Iue, as much as doth suffice: And thereof make a Lectuary, according to art, and know that it is mar∣uelous. Emperica benedicti victorij fauentini. TO helpe swolne legges. Take Mallowes & seethe them in water, then stampe them well, & strayne them: then put therto Barrowes grease, & frye them together, vntyl it he something thyck, & lyke an oynt∣ment: lay some therof vpon a cloath, and make a pla∣ster, and apply it to the sore & swolne legge, and lay a new plaster therto twyse euery day, morning and e∣uening, three or fowre dayes together: and by that tyme it wyll be asswaged, and as small as the other. This was tolde mee by a Woman that had tryed it many tymes. ONe neuer hath the gowte, vntyll he hath knowne a woman (carnally.) Hippocrates. ALexandrinus Iouianus Pontanus, doth say: yt he saw a man was grieuously stung or stricken of a Scor∣pion,
which presently was deliuered & helped therof, with drynking of Frankensence, wherein was sealed the sygne of Scorpij, or of a Scorpion: being after made in powder. But it must be grauen in the stone of a Ryng, (Scorpio ascending) the Moone then be∣ing there, and plaste in the Angle,) and the Franken∣sence must be sealed with that seale when the Moone is in Scorpio, and founde in an Angle. And let it be geuen in powder as is before sayde, eyther in water, or in whyte wyne, or in any other meete lycquor. HEre ensueth the making of a myraculous Oyle, called oyle Incombustyble. Take of whyte Sope the best that maye be gotten: and after you haue bea∣ten it well and fyne, put it into a great Retorte, on which powre so much weyght of Aqua vite, seuen tymes distylled ouer, then set the Retorte into ashes, fyxing a large receyuer to it, and very well luted in the ioyntes: this done, make vnder it a soft fyre in the begynning, and encrease the fyre by lytle and lytle, vntyll all be yssued forth that wyll come. Which toge∣ther wyll be an Oyle and Water, then drawe away the receyuer, and seperate the Water from the Oyle, which oyle is Incombustle and myraculous in sūdrie matters, in the worke of Alkemy: for this greatly a∣vayleth in fyxing the medicine Uolatyle, and serueth well to incorporate with all mettalles, and ceasneth such as be crude, and lykewise sweetneth when they beegar. This also dissolueth all paynes & swellings caused of grosse and clammy humors, and healeth in a manner all sortes of wicked Ulcers. And in this (sayth the Author) I conceyued a great delight, as to worke such a maistrie, to see so many straunge fumes
and varyeties: but a more pleasure I tooke in the practyse, as to see how ye same auayled in euery mat∣ter wherto it was applyed. By which I proue this to be a diuine substaunce, and an oyle worthy of eter∣nal memory. And this was the greatest secrete, with which that syngular Matheus the Hungaryan, dyd so many great maruels in Padua: for he heald with it the gowte, the quarten ague, the payne of the French disease, and the drye scab on the head, with sundry o∣ther griefes, for which whyle he remained in Padua, he was highly esteemed and wondred at. And at the last in his departure from Padua, he reuealed it to mee, that the onely medicine which he vsed to all the griefes, was this oyle and none other. The making of which, he fully vttered vnto mee at his departing: which before he would not teach to any man. And the same I haue many tymes made, & haue also seene such straunge practises of it, that to repeate them, I should scantly be beleeued. Hec de secretis Fallopij. TO put a Shedule, or lytle wryting into an Egge, lay an Egge certaine dayes in strong vynegar, vn∣tyl it be soft, and wryte your name or what you lyst in a lytle peece of paper, and folde the paper as harde together as you can: then with a Raser cut the sayd Egge in the toppe fynely, and aduisedly: through the which, put the litle paper into the Egge cyrcumspect∣ly, and then put the Egge into cold water, and imme∣diatly the shell wyl be hard as it was before. A pro∣per secrete. THe quieter Beasts, haue the lesser galles: the feare∣fuller, the greater hartes: the lyghter or more lea∣ping,
the more Lyuer: the meryar, or more pleasant, the greater Splene: and the greater voyce, the more Lyghts. Much like to these verses folowing. Cor ardet, Pulmo loquitur, Fel commouet Iras: Splen ridere facit, cogit amare Iecur. That is. The Hart doth burne, the Lungs do speake, the Gall to yre doth mooue: The Splene or Mylt doth make vs laugh, the Lyuer makes vs looue. Mizaldus. CAuda Draconis, in the seconde house, (called the house of Substaunce:) sygnifyes the chylde then borne, shall wastfully consume and spend his goodes, or sygnifyes the losse therof. And that he shall come to pouerty and open mysery. Haly Abenragel. A Grymony is of woonderfull profyte in medicines, especially: against hollow woundes & vlcers. Petr. Hispanus. And Trotula saith, that though the Fystula that penetrates to the eyes, is incurable: yet some do wytnes yt such a Fystula may be cured, by Agremony alone, by often vsing it, eyther in drynke, or in pow∣der. Filipendula is good for the same, and the graines (o lytle round things,) that are found in the ende of the roote. Gordonius alleadgeth Egremony to be the best and surest medicine, for the curing of a Fystula. FOr the webbe or spotte in the eye. Take the great bone of the Goose wing, (the elder the better, for though it be a yeare old it is not the woorse,) breake it, & take out the marrowe that is within it: then put some of it vpon the webbe, or in the spotte, and it wyl breake it, and saue the syght. Proued.
THe vertues of Tormentyl. This hearbe cōforteth the sight, & cleanseth the body of dyuers maladies: the powder therof is good to clarify the syght of the eyes, though one be blinde. And this hearbe is drest on this manner. Take the hearbe with the roote, & seethe i with whyte Wine, tyl ye thyrd part be sodden away: and geue him that is blynde to drinke of this lycquor nine dayes in the morning colde, and at night bloud warme: and within that tyme he wyll recouer his syght (by Gods grace.) But if the syght of the eye be hurte, take also the hearbe and stampe it, and seeth it in whyte Wyne, with a lytle water put into the Wyne, then laye or spreade the hearbes on a lynnen cloath, & bynde it vpon his eye or eyes: and it brings a woonderful helpe. If thou stampe this hearbe with the roote, a good quantitie, and put it into a lytle ves∣sell full of Wyne, and let it remaine therin three mon∣thes. Whosoeuer drinkes often of this Wyne, though he hath bene blynd nyne yeares: he wyll recouer his sight againe. This I had out of an old written booke, which doth much agree with Petrus Hispanus, in this case: whose minde thereof I haue mencioned, in ano∣ther place of this booke. IF the part of Fortune be Cadent from the Ascendēt, and doth not behold there ye lyght or Lumynary of the time, and his Lord be weake, and Infortunate, & remoued frō an angle, not beholding the part of For∣tune, & the Lord of the house of substaunce be euyll af∣fected of euyll Planets, or of the beames of the Sun: (which destroyes & scatters,) it sygnifyes that he or she that is then borne, shalbe poore, a wretch, & that he wyl not be able to get his owne liuing, and that is lyke to lyue of almos. Haly Abenragel.
THis following is a secrete, and approued medicine for them that are short breathed: very good for the poore (because it is not coastly.) Take of the rootes of Hollyocke dryed in the shaddow, one pound, (made in fyne powder,) clarifyed Honny, fowre pounde: set them ouer a fyre, and styrre them together, vntyll it be in the fourme of a Lectuary, wherof let the patient take often: and he wyll be whole. Emperica bene∣dicti victorij Fauent. A Perfect and most sure and proued remedy, and a rare secrete, for the helping of womens sore brests that be swolne & ful of paine: which was reuealed vn∣to me by an old woman: who sayd yt the Lady Owen, Doctor Owens wife, vsed it to women in this case ve∣ry much, who kept it as a great secrete. The medicine foloweth. Stampe or bruse nine litle woorms, of som called Swyne lyce, (which commonly wyll be founde betweene the barke and wood of olde or drye trees, which haue many feete, and being touched, they be∣come round as a button,) in eight or nyne spoonefuls of drinke, let them remayne therin all night, and the next morning streyne the same drinke, and let the di∣seased woman drinke ye same a lytle warmed, at one draught, and then let her laye to her breast, a two or three foulde lynnen cloath warmed: the next mor∣ning, let her take eyght of the same lytle woormes in drynke, in such order as before, & the thyrde morning seuen, & the fowrth morning syxe, & so euery morning following one lesse: discreasing one euery morning, vntyl nyne mornings be ended, on which nynth mor∣ning she must take but one of them, as it wyll fall
out by the discreasyng one euery day. And if she be not then throughly hole of her breast, let her encrease euery morning one immediatly following: vntyll she hath receyued nyne at one tyme, according to the or∣der before appoynted. A rare and notable thing, if it be true: for I neuer proued it. FOr the swelling of armes, legges, or feete. Take Lyn seede, Wheate bran, Brockleme, Chickē weed, Groundsell, of each one handfull, and one pottell of whyte Wyne: seethe them all together, tyl it be thick, and lay a plaster therof to the place that is swolne, as hotte as the partye can suffer the same: and it wyll take it away, and helpe him within three or fowre plasters. Proued. TO helpe a stynking breath that coms from the sto∣macke. Take two handfull of Coomyn seede, and beate it into powder, then seeth it in a pottel of white Wyne, vntyll a quart thereof be wasted away: then geue the party a good draught thereof fyrst and last, as hotte as he maye suffer it, and it wyll make him haue a sweete breath within fyfteene dayes. This is proued. MArke what Planet is ruler of the twelft house, & the day that beares the name of that Planet, wyl be vnlucky to the Chylde borne at that tyme. And many tymes wyll haue myshaps of that day: Which by long experience is found true. PUt the feete of Hens in hotte embers, tyl the scales or skyn thereof be seperated and shrunke from the
legs: and with the same skyn warme, rubbe Wartes three or fowre tymes or more, and it wyl dryue them away. Petrus Hispanus. IF you wyll do away or consume a Wen, do as fol∣loweth. Bynd fast the Wen, then take Uerdygrease, Brimstone, Sope, oyle of Egs, Allom and Honny, of each a lyke much, and temper them together, and lay it thereto: and it wyll do away the Wen, and heale it without doubt. A Syngular oyle & very rare, which causeth a com∣ly face, and maketh the person mery which vseth it, yea, strong & hardy to fyght: the making whereof doth follow. Take one pound or two of Hempe seede, which after the fynely beating therof, sprinckle & wet it with a lytle Wyne, then put all the same into a new earthen pan glased, and set it ouer the fyre: heate it so long, vntyll you can not suffer your hande in it, after put the same substaunce hotte into square bagges, which wryng harde out, in a presse, and an oyle wyll come forth very profitable: wherof if any drinketh to the quantitie of an ounce at a tyme, it maketh him pleasaunt and merry: and if a Souldior drinke it, it wyll make him both fierce and hardy to fyght, with∣out any feare or doubt of his enemy. And also it is profitable to Women, in that it maketh them merry, & coomly to see too: and in this maner you may draw out an oyle out of all seedes. This is in the newe Iewell of Health. A Notable and often proued medicine for a Sciati∣ca, ache, gowte, or other payne or griefe. Take a
pynt of pure Aqua Composita, one Beastes gall, and one ounce o epper beaten into powder, boile them all together ntll halfe the Aqua vite be consumed: then laye soe thereo on a cloath lyke a plaster, and apply it something hotte to the grieued place, and let it lye twelue howres vnremoued, and do thus fowre or fyue tymes if neede be: for it is a present helpe. A Precious Water for eyes that be fayre & cleare, and yet are blinde. Take Smalladge, redde Fen∣nell, Rew, Uarueyn, Bettany, Egremony, fyue lea∣ued Grasse, Pympernel, Eybright, Sage, Celendyne, of each one quarter of a pounde, washe them cleane, and stampe them in a fayre brasen mortar, or in a pan, then take the powder of fyfteene Pepper cornes fynely searced, and a pynt of good whyte Wyne, and do them to the hearbes, and also take three spoone∣full of lyfe Honny, and fyfteene spoonefull of the vrine of a Boy that is an innocent: and mixe them all toge∣ther, and boyle them ouer the fyre a lytle whyle: and strayne all through a cloath, and keepe it in a glasse well stopt, vntyll you occupy it: and with a fether do it into the sore eyes, and if it drye awaye, temper it with whyte Wyne againe. This is a medicine for all manner of euylles of sore eyes, to make a man see, if euer he shall see, within fyfteene dayes on warran∣tyse: by the grace of God. This I tooke out of an auncient wrytten booke. EUerye one that is borne, whose degree of the se∣uenth house is the terme of an euyl Planet, he shal de a fowle death. And if it be the terme of a good
Planet, he shall dye a fayre and good death. Haly A∣benragell. IF you rubbe Wartes with Egremony, stampt and myxt with vinegar, and also plastred vpon them: it taketh them away cleane. And also if Purslane be rubbed vpon them: it pulleth them vp dy the rootes. Petr. Hispanus. FOr the Coddes that be swolne. Take the powder of Coomyn seede, Barly meale, and Honny, of each a lyke much, frye them together with a lytle Sheepe suet, and bynde the same as a plaster all about the Cods: and it wyll helpe it. Proued. THis following wyll breake a Byle, Botche, or a Fellon. Lay fyrst thertoo some posset crudde, and let it not be remoued of twelue howres, and that wil gather the matter together and make it tender. But if once applying of the posset crudde do it not, then ap∣ply therof to it twyse or thryse: then take vnquencht Lyme, and cast vpon it some fayre spring water, and myxe the same with blacke Sope, and lay to the sore a peece thereof, according to the greatnes that you woulde haue the hoale of the sore, and when it is brooke, then washe it with whyte Wyne a lytle hea∣ted: and so heale it with Butter & powder of Sugar mixed together. This is a sure and approued thing. A Notable secrete for all incurable aches & paynes in the ioyntes where euer they be. Take all the whole horne yt a Buck castes off (the later the better,) cast away the scawpe, take nothing but the horne, cut
the same in shyuers or peeces, then seethe the same in a gallon of fayre water, vntyll all be comd to a pynt, or some thing more: then cast away the peeces of the horne, and then let that in the vessell stand vntyll it be colde, which then wyll be lyke a ielly. And when you wyll occupy therof, warme some of it in a sawcer, or some other conuenient thing, & then annoint the grie∣ued place therwith by the fyre morning and euening, & let it drynk in by the heate of ye fyre: and it wyl helpe and heale it throughly for euer, (God wylling,) with∣in nyne or ten dressings. This is very true, and well proued: which a friend of mine tolde me, that helped him selfe of such an ache therwith, that neyther coun∣sell of Phisitions, practise of Surgeons, nor yet the long vsing of the Bathes, could ease: wherby he spent much money in vayne, vntyll a Wenche by chaunce tolde him this excellent remedy. Which as she sayde a noble man of this Realme, dyd learne beyonde the Seas: who hath reuealed it synce to the great com∣modity and helpe of many. FOr swolne or sore throtes, a rare and sure remedy. Rubbe your hand on the bare earth or ground, and then therwith rubbe the sore or swoolne throote: if presently you do thus three seuerall tymes, the swel∣ling & payne wyll myraculously go away. This was taught me by a friende of myne, that dyd knowe it to be true by proofe. AN excellent remedy for a great heate, & pricking in the eyes. Fyl an Egge shel newly emptyed, with ye iuyce of Syngreene, & set it in the hotte embers, and skym of the greene baggage from it, and then it wyll
be a water, then straine it, and keepe it in a glasse, and put some of it into the hotte eies, fowre or fiue nights together: and it wyll cease the burning and pricking therof quickly. Often proued. HE shall scantly or neuer dye an euyll death: that hath a good Planet in his .viii. house. Haly Aben. A Woonderfull drinke against brusings, and it hel∣peth such maruelously that are brused through fal∣ling. Take Egremony, Bettony, Sage, Planten, Iuy leaues, Rosepearslie, stampe them together, and mixe Wyne therto: geue the patient it often to drinke, tyll he be hole. A true and tried medicine. I thinke that Petrus Hispanus hath the same. IF you burne fowre ounces of Turpentine, vpon a hotte or burning plate of Yron, vntyll it maye be made in powder, and then myxe two drams there of, with fowre ounces of the water of Saxifrage, and geue it twyse in a weeke, early in a morning to thm that haue the stone in theyr blather, and so continew it two monthes: he shall not onely be preserued from breeding of the stone in the blather: but also it wyll burst and dryue forth the stone bred there already. This is proued, and a secrete, and is to be kept well in minde. Benedictus victorius Fauentinus. IF Lauender be well sodde in water, and then stray∣ned, and halfe a pynt therof droonke dayly fyrst and last, for the space of a fortnight: it wyll heale them that haue the Palsey. This was founde in an olde written booke.
AN excellent and speedy remedy for many diseases, and chiefly for the stomacke. Myxe two spoonefull of Sallet oyle, with two spooneful of pure Aqua vite, and drynke all the same in the morning at one tyme, doo so syxe or seuen morninges together. It is a no∣table and often proued remedy. FOr the Strangury, a straunge medicine. Take a pynt of good Aqua composita, and put a good hād∣full of Iuy leaues therin, & keepe the vessell wel stopt, & the Iuy leaues wyll consume therin, vse to drink of the same three or fowre spoonefuls at one tyme, mor∣ning and euening, fyrst & last, fiue or sixe dayes toge∣ther: and you shall see a maruelous helpe therof. THis following is a proued medicine for the ache in the huckle bone, called the Sciatica. Take a pounde of good black Sope, one pint of good Aqua vite, halfe a pynt of Sallet oyle, and a quarter of a pynt of the iuyce of Rew, seethe them and sturre them all toge∣ther ouer an easie fyre, vntyll it be something thycke, and that it maye be made in a plaster: then spreade some therof vpon a peece of lether, and apply it to the ache or payned place, and let it lye thereon vnremo∣ued, three dayes and three nyghts: and if the payne be not then gone, then applye such an other plaster thertoo, and remoue it not of so long, and it wyl helpe it certainly. This was tolde me by one that knew it often proued. THe powder of whyte harde Sugar, put into a bloudshotten eye, or that is some thing dymme of syght: It helpes the same, and mendes the syght very
well. Especiallye, if you put afterwarde a lytle Rose water into the eye. This I haue proued dyuers tymes to be true. Yea, and I thinke if it were vsed, it woulde consume the webbe of the eye, at length. HAly sayth, that he that begyns to set forewarde his iourney in sayling, or enters to go to the Sea in the howre of Saturne, he wyll be drowned: or else wyll be lost by the inuasion of Pyrates or other: or else the fiercenes or great raginge of the Sea wyll throw him to ye land, where he shal suffer shipwrack. Or else into farre Ilands he shalbe caryed, (perhaps vnknowne to him.) Which of trueth hath alwayes hapned to that Shyp, (that then sets forewarde,) as the booke of Natures dyd contayne: which as he hath dillygently proued, and read, which chiefly en∣treates of the iudgements of howres. And the sayde Haly saith further, as foloweth: when a certaine shyp dyd set forth or forwarde in the howre of Saturne, I sayde to one of my fellowes, which vnderstoode some thing in this Science: all these men are geuen to be lost, and within a while after they all perished. Thus much sayth Haly. And in beginning of long iourneys as well by Lande as by Sea, in this howre I haue knowne much harme and mischiefe to follow: Which although many doo not, nor wyl beleeue to be true, because they know neither this excellēt Science, nei∣ther the proofe of these things: yet many that be wise and learned, and that haue payed full dearely for the prouing thereof: doth thinke this no lye. But if some of them dyd know the same howre, and should prac∣tise some such lyke thing therein: the euent thereof would teach them I thinke, not to be so incredulous.
I know (I thanke God therfore) that no harme shall happen to the chyldren of God: for he wyll so guyde them, that neither man nor deuil, nor any other thing can destroye them, though in this world they maye seeme to hurt them. And as he doth preserue them from harme, euen so he appoynts them theyr tymes to walke in, & the very beginning of theyr iourneyes: Assured and am fully satisyed, that he by his diuine prouidence, makes them auoyde that howre, & other euyll tymes: and the wicked and vngodly haue hap∣ned of that tyme, to theyr destruction. Therefore for my part, I attribute nothing to the tyme, but all ho∣nour to God that made the tyme: whose glory and power is to be extolde, that foreshewes such things to man, by such howres or tyme. BLack Sheepes wooll, myxt and chafed by the fyre, with freshe butter, and the deaffe eare stopt there∣with at night, and thus vsed nyne or ten nyghts to∣gether: it helpeth deafnes perfectly, and speedely. A proued thing. HEre followeth a notable and excellent Aqua vite. Take Galengale, Cucubarum, Ginger, Nutmugs Cloues, Cynamom, of euery one an ounce, fresh sage, fowre ounces, water that is distilled sixe times out of pure & good Wine, ten ounces: put them all together, and let them remayne so in a close cleane vessell three dayes: then distyll the same, & keepe that that is di∣stylled in a cleane & close vessell. Whosoeuer drinkes a nutte shell ful of this water euery day: it wyl preserue theyr bodyes maruelously, and keepe them from ma∣ny diseases, and bring them to olde age. It is sayde
that M. Gallus, Phisition to Charles the Emprour, vsed this water, and liued a hundreth and fowre and twenty yeares. Georg. Alapide deuised this water. IF you desyre to haue sweete water forthwith, or by and by: put two or three drops of oyle of Spyke, in a good deale of pure water, and chafe it together in a glasse with a narrow mouth. Euonymus. AN excellent oyle for colde aches. Take the wood of Iuie dryed, cutte the wood in lytle peeces, and of the berryes, and gum of Iuye, of each a lyke weyght: let them be put in an earthen vessell, boored through in the bottome, in two or three places: and then let an other pot be set vnder it in the earth, and ioygne the bottome of the vpper potte vnto the mouth of the ne∣ther with claye or paste, & the vpper potte must stand wholly aboue the ground: then make a fyre on euery syde, and the oyle wyll distyll blacke into the nether vessell. This oyle before all oyles, healeth the griefes of the ioyntes of a colde cause. This is proued to be a notable oyle in this case. Rogerius seemes to be the Author hereof. As appeares in Euonymus. IF you put out the whyte of a Hens egge, and fyll vp the same egge with the iuyce of Flowre deluce, and myxe the yolke and it well together, then warming it a lytle in the hotte ashes, and so geue it in the mor∣ning to them that haue the dropsie: it wyll auoyde downward the dropsie water aboue measure. This is proued to be true. Much lyke vnto this, Benedictus victorius Fauentinus wrytes for the same cause: but he appoynts the iuyce to be geuen with Mellicrate.
A Proper practyse to make a Capon to bring vp young Chickens. Take a Capon and pull his bel∣ly bare of fethers, & after rubbe the naked place with Nettels, then setting young Chyckens vnder him, he wyl maruelously cherish them then, and bring them kyndly vp. And the rather if you vse him thus for a time: for by yt meanes he is moued the more wylling∣ly, to cherysh, bring vp, and feede: yea, & to loue them, as the Hen would do naturally. And the reasō therof is, for yt by the pricking of the nettels, he is the rather desyrous to coutch on the softe downe & fethers of the young Chickins, sytting vnder him. This I had out of the natural and Artificial cōclusions of the Schol∣lers of Padua. Translated into English by Th. Hyl. ONe Aeschilus was foretolde by an Astronomer, yt he should be kylled by some ruyne, or something that should fal vpon him, vpō a certaine day or tyme: who (to preuēt the same,) did walk abroade a certain space about the warned time, & would by no meanes come into any house, thinking therby to auoyde that daunger, vnles the heauens should chaūce to fal: but marke how hard it is to auoyde Fate or Gods deter∣mined appointment, about the same tyme foretold by the Astronomer, an Eagle dyd flye ouer his head, frō whome a stone dyd fal vpon Aeschilus head, & kylled him. Wherby we may not onely see ye mans wisdome and pollicy is not able to frustrate Gods prouidence: but also yt there is a maruelous certenty in ye Astrolo∣gical foreshewing of euents, especially, by directions: which Ciprianus Leouitius seemes to affirme by this & other notable examples. And sure I am by many proofes & tryals, that the euents wyl assuredly hap∣pen
at the time promised by dyrections, that is: when the Signifyer coms to the very place & minute of the Promissor, accoūpting for euery degree betweene thē one yeere, & euery minute, about six daies, if the Sig∣nifyer be to be dyrected by the dyrect Ascencions: but if the Signifier be to be directed by the obliqu Ascē∣cions, (or els Intermixtim) which is not very easily or soone done, then they sygnify sometimes more, some∣tymes lesse, according to their swift or slow ascēding. Which dyrectiōs to be infallible, the learned & expert herein cannot chuse but affirme. For yt they are found as perfect by proofe, & as true by tryal: as the breake of the day, doth assure vs of the rysing of the Sunne. IN Lamberge a Towne of Schlesia, as Iohānes Lan∣gius wrytes, a certaine Woman great with chylde did folow a Priest that had newly washed or bathed his feete: who being taken with such a lōging or lust with the sudden sight of his bare feete, that she priue∣ly behynde his backe, dyd holde his legge with her hands, and out of the same pluckt a peece of flesh with her teethe: Nothing regarding the crye of the poore Priest, which cryed out both of God and man. IF the foote or leg of an Oxe, Cow or horse be swoln by chaunce, marke ye ground where the same swoln leg or foote doth stand, & take or graue vp wt a knyfe or dagger, a turfe or peece of earth in the same place where ye same foote dyd stand, & hang the same turfe or peece of earth vpon ye bough of a white thorn, or of som other tree, (if it be fayre or dry wether,) if not: thē hang it in some chimney where fire is made: and after as the turfe or earth doth drie, so wil ye swelling cease
and the payne go away. This I haue proued to be true dyuers tymes. And it is practised of many, espe∣cially: for Oxen or Kyne. But the suddaine swelling & griefe of my horse legge hath bene helpt therwith, within two or three dayes, & by none other meanes. Who lystes to proue it, shall finde it true: although it be farre vnlykely. THe water wherin Lauender is sod, doth quite put away any spotte or steyning in any cloath, Cap or Hat: if the steyned place or spotted, be washed or rub∣bed therwith. It is very true, proue it who wyll. TO make any fowle of what condition the same be, to haue the fethers all whyte. Take the Egges of what Byrde or fowle you wyll, rowle them in the iuyce of the hearbe called Mowse eare, or in the iuyce of Housleeke, or otherwyse in oyle (after the minde of Cardanus,) and after put the Egs againe in the nest: for after the hatching, the fethers wyll grow whyte. This is taken out of the naturall and artificial Con∣clucations of the Schollers of Padua. Translated in Englysh by Thomas Hyll. YF the figure of a Lyon be graued in a thyn plate of Golde, when the Sunne is in Leone, (that is the sygne called the Lyon:) So that the Moone beholde not then the syxt house, nor the Lord of the Ascendent behold Saturne or Mars, and the Moone then seperate or rather free from them: it doth put away the intol∣lerable paynes and tormentes of the backe: if it hang at the raynes of the backe, or touch the same. And if  be made of the powder of pure Olibanū and
Goates bloud, and after sealed with the same Lyon, and after dryed, and then being dyssolued in whyte Wyne and droonke fasting: it workes a maruelous effect against the stone of the reynes & of the blather. Andreas Cordubensis to Gregory ye Bishop of Rome. THis confection following is a most excellent medi∣cine and remedy for many inward effectes, especi∣ally: for all fluxes of bloud from whence soeuer they flowe, and also other fluxes, moreouer for them that haue great paynes in theyr backs, and also paynes in theyr Lyuer, or whose Lyuer is not all together wel: And Galen the Author hereof sayth, (belyke for the excellencie therof,) geue not this before thou hast re∣ceyued a rewarde therfore, the making wherof doth followe. Take of Cynamom, Cassialignea opium, of each two drams, Myrre, both Peppers, Galbanum, of each one dram: let them be stamped, & then myxed with a lytle clarifyed Honny, and made in a lumpe or masse, geue therof at night two round pyls, somthing bygger then peason, in the soft of a roasted apple, and let not the party drinke of two howres after, and if his griefe and paines be neuer so great, he wyll be in maruelous ease, and quietnes within an howre or two after, & so remaine the most part of all the night: yea, and perhaps sleepe soundly and well. You maye geue it two or three nightes together, if the party be strong, but if he be very weake, geue it euery other nyght, three or fowre tymes: and if the party be in ex∣treame payne, then geue it when you lyst. But if the stomacke be full of meate or fleame, it wyll shew the lesse effect. Who euer shal proue it, shal fynd it a wor∣thy thing. I haue proued it aboue a hundreth tymes.
A Fine way to make Corral by art, which foloweth. Make ye hornes of Goates (first shauen or scraped) into powder, and let the same stiepe in strong Lee, made of the Ashes of the wood of an Ashe, fyteene dayes together: afterwarde take it out of the sayde Lee, and mixe it with Cinabrium, dyssolued in wa∣ter, and hang it ouer an easie fyre, vntyll it be thycke, and if it haue then the cullour of right Corrall: make it in the forme or fashion you thinke good, drye it, and polysh it according to arte. This doth Mizaldus discribe. THe iuyce gottē out of a red Onion, & three or fowre drops therof put into the deaffe eare colde, three or fowre nyghts when the party goes to bed, helpeth the deafnes: be it neuer so great or auncient. Feare not though it put you to some paine at the fyrst time: for at the seconde tyme it wyll be more easie. This was taught mee by one that knewe it by proofe. TO make a Woman that hath a dead chyld within her, immediatly to be delyuered therof. Take the quantity of an Alon, of a Bulles gall, myxe it with two spoonefull of Wine, and let her drinke it: and she shall auoyde it strayght. Iac. Veckerus. DEuyde an Aple in the myddes, and in the one halfe of the Aple in the myds of it, make a round hoale, by cutting a peece out of it, then into the same hoale, put a blacke Betle, and so laye the flatte syde on the table: and the Aple wyll moue, by the meanes of the Betle, to the maruaile of them that behold it.
TAke an Aple of Coloquintida, and laye the same to stiepe in water, a whole night, and after boyle woormwood in that water: which water being cast about the chamber, kylleth all the fleas therin. Also annoint a staffe with the grease of a Hedghogge, and laye the same in the myddes of the chamber, and all the fleas there wyll come and cleaue to that staffe. A Certaine young Gentlewoman or Lady, trym∣ming and dressing her selfe, holding then in her mouth, a few pyns, was suddenly & priuily strucken between the shoulders, by a certaine Rular or Prince (being her Louer,) wherewith she was so suddenly feared & amased, that she swallowed the pyns which she did hold in her mouth: which pyns she auoyded in her vrine within two dayes after without an harm. Ioh. Langius a learned Phisition, is ye reporter herof. IF Roses & Lyllyes be sowne nye together, or yt they touch one another, the flowers of them wyll smell the more pleasauntly, & wyll grow the better. Mizal. ONe Apisius got much money, with this most excel∣lent Oyle following, and was maruelously estee∣med therfore: after whose death the King of Spaine dyd geue vnto his wife, fiue hundreth Crowns, for ye vttering & disclosing the making therof, as is mani∣fest in a booke made of ye same at large by one George Baker, in the English tongue: which hath manifestly shewed his honest hart & natural loue to his Coūtry. The same Apisius in his life time, & his wife after his death, did helpe all wounds, old vlcers, aches, paines of the back, & emroddes therewith, & it is maruelous
good for the gowte: the making of the oyle is thus. Take of the most purest and oldest whyte Wine, one quart, of the oldest oyle Olyffe, three pound, Carduus benedictus (called the blessed Thistle,) Ualerian, & the lesser Sage, with the flowres if you can get them, of each a quarter of a pounde, of the leaues & flowres of S. Iohns Woort, halfe a pounde: let the hearbs and flowres be infused or stieped in the sayd Wine & oyle xxiiii. howres: then the next day let all be put into an earthen vessell leaded, or a vessell of brasse vpon an easy fyre, vntyll the Wyne be consumed, moouing it styl being ouer the fire, then being taken from the fire & streyned, put therto of Uenys Turpentine, a pound and a halfe: then let all boyle together a quarter of an howre, then put therto Olibanū, fiue ounces, Myrre, three ounces, Sanguis Draconis, one ounce, and let all boyle vntyl the Myrre be dyssolued: then put it into a vessell of glasse stopped, & let it stand in the hotte Sun ten daies: before you vse this oyle, you must wash the sores or woūds with whyte Wine, wherin must be ye powder of Olibanū. I haue writtē this here, because I thinke thereby many shall haue knowledge of this precious Oyle: which otherwyse should neuer haue heard of it. A Sweete water & an vnknowen, wherof one part mixt with ten quartes of pure water, maketh the whole most sweet. Take Nutmugs, Cloues, Galin∣gale, Spiknard, graines of Paradise, Mase, Cinamō, of euery one an ounce, pound or stamp thē all, ad ther∣to twenty graines of Musk, or lesse, as you delyght in the smell therof, powre into them a pound & a halfe of Rosewater: let them so remayne together in a close vessell fowre or fyue dayes, then put therto thryse as
much Rosewater, and distyl all the same in a potte or kettel ful of water, seething as in Balneo marie, & keep the distylled water in a glasse wel stopt: to the vse be∣fore sayd. Euoni. IF an Eg be painted with sundry cullors, & the same set vnder a Hen, which syts to bring forth chickens: she wyll hatche therof a Chycken, hauing the lyke fe∣thers vnto the cullors paynted on the Egge. Thomas Hyll out of the naturall and Artificiall conclusions of the Schollers of Padua affyrmes this. IF one make a lytle rope of the guts of a Woolf, and then bury the same vnder sand or earth, there wyll neither Horse nor Sheepe go that way: though you beate them with a staffe. Albertus. IT is sayd yt a Hare doth lyue ten yeeres, the age of a Cat is so much, a Goate doth liue eight yeeres, an Asse thirty yeeres, a Sheepe ten yeeres, but the Bel∣wether many times doth liue .xv. yeeres, a Dog. xiiii and somtymes .xx. a Bull .xv. but an Oxe because he lacks his stones, doth lyue .xx. a Swine and a Pey∣cocke .xxv. a Horse .xx. and oftentimes .xxx. there haue bene Horses that lyued fifty yeeres, Pygeons lyues naturally .viii. yeeres, a Turtle & a Partrech .xxv. yeeres, & also a Ryngdooue, which oftentimes lyues xl. yeeres. Mizal. THe body of a Byrch tree, cut or scortched, (ye spring time going before,) doth yeeld great plenty of wa∣ter, which water being droonke, hath a maruelous strength to breake the stone in the raynes. Matheolus vpon Dioscorides, wrytes it. FINIS. Lib. 9.
¶The tenth Booke of Notable things. THere is an euident fa∣miliarity betweene the Oliue tree, and the Myrte tree, for as Andronicus reportes, the branches of the Myrt tree do pleasauntly extende or spreade by the Olyue tree, and the rootes of them do mutuallye embrace each other, nor any other plant: but the Myrt tree wyll grow well nye the Olyue tree. This also Mizaldus doth affyrme. THe smell of Bitumen rawe, or the smoake thereof burned, receyued by the nose of such as are grie∣uously tormented with the paynes of the moother, is a present helpe or remedy. It is most certainly pro∣ued. Wherfore many Women which are grieued with ye disease, do hang it about theyr necks in wooll, that they maye driue away theyr fyt, by the oft smel∣ling therof. Mizaldus wrytes this. And the learned Doctor Monardus affyrmes the lyke therof. THe sparrowe Hawke is a fierce enemie to all Py∣gions, but they are defended of the Castrell, whose syght and voyce the Sparhawke doth feare, which the Pygions or Dooues knowes well inough: for where the Castrell is, from thence wyll not the Pigi∣ons go (if the Sparhawke be nye) through the great trust she hath in the Castrell her defendor. Iohannes Baptista Porta hath written this.
THe leaues of a Wyllow tree, as also the bark ther∣of sodde in Wine: doth helpe them that haue the gowte: if they be fomēted or bathed therwith. Mizal. SToflerus an excellent Astronomer, knowing by his Natiuity, that he should be in daunger to be hurte about a certaine day or tyme: kept him self then with∣in his own house, assured that it was strong inough. The same day or very nye vnto it, yt the euent should happe, certayne of his learned friends and he, as they were reasoning together, dyd vary in some certayne opynion, about the tryall wherof as it should seeme, he reached to take downe one of his bookes, (being placed among dyuers other,) when through the lacke of a nayle, the whole classe or shelfe where the booke was, fell vpon his head, and wounded his head very sore. Which doth not onely shew the worthynes and excellencie of Astrology, especially, in a learned and skylfull person therin: but also our folly in flying from Fate for that, our wisdome doth leade vs into it, whē most of all we meane for to shun it. Therfore perfect prayer passeth pollecie, in preuenting of peryls. THree halfe penny weyght of the powder of the A∣damant stone, droonke with the iuyce of Fennell, drawes the water from them that haue the dropsie. And the same stone put to the head, takes away quite all the paynes therof. Iacobus Hollerus an excellent Phisition affyrmes it. IT is a manifest thing, and proued by dayly experi∣ence, that the bodies of them yt be murthred, when they be founde, if any of theyr kynred be then present,
or the party or partyes that kylled or murthered thē, or was the cause therof: Immediatly bloud wil burst forth suddenly, either out of the wound, or nose, or out of some other part of theyr body. I could aleadge here a great sort of examples for the verifying thereof, but I omyt them: for it is a thing found true by dayly ex∣perience. Besydes that Lucretius, Philip. Melancton. Iohannes Langius, and Lauinius Lemnius haue writ∣ten therof. PEeces of Amber being put or tyed to the hynder part of the head: doth helpe the running or watri∣nes of the eyes with a maruelous successe: and han∣ged about the necke doth hynder distyllations, that they go not downe by the throate. Mizaldus. Besides that, it is proued to be true. A Certayne Woman went with a dead Chylde in her wombe aboue fowre yeeres, which by the counsayle of learned Phisitions, and expert Surge∣ons, was drawne from her peecemeale: and the mo∣ther dyd not onely lyue, but also conceaued an other Chylde, as Mathy Cornace, a notable & learned Phi∣siciō hath affyrmed: who was present when the sayd Woman was cutte for the getting out of the sayde dead Chylde. Mizaldus reports this. IF Eeles be suffocated in wyne, whosoeuer shall drynke of that wyne, (though they haue bene very much geuen to wyne before, & could scantly abstayne from the same,) they wyl loothe wyne, and not be de∣syrous to drinke wine after. The greene Frogges which vse or leapes about sprynges, if they be suffo∣cated
in wyne, workes the lyke effect. Mizaldus. IF Musaraneus, called a Shrew, (I take it to be the blinde Mowse,) doth chaunce to go ouer any part of any Beast: that part of the Beast wyll after be lame. This is knowne to be true. WHo so would haue a very whyte & delycate skyn. Let them boyle or heate Lytarge of Syluer in vinegar distylled: and wash therewith theyr skynne which they desyre to haue fayre, trym and whyte. This I tooke out of Mizaldus. IN the tyme of Traiane the Emprour, a certayne man hauing a disease, called the Dissury, dyd pysse with much a doo, a knotted Barly straw. Anthonius Mizaldus hath written this. And I knew a Gentle∣man that after his death being opened, had a Pygi∣ons fether stycking in his harte: which fether was shewed me by the Surgeon that dyd cutte and open him. OTes sodden and the hotte fume therof close recey∣ued on any lame members, eyther armes, legs or any other: and then the sayde members put & holden, a good whyle in the same sodden Otes, when they may be suffred therin, and the same order vsed fowre or fyue tymes, (if neede be) doth helpe them perfectly that be lame. This was tolde me for a very trueth by them that knew it, and saw it tryed. THe toothe of a man hanged at the necke of the par∣tye that is tormented with toothe ache, doth take away the payne therof, especially: if a Beane be put
thereto, wherin there is a hoale bored, and a lowse put therin, and ye same beane wrapt in a peece of sylk, and then hanged about the parties neck, as is before sayde. Anthonius Mizaldus. THe most whytest Frankensense made in very fyne powder, and droonke with Wine, (if it be in colde wether or in wynter,) or in water wherin Reysens are sodde, if it be hotte wether, or in Sommer,) in the encreasing of the Moone, at the rysing of the Sun, at noone, & at the setting of the Sun: doth maruelously helpe and encrease the memory. And is very profy∣table for the brayne and the stomack. Rasis is the Au∣thor hereof, by the report of Mizaldus. ANy parte or a peece of the bone of a Mans arme, with the hyghest parte or ende of a Goose wyng, being carryed or borne of them that haue the quar∣ten ague: doth cure the same. Mizaldus fathers this of Geber. IF one yt hath the Dropsy or the Iaundise, shal drink theyr owne vryne for certayne dayes together, it wyl helpe maruelously. Thus Hermes sayth. But Be∣nedictus victorius Fauentinus in his practises, affirms for trueth: and sayth it is certaynly proued, that fyue ounces of the vryne of a Boye not polluted, and of a sanguyne complection, myxt with hale an ounce of good whyte Sugar, being droonke euery morning early, asting for the space of ten daies: doth helpe cer∣taynly the Iaundyse, and also so much droonk at once, a month together in such order, doth helpe the Drop∣sye perfectly.
STiepe a threede in oyle & brimstone myxt together, and compasse a glasse with that threede in the place where you would haue it broken euen, or parted, and after kyndle the same threede with fyre, and do thus so often vntyll that place of the glasse be hotte, and af∣ter compasse the same with a threede wet in cold wa∣ter: and it wyll part so cleane a sunder, as though it had bene cut with a sharpe poynted Diamonde. IF they that be swolne and are full of the Dropsy, do lye three dayes and nyghts in theyr beds wel coue∣red rounde about in sodden Barley: it helpes & cures them perfectly. This was proued by them that came vexy swolne from Gynny. And one of them that was helpt therwith, reuealed it vnto me: which I am con∣tent to publysh, to the common commodity of many. THe earnest searchers of naturall things, saye and set forth: that certayne woormes are bredde in the vowels or guts of the Harte, & they are destroyed by the eating of Serpents, which the Harte doth allure with the breath of his nose to come out of theyr heale or denne: and least the poyson of them should hurte him, he goes a pace to some fayre Spryng of water, and whyles all his whole body is therein vnto the lyppes, lytle drops or teares distylles out of his eyes, which at length encreaseth to a thyng, as bygge as a Walnutte, and are in manner of a stone, and when he perceyues he hath therby auoyded all the poyson, and being comd forth of the water: with the rub∣bing of his eyes at a tree, the same lumpe or Stone, (being a hynderaunce to his syght,) he gets away.
Which matter or Stone is a thing most effectuall a∣gainst any venome or poyson. Many Phisitions of great aucthority and antiquitie, are witnesses herof. Iulius Scaliger, and Amatus Lucitanus do boast, that they saw such a thing, and they affyrme that it maye be geuē effectually with a lytle wine to them that are infected with the plague: for by the strength and help therof, so much sweate wyl come forth of ye body, that you would thinke the whole body, wyll turne or con∣sume into moysture, with which once geuing all the poyson or venom is thrust out of the body. The Ara∣byan Phisitiōs calles this Stone Besoard. And ther∣of Alexipharmaca, a remedy against venoms, Bezoar∣dica. This Anthonius Mizaldus wryteth. These Be∣saar stones, being of a most excellent, notable and pre∣cious vertue, are now gotten in Peru, in the west In∣dyans, and found about ten yeares past, in certayne kynd of Beasts that goeth in the mountaines of that Countrey, which are much lyke to Sheepe or Kyds that are in the Portingal Indyas, by a worthy Spa∣nish Gentleman, called Peter de Osma, who killed som of those Beastes purposely, for the sayd Besaar stones, which he thought to finde in them: but although he looked and searched therfore in the belly, and in other places of one of the eldest and greatest of them: yet he could find none of them, neither would ye Indyans tel him in what place of the Beast they were, saying they knew no such Stones: being loath he should know that secrete. But at the last an Indian Boy, of twelue yeares of age, tolde him where to finde them. Wher∣fore the other Indyans would haue kylled the Boy, because the Indyans do much esteeme those Stones: for they doo offer thē vnto their Gods, or before their
Idols, as one of the most precious things they haue. So that by the sayde Boyes reuealing, the sayde Gentleman found ye Stones in a certaine lytle purse that the mawe of the Beast hath: wherin the hearbs doth lye when he chaweth the cudde. The sayd Gētl∣man geues a maruelous commendation of them in a letter, which he wrote to Doctor Monardus an excel∣lent learned Phisitiō of Ciuil in Spaine, saying: that they are maruelous good against all venom, and a∣gainst all sorts of poyson, as well in meates as other∣wyse, and in euylles of the harte, and to expell and kyl woormes, and that they haue healed such diseases with this Stone, that it is woonderfull to be seene, both of Ladies, Gentlemen, and many other: naming many of theyr names in that letter, saying further: That as a new thing, all such takes it in powder, as haue diseases which can not be healed by medicine, & many do heale: and so with many other thinges he prayseth God, for the great benefyts receyued by the vertues of this Besaar Stone. And the sayde Doctor Monardus hauing receyued of the sayd Stones from the sayd Gentleman, doth maruelously prayse & extol the sayde Stones in a worthy worke or booke made by him of certayne trees, oyles, plants, and stones of woonderfull great and maruelous effects, whose ve∣ry wordes thereof, (as much as shall seeme needefull therfore:) I here do vtter. If I would (sayth he) put here the great effectes, and the diseases which the Stones of Peru haue healed, that they which do com from thence do tell me, & that Gentleman doth wryte merit would make a great booke. I wyll put that on∣ly which I haue experymented, and the effectes that I haue vnderstoode that they do, and these that haue
past by my handes, wherby all credyte may be geuen vnto it, and as a thing certayne: seeing that there is experience of it, with all assurance and trust, it maye be vsed. Our Occidental Besaar Stones haue great vertues, principally they do remedy many persons which be sycke of the harte, for the which I haue ge∣uen great quantitie of them that haue bene brought mee, and they haue made maruelous effectes: so much that to many persons which dyd swounde, by taking it away from them, they were delyuered from death. It must be geuen when they do swound, and before it come, taking it in the morning fasting with Rosewater, if the party haue great heate: if not, then with the water of flowres of Orrenges, the quantity of fowre graines, euery tyme made in pow∣der. In all kinde of venom, it is the most principall remedy that we know now, & that which hath done best effect, in many that haue bene poysned, which haue taken it, as well by venom taken at the mouth, as by byting of venemous woormes, which are full of poyson. It doth truly a maruelous and a manifest worke, vnto them that haue droonke water standing in a stinking lake: being infected with Beasts or var∣ment, which are full of poyson, and being swolne im∣mediatly after they had droonke it: by taking of this Stone two or three tymes, they were remedyed, as I haue seene them after. &c. In pestilent Feuers I haue geuen it many times, & surely it doth extinguish and kyl the mallyce of them▪ which is the principall thing yt the Phisitions should procure in the lyke diseases. And although he doth take away the cause, & doth withdraw the putrifac∣tion. And if he do not extinguish & take away the mal∣lyce,
the cure is neuer at an ende. For that is it which kylleth, & doth the principall hurt. And where there is certaine spots in ye body lyke to fle bytinges, which do appeare in the lyke Feuers, the Besaar Stone of our Indians, doth make maruelous effects. Of those which they haue brought mee, I haue spent the most parte, geuing them in the lyke diseases, and surely it hath remedyed many with maruelous successe, and in that which some of them haue bene spent by me, hath bene in swoundings: and surely I haue seene in these Stones the effectes so great, that it seemeth a thing of woonder. And especially, I haue seene these causes more remedyed in women, then in men: it is a mar∣uelous thing to be taken, & it hath done manifest ef∣fectes, where there is melancholy humor, it doth re∣payre him much. And it doth in him & in all thinges which do result of him a great worke, be it vniuersall or perticular, in the head, or yt as they cal Mirarchia, & also in them that haue Leprosie: of the Arabienssor, E∣lephanciacis, of the Greekes. It doth profyt much in Scabs, in Itchings, in Scuruines, & in all partes of the body yt is infected. It maketh a very good work: and doth remedy the euyls manifestly. For that this Stone hath property, to heale them. I haue geuen it in quarten agues, & although it taketh not away the quarten, it taketh away the accidents of it, the faynt∣nes and sadnes, and the griefe of the harte: which in these Feuers are common. Surely they do feele with the vse of it notable profyt, in all large & importunate diseases. &c. It is good to cast into purges, som grains of it, that if the purge do carry venemous medicines, it may rectify and amend them. And if not, it geueth force & strength to the hart, & they worke the better.
In the Oryētal Indyas, they haue a custom to purge them selues two tymes euery yeare: and especially, ye noble people of estymation. And after they haue pur∣ged them selues, they take euery morning fasting, fowre graines of the Besaar Stone with Rosewater, or with water made for ye purpose, and they say that this doth concerue the youth, and doth strengthē the members, & doth preserue them from diseases. And it is a good vse, for it can not but do them much good. I haue geuen it to many people, & especially to chyl∣dren and Boyes that are tormented with Woorms: and I haue seene such workes as are not to be belee∣ued: if they were not seene. This & more hath Doc∣tor Monardus wrytten in his sayde Booke of this Stone, and other worthy and woonderfull thinges. Which booke is dillygently and truly translated into our Englyshe tongue, by one Iohn Frampton Mar∣chaunt. Which booke is tytled and called, Ioyfull Newes out of the new found World: who deserueth great thankes, and continuall commendations for publishing such a common commodity to his Coun∣trey. A Water which certainly wyll heale the Fystulaes. Take two pounde of water that is distylled out of good whyte Wyne, as you styll Aqua vite: put therto of the water of Sage, and of the water of Rosemary, of eyther fyue pounde, Sugar two pound: distyl them all together, and when they are distylled, put too the water distylled, one ounce of Sage, and as much of Rosemary, and when they are stiept together eyght dayes, strayne it and vse it in curing of Fystulaes. E∣uonymus. In which booke is many excellent things.
IF you lay the wieke of a Candle to infuse or stiepe in the oyle of Hempseede, and after make a tallowe Candle therof, which if you do lyght after it be colde: the same Candle wyll not go out with any winde, so long as the whole Candle lasteth. And in lyke sorte may lyghts be made to serue in the night time, if that fyne lynnen rags be fyrst soked in the Oyle of Hemp∣seede, & dipped into mowlten tallow, which so bound or wrought on a staffes ende: or otherwyse lying in an Yron or plate at the ende of a staffe. This is taken out of the naturall and Artificiall clonclusions of the Schollers of Padua. &c. THe young Swallowes of the fyrst broode, that a Swallow hath, being cut and opened before the full of the Moone: two Stones wyll be found in their mawes, wherof one is of one cullour, the other is of dyuers cullours: if these Stones (so that it be before they touch any grounde,) be wrapt or enclosed in a Harte skynne, and be tyed to the arme or about the necke of them that haue the falling sycknes: it doth heale them of the same disease. Mizaldus wrytes this by the report of an Italyan, which affyrmed to him that he had proued it to be true. WHosoeuer shall, especially, the fyrst Frydaye in May, and euery other Frydaye in May, before the rysing of the Sunne: graue vp two turfes of new growne grasse with the dew vpon the same, & then doth tye the grasse sydes of them together, and shall then laye the same in a water in the syde of a ponde, or in some other water, so that the vehemencie of the water dooth not remoue the sayde turfes from the
place where they be layde, & so letting them lye there vnremoued nyne or tenne dayes: if at the ten dayes ende, he shall take vp the sayde turfes, and vntye or loose ye same, he shal finde a great sort of young Eeles within the same: although there be not one Eele in ye same water at the laying there, of the sayde turfes. And then if he tye the sayde turfes with the young Eeles together againe, & lay them againe in the same water, a great encrease of Eeles wyl after come ther∣of. This was credibly tolde me for a very trueth, of one that dyd trye the same. I thinke they breede of the same dew. THe Uine tree dooth not agree with the Bay tree: for with his odor or smell, he is the woorse, wher∣fore when the branches of the Uine drawes neere to the Bay tree, he wyl draw backward, flying the smel of his enemy. Euen so the Burre is enemy or doth not agree with Lentyls. Iohan. Bap. Por. AN Image of a Ram grauen or molten in Gold, the fyrst degree of Aries ascending, and Iupiter plaste in the same, not impedite by any euyll Starre or Planet, so that the Moone and Venus beholde him friendly: is a maruelous helpe & remedy to them that haue a continuall headache, (if they weare the same Image of golde.) Laurentius Miniatus, by the report of Iouianus Pontanus, dyd with the same help a friend of his of a continuall head ache. Mizaldus. IF you wyl cullour or paynt the brystles of a Swine with dyuers cullours, when they be well washte,
and sodde in Allom water, let them be put whyles they be warme, in water cullored with Saffern, if you wyl haue them yallow: or in the iuyce of Elderne or Walwoort berries, if you wyl haue them of a blew cullour: or in water myxt with Flos eris or Uergdy∣grease: if you wyll haue them of a greene cullour, and so of other cullours. You maye proue the same with the fethers of Byrds. Mizaldus. THe powder of Earthwoormes, of Myce dung, or of a Hartes toothe, put into the hoales of teethe, that be woormeaten: doth plucke them vp by the rootes, or makes them fal out without any other In∣strument. Mizaldus. IF the Stone that is founde in the heade of a long Snayle, be made in fyne powder, and blowne in the eye, it puttes quyte away all the spottes therof, and it destroyes the webbe in the eye, and any other euyll in the same. Mizaldus affyrmes this. IN the wynter tyme, a spooneful of Aqua vite sweet∣ned with good Sugar, with a lytle peece of the pu∣rest whyte bread put into it, least it shoulde trouble the braine, or do some harme to the Liuer, is health∣fully geuen to grosse and flegmatyke bodyes, that it may concoct the humors, and defende theyr bodyes from the Lethargie, (which is a forgetfulnes, and a losing almost of all the sences) and frō the Apoplexie, (which is a ceassing as well of the inwarde sences as of the outwarde,) and from colde diseases. Lem∣nius.
TO make a Candle burne vnder the water. Take waxe, brymstone, & vynegar, of each a lyke much, boyle all these together ouer the fyre, vntyll the vine∣gar appeare all consumed, and then after of that that remaynes make a Candle: and you shall see the pro∣per effect as aboue is wrytten. This is taken out of the natural and Artificiall conclusions of the Schol∣lers of Padua. Translated by Thomas Hyll. TAke a Ryng that is hollowe rounde about, into which put quicksyluer and stop the same fast, that it runne not forth, after heate the Ryng somewhat in the fyre, which being hotte, laye on a table or stoole, and soone after it wyll leape or daunce of it selfe, vntyl it be colde. It is proued. QUenche hotte Yron in the iuyce of Hemlockes, three or fowre tymes, letting it remayne ther∣in euery tyme vntyl it be colde, & the Yron wyl be soft. Also Cardane wryteth, that if you take Oyle, putting into it mowlten leade, seuen tymes together, and after quench Yron red hotte in that Oyle fowre or fyue tymes together, it wyll make the same Yron soft to worke vpon. A Certayne Woman with Chyld, seeing a Bakers shoulder naked or bare, whyles he dyd put bread into the Ouen, dyd long or desyre so much to eate of the sayde Bakers shoulder, that she abhord or lothed all other meate. Her husband hauing pitty of his lo∣uing wyfe, dyd agree to geue the Baker certaine mo∣ney for euery bytte that his sayd wyfe should byte of his shoulder, and the same Baker suffered the sayde
woman to haue two byts at his shoulder: but when she beganne to byte at it the thyrde tyme, he was so grieued with paine, that he would suffer her no more to byte at his shoulder. Immediatly after the wo∣man traueyled, and brought forth three children, two of them a lyue, and the thyrd dead. Iohannes Langius is the Author hereof. A Notable distylled water as followeth, worthy to be compared to golde. Take one part of Gentyan, and two partes of Centory, stampe them together, then put Wyne to them, and let them sooke together fyues dayes, then distyll them, keepe the water distil∣led in a close cleane vessell: this water droonke, mor∣ning and euening, preserueth the body from all kinde of diseases, it putteth away all impostumations, it maketh good cullour, it resysteth the plague, it hea∣leth the sycke of the Ptysicke, it auoydeth the stuffed stomacke, it breaketh the stones in the reynes, it sepe∣rateth and putteth away the watrye humors of the Splene, it helpeth forwarde the flowers, if it be droonke nyne dayes together in the morning, & pur∣geth the belly: also it purgeth all chollor and all cor∣rupt bloud, it healeth all wounds within the belly, it cleareth the sight, it cureth poysoned bytings. To the healing of wounds, the powder of Centory ought to be put to them. Lullius in his booke of waters. Euo∣nymus descrybes this, which is a worthy worke. PUt quicksyluer in a bladder, and lay the bladder in a hotte place: and it wyll skyp from place to place, without handling.
AN excellent water for purifying or cleansyng the skyn of the face or other parts of the body, which is secrete & vnknowne. Take syx new layd Egs, half a pound of Malmsey, a young Pigion not wholly fe∣thered, halfe a pounde of new Cheese, comming from the presse made of vnskymmed mylke: eyght Orren∣ges, Oyle of Tartare, three ounces, one ounce of Ce∣ruse made in powder, gum Arabick, and Mastick, of eyther halfe an ounce, water of Beane flowres, eight ounces, Ryce, fowre ounces, stieped fyrst a whole day and a nyght in halfe a pynt of Creame: cut the Orren∣ges in peeces, and stampe them a lytle, then put all to∣gether with the Creame & Ryce also. And distyll the same also with an easy fyre: and keepe the water dy∣stylled therof in a cleane close stopped glasse, and vse to rubbe and wette the face therwith euery euening before you go to bedde: and euery morning wash it cleane with water distylled of Beane flowres. Use this a fortnight or three weekes together; and you shall find it a notable thing. TO make a Glew to hold (or ioygne thinges) toge∣ther as hard (or fast) as a stone, an excellent secret. Take vnslackt Lyme, & quench the same with wine, & beate the same into fine powder, myxing therwith both Fygs & Swynes grease, and after labour them well together: for this (as Pliny wryteth) passeth the hardnes of a stone: with which ioygne broken pots or any thing together. Also take greeke Pytch, Rosē, and the powder of lytle stones, these myxe together, & when you wyll occupy of the same, then heate it ouer the fyre, & worke therwith, (that is, ioygne any thing therwith,) and it holdeth them together as harde as
any nayle. Also take of Spuma ferri, one pound, of tyle shardes (in powder) two pounde, of vnslackt Lyme, fowre pound, of oyle of Lynne seede, as much as shall suffice to prepare, myxe & worke them together: this Glewe is maruelous strong, which neyther feareth nor yeeldeth to water nor fyre. This is of the natural and Artificiall conclusions of ye Schollers of Padua. Translated into Englysh by Thomas Hyll. AN Angelike water of a maruelous vertue against blearednes of the eyes, Canker, and burning with fyre. Take three ounces of vnslackt Lime, and halfe a pounde of rayne water, let them stande together in a vessell of glasse or tyn, three dayes, then mixe & styrrre them together, and let them setle againe a whole day & a night, in a vessell well couered, afterward strayne them tenderly through a lynnen cloath, vntyll it be cleare, then put into it ten drams of Sal Armoniack, the whytest you can get, beate it finely, & let it be dys∣solued with long standing, and oft mouing in the sayd water: After when it is setled, strayne the cleane wa∣ter that standeth aboue certaine times, or else distyl it by a fylter. This water healeth ye spot and web in the eye, if you drop three drops thryse euery day into thē, continewing so vntyll the eyes be whole: it taketh a∣way also the teares of the eyes, the rednes, and the blearednes of the eyes. And also the Canker and bur∣ning: It taketh away all spots and staynes of cloath, both of Sylke and Woollen: if they be washed with it, a lytle warmed. Furnerius by the report of Euony∣mus. Besydes I haue proued it in the lyke case: ther∣fore I am bold to say it is an excellent thing.
AN excellent water called ye golden water, a balme & a blacke oyle doth follow. Take of cleare Tur∣pentine, seuen ounces, wash it wel with whyte wine, after take good whyte Honny three pound, clarify it with a lytle whyte wine, ouer an easy fyre, and take of the scoom styll from it: then put the Turpentyne to it, myxing them well together: Then powre therto of Aqua vite, fowre pound, and myxe them well in a bo∣dy of glasse, luting it (or stopping it well,) then take Buglosse, Borrage, Bawme, Sage, Lauēder, of each one handfull, Hysop, Camamyle, Yarrow, red Roses, of each one handfull, Woormwood, one dram, Rose∣mary, two handfulles. Then take wood of Aloes, Xilobalsamum, the three Saunders, of eache one dram, Mace, Nutmugge, Cynamom, Galanga, Cloues, Cucubes, whyte and long Pepper, Saffern, Spyknarde, Graynes of Paradise, Cardamomum, of each three drammes, Zedoarye, halfe an ounce, Squynant, halfe a dram, the pylles or ryndes of Ly∣mons, the seedes of Lymons, Scicados Arabike, of eache one dram, Calamus Aromaticus, halfe a dram, Carlinae cardopacij, two ounces, Bistorte, two drams, the roote of Flowre Deluce, halfe an ounce, Bay ber∣ryes, Ualeryan, Polypode, of each half an ounce, Lic∣queres, Annes seedes, of eyther halfe a dram, of Ra∣dyshe, two ounces, of Coryander correct, halfe an a ounce, Syler mounten, one dram, blaunched Al∣mondes, halfe a pound, small Reysens, halfe a pound, being washt with Wyne. All these (being beaten or strayned,) put into the sayd body of glasse, to the Hon∣ny and other thinges: and if there be not inough of Aqua vite, put therto more, and let them stande so se∣uen dayes, well couered and stopt: then after distyll
the same in ashes with an easy fyre, (all being wel lu∣ted,) for the space of fowre howres, (least the Honny boyle,) and there wyll come out a cleare water. Then encrease the fire, and when you see the water yallow, then put too another receyuer of glasse, which you must lute also with the beake of the Styll: and keepe ye fyrst water by it selfe, & encrease the fyre vntyl there come no more yallowe water, and when you see it come blacke, then take away the receyuer, and put an other thertoo, and lute it lykewise, and when you see a smoake come, then it is inough, and keepe all these three seuerally, and let the Styll stande vntyll it bee colde. In the fyrst water put Folij Indi, fyue drams, Amber, halfe a dram, Mosche, halfe a scruple, which is twelue graynes, and also fyfteene leaues of Gold. If you wyl vse it for the head, take one ounce of the wa∣ter of Bettony, and of the fyrst water one spoonefull: myxe them together & drinke it all fasting. The ver∣tue of this doth strengthen all the members. Take one ounce of Malmsey, or of other good Wyne in a lytle glasse, and put one spoonefull of this fyrst whyte water thertoo, myxe them together, and it wyll be whyte as mylke: which, drynke with a fasting sto∣macke, and neyther eate nor drinke of two howres after: and it wyll preserue all thy members. For a colde Lyuer, take a spoonefull of the whyte water, with an ounce of the water of Sage. For the breast, and the cough of a cold Rewme, take it with the wa∣ter of Isope, Louathe, or Fennell. For the harte, with the water of Buglosse, Burrage or Balme. For the stomacke, with the water of Woormwood. For the Lyghts, with the water of mayden heair, or Poly∣pode. For the Splen, with the water of Hartstongue.
For the Vertigo (a gyddynes of the head) or the Apo∣plexie, with the water of Pyony, of Fennell, or of S. Iohns Woort. For the Stone, with the water of Ra∣dysh, or winter Cherries. For the retayning or hol∣ding of the water, with the water of Cresses, some Pearsley, or Saxifrage. For the eyes, with the water of Fennell, or Eybright. For the retayning or with∣holding of Menstrues, with ye water of Mugwoort, or with water of Radysh. For the too much fluxe of the Menstrues, with the water of Planteyn, or of Nightshade. For the Matrix hurt by the mydwyle, or of any colde cause, whereby she doth conceyue no more: let it be vsed with the water of Ualeryan or Bettony. Against the spottes of the face, take of the water of Pympernell, fowre partes, of this whyte or fyrst water, one parte, myxe them together, and an∣noynt the face morning and euening: and drynke it twyse or thryse in the weeke with Endyue water. It cures the Cankar, being annoynted therewith, and the Fystula: if a droppe thereof many tymes put into it. It helpes a colde gowte: if it be annoynted ther∣with. For the payne of the Matryx, let this water be taken with the water of Mugwoort. Also it is good against the quarten and quotidian Feuers. The Cy∣tryne oyle hath many vertues, as the oyle of Balme: if any griefe be annoynted therwith. The blacke Oyle is of great vertue in the gowte: if it be annoyn∣ted therwith, as the moother of Balme being whyte, called the golden Water. Gratarolus. HEre followeth an excellent medycine that wyll heale olde, rotten & incurable Ulcers, very quick∣ly. Take of Turpentyne, three tymes washt, fyrst in
fayre spring or well water, & after in Rose or Plan∣teyn water, three ounces, the yolke of an Eg, Oyle of Roses, an ounce & a halfe, Mercury sublymate made in powder, halfe a dram, & let them all be myxed well together, and make therof an oyntment, & washe the Ulcers or sores with whyte Wine: then spreade some of that oyntment or salue vpon flaxe, & apply it to the sore, and dresse it with new salue twise euery day: but before euery dressing, annoynt with this following, three or fowre fyngers bredth about the sore. Take of the oyle of Roses, two ounces, of Uineger, halfe an ounce, of the powder of bole Armoniack, a lytle, myxe them together, and annoynt it as is before sayd. And when all the rottē or putrified flesh is eaten out: then annoynt the Ulcer with butter, and you shall see a woonderfull effect. Proued. FOr the burning or great intollerable heat of the v∣ryne. Take of the seedes of Purslane, of ye seedes of Lettys, of the seedes of Endiue, of the seedes of white Poppy, two ounces of euery of them, of the seedes of Hēbane, half a dram, Sebasten two ounces, Saffern, one drā, Licqueres, fiue drams, Pineaple kernels, ten drams, foūtaine or spring water, six pound, myx them all together, & let them be sod vntyll the consuming of the thyrde part of the water: then let it be strayned. Wherof take one ounce in ye morning mixed with one ounce of Inle, of Uyolets, and the fowrth day the ef∣fect worthy of maruell, wyl appeare. This is proued. A Notable & an excellēt Balme. Take of Turpētine, one pound & a half, Galbanum, two ounces, Aloes cicotrin, Mastick, Cloues, Galangale, Cynamō, Nut∣mugs,
Cubebs, of euery one of them an ounce, gum of Iuy, halfe an ounce: when all is well beaten, myxe them together, and distyl them in glasse, with a slowe fyre fyrst, and receyue the fyrst water by it selfe seuerally, then encrease the fyre, & a water more red∣dyshe wyll come, then encrease the fyre more, and an oyle wyl come of a redde cullour, receiue that as long as any wyll come: you must chaunge the receyuer thryse. This oyle hath all the vertues of true Balme, for it burneth in the water, and curddeth mylke by & by: for if one droppe of it warme, be put into a pynt of mylke, it wyll forthwith become curdded. The fyrst lycquor is called the water of Balme, the seconde, oyle of Balme, the thyrde, Balme artificiall. The fyrst is profytable against the running of the eares, if two drops morning and euening be put into them: dropt into the eyes, it amendeth the blearednes, and consu∣meth the teares: it doth maruelously restrayne su∣perfluous humors in any parte of the body: it taketh away the tooth ache, if they be washt therewith, and kylleth the woormes, if there be any in them. The thyrd lycquor wyl suffer no venom, it is an vtter ene∣my and destruction to Spiders and Serpents. Two or three drops thereof layde vpon any venemous by∣ting, doth make it whole strayght. If thou drawe a cyrcle with this lycquor, and shut a venemous Beast therin, it wyl dye there, rather then go out of it. To be short, it doth all ye same things that Treacle doth, but all things more effectually: being powred or put vpon any Impostume, within nyne dayes it healeth them, and lykewise a Fistula be it neuer so euyll, and also Noli me tangere. All diseases bred of fleame, and of colde humors, it healeth: if a lynnen cloath dypped
in it, be layde vpon the place, where the griefe is. It putteth away vtterly the Palsey, and all trembling of members: it strengthneth maruelously ye Sinewes, it is hotter then the fyrst, or the seconde. If a man put a drop of it in his hande, it pierceth straight with∣out griefe. To conclude, it doth many other things, and all diseases rysen of a colde cause it healeth: if they vse it ryght. Lullius in his booke of waters. But this is taken out of Euonymus. IF you take ye gall of an Oxe, mans vrine, Ueriuyce, and the iuyce of Nettelles, of each a lyke quantity, and myxe them very dillygently together, and after quenche steele red hotte therin, fowre or fyue tymes together: the same steele wyll after become as soft as paste. This is affyrmed by the Schollers of Padua in theyr natural and Artificial conclusions. &c. A Most present remedy for them that are infect with the plague, for Carbuncles, pestelenticall Puslles, holy Fyre, and other of that kinde. Take the ripe ber∣ryes of Iuy, being dryed in the shaddow, then stampe them and make them in powder, of which powder take half a dram in two or three ounces of the water of Planteyn: and remayne styl in the bed, vntyl you haue sweat very well, and after you haue sweat, put on a cleane shert wel ayred at the fyre: and if you may conueniently, let the sheetes and the cloathes of the bed be shyfted. There hath bene some healed with this order in one nyght. This is proued. Alexis of Pyemount sawe one helped with taking this pow∣der twyse, that is: at morning and euening, hauing two Sores appearing, which with this powder,
broke the next day after, and so recouered. DOctor Monardus in his booke before mencioned among other maruelous matters, hath declared at large of two woonderful and straunge Stones, in these words following. They do bring (saith he) from the newe Spaine, two Stones of great vertue, the one is called the Stone of the bloud, and the other is a Stone for the disease of the Stone in the kydneys & raynes. The bloud Stone is a kind of a Iasper of dy∣uers cullours, somewhat darke, full of sprinckles lyke to bloud, being of cullour red: of ye which Stones the Indyans do make certayne Hartes, both great and small. The vse therof, both here and there, is for all fluxe of bloud, of what parts so euer it be, of the Nose, or of the Menstrues, or of the Pyles, and of wounds, or of that which is cast out of the mouth. The Stone must be wette in colde water, and the sycke man must take it in his ryght hand, and from tyme to tyme wet it in cold water. In this sort ye Indyans do vse them. And as touching the Indyans, they haue it for cer∣tayne, that touching the same Stone in some parte where the bloud runneth, that it doth restrayne: and in this they haue great trust, for that the effect hath bene seene. It doth profyte also, hauing it holden, hanged or tyed in the same parte, where the bloud runneth, so that it touch on the fleshe. Of this Stone we haue seene great effectes, in staunching of bloud. And some that do suffer the Hemeroidall fluxe, haue remedyed them selues with making Rynges of this Stone, and wearing them continually on theyr fyn∣gers, and also in Menstruall fluxe of Women.
The other Stone which is for the disease of the Stone in the kydneys or raynes, the fynest of them are lyke vnto Plasina of Esmeraldes, which is lykened to greene, with a mylkishe cullour, the greatest is the best, they bring them made in dyuers fourmes and fashions: for so the Indyans had them in olde tyme, some lyke to Fyshes, other lyke to heads of Byrdes, other lyke to bylles of Popageys, other lyke to round Beade stones: but all pierced through, for that the Indyans dyd vse to weare them hanging, for the ef∣fect of the griefe of the stone or stomacke: for in these two sycknesses it doth maruelous effects. The chiefe vertue that it hath, is in the paine of the stone in the kydneys and raynes, and in expellyng of sande and stone. Insomuch that a Gentleman which had one of them here, the best of them that I haue seene, hauing put it to his arme, it doth make him to expell and cast out much sande, that many tymes he doth take it away: for that he thynketh that it doth hurte him for to put out so much, and in taking it a∣waye, he ceaseth to cast any from him. When he fee∣leth the payne of the Stone, and puttyng it too a∣gaine, it dooth take awaye incontinent, with expel∣lyng of much Sande and small Stones. I haue seene it carryed to personnes, that haue bene grie∣ued with great griefe and paynes of the sayd disease, and puttyng it to them, they doo forthwith expell the Sande and the lytle Stones: and remayne cleare thereof. The Stone hath a propertye hydden, by the which meanes, he dooth great effectes, to pre∣serue that they fall not into the payne of the sayde diseases.
And after it is come, it taketh it away, or diminisheth it. It doth make the sande to be expelled with great abundaunce, and lykewise stones. It taketh away the heate from the raynes of the backe: it profyteth in griefes of the stomacke, put to it, and aboue all it pre∣serueth from the sayde griefe. My Lady the Dutches (a Dutches in Spaine) for that she had in short time, three tymes, exceeding paynes of the stone, she made a bracelet of them, & she vsed to weare it at her arme, and sythence she put them to her arme, she neuer had more paynes of the stone. And so it hath happened to many other that had the lyke benefyte, for the which they are much esteemed, & nowe they be not so soone had as at the beginning: for yt these Stones only the Gentlemen & Ritch men haue them. And with reasō: because they do such maruelous effects. Thus much hath the learned Doctor Monardus declared of the excellencies of ye two afore named Stones, which are brought from the West Indyas, with dyuers other precious Oyles, Woods, Gooms, & other things, as are most playnly & largely set forth in his sayd booke with many credible proofes: lately Englished and publyshed in print by the sayde Iohn Frampton, ther∣fore worthy of great commendations, called, Ioyfull Newes out of the new found World. Which is of a smal pryce, but yet very precious: for in my iudgemēt, whosoeuer doth bye it, doth not pay therfore the hun∣dreth part that it is woorth. THe making of a stone which moisted with spettle, wyl burne. Take of quick Lyme, pure Salnyter, Tutye Alexandrine, not preparate, Calamita, of each one parte, quick Brymstone, and Camphire, of eyther
two partes, let them all be made in very fyne pow∣der and searced, then tye the same powder harde in a lynnen cloath, then put it into a Crucyble, and couer the same with an other Crucyble, & wrap it fast with wyars, and close it well with lute of wisedome, that nothing maye respyer out, then let it be dryed at the Sunne: which done, cast the same Crucybles into the fyre of a bryck Kyll, vntyll the matter be well burned, which taken out, you shal find a perfect matter of the cullour of a Tyle: which if it be wet or moistned with a drop of water, or with spettle, putting Brymstone to it, then it wyll burne: which with blowing, or a blast is put out. Iacobus VVeckerus. TO make an Eg ascend into the ayre. In the month of May, fyll an Eg shell cleane emptied, with dew, and stop the hoale well, wherin you dyd put the dew, then lay the Eg in the hotte Sunne about noone: and it wyll be lyft vp. But if you set a staffe by it, it wyll ascende the more easylye. Iacob. VVeckerus. TO make a thyn Glew, a trym secrete. Take the Glew made of Fyshes, and beate the same strong∣ly on an Anuyle, vntyll it be thyn: which after laye to soke in water, vntyll it become very softe and tender, which wyll be within fyue or syxe howres, and then worke it lyke paste, to make small rowles thereof, which being lyke paste, stretch it, or draw it out very thynne: and when you wyll worke with it, then put some of it into an earthen potte with a litle fayre wa∣ter ouer hotte embers, & sym the same very cleane, and let it so seethe a lytle whyle, then after work with the same, keeping it styll ouer the hotte embers, vntyl
you haue done with it, for so it fastneth and byndeth the stronger: and in such sort, that it fastneth peeces of glasse together. IF you woulde destroye Caterpyllers, do thus. An∣noynt all the bottom of the trree round about with Tarre, then get a great sort of Antes or Pyssemyres, and put them in some bagge, and drawe the same vp by a corde into the tree, and so let it hang there, so that it touch the body of the tree, and the Ants letted to go downe from the tree by the meanes of the Tar, wyll (for want of foode) eate and destroye all the Ca∣terpyllers there, without hurting any of the fruite. This was tolde me for a very trueth. MAke a hoale in the ende of a Goose egge, and put all the whyte and yolke out of it, then put into the shell, a Backe that flyes about in the euening, and then glew or close it fast on the toppe, and you shal see the Backe flye away with the same Egge shell: to the great maruayle of them that knowes it not. IT is verye euyll (for them that falles sycke) when the Moone is applying in coniunction to the Sun, and woorse, when she is within syxe degrees of the Sunne. This I know to be true by often proofe and tryall. And Abraham Auenezra affyrmes the same, wryting De criticis diebus. RUbbe any precious Stone vpon Lead, and if then it chaunge the cullour: then it is a counterfeyte Stone. If it chaunge not: then it is a naturall
and good Stone. STampe Celondyne, and laye it to any Tetter or Ryngwoorme, or any other such lyke, called Imipe∣tigo or Serpigo, shyfting it twise euery day with new, for the space of a fortnyght: and it wyll quyte destroy and kyll them. And also it wyll put away any black spottes with the lyke vsyng thereof, in what part of the body so euer they be. TAke pure Waxe and fyne Brymstone puryfyed, of eache a lyke much, melte them together, making therof a Candle, and after take the powder of a coale fynely beaten, and as much of Brymstone in pow∣der. These syfte through a Searse, or a lynnen cloath, and after heatyng the sayde Candle, smeare it about with this powder, so long vntyll it haue (as it were) a thycke cruste rounde about the same, lyke vnto the thycknesse of a backe of a knyfe. Which after couer about the head of it, with a Paper, and then hange the same at the mouth of a gutter that droppeth faste, in a frostie euening, vntyll it be coue∣red with yse a fynger thycke: then lyght the same, and it wyll burne lyke as it were all Waxe. This is taken out of the naturall and Artifyciall conclusy∣ons of the Schollers of Padua. Translated into Englyshe by Thomas Hyll. THe coniunction of the Moone with Saturne (in the fyrst begynning of sycknesse) doth sygnify euyll and long sicknes. But if Saturne be of a slow course, it aug∣menteth
the euyll. If of a swyft course: then it dimy∣nisheth of the euyll. If he be Retrograde applying by opposition to the Sunne, after he is cured, he wyl fall sycke againe: but if he be Retrograde, and seperate by opposition from the Sun, the euyll is dimynished. Abraham Auenesra de criticis diebus. A Uery good laxatiue Dredgepowder, whereof you may take a spooneful when you neede in your pottage, or broath: it wyll make you to go to ye stoole. Take of pure Turbyt, one ounce, Gynger, Cynamō, Mastick, Annes seedes, Hermodactyls, Diagredyon, of each half an ounce, of the leaues of Sene, two oun∣ces, of Sugar, fowre ounces, beate them al into pow∣der, and let them be myxed together. Leonardus Fuchsius. THat sygne and degree wherin the Moone is in the howre and time of the byrth of any: the same signe and degree dyd ascende at the verye tyme of the con∣ception of the same Chylde. And that sygne & degree wherin ye moone is, at the tyme of the conception: the same sygne and degree, or the opposyte to the same, doth ascend at the very tyme of the byrth. Hermes et Ptolomeus: Therfore according to this rule of these auncient and famous Authors, (whereto Guido Bo∣natus, Iohannes Ganiuetus, Sconerus and Taisnerus, notable & learned Astronomers, with dyuers other, do consent and agree.) Dyuers Women, haue dyuers times, betweene the conception & byrth of their chyl∣dren: For the place of the moone at the tyme of the conception, & her vncertayne course after, doth plain∣ly manifest that some Women goes with Chylde not
aboue seuen and thyrty weekes: some others eyght and thyrty weekes and vnder: some nyne and thyrty weekes, and something lesse: some againe goes forty weekes and a few dayes lesse, and somtymes certain dayes more, yea: and somtymes forty and one weeke, and one day, which is the longest time, as the learned in the same Science, can perfectly finde out. Where∣fore they are much deceyued, that thinkes euery wo∣man goes but iust forty weekes with chylde: which fonde and false opinion, hath made many an honest woman falsely suspected, wrongfully slaundered, and without iust cause from theyr husbandes seperated. Therfore it were good and very meete for euery one, not to geue too much credyte to this fonde reckoning of iust forty weekes: which is more cōmon then true. Which fore discrybed excellent rule, (according to the mynde of the worthy and learned Mizaldus,) is of no small weyght, for the tryall of the fydelytie & honesty of women to theyr husbandes, and to fynde out the very right tyme of the Natiuity or byrth, so that the very day and howre of the conception be certen. TAke the stones out of Reisens of the Sunne, then stampe the same Reysens, and apply a plaster ther∣of to any griefe or ache: and it wyll cease it presently, and if you vse it fyue or syx tymes in such order, it wyl throughly helpe and cure the same. I haue seene this well proued. IF you gather greene Beanes from the stalkes, whē they be rype, fully growne and ready to eate, and then immediatly cutte of the sayde stalkes with∣in a handful of the roote: then new and moe branches
wyll shortlye after spryng out of the same. Which wyll bring forth new Beanes, and more plentyfully then before: and as good as the fyrst. Whereby you maye haue more then double encrease, and two seue∣rall gatherings of Beanes in one yeare. But in any∣wyse, take heede that the fyrst gathering and cutting away of the stalks be, when the said stalks be greene. I haue seene it proued, therefore I wryte and pub∣lysh it for an vndoubted trueth. It is credibly tolde mee, that if you vse Peason in the same order: the lyke effect wyl follow. Which I beleeue to be true, as well in the one as in the other. LAye a dysh ouer hotte sodden milke, and there wyl a water be on the insyde of the dyshe, which water keepe in some glasse: whereof if a lytle be put into sore payned or dymme eyes, it wyll helpe them mar∣uelously. This was affyrmed to mee for trueth. HEre followeth the discription of a notable Oyle of Balme. Take of Turpentyne, one pounde, and put it into a body of Glasse, and warme it at a softe and easye fyre, vntyll it waxe lyquyd, and put therein by lytle and lytle, with myxting or sturring it, the powder of Frankensense, fyue drams, of Lyg∣num Aloes, Mastycke, Cloues, Galynga, Cynamom, Mace, Quibybs, of each one dramme, all well pow∣dred together, goom of a Fygge tree, syxe drammes, lykewyse made in powder and all myxed together, and myxe them all wyth the sayde Turpentyne made
lyquyd as is before sayde, and when they be well in∣corporated together, set on the head of the Lymbeck, and lute all the ioyntes of the same well, and set it in ashes, and put vnder it an easye fyre. And when it begynnes to distyl, let it droppe away a lytle, for the fyrst droppes are lytle woorth: then put the recey∣uer to the nose of the Lymbecke, and close and lute them well together that no ayre go forth: for then the vertue of it woulde go awaye. Then knowe that at the fyrst wyll come forth a whyte and cleare water, which keepe by it selfe. Then wyll come forth the seconde water, which is better, of a hea∣uenlye and ayrie cullour: which keepe by it selfe. Then receyue the thyrde, which is the best, which wyll be yallowe and thycke as Honny: keepe this also by it selfe. The fyrst of these is called the water of Balme: the second, the Oyle of Balme: the thyrd, is called Balme. His proofe to all examynations is, that you take one droppe of the same, and let it be put in a vessell full of water, as you doo of naturall Balme, for the sayde droppe wyll go to the bottome of the water: and it wyll stande theyr whole, as though it were pure Balme. This is maruelous, and is of great vertues, which is called of some, moo∣ther of Balme. The fyrst vertue thereof is, that it burnes: the se∣conde is, that if thou washe thy face and nose there∣with, and that thryse in a daye, it cures and helpes the rewme. It cleareth the syght, and it comfor∣teth the Synnewes: and if thou washe therewith the hynder parte of thy heade, then it comfortes the memorye, and all the vertues of the mynde.
This doth purify both Fysh and Flesh, and if they be putrifyed or corrupt, whatsoeuer therof is corrupt or putrifyed: it takes and consumes it away. And it keepes that that is good and sound: so that you maye eate them as though they were new and fresh. It bringes againe an appetite, it cōforteth the stomack, and if you take thereof morning and euening: it con∣sumes the fleame in the stomacke. It helpes or cures a stynking breath, as well comming of the stomacke as of the brayne: if you take fowre or fyue drops ther∣of once a daye in a lytle Wine. No colde venemous thing may come neare it, as Frogs, Todes, Serpēts and Scorpions: if a cloath dypt in the same, and com∣passe a Tode or Serpent, compassed therwith, they wyll dye, although they touch it not, and so it doth in all kinde of colde venoms: as the byting of a Tode, or of a Serpent. For it heales it, if you wash oftentimes therwith the grieued place. And if you seethe an Eg in it, it wyl sooner be sodde therin, then in any boyling water. It heales and dryes vp any kinde of scabbe or Tetter quickly: if you wash it therewith twyse in a day: and if you put three or fowre drops of this into the eare, and suffers it there as long as you maye: it helpes and cures all noyse and soundings of ye eares. If you myxe with this equall porcion of the iuyce of Germāder, & puts therof into the eare three or fowre drops, fowre tymes in the day, then it helpes & cures all deafnes: of what cause soeuer it comes. Watryng eyes and bleared eyes it doth cure, clarify, restrayne and comforts: if you wash them therwith twyse or thryse. All Impostumes, Ulcers, & all other superflui∣tyes it doth restrayne, cure, and rectify. And it is a thing more repercussyue & consumptiue against colde
humors, thē the Saphyre or Planteyn. All paynes of the teethe, or running humors, it doth helpe, restrain, fortify: and it makes the teethe whyte, if therwith you do wash the rootes of the teethe. All woundes of the head, though they be deepe, are cured with this same Oyle: if therwith you wash it twyse or thryse a daye. Yea, though the braine panne be broken, so that Pia mater be not hurt. It heales and cures all Fystu∣laes, Cancers, Noli me tangere, the Kings Euyll, and euery other eating Sore: if you wash the same ther∣with twyse or thryse a day. It heales and cures all kynde of Gowtes, if you wash or annoynt them ther∣with, so that they come of a colde cause: and laying also a lynnen cloath dypt therein vppon the grieued place. It helpes also all strokes with staues or other brusinges, eyther by falles or otherwyse, if you an∣noynt the brused or grieued place therwith, & heales them perfectly and well. It helpes the Emrodes and the fundament that goes forth, and makes it tarry in his place: if you annoynt the same therwith. It helps the Palsey, and all weaknes of the members, it doth strengthen: if you annoint the same therwith. Know that it is most hotte, and is of such penetration and heate, that if you put one drop therof in your hand, by and by it penetrates the hand without any hurt. And you shall not feele any swelling of the feete or of the legges, or any payne of the ioyntes: if you washe or annoynt the same therwith, and it wyll helpe it, if you dyp a lynnen cloath therin and plaster it therto. And briefly, if you wyll vse it, it profites, helpes and cures all colde griefes, and all diseases comming of a colde cause, of fleame, or of putrifyed or corrupt bloud. It hath yet many other vertues here left out, and it is
called the moother of Balme, because it is better then Balme in many of his effects. And if you wyll proue that it be a true Balme: take a Chycken (the fethers pluckt off, and the guttes taken away,) and see that it be well washt & made as cleane as can be, and drye the same at a soft fyre, so long as you may well holde it in your hande, then annoynt the same Chycken wel both within & without, with the sayde Balme, twyse or thryse: then afterwards laye the sayde Chycken a∣gainst the Sun, for the space of two howres, suffring it a lytle to drye at the Sun, and afterwards laye vp the sayd Chycken where you wyll: for it wyll neuer putrifye nor receyue any corruption, so long as the worlde shall endure. And knowe further that this Oyle hath eyghteene other vertues, which are writ∣ten: but not here. This notable Oyle of Balme, I cop∣pied out of a very old written booke, which came out of the Abbey of Elsam in Lyncolnshyre. And now by me conuerted out of Latin into English, to the profyt of many, I hope. A Flye drowned in water, Wine, Ale, or Beere, and so throughly dead, being layde in warme Ashes: (but they must not be burning or verye hotte,) the same Flye wyll recouer and lyue againe. This is very true. IF you do gather Roses when they be fully ripe, and immediatly cut away the new springes, tops, and the vppermost branches of that yeere: you shall haue new & fresh Roses grow againe out of the same, the same yeere, about Mighelmas. I know this to be true, and for trueth I haue published it abroade.
THe Indians do vse the Tabaco (a notable hearbe) for to suffer the dreyth, & also for to suffer hungar, and to passe dayes without, hauing neede eyther to eate or drinke, by any desart or dyspeopled countrey, where they shal find neyther water nor meate. They do vse of these litle balles, which they do make of this Tabaco, they take the leaues of it, and do chew it, and as they go chewing of them, they myngle with them certaine powder made of the shelles of Cockles bur∣ned, and they myngle it in their mouth all together, vntyll they make it lyke to dowe, of the which they make certaine lytle balles, lytle greater then Peason: and they put them to drye in the shadowe, and after they keepe them & vse them, for the auoyding of hun∣ger & thyrst, in theyr trauell without any meate and drinke: for the space of three or fowre dayes. This Doctor Monardus hath wrytten, with many other woonders and notable vertues therof, in his booke before mencioned: intituled, Ioyfull Newes out of the new found Worlde. This Tabaco is a maruelous & woonderfull hearbe, growing in the west Indyas, called the new Spaine: and through the brynging of the seedes therof from thence, it growes nowe both in Spayne and Fraunce. WOormes and other venemous Beasts are dryuē away from any place, with the smoake or fume of other Beasts of the same kinde, as Rasis wrytes. QUick syluer kylled, burned Leade, the scales of Yron, or black Hellebor, mixed with some plea∣saunt meate that Mice loues: if any Mice eate therof, it wyll kyll them. Mizaldus.
THere is a certaine Goom is brought from ye firme nde of the Peru, which helpes the gowte with purging the cause therof, if you put of it as much as a Nut in distylled water, which water ought to be the quantity of two ounces, and geue the same to the pa∣tient, (the same partye forbearing meate vntyll the myddest of the day.) This Monardus affyrmes to be proued, manifesting the same at large in his sayde booke called, the Ioyfull Newes out of the new foūd World. The name of the Goom he names not. THe rootes of Roses or their slips with their knots, remoued and set amongst broome, wyl bring forth yallow Roses. Iohan. Bap. Por. THat Cheese that is made with cheslep or rennet, wherein a lytle of the brayne of a Wesell is put or myxt: wyll not putrifye, neyther be eaten of Myce. Pictorius. THere is a certaine Tree growing in Peru, a boowe wherof, if one doth hold fast in his left hand, a good whyle, that would knowe whether one that is sycke shall lyue or dye (of that disease, or at that tyme,) if the sycke shall lyue and escape: the party that holdes the same, shall shewe much gladnes. If the sycke shall dye, then the party that holdes the same shall be ve∣rye sad. Monardus wrytes of this Tree in his sayd booke, and shewes that the same was proued true by a Gentlewoman that was maruelous sad, whiles shee dyd holde the same, whose husbande dyed soone after accordingly.
A Rare and straunge kynde of fruite, as great as a Nutte, with maruelous rounde and harde bcke stones in them, is brought out of the new Spaine, by the report of the sayde worthy Doctor Monardus, whereof two or three, with hotte water, doth more effect for to wash and to make cleane cloathes, then one pound of Sope doth: wherof as well as of many other straunge and most excellent thinges you maye reade, discrybed at large in his sayde booke, called the Ioyfull Newes out of the new founde Worlde. A Booke no doubte worthy of great estymation, and commendation. IF a handfull of Fygs be stampt, tyll the kernelles be broken, then tempered with a lytle fresh grease, and so a plaster therof layde to a Womans breast that is sore, as hotte as she may suffer the same: it wyll take away the swelling and paine therof, and if it be ready to breake, it wyll breake it, or else not. This is an ex∣cellent and a sure tryed thing. TAke two ounces of Sulphur vyue, called quycke Brimstone, beate it in powder, and mixe the same well with as much of blacke Sope, that is of the most stinking smel, and tye the same in a lynnen cloath, and let it hang in a pynt of strong Wyne Uinegar, for the space of nyne dayes, and then vse to wash any kinde of skuruynes, or morphew therwith, though neuer so olde or rooted, being eyther on the face, or on any o∣ther parte of the body, with a lynnen cloath, dypt or wet therin, and so let the same Uinegar drye in of it selfe, and do thus as long as the sayd Uinegar lastes: and therwith the deformity or morphew wyl be per∣fectly
healed. And whosoeuer vses to drynke the wa∣ter of Strawberyes distylled: it wyll certaynly kyll the roote of any morphew that is within the body. All this is well proued AN excellent preseruatiue against ye Plague, which was proued and vsed in the great Plague in Eng∣lande, in the yeare of our Lorde. 1548. For euery one that vsed it then, escaped. Take Aloes Hepatick, pure Cynamom, Myrre, of each three drammes, Cloues, Mace, wood of Aloes, called Lignum Aloes, Mastick, Bole Armoniacke, of each halfe an ounce, myxe them all together, and make thereof a very fyne powder, wherof take early in the morning with whyte Wine myxt with a lytle water: and by the grace of God, you shall be preserued safe from the Plague. VVec∣kerus. IF you burne the shelles of Snailes with Styracks, and then sprinckle therof vpon an Antes hyll: ther∣by they wyll be driuen forth of the grounde, or place where they are. TAke of English Saffern beatē in fyne powder, and as much of pure & good blacke Sope: which, when they be well myngled together, spreade it vpon the fleshie syde of a peece of Leather, then laye it vppon the Nauell of them, whose vryne or water is stopte: and it wyll procure the water to come forth, and ther∣by they shall make water within one howre. This was tolde mee for a true and tryed secrete, whereof I dare make no warrantyze: but fauour it as you fynde it.
MAke lute or claye with the dregges or moother of Oyle, and myxe therewith a lytle chaffe, then let it lye so two or three dayes, then dawbe with the sayde thycke lute or claye, your Garner or rowme, where you wyll laye your Corne, then sprynckle the dregges or moother of Oyle, al ouer where you haue dawbed: and when it is drye, laye Wheate therein, and there shal neyther Weuell nor Myce, hurt, touch, or come neere that Wheate. This I had out of an olde Booke. And Iacobus VVeckerus also affyrmes the same. WHen you first see the Cuckoo, marke well where your right foote doth stande: for you shall fynde there an heair. Which if it be black, it sygnifyes that you shall haue very euyll lucke all that yeare after. If it be whyte, then very good lucke: But if it be graye, then indyfferent. It is sure that such a heair hath bene founde accordingly, but what euent dyd follow therof I am yet vncertayne. But this was affyrmed to mee for a very trueth. It was also credibly repor∣ted vnto mee, that the lyke heair wyll be founde vn∣der the ryght foote, at the fyrst seeing of the Swal∣lowe, after they are comd at the spring tyme: so that you looke after the sayde Swallowe, as long as you can see her. A Quantitie of Hempe seede stampt, and strayned through a cloath when it is wel sodden with run∣ning water, and a good draught thereof droonk last, going to bed, and so vsed: wyll make one laxatiue and loose bellyed. This is a proued thing therfore.
THe great Alexander being desirous, that the long lyfe of Hartes might be knowne to his posterity: caused golden Chaynes to be made fast vnto many Harts (about theyr neckes I thinke:) the tyme when the same was done, being exprest or marked in the same, and they which were taken of the same Harts, an hundreth yeares after: dyd not yet seeme to be of the age of olde Hartes. Mizaldus wrytes this: who affyrmes that Pliny is the Author therof. QUicke Lyme mixt with olde Cheese, and well beaten together, wyll fasten and glew strongly together, broken stone vessels, and also broken glasses. This was very credibly tolde me for a very great secrete, by one that proued it many tymes, as he sayde. WHosoeuer hath an extreame heate, or sore bur∣ning Feuer, let them vse to drinke fowre or fyue tymes in one day, a good draught of the distylled wa∣ter of wylde Poppy, that is, Papauer erraticum, which growes among Corne, with a red flowre, much lyke the leafe of a Rose, it is called of some, red corne Rose. This haue I tryed to be true. THey in whose Natiuitie Saturne is Lord of the se∣uenth house, are not lyke to marry before they be thyrty yeares of age: or else vntyll Saturne (from that tyme,) hath compassed the whole Zodiack, (which differs not much.) This is proued true by long expe∣rience, & I haue seene many, whose seuenth house is Capricorne or Aquary (the houses of Saturne,) and yet I neuer knew any of them, but either dyed vnmaried,
or else married after they were thyrtie yeares of age. And as I remember Cardanus agrees herein. IF the bottom of a seething potte with meate new∣ly taken from the fyre, may be touched or felt with∣out harme or daunger of burning: then certaynly the same meate is boyled inough. But if it be hotte and not sufferable: then it is not sufficiently sodde. This I know to be true: for I haue seene the tryall thereof. LAy a greene Iuy leafe in a dyshe, or other vessell of fayre water, eyther for your selfe or for any other, on Newyeares euen at night, and couer the water in the sayd vessel, and set it in a sure or safe place, vntyl Twelfe euen next after (which wyll be the fyft day of Ianuary,) and then take the sayd Iuy leafe out of the sayd water, and marke well if the sayde leafe be fayre and greene as it was before: for then you or the par∣ty for whom you layd it into the water, wyl be whole and sound and safe from any sicknes all the next yeare following. But if you fynde any black spots theron, then you or the party for whome you layde it into the water, wyll be sicke that same yeare following. And if the spots be on the vpper part of the leafe towards the stalke, then the sycknes or paine wyll be in ye head, or in the neck, or there about. And if it be spotted nye the myds of the leafe, then the sycknes wyll be about the stomack or hart. And lykewise iudge that the di∣sease or griefe wyll be in that part of the body, accor∣ding as you see the black spots vnder the same in the leafe. Accoumpting the spots in the nether or sharpe end of the leafe, to sygnify of the paynes or diseases in the feete. And if the leafe be spotted all ouer, then it
signifies, that you or the partie shall dye that yeare following. You may prooue this for many, or fewe, at one time, by putting in the water, for euery one a leafe of greene Iuy, (so that euery leafe be noted or marked to whom it doth belong.) This was cre∣diblye tolde me to be very certaine, who affyrmed to me faithfully that it was diuers times proued for a verye trueth. But because I neuer tryed it: there∣fore I refer euery one that shall reade it to the tryall thereof. BRusonious wryghtes, and Georgius Fabricus af∣fyrmes the same, that the bones of Hens, myxed with melted Golde: doo consume the same Golde in to themselfe. THe water distilled of Honny, makes faire and com∣ly cullored Heyre, if it be often moystned, or spun∣ged therewith. This is prooued. THe rootes of Hollyockes, stampt and myxt with the Grease of an olde Hogge, and plastred to the Gowte, healpeth it in three dayes. Petrus Hispanus. VEriuyce sodde, vntill it be very hot, and then put into a tnen Bottell with a narrow mouth, and then holden too, or in the eare, that the fume thereof may enter into the head: it will helpe the head ache meruelously, and the sounding of the eares. And if there be any quick thinges in the head, it wyll bringe them forthwith great speede. A Gentleman taught this to a woman that was sore tormented in her
head, esteeming it as a precious secret: but I neuer tryed it, therefore as it prooues so prayse it. IF one be wounded that hath the dropsye, it is hard to heale him. Hippocrates. Therefore this is worth the marking. YOu shall knowe how many dayes old the Moone is, if you do as followeth, (especially shee being in the fyrst quarter) holde before your eyes a peece of fyne Lawne, and looke through it straight vpon the Moone, and so many dayes old as the Moone is, so many Moones shall you see, or at the least, they wyll seeme so many in your sight. Assoone as you try it, you wyll saye it is true: For I haue seene the proofe thereof. I Hard it tolde for a very truth by diuers persons, that in a plague time, in the Citty of Cullen, there was a certaine woman dyed, and was buryed with a Ring of golde on her fynger, for the greedines whereof, a couetous fellow within a whyle after she was buryed: digged her Graue, and opened the cof∣fyn wherein shee did lye, thinking thereby to take a∣way the Ringe from her fynger, but immediatly the sayd woman did soddainly sturre and mooue, and be∣gan to syt vp: which when the sayd fellow sawe, with great feare he did runne away, and then the woman by some meanes, did teare or vnloose the sheete, wherein she was wrapt, and then she went straight home to her Husbande, and called vpon him, to let her into the howse: whom, when he harde, hee thoughte it had beene a Sprite.
But at last, through her importunate calling, he re∣ceyued her into the house, and thus woonderfully she recouered and lyued: which Woman after that, had three or fowre chyldren, of whome it is sayde, there is a Monument at this present, in the sayde Citie of Cullen. Therfore too hasy or quick buryall is not to be vsed, as not onely this rare example maye suffici∣ently teach vs: But also for such causes as I haue al∣leadged in another place of this booke. IF you graft the slyps of a Wylding or sowre Aple, vpon the stock of a Hawthorne: you shal haue Med∣lers grow therof. This I haue seene proued: therfore I affyrme it for trueth. A Lytle Byrde called the Kings Fysher, being han∣ged vp in the ayre by the neck: his nebbe or byll wyll be alwayes dyrect or strayght against ye winde. This was tolde mee for a very trueth, by one that knew it by proofe: as he sayde. WHosoeuer shall weare about theyr mydle such a gyrdle as followeth, tying it fast that it fall not away, they shall not neede to feare drowning: though the boate they are in should myscarie, whereby they may passe ouer any water safely & without any daū∣ger, though it be neuer so deepe. For so long as it is about them, they can not synke. Take two peeces of good Neates lether well tand and drest, such as foote balles be made of, (eyther peece being of the breadth of fyue or sixe fyngars:) And of such a length as wyll make a sufficient gyrdle for you, let a shoomaker sew them very strongly, thycke stytched, and surely toge∣ther,
and lykewise at both the endes: and in the myds therof fasten a Pype lyke to a Bagpype, wherewith blow the same gyrdle as ful of winde as you can pos∣syble: then vnder the nether ende of the Pype, tye the lether very fast and sure, that ioygnes the pype & the gyrdle together, with a strong packthred, or with some other sure & strong thing, least the winde should come out of the gyrdle, (whereof you must take great heede.) Also blowe three Oxe bladders full of wind, and tye them hard that the winde go not forth of the same, and sew ech of them strongly and surelye within good strong Neates lether, rounde lyke vnto a foote ball, and make three strong lowpes vpon the sayde gyrdle, one against the middes of the backe, and against eyther of the sydes one, and then tye fast and surely one of the sayde bladders sewed in the lether, to euery of the sayde lowpes, and then tye the same gyrdle about your mydle very fast and sure. And then you can not synke into the water. And so you maye passe safely ouer: if the water be not too broade and too rough. Nicholaus Michauel hath wrytten of such a lyke gyrdle in his excellent Booke of the Arte of Warres: for the saueing of Souldiours and Fyshers ouer waters. In which Booke there are other no∣table Engynes, and worthy matter besyde, concer∣ning warres. A Ladle made of the wood of a Fygge tree, hath a maruelous propertie, for if Fleshe in the seething therof, be often sturred therwith, or if it be in the Pot whyle it is seething: it makes the Flesh to be sooner sodden. Mizaldus.
A Partrych wyll crye alowde, and will teare or breake the Cage or Coope where she is fedde, if there be any deadly medcyn or poyson prepared with∣in the same house, which shee dooth feele presentlye, and also hath knowledge thereof, through a woon∣derfull speciall and rare gift of nature. Actius ex pisone. GEllius wrytes that the Hedgehogge makes the mouth of her hoale, Cabban, or Caue alwayes con¦trary to the winde: for through a meruelous natural gyfte, shee hath foreknowledge in what quarter the wynde wilbe, and thereupon shee chaungeth the mouth or entringe in of her hoale or caue, whereby Marryners haue learned a∣forehand, the place of the wynde. The ende of the tenth and last Booke. FINIS.
¶ A speciall Table for the finding out of any matter in this Booke, whereof the Table of the first Booke doth folowe. A Straung Historie of two louers that were poysoned by eating of Sage. pag. 1 ph. 1. A  Poct dyd weare leaden soles. pag. 2. ph. 2. A straunge thyng of Mullen. pag 2.3. To encrease mylke in Nurses. pag. 2.4. Aqua vite helpes synewes and muscles. pag. 2.5. To make rough or chapped lippes smoth. pag. 2.6. To knowe who shalbe crooke backt or halt. pag. 3.7. Earth wormes helpe deafenes. pag. 3.8. A notable cure of one that had the griefe of the splene seuen yeres. pag. 3.9. A rare thyng to make a horse all, as dead, and after to make him lyuely. pag. 3.10. To get a precious stone out of a snake. pag. 4.11. A way to keepe wine safe from thunder. pag. 4.12. To knowe who shall haue the palsie. pag. 4.13. To take away a Wen. pag. 4.14. To make wood of the cullour of Hebenus. pag. 4.15. An excellent vertue of Mullen in helping of bruses and sores. pag. 5.16. Ualerian wyl drawe out any wood or yron out of the fleshe. pag. 5.17. To make a barren vine beare grapes. pag. 6.18. To preserue the teeth frō rotting. pag. 6.19. The teeth of a Bore newely killed wyll burne brysies or haires. pag. 6.20. A present cas for the gowte. pag. 6.21. The Citie of Tornace ws marueylously deliuered from the plague, by the shooting of of gunnes. pag. 6.22. To make common Azure. pag. 7.23. A Cocke feares not a Serpent, yet he is a∣frayde of a glead. pag. 7.24. To mae amber clearer & better. pag. 7.25. A are way to staye the fluxe of spae. pag. 8.26. Cantarides applied made one to pyss blood pag. 8.27. A straunge vertue of y• bu leafe. pag. 8.28. A salue made of ale helpes sores and aches. pag. 8.29. Docks makes toughe fleshe to be tender. pag. 8.30. A way to knowe whether one be sicke in body or in minde, or in both. pag. 9.31. To know who is enfect with the pluresye. pag. 9.32. They that haue the quarteyn, shal not haue the falling sicknes. pag. 9 33. To cullour bones with a greene cullour. pag. 9.34. Oile keepes wine frō corrupting. pa. 10.35. The coles of a birch tree healeth woundes. pag. 10.36. A Robin red breast will couer the face of a dead body with mosse. pag. 10.37. A straunge example of the heathe basyll. pag. 10.38. Great heede ought to be taken of childrens nauels strings whē they be cut. pag. 10.39 To helpe them that can not holde theyr water. pag. 10.40. An incredible tle of a louyng dogge. pag. 11.41. The member of generation dooth folow the proportion of the nauell string cutte. pag. 11.42. A straung way for the helping of the cods. pag. 11.43. A woman caried a dead child in her wombe thirteene yeres. pag. 12.44. To make a woman be speedilye delyuered. pag. 12▪ 45. A straung effect of the loue of Pigeons with the Castrell. pag. 12.46. A rare secret of the woort leafe. pag. 12.47. A perfect and precious medecine for the plague. pag. 12.48. A straunge way to know, whether the next childe of a woman wyll be a boye or a wenche. pag. 13.49. A sure medcin to destroy a fellon. pa. 13.50.
A good proo that children are not alwaies lyke their Parents. pag. 13.51. A Tode stone ceases the paines cōming by ye byting of any venemous beast. pa. 14.52. A try way to kyll Lyce. pag. 14.53. To make womans dugs round and harde. pag. 14.54. To knowe whether a woman e barren or not. pag. 14.55. A Ryng which makes the bearer thereof safe from poyson and plagu. pag. 14.56. The excellent vertues of fasting spele. pag. 15.57. To keepe Cheese from putrifying. pa. 15.58 To nde a precious coale on Mydsommer euen. pag. 15.59. A good thing to feede Beasts, and to make the handes whyte. pag. 15.60. All thinges wyll swyne vpon quicksyluer, except golde. pag. 16.61. An excellent waye to staye the growing of hea. pag. 16.62. A present remedy for horsenes & the cough. pag. 16.63. To  who are lyke to haue the gowte. pag. 17.64. To take awaye the euyll smell of the feete. pag. 17.65. A straunge waye to cease the bleeding of the nose. pag. 17.66. Mylke and exercise from the cradle, makes tall and  persons. pag. 17.67. A present remedy for ye Suinācy, pa. 17.68 Two cōtrary natures in ye netle. pa. 17.69 To know whether a womā is lyke to haue chyldren or not. pag. 18.70. To make teeth as white as Iuory. pa. 18.71 To take spots out of the face. pag. 18.71. A straunge waye to helpe the qurteyn a∣ue. pag. 18.73. A proued waye to helpe the Collyce and paines of the backe. pag. 18.74. To helpe the swellinges of the throate. pag. 18.75. To make a woman loathe the company of man, & a man to desyre a woman. pa. 18.76 The straunge nature of dogs. pag. 19.77. To know good & pure . pag. 19.78. To ioygne broken glasses and broken cups. pag. 19.79. The great vertue of Planteyn, being the hearbe of Mars. pag. 19.80. To cause a Bull vnable to bull a Cowe. pag. 20.81. A straunge waye to loose a man that is en∣chaunted or bewytched, therby vnable to the act of generation. pag. 20.82. A straunge waye to put awaye the crampe. pag. 20.83. A pretie deuise to put out and lyght a cādle, to make them maruayle yt sees it. pa. 20.84 To make a writing, being cast into the fire, to leape out of the same. pag. 20.85. To gette any quicke thing out of the head. pag. 21.86. A rare helpe for the crampe. pag. 21.87. A straunge secrete to plucke out a thorne out of the fleshe. pag. 21.88. Sygnifycations when the paines be in the eyes. pag. 21.89. One through vse dyd forbeare drinke all his lyfe after. pag. 21.90 The three corned bon of a Cap ceaseth the bleeding of the nose. pag. 22.91. A straunge medicine for curing the webbe, and the blindnes of the eye. pag. 22.92. Salt wyll make women apt to haue chyl∣dren. pag. 22.93. Dyuers Beastes and Byrdes, do dyuersly helpe theyr diseases according to theyr nature. pag. 22.94. Annyball made a passage through the harde rocks of the Alpes, with vinegar. pa. 23.95 A notable remedy for all wounds. pa. 23.96 To make whyte yllies re. pag. 23.97. A hynderaunce for women to bring forth wenches. pag. 23.98. A notable waye to get quicksyluer out of such as are annoynted with oyntmentes myt with the same. pag. 24.99. To draw out thornes, and to help the drop∣se, a rare and straunge secrete. pag. 24.100. The Table of the second booke. FOr knowledge of griefs and diseases in in the eyes. pag. 25.1. A maruelous vertue geuen to the suth male Childe. pag. 25.2. A learned Phisition knew one was sicke for loue, by the feeling of his pulse. pa. 25.3
A straunge way to know whether one that is sycke, be in daunger of death, or not. pag. 25.4. To gather Hars together into one place. pag. 26.5. Why chyldren haue clouen ouerlyps, called Hartlyps, a wonderful thing. pag. 26.6. What tyme the disease taken wyll be daun∣gerous, or not. pag. 26.7. To draw an Eg through a ring. pa. 26.8. To resolue Flynt stones into powder. pag. 27.9. To cause woorms come out of the ground. pag. 27.10. To take spottes and rustynes from Yron. pag. 27.11. An excellent helpe for the gowte. pa. 27.12. That Inke shal neuer be frosen. pa. 27.13. The Starres are strong in the byrth, accor∣ding to the aptnes of them that be borne. pag. 27.14. A straunge nature of the Sycamore tree. pag. 28.15. A rare thing to procure sleepe. pag. 28.16. To foreknow who shall haue paines in the stomacke. pag. 28.17. A very straunge way to helpe them that be broken bellyed. pag. 28.18. To make Hens laye Egs apace. pa. 29.19. To clense the face from all spots and other deformities. pag. 29.20. To driue away Flyes, that neuer, there be seene any there after. pag. 29.21. To make troubled Wyne, fayre and cleare. pag. 30.22. What tyme is daunger to wounde or cutte any body. pag. 30.23. A straunge cause of the notable markes of chyldren before they be borne. pag. 30.24. To keepe things frō putrifying. pa. 31.25. Beasts of one kind, wyl be hurt, & not hurt, with eating of one thing. pag. 31.26. A chyld maruelously preserued by a woolf. pag. 31.27. A straunge waye to preserue Chesnuttes. pag. 32.28. The great vertue of Knotgrasse. pa. 32.29. A straunge thing to make a Dogge turne round about, and to fall downe as dead. pag. 32.30. A way wherby hungar was the lesse gre∣uous to the Scithians. pag. 32.31. A notable Pollicie whereby the Romains got a worthy victory. pag. 33.33. A louing Dog to his maister. pag. 33.34. A sygnification of blindnes. pag. 34.35. A present case for the gowte. pag. 34.36. Knotgrasse dangerous for sheepe. pa. 34.37 An incredible matter doon in ones sleep. pag. 34.38. The straunge nature of chaffe. pag. 36.39. To make wine pleasāt in cullour and taste. pag. 36.40. Who shal haue pains in their Liuer. p. 36.41 A proued medicine to cure the black Iaun∣dies. pag. 36.42. To make a sword, dagger, or knife to cutte yron, as though it were steele. pag. 36.43. An excellēt way to purify wine. pa. 37.44. To keepe a dog from being mad. pa. 37.45. To make sweete & pleasaunt Arthychokes. pag. 37.46. A sure medicine to help the stitch. pa. 37.47 What ground wyl breede the fyne wheat. pag. 37.48. A straunge medicine wherwith Galen cu∣red the allyng sycknes. pag. 37.49. To keepe Dogges from madnes, and from much barking. pag. 38.50. To make a Leeke haue a mōstruous head. pag. 38.51. The maruelous properties of the stone A∣tites. pag. 38.52. Certayne people without mouthes, lyues by smelling of Flowres, apples & rootes. pag. 38.53. A speciall remedye for falling or bruses. pag. 39.54. Children borne at some tyme wyll be blind. pag. 39.55. A straunge cuing of the falling sycknesse. pag. 39.56. To turne Wyne into vinegar presentlie. pag. 39.57. A rare helping of the Kings euyl. pa. 39.58 A daungerous time to fal sick in. pa. 40.59 Byrdes helpes theyr diseases diuerslye. pag. 40.60. Reysens wyl auoyde and kyl the woorms. pag. 40.1.
An excellent help for the collick. pa. 40.62. To help the paynes of the bladder. p. 41.63 Children borne at such a time wyll haue the deseas of the slen. pag. 41.64. To make fruit growe with what forme you lyt. pag. 41.65. The great liberalitye of Alphons for ma∣king of the Astronomycall Tables. pag. 41.66. To know whether the plague be curable or not. pag. 42.67. A maruelous proffitable vse of sparrowes. pag. 2.68. To make white handes. pag. 43.69. A straunge matter of the quilles, or pennes of an Eagle. pag. 43.70. To help the readnes of the face. pa. 43.71. To make vnuly beasts tame. pag. 43.72. To make stones soft. pag. 43.73. To make frosen Apples come to there first nature. pag. 44.74. An excellent thinge to be knowne by the mulbery tree. pag. 44.75. To seperate golde from syluer. pag. 44.76. A notable vertue of the Iasper stone. pag. 44.77. To keepe Pigeons from being hurt of any Cats Wesels or of anye other vrmen pag. 44.78. Who are like to haue the pysyck. p. 44.79 A notable medicine to helpe itchinges or scabbes. pag. 45.80. A prooued medicine for the stone. p. 45.81. A foreknowledge of the plague. pa. 45.82. Two straunge brethren borne in . pag. 45.83. An excellent medicine for all sores. p. 45.84 Women transformed into young beastes. pag. 45.85. To cease quicklye the grefe of the gowte. pag. 46.86. A wonderfull gyft giuen to Rats and dor∣mice. pag, 46.8. To cease ye bleeding of the nose. pag. 46.83. To preserue children from the falling sick∣nesse. pag. 46.8. One becam mad by playg with a whep. pag. 46.0. To helpe the  or the gowte. pag. 47.91. A straunge matter of a Woolues skinne. pag. 47.92. To make mice run into the fyre. pag. 47.93 To keepe clothes from mothes. pag. 48.94 To know which parte of ones lyfe is moste fortunate. pag. 48.95. To stay hayres from growing. pag. 48.96 A straunge secret to stop the bleeding of the nose. pag. 48.97. To know whether a woman be with child or not. pag. 49.98. They shalbe faint and geuen to swounding being borne at such a time. pag. 49.99. To make them slender that are grosse. pag. 49.100. The Table of the third booke. TO helpe a Horse of the Coughe. pag. 50.1. The loyal loue of the Turtle Dowue. pag. 50.2. To knowe in what quarter it is best for one to dwell in. pag. 50.3. A woonderfull thing of a woman tormen∣ted. pag. 51.4. Wytchery or Sorcery put away. pa. 51.5. A straunge thing of Moules or woontes. pag. 51.6. preyge of wars scarsenes or plague. pag. 52.7. The signe of death of a sick body. pa. 52.8. To help the Cough or shortnes of breath. pag. 52.9. A sure remedy for a fellon. pag. 52.10 To help chapt handes. pag. 53.11. That Horses shall not be hurt with shoo∣ing. pag. 53.12. A straunge thing of a Ferre tree. pa. 53.13. A good time to fall syck in. pag. 53.14. To heale the sores or postules of the head. pag. 53.15. One foretode the death of one that was sck by Astrologye. pag. 53.16. To purge the head and gooms, and to fasten the teeth. pag. 54.17. A straunge medicine to helpe the blody flux. pag. 54.18. To confyrme the memorye. pag. 55.19. To make no woolues enter into any towne pag. 55.20.
Things throwne to a certaine well, was conuerted into a stone. pag. 55.21 To know whether one shall fynde the par∣tye at home or not. pag. 55.22. An excellent property of the sapher. pag. 56 23. To bewray whether a woman be paynted or not. pag. 56.24. Tokens of the murryan or death of catell. pag. 56.25. Tyberuis the Emperour did see as Cats doo in the night. pag. 57.26. A preseruatiue from the plague. pag. 57.27. To make a meruelous hedge. pag. 57.28. A woonderfull of the Elephauntes. pag. 57.29. To quicken forgetfull persons. pag. 58.30. A notable water for the eyes. pag. 58.31. The threescore and thirde yeare of ones age a part daungerous time. pag. 58.32. An excellent remedye for the tooth ache. pag. 59.33. They that are borne at a certaine tyme, shal haue paines in their stones. pag. 59.34 A true medicine for laenes. pag. 59.35 They shall haue a specyall marke in there face, that are borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 59.36. Thinges that feares Lions. pag. 59.37 To keepe Pigions safe from Cattes. pag. 60.38. To make any place safe from woolues and flyes. pag. 60.39 Good and euyll sygnes in a madde man. pag. 60.40. To procure a good stomack. pag. 60.41. A straunge waye to let Fleas from bree∣ding. pag. 60.42. To make the counterfeyte Mandrag. pag. 61.43. To keepe handes from feeling any colde. pag. 61.44. To resyst venome or poyson. pag. 61.45. Testemonies of death by the Planettes. pag. 62.46. To make a woman speedely to be delyue∣red. pag. 62.47. A rare secrete for consuming the webbe in the eye. pag. 62.48. A speciall medicyne for swounding. pag. 62.49. Toens of deafes by Astrologye. pag. 63.50. A precious thing for swelling of the throte. pag. 63.51. The Kings Eell, helped by a woonder∣full meane. pag. 63.52. A straunge thing to ryse them that haue the falling sicknes. pag. 65.53. To auoyde the stone or grauell. pag. 65.54. To make beyonde sea Azure. pag. 65.55. To make Pease leape out of the Potte. pag. 65.56. To mae Hens to lay great Egges and of∣ten. pag. 65.57. To knowe whether they feare needles or not. pag. 65.58. For them that bee much geuen to sleepe. pag. 66.59. A pleasaunt oyle of Cloues. pag. 66.60. A straunge curing of the falling sycknesse. pag. 66.61. A woonderfull thing passing all credyte. pag. 67.62. Eeles breedes in cleāsed Ponds. pag. 68.63 To make a Bull tame. pag. 68.64. An excellent propertye of the Nettle. pag. 68.65. Good and euill signes in a mudde man. pag. 68.66. Astrologycall demonstrations of death. pag. 68.67. A notable medicine for breaking the winde in the bellye. pag. 68.68. A speciall helpe for any ache. pag. 69.69. They that be borne at a certaine time, will be weake in the act of generation. pag. 69.70. A notable remedye for the stone. pag. 69.71. A straunge thing like a black Birde, wyl breede of Sage. pag. 69.72. To make that as shall not stray abrode. pag. 70.73. When and where to get Pearles. pag. 70.74. Fleas and Lyes leaus sicke persons before their death. pag. 70.75.
An excellēt medicine for the gowt. pa. 70.76 o draw water from Wine. pag. 70.77. A notable medicine to heale lame members. pag. 70.78. To styll a most hotte water. pag. 71.79. The maruellous knowledge of Hartes. pag. 71.80 A Woman longed to eate of her husbands flesh. pag. 71.81. Leprous faces cured. pag. 72.82. They shall be hy minded, strong, & famd for their strength and lyberality, that are borne at a certaine tyme. pag 72.83. An caste way to stynche bloud. pa. 72.84. A sure remedy to put away etters or ring∣woormes. pag. 73.85. Excellent Pylles that helpes the headache, brings gladnes, and are good for the eye∣syght. . pag. 73.86. A Chylde borne at a certaine tyme shall be hyndred in his speech or tōgue. pa. 73.87 A man dyd barke lyke hounds. pa. 74.88. The eyes of young Swallowes put out, wyll see againe by a maruellous meanes. pag 74.89. To prouoke sleepe. pag. 74.90. A perfect waye to heale lame members. pag. 74.91. It was a maruelous offence with the E∣giptians to kyll a Cat. pag. 75.92. To keepe Harnes or Yron from rusting. pag. 75.93. They shall haue ryches without labor, that are borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 75.94. A notable oyle for the gowte. pag. 75.95. An excellent thing to keepe one safe from pyson. pag. 76.96. A thing to make one sleepe presently. pag. 76.97. A rare secrete to cease bleeding. pag. 76.98. To draw out a toothe with ease and with∣out any instrument. pag. 78.99. A sure medicine for them that bee costy . pag. 78.100. The Table of the fourth booke. TO make Dwale that wyll cause one to sleepe, whyles they are cut, whereby they shall feele no payne al the while. pag. 79.1. They that be borne at a certaine tyme, wyll haue griefs in their noses. &c. pag. 79.2. A precious thing to breake the stone. pag. 79.3. To make a combe that wyll helpe heade ache. pag. 80.4. A Ryng procuryng the vertue of strres. pag. 80.5. A straunge help for the pains of the throte. pag. 80.6. An excellent thing for the gowte. pa. 80.7. To make Yron of the cullour of Brasse. pag. 81.8. What Horsses are deafe and doom. pa. 81.9 To keepe Harnes or Yron from rusting. pag. 81.10. To know whether one com to deceyue thee or meane well or not. pag. 82.11. To loose the belly. pag. 82.12. The good effect of deafenes in an ague, and bleeding at the nose. pag. 82.13. A diuine medicine for the pluresie. pa. 82.14 A straunge waye to keepe a woman from hauing a chyld with a Hare lyp. pa. 83.15. To destroy any Impostue. pag. 83.16. To knowe Astrologicallye where any dis∣ease is eyther in the body or in the minde. pag. 83.17. A Queen droonke at one draught, the va∣lue of two hundreth and fyftie thousande pounde. pag. 84.18. The straunge propertye of a Fygge tree. pag. 84.19. The excellent vertue of Uarueyne in hel∣ping the falling sycknes. pa. 84.20. A Chylde borne in a certayne constellation, wyll be chiefe of his brethren. pag. 84.21. A notable waye to put away the paynes of saldng or burning with gunne powder. pag. 85.22. To make syluer Plate fayre and whyte. pag. 85.23. A sure preseruatiue from the Plague. pag. 85.24. A notable vertue of Pyony, in curing the falling sycknes. pag. 86.25. Astrologicalles tokens of death of the sick. pag. 86.26. A rare waye to make a woman be spedilye delyuered. pag. 86.27.
To drawe out the Oyle of Cynamom. pag. 86.28. To plucke out a rotten or aking tooth with ease. pag. 87.29. An excellent proofe whether one that hath the plague shall escape or not. pag. 87.30. The place where the Censors of Uenys syt, is free from flyes. &c. pag. 87.31. The first Chylde borne at a certayne tyme, wyll be a boye. pag. 88.32. A sure medicine to take away the greatest & eldest paine of the head yt is. pag. 88.33. A perfect medicine to kyll woormes in the belly. pag. 88.34. A daungerous tyme for the syck. pa. 88.35. The excellent vertue of golde. pag. 89.36. The nature of the water or goomme of the vine. pag. 89.37. The sygnes of death of such as haue a con∣sumption. pag. 89.38. An excellent Electuary preseruing lyfe, and hindring olde age. pag. 89.39. A Lampe without fyre to geue lyght in the nyght. pag. 90.40. Excellent vertues of the Nauell stryng. pag. 91.41. Golde found in vines. pag. 91.42. To knowe what place is best to dwell in. pag. 91.43. Women lyke to be barren that are borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 92.44. To make barren trees fruitful. pag. 92.45. A straunge waye to put awaye the quarten ague. pag. 92.46. That Gnates shall not trouble them that sleepes. pag. 93.47. Troubles and debates what day they shall happen. pag. 93.48. An excellent waye to staye the Fluxe. pag. 93.49. To cause a woman bee spedilye delyuered. pag. 93.50. A woonderfull medicine in the tyme of pe∣stilence. pag. 93.51. To keepe one from being bytten with a mad dog. pag. 94.52. To helpe the griefes or stitches in the side. pag. 95.53. To see terrible and fearefull Dreames. pag. 95.54. The howre of Uenus good to take iourney in. pag. 95.55. To draw out woormes out of the stomack. pag. 95.56. A great token of death when the Moone is nye the Sunne. &c. pag. 95.57 An excellēt medicine for paines of the hart. pag. 96.58. For the gowte and swellings of the ioynts. pag. 96.59. A straunge helping of the Swyne pockes. pag. 96.60. A perfecte medicine for the bloody fluxe. pag. 97.61. A rare helpe for the crmpe. pag. 97.62. They that are borne at a certayne tyme, shal fall from some hye place. &c. pag. 97.63. To cure the Dropsie. pag. 97.64. The great vertues of Eybright. pag. 97.65 To pluck vp a Cankar by the rootes. pag. 98.66. To knowe whether a woman be barren or not. pag. 98.67. To make Letters of the cullour of what mettal you rub the same withal. pa. 99.68 To helpe the red & pympled face. pa. 99.69. To knowe whether the dropsie be hotte or colde. pag. 99.70. To knowe whether the sycke shall dye of that sicknesse or not. pag. 99.71. An horible murder bewrayed by young Swallowes. pag. 100.72. For them that can not holde theyr water. pag. 100.73. A sygne of recouery or health. pag. 100.74. Significations of dreames. pag. 100.75. To make a Swoorde haue a sharpe edge. pag. 101.76. To make that Antes go not vp on trees. pag. 101.77. A chylde borne at a certaine tyme, is lyke to be blinde. pag. 101.78. To helpe the Reme. pag. 101.79. To conserue youth. pag. 102.80. Thinges prospers not after the woordes of some. pag. 102.81. To cease the Hyckop. pag. 102.82. Chyldren borne in the earthquake. What followes. pag. 102.83. The nature of Sperma ceti. pag. 103.84.
They that are borne in a certayne constella∣tion shal haue impedune in their tongue. pag. 103.85. To cure the dropsie. pag. 103.86. Signes when a woman with two childrē, is lyke to lose one. pag. 103.87. To helpe or ease a hotte or colde gowte. pag. 103.88. The making of the flowre of oyntmentes. pag. 104.89. Signes of death by Astrology. pa. 105.90. A perfect way to cure ye Splen. pa. 105.91 Tokens of health in a sick body. pa. 105.92. To destroy a Carbuncle. pag. 105.93. To make y• blac sea coale soft. pa. 106.94. To helpe the stone. pag. 106.95. A straunge example of a chylde borne with∣out a mouth. pag. 106.96. The Wyfe shall dye before the Husbande. pag. 107.97. To helpe the Dropsie. pag. 107.98. To know perfect Bale. pa. 107.99. To help the falling sycknes. pag. 107.100. ¶ The Table of the fyft booke. TO make a Mare bring forth a Fale of dyuers cullours. pag. 108.1. To helpe the stone and the Dropsie. pag. 108.2. A Woolfe feares to go in  wayes. pag. 108.3. They that are borne in a certayne constel∣lation, shall neuer marry. pag. 108.4. A helpe for the head ache. pag. 109.5. A water to prouoke sleepe. pag. 109.6. To destroye an Impostume in the head. pag. 109.7. Signifycations of dreames. pag. 109.8. To cause softe heairs to grow on the chyn. pag. 110.9. A straunge medicine for the swellynges. pag. 110.10. To see true dreames. pag. 110.11. A helpe for the falling sycknes. pa. 110.12. One borne at a certaine time, shall dye a na∣turall death. pag. 110.13. A precious helpe for the Rem. pa. 111.14. To preserue youth. pag. 111.15. An excellent Gargane to cleanse the head and the breast. pag. 111.16. The syck party shall escape death without all hope. pag. 112.17. To cure perfectlye the blacke Iaundyes. pag. 112.18. To keepe Chyldren from breeding of Lyce. pag. 112.19. The Cocke reioyceth contrary to all other Byrds or Beasts. &c. pag. 113.20. A Chylde borne at a certaine tyme wyl die of yron. pag. 113.21. To forbyd the engendring of the Impostu∣mation of the stomack. pag. 113.22. To restore syght to the blind. pag. 113.23. A Woman helped of the moother with the roote of Bryony. pag. 113.24. A straunge waye to put awaye Wartes. pag. 114.25. A maruelous thing of a Cockes Egge. pag. 114.26. A Chylde borne at a certaine time wyll be hangd. pag. 114.27. An excellent purginge of the head. pag. 114.28. Blacke seges an euyll sygne. pag. 114.29. A notable medicine for the Collyck, Strā∣gury and the stone. pag. 115.30. To breede Childrens teeth asly. pa. 115.31 A straūge nature of the Walnut. pa. 115.32 To keepe water hotte without fyre. pag. 115.33. To take madnes from Dogs. pag. 116.34. To keepe a Chyld safe vntyll the due tyme of the byrth, a rare secrete. pag. 116.35. A straunge thing to put awaye Wartes. pag. 116.36. Sygnification that a Chyld wyl be hangd. pag. 116.37. To preserue one from head ache. pa. 117.38 A straunge medicine for the gowte. pag. 117.39. To make a hotte loafe leape. pag. 117.40. A notable oyle of Saint Iohns Woort. pag. 117.41. That no Flyes shall touch any Beasts in the hotte wether. pag. 118.42. One borne at a certaine tyme wyll dye by the commaundement of the Iudge. pag. 118.43.
To kyll and heale any Caner. pag. 118.44 A precious water for mad men. pa. 118.45. They shall neuer lose theyr sences nor vn∣derstanding, borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 119.46. To make a glasse with water burn a thing nye to it. pag. 119.47. To make a sheepe follow one. pag. 119.48. To know what one shall see in his dreame. pag. 120.49. A straunge way to help the quarteyn ague. pag. 121.50. To see the Sunne Eclipsed without hur∣ting of the eyes. pag. 121.51. Excellent vertues of plates of gold worne. pag. 121.52. A Chylde borne at a certayne tyme, is lyke to perish by the hands of many. pag. 122.53. To preserue the stomacke from any paine. pag. 122.54. A precious water that breakes the stone in the reynes and in the blader. pag. 122.55. Significations of dreames. pag. 122.56. To make Copper melt quickly. pa. 123.57. To keepe Goates frō straying. pag. 123.58. To keepe Corne from hurtfull stormes. pag. 123.59. They wyll dye in captiuitie that are borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 123.60. An excellent oyntment. pag. 123.61. A maruelous waye to helpe any paines of the throate. pag. 124.62. A precious medicine for a redde face. pag. 124.63. A burning candle founde in an olde tombe. pag. 124.64. What tyme is best to dygge or make a wel. pag. 125.65. A notable vertue of Basyll. pag. 125.67. The great vertue of Coriandar. pa. 125.68. A sygne that the sicke wyll dye the nexte yeare after. pag. 125.69. To helpe a red pympled face. pag. 126.70. For the falling sycknes. pag. 126.71. A daungerous thing to suffer a venemous woorme or a mad Dog to lyue after one is hurt by the fame. pag. 126.72. To make Scorpions come into one place. pag. 126.73. One borne at a certaine tyme, wyll dye in prison. pag. 127.74. A notable help for the Splen. pag. 127.75. A precious oyle of Balme. pag. 127.76. An excellent proued plaster, to destroye any Impostume, stytche, or swelling. pag. 127.77. Astrologicall lykelyhoods when the sycke cannot be cured, but with great expences. pag. 129.78. The great vertue of Egshels. pag. 129.79. The great vertue of Sugar. pag. 129.80. A straunge thing of a young Wenche. pag. 129.81. To decke a balde head with heairs. pag. 130.82. A Beast shal neuer conceyue. pag. 130.83. A Dogge that takes his disease of a man ought to be buried. pag 130.84. To cease the noyse of Frogs. pag. 130.85. The whyt thorne is neuer touched with lyghtning. pag. 131.86. Chyldren borne at a certaine tyme wyll be drownde. pag. 131.87. A present helpe for the stone. pag. 131.88. To make one looke young a great whyle. pag. 131.89. To let heair from growing. pag. 131.90. To make one laxatiue. pag. 131.91. They are lyke to haue the falling sicknes that are borne at a certayne time. pag. 132.92. That Fetters hurte not young Beastes. pag. 132.93. A notable medicine for the falling sycknes. pag. 132.94. Garlicke brought out a Serpent out of a man. pag. 132.95. A stone founde in a Swallowe, helpes the falling sycknes. pag 132.96. To knowe if a woman be conceaued. pag. 133.97. Who shall be poore. pag. 133.98. To beawtify the face. pag. 133.99. To knowe whether the sicke shall dye or lyue. pag. 133.100.
¶ The Table of the syxt booke. TO turne anye beast into a whyte cul∣lour. pag. 134.1. A precious thinge to expell the stone. pag. 134.2. To knowe whether a Dreame be good or not. pag. 134.3. A quick cure for the Hyckop. pag. 135.4. To fynde out him that hath doan a mur∣ther. pag. 135.5. To know whether water be in Wine or not. pag. 136.6. Planteyn is meruelous for the Plague. pag. 136.7. To know a liuely or quick house. pa. 136.8. Diuers beasts, hates diuers colloured gar∣mentes. pag. 136.9. They that be borne at a certayne time wyll dye in the countrey. pag. 136.10. To heale the web in the eye. pag. 136.11. A proued oyle which healeth the dropsye. pag. 136.12. A straunge thinge of a Butchers wyfe. pag. 137.13. They that falles syck at a certaine time are not like to escape. pag. 137.14. To take the hayre away, and that it growe no more. pag. 138.15. To catche easelye Rauens or Crowes. pag. 138.16. Byrdes leaues their singing or are syck, according to the Starres. pag. 138.17. The chylde borne at a certaine time wylbe imprisoned. pag. 139.18. A sure and prooued medicyne for the tooth∣ache. pag. 139.19 To take awaye wrincles, and spots in the face. pag. 139.20 An excellēt way to take foxes. pag. 139.21 What women doo hurt with their looking. pag. 140.22. What dead bodyes remaine vncorrupt. pag. 140.23. They shall dye among straungers, that are borne in a certaine constellacion. pa. 140.24 To take the bloud or readnes out of the eyes. pag. 140.25. They shall neuer haue the Collick, that v∣seth a certaine confection described. pag. 140.26. To make wood or bones red. pag. 141.27 Sygnifycations of Dreames. pag. 141.28. To make lagging or hāging paps round. pag. 141.29. A woonderfull thing of a Tode and a spi∣der. pag. 141.30. A notable and approued powder for brea∣king  consuming of the stone. pa. 142.31. A great vertue for the eyes, of the Oyle of Paper. pag. 143.32. Signifycations that the sick party wyl kyl him selfe. pag. 143.33. A spreete came to M. Brutus. pa. 143.34. The great vertue of Egremony for woūds pag. 143.35. Money receyued in Uenus, howe it wyll be spent. pag. 144.36. To ryd one of an auncient dymnes of sight. pag. 144.37. Whether a woman bee conceaued or not. pag. 144.38. A notable medicine for the stone. pa. 144.39 A rare and true medicine for the tooth ach. pag. 145.40. Who shall haue few chyldren. pag. 145.41. To consume Wartes, a straunge thing. pag. 145.42. Myce wyll make Elephantes refuse theyr meate. pag. 145.43. Who shall dye in pryson. pag. 145.44. A notable medicine for to heale the Stran∣gury. pag. 146.45. To make a woman bring forth her childe without paine. pag. 146.46. To stop the bloudy Fluxe. pag. 146.47. To proue whether a woman be with chyld or not. pag. 146.48. A Crowe wyll dye, if he eate of the meate whereof the Woolfe hath eaten before. pag. 147.49. The great power and vertue of a Baye tree. pag. 147.50. That Myce eate not wrytten Papers. pag. 147.51. The howre of Mars is to be abhorred. pag. 147.52. To make Cattell safe from diseases. pag. 147.53. A straunge matter of the skynne of a Ly∣on. pag. 148.54.
Colewoortes and Rew ought not to bee sowne nye together. pa. 148.55. A myraculous thing for the destroying of woorms in man or beast. pa 148.56. They that bee borne at the conunction of the Sun and Moone. pag. 149.57. The maruelous vertue of the seedes of O∣culus Christi. pag. 149.58. A maruelous straunge waye to destroye Wartes. pag. 149.59. To make the Letters of the cullour of pa∣per. pag. 150.60. A woonderful matter of a woman trans∣formed into a man. pag. 150.61. What chyldren are lyke to haue short life. pag. 151.62. A notable thing to heale olde sores. pag. 151.63. An excellent helpe for the yallowe Iaun∣dyes. pag. 151.64. When the sick is to be feared. pag. 152.65. What kind of Chycken coms of the Egge. pag. 152.66. To make Amber as soft as clay. pa. 152.67 The force of olde lether in expelling Ser∣pents. pag. 152.68. A precious thing for the Strangury. pag. 153.69. When the sycke personne is lyke to dye. pag. 153.70. A notable medicine for the Sciatica. pag. 153.71. A good lesson for Phisitions. pag. 153.72. The loue of a Lyzard to a man. pa. 153.73. A notable medicine to breake the stone. pag. 154.74. Who shall go farre and long iourneyes. pag. 154.75. A straunge thing for them that haue lost their voyce. pag. 154.76. An excellent thing for the Palsey and the gowte. pag. 155.77. To heale the Sciatica. pag. 155.78. To make a lyght to make the beholders yallowe. pag. 155.79. The straunge nature of the dunge of a Woolfe. pag. 155.80. To plucke out thornes, an excellent thing. pag. 156.81. A maruelous Hystorie of a Lady that had by Imagination a Chyld lyke an Ethy∣opian. pag. 156.82. The straunge propertie of certain flowres. pag. 157.83. thought to be dead with the eating of Helocks. pag. 157.84. To take away the spotte in the eye in three dayes. pag. 158.85. Things askt in the howres of Saturne or Mars, is a suspicion of euyl. pa. 158.86. A maruelous way to helpe women, weak∣ned their monthly disease. pag. 158.87. The straunge breeding of Synnewes. pag. 158.88. The great dyuersitye betweene the leaues and seedes of Docks. pag. 159.89. To amende sowrenes or tartnes of Wine. pag. 159.90. A straunge medicine to helpe all Rewmes, distyllations and watrines of the eyes. pag. 159.91. A Chylde borne in a certayne constellation, wyll be mighty, wyse, and a great Phi∣losopher. pag. 159.92. To gette a stone that wyll cure the dropsie. pag. 159.93. A maruelous medicine to kyll the Cankar. pag. 160.94. To destroy Tetiers and Ringwoormes. pag. 160.95. To breake the stone. pag. 160.96. To dryue away Crowes or Byrdes from Corne that is sowne. pag. 160.97. A straūge helpe for the Collick. pa. 160.98. What people are euyll. pag. 161.99. When beares shall aryse in iourneyes. pag. 161.100. The Table of the seuēth Book. A Helpe for all griefes of the bladder. pag. 162.1. A notable water for breaking of the stone. pag. 162.2. The straunge breeding of Barnacles. pag. 163.3. To helpe them that are bewytched. pag. 163.4. Mony delyuered in ye howre of the Moone. pag. 163.5. Great vertues of Bettony. pag. 163.6.
To know whether one that is sick, wyl liue or dye. pag. 164.7. A great cure of one that was swolne. pag. 164.8. A good warning for purginge or letting of bloud. pag. 164.9. Good knowledge for the certaintye of the winde. pag. 165.10. A straunge helpe for the gowte. pa. 165.11. A straunge thing of Harpe stringes. pag. 165.12 To cease the swelling of the yarde. pag. 165.13. One fortold by Astrologie, the speedy death of one that was sicke. pag. 165.14. For the Stone an easie medicine. pag. 166.15. That wrytinges shall not be read, vnlesse the same be put first in the water. pag. 166.16. A notable medicine for an olde paine in the head. pag. 166.17. To get the Tode stone. pag. 167.18. The straunge generating of Upers. pag. 167.19. To prouoke the Flowres and after bur∣then. pag. 168.20. An incredible helpe for the falling sycknes. pag. 168.21. To cease the barking of Dogs. pag. 168.22 Soes that wyl neuer be worn. pa. 168.23 A straunge thing to stoppe the bloud. pag. 168.24. The fyre shall not burne a thing cast into it. pag. 169.25. Feare or daunger in long iourneyes. pag. 16.26. A myraculous thing in Ireland. pa. 169.27 Whether the sicke shall escape or not. pag. 169.28. To make a greene that wyl last pa. 170.29 To make Letters of golde. pa. 170.30. To know when Wheate wyll be chape or deere. pag. 170.31. The Lyon is more fierce against men▪ then women. pag. 171.32. The great vertue of nettle seede. pa. 171.33. To put a Egge into a narrowe mouthed gasse. pag. 171 3. To roast a dysh of Btter. pag. 171.35. To put awaye the tooth ache, a straunge thing. pag. 172.36. They that are borne at a certaine time, wyl be possest with Deuyls. pag. 172.37. A straunge well. pag. 172.38. To handle fyre without harme. pa. 172.39. An excellent tyme to take medicine. pag. 173.40. An excellent thing to cleare the sight. pag. 173.41. To bring Pigions to a Doouehouse. pag. 173.42. To make an hearb like Dragōs. pa. 174.43 To keepe Hens safe from Foxes. pa. 174.44 To helpe barrennes. pag. 174.45 To knowe in what case a Shippe with the men in her is, being absent. pag. 174.46. For swellings in a sore breast. pag. 175.47. To helpe a wound in the hand. pa. 175.48 A speciall medicine to strengthen the back. pag. 175.49. For sore throates. pag. 175.50. They are diuellishe that are borne at a cer∣taine tyme. pag. 175.51. That Beastes be not bytten of the blynde Mowse. pag. 175.52. A good lesson to be obserued in Beastes that are with young. pag. 176.53. Who are lyke to see true dreames. pag. 176.54. A notable oyntment for ny payne in the head. pag. 176.55. An excellent water for hearing. pa. 177.56. A Wren wyll turne at the fyre by it selfe. pag. 177.57. To make fyne pictures and vesselles with smal coast. pag. 177.58. When the mother shall be of short lyfe. pag. 178.59. To take awaye the hardnes of Womens pps. pag. 178.60. To helpe mad en. pag. 178.61. A precious thing for burning. pag. 178.62. To cause one make water. pag. 178.63. To hatche Chyckes without a Hen. pag. 179.64. The straunge vertue of the Medler. pag. 179.65. That toasted or sodden flesh seeme bloody. pag. 179.66.
Of quicke and slowe deliuering out of pry∣son. pag. 179.67. To heale a scalde head. pag. 180.68. To destroy Wartes. pag. 180.69. A Dogge taught to do the offyce of a ser∣uaunt. pag. 180.70. A most extreeme famine. pag. 180.71. To dryue forth sande out of the reynes. pag. 181.72. To cause speedy delyueraunce of a Chylde. pag. 181.73. That scalding be not seene. pag. 181.74 To drawe out a tooth easly. pag. 181.75. To put away freckles in the face. pag. 182.76. To helpe the Elfe cake in the syde. pa. 182.77. To helpe shaking hands. pag. 182.78. To know a ryght Tode stone. pa. 182.79. To make that Garlicke shall not smell. pag. 182.80. An easie medicine for the gowte. pa. 183.81. An argument of death. pa. 183.82. To make a Woman be speedely delyuered. pag. 183.83. To know who shalbe gelded. pag. 184.84. To make that no Dogge bark at you. pag. 184.85. To put away the quarten ag. pa. 184.86 To helpe olde and incurable gowe. pag. 184.87. A notable medicine for the falling sicknes. pag. 184.88. An excellent oyntment for the gowte. pag. 185.89. To destroy an Itche. pag. 185.90. To make a candle that wyll not be put out. pag. 185.91. An excellent oyle for the Synewes and ach of the ioyntes. pag. 185.92. To bring woormes and hurtfull things in a garden, into one place. pag. 186.93. A token of the fathers short life. pa. 186.94. To helpe paynes and deafnes of the eares. pag. 186.95. A proued water to heale the Fystula. pag. 186.96. That horses be liuely & quick. pag. 187.97. To make a horse pysse. pa. 187.98. A maruelous & precious water. pa. 187.99. For winde or sounding in the eares. pag. 188.100. The Table of the eyght booke. TO make vineger presently. pag. 189.1. The straunge propertie of the Woolfe. pag. 189.2. Deadlye wre betweene the Hawke and the Eagle. pag. 189.3. To take Byrdes that eates seedes that are sowne. pag. 189.4. An euyll howre to take iourney on the seas. pag. 189.5. Approued Pyls for the Palsey. pa. 190.6. A straunge thing of a woman with chylde. pag. 190.7. To turne whyte wine into red. pag. 190.8. A rare medicine for the cough. pag. 191.9. Who shall possesse greater rytches and ho∣nours, then their Auncestors. pa. 191.10. To cleare a dym syght. pag. 191.11. A maruelous medicine for woundes and sores. pag. 192.12. A straunge diuersitie betweene dead men, and dead women. pag. 192.13. The great vertue of Marygooldes. pag. 192.14. A rare thing to helpe the gowte. pa. 193.15. If one doo come or sende to thee in a good howre. pag. 193.16. To cause a speedy byrth of a Chylde. pag. 193.17. To knowe whether one that is sycke, wyll lyue or dye. pag. 193.18. To helpe them that be deaffe. pag. 193.19. To drawe out a toothe without any paine. pag. 194.20. A awe that no syck person shoulde drinke Wine. pag. 194.21. Whether any water be myxt with Wyne or not. pag. 194.22. To encrease Pigions in a Doouehouse. pag. 194.23. An excellent thing for deafnesse. pag. 14.24. One dyd foretell of the tyme of the death of one that was sycke, by Astrologie. pag. 194.25.
For ache in the bones or in any other place. pag. 195.26. They that bee gelded are neuer gowtie. pag. 196.27. A prowde and vaine glorious Emperour. pag. 196.28. It is not good to burie any too hastelye. pag. 196.29. A notable medicine for shortnes of breath. pag. 197.30. To breake the great heate of Wine in the vessell. pag. 197.31. To keepe any parte of the body from colde. pag. 197.32. To keepe cloathes & bookes from moaths. pag. 198.33. To helpe a long continewed deafnesse. pag. 198.34. A precious powder to concerue the syght. pag. 198.35. To gette out the water out of swolne legs. pag. 198.36. Aqua vite good for the eyes. pag. 199.37. To ioygne or knyt wounds. pag. 199.38. A water more precious then golde. pag. 199.39. To cause a woman bee speedily delyuered. pag. 200.40. A blessed water for the gowte. pa. 200.41. To driue awaye Backes or Rearemyce. pag. 201.42. To knowe whether you shall obtaine that thing you hope for, or not. pag. 201.43. A present helpe for the toothache. pag. 201.44. To resolue the sorenes, and swellings of the throate. pag. 201.45. For the weaknes and paines in the backe. pag. 202.46. To make one syng cleare, and to haue a cleare voyce. pag. 202.47. The straunge property of mints. pa. 203.48 A daungerous howre to fall sycke in. pag. 203.49. To breake a tooth and to take awaye the paine. pag. 203.50 uido bonatus, learnedly foretold a great daunger to the Emperour, by his reuo∣lucion. pag. 203.51 A meruelous matter of a woman with chde. pag. 204.52. A child borne in a certaine time, wyll be a Shypman or a Sayler. pag. 205.53. A perfet helpe for the Gowte. pag. 205.54. To restore the deaffe to hearing. pa. 205.55. A notable thing to stop ye rewine. p. 206.56 To help the Pocks in the eyes. pa. 206.57 When the Phisitiō shall not profit the sick. pag. 206.58. To make a toothe to fall out by the roote. pag. 207.59. To restore one that is brought lowe pag. 207.60. A noble receate for the black Iaundyes. pag. 208.61. Bettonye is meruelous good for the gowte. pag. 208.62. An excellent thing for the pluresye and the stuffed stomack. pag. 208.63 To make gotes giue much milk. p. 209.64 He that is borne at a certaine time, wilbe a maister Carpenter. pag. 209.65. To cease the outragious paine of the gowt. pag. 209.66. A most approoued medicine for the Gowt. pag. 209.67. To catch Byrdes with your handes. pag. 209.68. To make a woman be speedelye deliuered. pag. 210.69. A true medicine for the Gowte. pa. 210.70 To kindle a Candle and to burne in the water. pag. 210.71. To make that a Ram shall not putte. pag. 211.72. A good howre to fall syck in. pag. 211.73. A present help for the tooth ache. pa. 211.74 A warranted medicine for the Gowte. pag. 211.75. A specyall medicine for all suddaine sick∣nesse. pag. 211.76. A straunge medicine for the yellow Iaun∣dye. pag. 211.77. To helpe the ad ache and swymming of the head. pag. 212.78. To make a Cock stowte to fight. p. 212.79 A straunge thing of Myce. pag. 212.80. For the Kinges Euell a rare thing. pag. 212.81. Who shalbe fortunate and happy. &c. pag. 212.82. A meruelous water to recouer the sight. pag. 213.83.
To make  light that neuer shall fayl. pag. 213.84. To make a swine follow one. pag. 214.85. What thing dryues away Bees. pag. 214.86. A good howre to take iourney in, for get∣ting of vnlooked profit. pag. 214.87. To stay the bleeding of the nose presently. pag. 214.88. That wrytinges appeare of the cullour of the paper, and not to be read vnlesse it bee holden against the fyre. pag. 214.89. To gylde Yron or Copper. pag. 215.90. To make an Eg very harde. pag. 215.91. To make a red Rose whyte. pag. 215.92. To seperate golde from any thing gylded. pag. 215.93. To knowe whether the sycke wyll lyue or dye: a straunge practize. pa. 216.94. To stay the bloody Fluxe. pag. 216.95. An easye plaster for the gowte, but of great effect. pag. 216.96. To destroye any Impostumation, and to auoyde the same. pag. 217.97. He that is borne in a certayne constellation, wyll be a good Phisition. pag. 217.98. A straung thing of a lytle Bird. pa. 218.99. He wyll dye in prison, that is borne at a certaine tyme. pag. 218.100. The Table of the nynth booke. THe woonderfull vertue of Egremony, in helping them that be poysoned. &c. pag. 219.1. A maruelous Oyle of Balme for tremb∣ling and the Palsey, and for helping the memory. pag. 219.2. The hoofe of a certayne Beast, wyll cure perfectly the falling Euell, a maruelous thing. pag. 220.3. A proued thing for the spytting of bloud. pag. 221.4. A precious and an easie medicine for the Cauncle, Plague sore, Botch, Byle, &c. pag. 221.5. Tokens of death in the sycke person. pag. 221.6. Pottage that wyll helpe perfectly the yal∣low Iaundies. pag. 222.7. Serpents hates maruelously the Ah tree. pag. 222.8. Who wyll procure their owne enemytie. pag. 222.9. Ienuper beryes maruelous against poy∣sons. pag. 222.10. To trye whether precious stones be pure or not. pag. 222.11. A principall medicine for the bone ache. pag. 223.12. To helpe the paynes in the back. pa. 223.13 To catch Mowles or Woonts. pa. 223.14. To helpe the Fystula outward or inward. pag. 224.15. For them that haue surfeyted. pag. 224.16. To plucke away carnall and fleshly lust, a very straunge thing. pag. 224.17. For them that cannot eate. pag. 224.18. A present helpe for such as haue droonken poyson. pag. 224.19. To let heair from growing. pag. 225.20. The Lapwing foreshowes the great plen∣tie of Wine. pag. 225.21. A good howre to delyuer money in. pag. 225.22. A precious drinke which cureth the Fy∣stula. pag. 225.23. To make a woman bee delyuered inconty∣nent. pag. 226.24. To make a fayre cullour in the face. pag. 226.25. To make one heare againe. pa. 227.26. To make Copper or Brasse of the cullour of Syluer. pag. 227.27. That Serpents can not go out of the place where they are. pag. 227.28. Anger or enemities wyll come to them through money, that are borne at a cer∣tayne tyme. pag. 227.29. To heale a hollowe Ulcer. pag. 227.30. To seperate golde from any thing that is gylded. pag. 227.31. For them that can not heare. pag. 228.32. For the fundament that goeth forth. pag. 228.33. For bleaed eyes. pag. 228.34. A Harte can not abide the syght of a Ram. pag. 229.35. A straunge thing foretolde by a Chylde newly borne. pag. 229.36. A proued thing for the Palsey. pag. 230.37.
To helpe solne legs. pag. 230.38. What makes men be without the gowte. pag. 230.39. A straung cure of one bitten with a Scor∣pion. pag. 230.40. A myraculous oyle. pag. 231.41. To put a wryting into an Eg. pa. 232.42 Beast are according to the prporcion of the inwarde parts. pag. 232.3. He that is borne at a certaine time shal co∣sume his goods or come to pouerty or mi∣serye. pag. 233.44. The great vertue of Egrunoy. pag. 233 45. For the webbe or spot in the eye. pa. 233.46 The great vertue of Tormentyll. pag. 234.47. Who shalbe poore and a wretch. pag. 234.48. A good medicine for them that are shorte breathed. pag. 235.49. A straunge medicine for helping womens sore brestes. pag. 235.50, To helpe swolne armes, legges or . pag. 236.51. To helpe a stinking breath, a tryed medi∣cine. pag. 236.52. What daye is vnluckie to a childe borne. pag. 236.53. To destroy Wartes. pag. 236.54 To put away or consume a Wn. pag. 237.55. A snguler oyle to bewtyye the face. pag. 237.56. A notable medicine for ache or the Gowte. pag. 237.57. A precious water for eyes. pag. 238.58 Who shall dye a fowle or euyll death. pag. 238.59. To take Wartes cleane away. pag. 239.60 The coddes that are swolne. pag. 239.61 To breake a Byle, Botch, or a Fellon. pag. 239.62. A notable secret for all incurable aches. pag. 239.63. For swolne or sore throates, a rare remedy. pag. 240.64. For a great heate and pricking in the eyes. pag. 240.65. He that is borne at a certaine time, shall neuer dye an euill death. pag. 241.66 A wonderfull drinke for brusynges. pag. 241.67. To driue forth the stone in the bladder. pag. 241.68. To helpe the Palsey. pag. 241.69. An excellent remedye for many deseases. pag. 242.70. For the strangury, a straunge medicine. pag. 242.71. A prooued medicine for the Sciatica. pag. 242.72. The great vertue of Sugar, for eyes. pag. 242.73. They that sets forward to the Sea, in a certaine hower are like to be drownde. pag. 243.74. For to helpe deafnes, a tryed medicine. pag. 244.75. The making of an excellent Aqua vite. pag. 244.76. To make sweete water forth with. pag. 245.77. A precious oyle for cold aches. pa. 245.78. To auoyde the dropsye water. pa. 245.79. To make a Caon bring vp young Chyc∣kens. pag. 246.80. A learned Astronomer foretolde one of his death. pag. 246.81 A straunge longing of a woman with childe. pag. 247.82. A meruelous straunge helpe for swolne legges of beasts or horses. pag. 247.83. To put away any spottes or steyninges. pag. 248.84. To make any byrd to haue white fethers. pag. 248.85. A maruelous straunge helpe for the stone. pag. 248.86. An excellent ryed secret for diuers inward greefes. pag. 249.87. To make Corrall by arte. pag. 250.88. An excellent thing for deafes. pag. 250.89 To deliuer a woman of a dead Chylde. pag. 250.90. To make an Apple mooue. pag. 250.91 To kyll all the fleas in a chamber. pag. 251.92. A Lady swallowed pins without harme. pag. 251.93.
That Roses smell more pleasantlye and grow the better. pag. 251.94. A notable oyle wherewith one got much money. pag. 251.95. An excellent sweete water. pag. 252.96 To make that Chyckens be hatched of di∣uers culloures. pag. 253.97. To make that Horse nor sheepe shall goe forward though you beate them. p. 253.98 The age of certaine Beaes and Byrdes. pag. 253.99. The great vertue of the water that comes out of the Byrtch tree. pag. 253.100. The Table of the tenth Booke. A Sraunge thing of the Myrt tree and the Oliue tree. pag. 254.1. A sure helpe for the moother pa. 254.2 Pygeons defended from the spar Hawke. their enemy. pag. 254.3. An easy helpe for the Gowt. pag. 255.4 A learned prediction of an Astronomer. pag. 255.5. The great vertue of the Adamant stone,  or the Dropsie. pag. 255.6. A myraculous thing of them that be mur∣thered. pag. 255.7. The great vertue of Amber, for the wtri∣nes of the eyes. pag. 256.8. A woman went with a dead Childe aboue fowre yeares. pag. 256.9. To make one loath wine. pag. 256.10 How beastes chaunces to become ame. pag. 257.11. To make a white and delicate skine. pag 257.12. One did pysse a knotted barlye strawe. pag. 257.13. To helpe lame members. pag. 257.14 A straunge thge to helpe the tooth ache. pag. 257.15. A notable helpe for the memory. pa. 258.16 A rare helpe for the quarten ague. pag. 258.17. For the aundse and the dropsye. pag. 258.18. To part any glasse a sunder. pag. 259.19. To help the dropsye, a tryed thinge. pag. 259.20. A straunge discription of the Besaar stone. pag. 259.21. A water which certainelye wyll heale the Fystul. pag. 264.22 A Candle that will not be put out with the winde. pag. 265.23. The getting of the stones out of younge Swallowes, and of their excellent vertues. pag. 265.24. A meruelous straunge wae to breede Eeles. pag. 265.25. The Uine agrees not with the Baye tree. pag. 266.26. An Image of golde helpes the head ache. pag. 266.27. To cullour brystles. pag. 266.28. To make the teeth fal easily out. pa. 267.29 To destroy the web in the eye. pa. 267.30 Aqua vite, with Sugar and pure whyte bread, is good for grosie bodyes. pa. 267.31 To make a Candle burne vnder the water▪ pag. 268.32. To make a Ring leape by it selfe. pag. 268.33. To make yron soft. pag. 268.34. A straung longing of a woman with child. pag. 268.35. A precious water distylled of Centorye. pag. 269.39. To make a bladder ape frō place to place. pag. 269.37. A notable water for bewtifying the face. pag. 270.38. To fastē things hard together. pag. 270.39 An Angelyke water for the eyes. pag. 271.40. An excellent water, called the golden wa∣ter. pag. 27.41. To heale incurable vlcers. pag. 274.42. For the great heate of the vryne. pag. 275.43. A notable and excellent Balme. pa. 275.44 To make steele as soft as paste. pa. 277.45 A present helpe for the plague. pa. 277.46. To woonderful Stones. pag. 278.47. To make a Stone that wyll urne, by moystning it with spettle. pag. 280.48. To make an Egge ascende into the ayre. pag. 281.49. A Glue that fastneth glasse together. pag. 281.50. To destroy Caterpyllers. pag. 283.51.
To make  in the . pag. 28.5. A daungerous time to fal  in. p. 282.53 To know a  stone. pag. 282.54 To destroye a  or Ringworme. pag. 283.55. To make a Candle of Ise to burne. pag. 283.56. Yf  fall syck at a certaine time, it syg∣nyfyes  sycknesse. pag. 183.57. A good  dredge powder. pa. 284.58 Euery woman doo not go a like tim with theyr children. pag. 284.59 An excellent thing for any ache. pa. 285.60 To haue Bea yse of once seting pag. 285.61. To help dim eyes. pa. 286.62. A most excellent oyle of balme, which wyll helpe all colde diseases. pag. 286.63 A straunge reuiuing of flyes. pag. 290.64. To hau Roses twyse in one Sommer. pag. 290.65. A straunge Herbe that keepes one from hunger. pag. 291.66 Uenemous bests driuen away. p. 291.67 To kyll mice. pag. 292.68. A  that helpes the gowt. pa. 292.69. To haue yllow Roses. pag. 292.70. That mice shal not eate Cheese. p. 292.71. A  which wyll show whether the syck wyll liue or dye. pag. 292.72 better to wash withall then sope. pag. 293.73. For womens breastes swolne or sore. pag. 293.74. For the Mrphew and scumines of the face. pag. 293.75. A preseruatiue against the Plague. pag. 294.76. To bringe Antes out of the grounde. pag. 294.77. To cause  to  Water, a straunge medicine. pag. 294.78. To keepe  from Weelles or ice. pag. 295.79. When you  see the Cuc, marke where your right foote dooth stande. &c. pag. 295.80. To make one soluble. pag. 295.81 The great age of Hartes. pag. 295.82 To glew fast together broken Glasses. pag. 296.83. For them that haue an extreame heate and burning Feuer. pag. 296.84. Who are not lyke to marry before they be thirtye yeeres of age. pag. 296.85. To knowe when fleshe is sodde enough. pag. 297.86. A meruelous thinge of Iuye . pag. 297.87. The ones of Hens consumes golde. pag. 298.88. To make fayre culloured hyre. pa. 298.89 A notable helpe for the gow. pa. 298.90. meruelous help for the head. pa. 298.91. A thing worth the marking. pa. 299.92. To know how many dayes olde the  is, a very straunge thing. pag. 299.93. A meruelous matter of a woman that was burye. pag. 299.94. To bring forth Medlers out of a Haw∣thorne. pag. 300.95. A straunge thinge of the lyttle byrde called the Kings fysher. pag. 300.96 A gyrdle that will keepe one from drow∣ning. pag. 300.97. A Ladie that makes flesh sooner to be sod. pag. 301.98. Poyson is discribed by a Partritche. pag. 302.99. To know where the winde wyll be. pag. 302.100. FINIS.
