C6342 12121736 54441
AN HISTORICAL AND Geographical Account OF THE MOREA, NEGROPONT, AND THE Maritime Places, AS FAR AS THESSALONICA. Illustrated with 42 Maps of the Coun∣tries, Plains, and Draughts of the Cities, Towns and Fortifications. Written in Italian by P. M. Coronelli, Geographer to the Republick of Venice. Englished by R. W. Gent. London, Printed for Matth. Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster-Hall, and W. Canning at his Shop in Vine-Court in the Middle Temple, 1687.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. Reader, THis Book having been Published in Italian in the Year 1685. by the Inge∣nious Coronelli, and the last Year in French with Additi∣ons, 'twas thought a Pre∣sent not unacceptable to give our Nation the Translation of it in English, which how performed here we leave to
thy candid Judgment. The Draughts of the Cities, Towns and Fortifications, having already received suffi∣cient Approbation. As to the Book it self, we dare promise the Reader Di∣version and Pleasure mixt with Profit, let his Genius be what it will. The Sons of Mars will with Warmth and Action read of the glorious Victories, and even envy the glittering Fame of those No∣ble Hero's that sleep in the Bed of Honour. The Poe∣tick Fancy will be diverted with the old Fictions, like sweet Flowers strewed over
the whole, and the grave Mythologist with their Mo∣rals. The Antiquary and Historian will find Enter∣tainment in the Melancholy∣pleasing Remains of past State and Glory, that were once the Scenes of the great∣est Performances the Mind of man joyned to active Bodies is capable of, and reflect on the Fate of human Affairs sub∣ject all to Time and Chance. The Naturalist will meet with the Descriptions of the Labours and Sports of Na∣ture, and find some Account of the hitherto puzling Tides of the Euripus. Nor will the
solid Mathematician lose his Time, but with satisfaction behold the Views of Cities, Plains of Fortifications, and Charts of Shores, Rocks and Seas: But we refer to the Book it self. Farewel.
An INDEX of the Draughts, Maps and Plains inserted in this Work, in the order that they ought to be pla∣ced. THE General Map of the Morea Page 1. Patras p. 47. Castel Tornese p. 52. Navarin ibid. Modon p. 55. Plain of Coron p. 61. Plain of Coron, with the Incampments p. 74. Two Prospects of Coron ibid. Standard taken before Coron ibid. Horse-tails taken with the Standard ibid. Calamata, and the Battle before it p. 84. Plain of Zarnata p. 87. Profil of Zarnata ibid. Height of Zarnata ibid. Plain of Chielefa p. 88.
Plain of Passara p. 92. Mysitra or Sparta p. 93. Plain of the Ruins of Maina p. 102 Cape of Matapan ibid. View of Malvasia p. 111. Two Views of Napoli di Romania p. 117. Isle of Corfu p. 132. Plain of Santa Maura p. 147. Santa Maura, with the little Isles round it p. 149. View of Cephalonia and the Chart of the Isle p. 151. Fortress of Asso p. 157. Isle of Zant, and Fortress of Zant p. 162. Port of Cerigo and Plain of Cerigo p. 179. Megara p. 190. Port Lion p. 195. City of Athens p. 197. City of Negropont p. 204. The Ebb and Flow of the Euripus. p. 212. Plain of Volo p. 220. The Dardanelles of Lepanto p. 225. Lepanto p. 228.
map of Morea
OF THE MOREA. PART I. VVherein is shown, That the Morea is a Peninsula; the different Names by which it has been call∣ed; its Extent and Figure; the Divisions that the Ancients and Moderns have made of the Pro∣vinces contained in it: with a Discourse of its Consines and Frontiers; and at the End, seve∣ral Curious Relations are added upon the same Subject. IF a Land surrounded by the Sea, except a small Isthmus, that joyns it to the Continent, may be called a Chersonesus, or Penin∣sula, the Morea may justly be so reckon∣ed, since being on all sides environed
by the Sea, 'tis at the North only joyn∣ed to Achaia, by the Isthmus of Co∣rinth. This pleasant part of Greece has not always had the Name of Morea, as 'tis now commonly called; but formerly, Argos, Apia, and Peloponnesus. Its Fi∣gure well enough resembling the Leaf of a Mulberry, or Plane-tree, gave suffi∣cient ground to the later Emperors of Constantinople to entitle it Morea; tho' some will not assent to this, but pre∣tend to derive the Name from Romea, which by a transposition of the Letters was changed into Morea, grounding themselves upon this, That the Greeks, while subject to the Empire of Con∣stantinople, and that City was stiled New Rome Which Name it kept till Constantine the Great., were themselves also call∣ed Romei, as much as to say, Romans. Doglioni thinks that it took this Name when invaded by the Moors. Strabo insinuates, that it was anciently called Argo, or Argos, from a famous City of that Name within its Confines; and Aegialea from Aegialus, a renowned King of the Sicyonians. According to Compend. Hist. Ʋniv. di Nic. Ʋ∣dogl. p. 11. Apollodorus, and Pliny, it had the Name of Apia from Apis, the Third
King of the Argives, who reigned from about the year of the World's Creation, 2307. to the year 2342. that is 1647. years before the Nativity of Christ. This Apis was the Son of Egialus. Four hundred and twenty years after, it had the Name of Pelo∣ponnesus, from Pelops, Son of Tantalus, King of Phrygia and Taygeta, a Man suf∣ficiently famous for his Ivory shoulder, and Incests with his own Daughters. Its bounds (which, as we said, are of the shape of a Plane-tree Leaf), are sixt between the end of the 35. de∣gree, and beginning of the 38. degree of North Latitude, and at the Extre∣mities of the degrees 37, and 51. of Longitude, taking the most West part of the Isle of Ferro for the first Meri∣dian. As to its Circumserence, Authors disagree, some making it bigger, o∣thers less. Isidore allows its Circuit to be 363. Miles; Bourdon extends it to 563. Porchacchi adds Ten more, assu∣ring us, that it is 573. Miles round: Blean, Sagredo, and Vianoli, assign it 600. Baudrand, a Geographer, of our time, makes it but 550. Miles.
Strabo makes its length 1400. Sta∣dia; and Sagredo agrees with him, ma∣king 170. Miles from the Isthmus to Modon. Baudrand makes it five Miles longer from the Cape of Schilli to the Castle Tornese, and takes its breadth, which, according to him, exceeds not 150. Miles between Corinth and the Cape of Matapan. The most skillful Geographers descri∣bing this delicious Peninsule, have em∣ployed the greatest accuracy in distin∣guishing those parts from the rest, whereon Nature has been at the great∣est expence for Embellishments, that they might the more advance its Glo∣ry and Reputation. As Pausanias re∣ports, it was once divided into five parts, the first containing Arcadia, the second Achaia, the third Doria, &c. Ptolemy, and others, divided it into Eight Provinces; viz. Achaia, pro∣perly so call'd, Arcadia, Argos, Corin∣thia, Elis, Laconia, Messenia, and Sicyo∣nia, or Sicyonis. Achaia was bounded on the North with the Gulf of Lepanto, on the West with the Ionian Sea, on the South with Elis and Arcadia, and on the East
with Sicyonia. Patras was then its ca∣pital City. Arcadia being up in the Countrey, and by consequence distant from the Sea, had for its Eastern boundaries Ar∣gos and Laconia, with the Mountain O∣ronio; Elis and Mount Flora for the Western; on the North, Achaia proper, and Mount Skinfali; and on the South, Messenia, and the Mountain Taygeta. Its principal City was Megalopolis; that is, the great Arta situated at the foot of Mount Coronio, called at this ime El Cesal Londari. Argos he  the East the Gulf of Napoli di mania, and the Aegean ea; on the West, Arcadia; on the outh, Laconia, and on the North, the Gulf of Engia, or Sinus Sardonicus. Ar∣os was its chief City. Corinthia, which was the most Nor∣hern part of Peloponnesus, was extended etween Sicyonia Westward, and Argos outh and Eastward; and was separa∣ed from Achaia by the Isthmus and Gulf of Lepanto. It took its Name om Corinthus, the Son of Jupiter, or  Ephipeus, who also gave a Name to e Capital City.
Elis bordered on the North upon A∣chaia, properly so called; on the East upon Arcadia, on the South upon Mes∣senia, and on the West upon the Ionian Sea. Polybius and Strabo name this likewise Elea and Cauconia. Its prin∣cipal City was also called Elis. Laconia had for its Southern Limits partly the Gulf of Colochina, and partly that of Coron; for its Eastern, the Gulf of Napoli di Romania; for its Northern, Arcadia; and for the Western, Messenia. Sparta was its chief City. The South of Messenia was between Laconia towards the East▪ nd Elis to∣wards the West: it had Arcadia on the North, and contained all that space between the Gulfs of Coron and Zon∣chio. Messene was the principal City. Sicyonia, or Sicyonis, which was the least of the Provinces, took the Name from its capital City called likewise Si¦cyon. It bordered Eastwards on Corin¦thia, Westward on Achaia; the Gulf o Corinth was on its North, and Arcad on the South. Pomponius Mela divides the whol Lib. 2. cap. 3. Morea into six Provinces; viz. Argo Laconia, Messenia, Achaia, Elis, and Ar¦cadia.
At this time Morri and Baudrand make but four Provinces of it: and this Division is likewise approved of by the Learned Cautelli, in his Geo∣graphy, received with general Ap∣plause. The first of thse four Provinces  comprehends the whole Extent of A∣chaia proper Sicyonia, and Corinth, and is called the Duche of Chiarenza. Its Northern bound is the Gulf of Lepanto; and on the South the Province of Bel∣vedere. This Province has several Ci∣ties and Towns. Patras is its chief City, after which Chiarenza, Caminit∣za, Castel-Torneso claim their places: but we shall reserve their description to the Second Part, where we will give par∣ticular Informations of the whole Countrey. Its most noted Promontories are the Cape de Rio, of which we will speak when we come to treat of the Gulf of Patras. Another is the Cape by Bourdon, call∣ed the Cape de Chiarenza, and by Pto∣emy and Strabo, Araxis Promontorium, which extends it self into the Ionian
Sea, not far from the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Larissus, between the Gulfs of Patras and Chiarenza. The last, lying Southward, is Cape Torneso, which Strabo called Chelonates Promontorium, Thevet Cape Thorice, and Sophianus Cape Chlumutzi. This like∣wise stretches it self into the Ionian Sea, between the Gulf of Chiarenza and that of Arcadia. The second Province termed Bel∣vedere,  reaches where Elis and Messe∣nia were formerly: It confines North∣ward on the River Carbon, which also divides it from the Province of Chia∣renza; and on the South it is bounded by the Gulf of Coron; on the East it has Braccio di Maina; and on the West the Gulf of Arcadia and Zonchio. It contains several Countries and Cities, amongst which Modon is the principal, then Coron, Calamata, and Navarin, fol∣low in dignity. The most celebrated Promontories are Cape Jardau, which is the Ichtus Promontorium of Ptolemy, and is the most Northern of all.
Cap de Zonchio, which Pausanias calls Coryphasium Promontorium. Cap de Sapienza, or Cap Gallo, by Ptolemy named Acritas Promontorium. The third Province is called Sacca∣nia,  or the lesser Romania, and contains all the Ancient Argos. It has its North Confines on the Gulf of Lepanto, the Gulf d' Engia, and the Isthmus; its South on Braccio di Maina, and the Gulf of Napoli di Romania; its West in part on the Duche of Chiarenza, and part on Traconia. Napoli di Romania is the capital, the other chief Towns are Ar∣gos and Corinth. The Palus, or Morass of Lerna, where Hercules killed the Seven-headed-Hydra, is a place very remarkable in this Pro∣vince. Though this Monster was but a Fi∣ction, yet it is true, that there were Seven Brethren that lived in this place, and pillaged all Passengers, making the Countrey desolate; against these Her∣cules undertook the Combate, and ha∣ving killed the first that encountered him, he dispatch'd the rest two by two, as they came under his hands. Whence
the Poets took occasion to feign an Hy∣dra with Seven Heads, and its Death from that of the Seven Brethren sacri∣ficed by Hercules his Rage to the just Revenge of the Countrey. This Province has but one Promon∣tory, but that very famous, and known by several Names. It is called Cape Shilli, in Pliny Scylaeum, and in Pausa∣nias Plethon Promontorium, by Ptolomy Scillium, by Favolius Sigillo, by Sophia∣nus Scylli, by Villanova Damala. This Promontory with its opposite, called Colonne in Attica, makes the entrance of the Gulf of Engia. The fourth Province, which has  changed its Name, Laconia for Zaco∣nia, is the Braccio di Maina, and is at this day indifferently called by those two Names. It much surpasses the bigness of either of the three former, as it is also more extended on the South along the Sea-side. It was at first called Lelegia from Lelex, who first ru∣led there as King. Virgil, and other Poets, call it Oebalia from Oebalus, Lord thereof; and, according to Stra∣bo, 'twas likewise termed Argos. 'Tis
wash't on the South by the Gulf of Ca∣lamata, and in part by that of Colo∣china; on the East by the Gulf of Na∣poli di Romania; its West bounds on the Province of Belvedere, and some part of it on the Duché of Chia∣renza. This Province has many high and dreadful Rocks and Precipices, whence 'tis subject to frequent Earthquakes. The most of its deep Caverns are found about Mount Tageta, at this time call∣ed, on the side of Misitra, Voutri tis Mi∣sitras, and on the side of the Main, Vou∣tri tis Portais. It breeds Dogs of good esteem: Zaiman Basha, or the Grand Signior's chief Huntsman, chooses a great num∣ber of them yearly for the Sultan's use and diversions: and there is scarce a Turk that lives at any Rate, but has one of them. The principal places of this Pro∣vince are Malvasia, Misitra, Sarnata, Chielefa, Vitulo, Paslava, and others; of which in their places. Its Promontories are the Cape of Matapàn, of which we will give a par∣ticular description when we come to
speak of that of Maina. The Cape O∣nugnato, or Asses Jaw, distant from Cape Rampani about 200. Stadia; there stood once the Temple of Minerva, built by Agamemnon. The Cape of Malea brusht by the South Wind from the Sea of Candia: It is famous not only for its exquisite Wines, but also for its Shelves and Shoaly ground, dreadful to the Mariners. Ptolomy calls it Malea, Pliny Maleum, Hesychius Promaleum, So∣phianus Capo Malio. The Seamen (as Bredebachius says) name it Ale di San Michael, Saint Michael's Wings. Brichus calls it Capo Malio di Sant Angelo: accor∣ding to Baudrand 'tis Ten Miles distant from Cerigo, 90 from Napoli, 70. from Sparta, and 60. from Candia. Mention Aeneid. lib. 5. Amor. l. 2. Baudr. let. M. Laur. p. 164. is made of this place by Virgil, Ovid, in the Universal Geography of Baudrand, and in the Greek of Laurembergius.
Of the Mountains of the Morea. AMongst the Mountains of this Peninsula is reckoned that of Foloe, near which was once situated the City of Olympia, so much famed by the Poets for the Country of the Centaurs. The rise of this name was thus, Hercules having slain the Nemaean Lyon, and being Victorious over the Lernaean Hydra, and the Boar of Ery∣manthus, happened to go to this Moun∣tain, where he retired into the Cave of the Centaur Foloeus, who treated him with a great deal of Civility, and entertained him with excellent Wine which he kept there hid from the rest of the Centaurs; it chanced while they were thus Carousing, some other Centaurs passing by, were drawn by the smell of the Wine, and running to the Den endeavoured to enter by Violence. Foloeus's chief en∣deavour was for an hiding place, so that Hercules was left alone to engage with all the Centaurs; he then playd his best, and gave them such terrible
Effects of his Rage, that having killed some, the rest betook themselves to flight to carry away a wretched Life. The Combat ended, Foloeus crept out of his hole, and sufficiently admired the Valour of his Guest; but by mis∣fortune handling the Arrow where∣with Hercules killed the Hydra, he let one of them fall on his Foot, the wound was so deep that he fell down and dyed on the spot; Hercules much grieved at this accident, and in ac∣knowledgement of his kind Entertain∣ment buried him in his own Cave, and named the Mountain from his name Foloeus. The other most noted Mountains are Cyllene, Lyceus, Parthenius, Menalus, and Sepia; of all these Cyllenius is the highest, 'tis near that of Calidoria, at the Top whereof are yet to be seen the remains of the Temple of Mercury, from thence called Cyllenius; yet some will have that name to be derived from Cyllenus Son of Aleates. The Mountain Lyceus taking its beginning in Zaconia, is memorable for the place where the Tyrant Aristarchus was made an offering to the publick Rage of the
Lacedemonians, who there stoned him. It joyns to Mount Menalus, which is cover'd with green and shady Groves and pleasant Pasturage for Cattel; a place for the coolness of its Shades, and refreshing briezes of serene Air de∣dicated to the God Pan, as Mount Cyllene, whose name signifies Maiden, was Sacred to the same Deity. Mount Sepia is that where, as Pausanias re∣ports, Epites, the Son of Eleates was stung to death by a Serpent. The Duché of Chiarenza has on the North the Mountain now called Poglizi from Diana's Temple which once adorned it; it was at first named Geronte, then Skinfale from the name of a Nymph, the Daughter of Arcas, or from certain large Birds of Prey called Stymphalides, that live in these quarters in great flocks: These devoured Men, where∣fore they were either chased away, or the Species quite destroyed by the slaughter Hercules made of them. On the East side between Saccania and Tzaconia lyes Mount Cronie com∣monly called Grevenos, on whose far∣thest Northern part stood the Temple of Lucina and Fesipoli, so named from
the Idol to which the Eleans offered Sacrifices. Where is found the Stone called a Cylinder which may be taken from the Rock, when the thunder rumbling in the Clouds causes an agi∣tation of the Air. In the Province of Belvedere Mount Mintia or Mente now Olonos comes in view; its South has a Prospect of the Gulf of Coron, on the North rises the River Alpheus; it took its name from Pluto's Mistress, when Proserpina Jea∣lous of her Husband, sought after her and found her in this place, and chan∣ged her into the Herb Mint, a great quantity of which grows wild on this Mountain; and in Memory of this Act of the Infernal Goddess, the proud Fanes of Pluto and Proserpina once stood there. The little Mount Neris lifts it self up in Saccania and Nonacris in Tzaconia, at the foot whereof roul the fatal Waves of Styx, fatal to those that taste the otherwise clear and tempting Stream. The Poets make this one of the infernal Rivers; Inachus also has its source in this Province. There is like∣wise Mount Artemisius, thought to be
Mount Parthenius; 'twas named Arte∣misius, from the abundance of the Herb Artemis, wherewith it is covered. The most considerable and famous of all the Grecian Mountains, and that which Polybius compares with the Alpes is Taygeta, bearing another name now of Orta, it extends it self in the Province of Tzaconia not far from the River Taenarus, very near the Eurotas that runs by Misitra; 'tis stockt with Deer, Bears, Boars and other wild Beasts: It took its name from Taygeta, the Daughter of Lacedaemon, who be∣ing ravisht by Jupiter, out of shame and grief for her lost Virginity, killed her self there. At different times this Mountain has been Sacred to Bacebus, Ceres, Apolle, and Diana; and in its Entrails are found excellent Whet∣stones. Of the Streams and Rivers of the Morea. HAving discoursed of the most re∣markable Mountains of the Mo∣rea,
it seems natural to descend from them with the Streams and Rivers that water the lower Grounds of this King∣dom. Amongst these is reckon'd that in the Duché of Chiarenza commonly called Carbon, and by Sophianus Orsea; Strabo names it Alpheus, Ptolemy Alpe∣hius, others Strimphalus and the River Nyctimus; into this stream One hun∣dred and forty Torrrents, whose Virtues are so extolled for taking a∣way Tetters or other deformities in the Skin. The Poets have sung a thou∣sand strange things of this River; they would perswade us that its Waves have a peculiar subterraneous Chanel under the Sea, and that passing the Arcadian Gulf without mixing with it; beyond the Strophades they haste to unite with their beloved Fountain Arethusa, which is in the Territory of Syracuse a City of Sicilia: This River receives several lesser into it, as Cela∣don, Erimantus and Amarinthus: It's name was derived from Alpheus. Tebba after the Death of his Brother Cercafus, flying from the sury of the Arcadians and despairing of e∣scape, his Enemies being at his Heels,
drownded himself in this River. It formerly had the name of Strimphelus from one of the Sons of the God Mars; one may well term it the Antaeus of Ri∣vers, for after having several times in∣gulfed it self in narrow Passages under the Rocks, it breaks out at last and slides with a serene Majesty within its own Banks. The River Eurotas is also in great Reputation, at this day called Vassali Potamos: Niger names it Iris, Plutarch Hemerus and Martathon; it passes through the middle of Misitra, and falls into the Gulf of Colchina; it has its source from the same place as the River Carbon. The name of Eurotas, so celebrated by the Ancients, was gi∣ven to it from Eurotas the third King of the Lacedemonians, either, as, Pau∣sanias reports, for that this Prince made a new Bank to this River to keep in its Waters, that sometimes u∣sed to overflow the Country to their great damage; or as Plutarch says, be∣cause that this King having lost a Bat∣tel he had engaged in before the Full Moon, in scorn of the superstitious Custome of the Lacedemonians, car∣ryed
on by the height of Despair, cast himself into this River; which from so Tragical an Event changed the name Himerus to Eurotas. As for the name Vassali Potamos, the Inhabitants say it signifies the Imperial River, which name was imposed on it by the Despots of Morea, who descended from the Imperial Blood, and for the most part resided at Misitra, for the pleasant Diversions of Hunting, &c. on the Banks of Euretas, which the Lacedemonians called the Imperial Ri∣ver in flattery, and to enhanse the Glory of these Despots and Despoenes, a name given to the Princesses the De∣spots Wives. This Stream is still ador∣ned with Silver Swans, which here come in great flocks to sport them∣selves; these are the more admirable for their extraordinary Beauty and Size, besides their extream whiteness; possibly the Poets on this account cal∣led this River Olorifer, upon which Statius sings, Taygetique falx & oloriferi Euroae. And since its Banks were cloathed with Laurels, 'twas dedicated by the
Poets to Apollo; all the Summer it de∣serves not the name of a River, for 'tis so shallow, that it may rather be ta∣ken for a pretty large clear purling Brook; but in Winter encreased by the Rains, it proudly lifts it self up, and sometimes overflows its bounds. It once had on its left the Country of Ormoas, which Strabo and Pliny call Acria. There is also in Tzaconia the River Inachus, taking its source from the Mountain Crovia; 'tis at this time cal∣led Planizza, once Cramavor, then Haliacmon; in fine, Inachus, from the name of a Son of Occanus and Thetis. The cause thus, Inachus not being able to take the Ravishing of his Daughter by Jupiter, without repining and murmuring against the deflowring God, in punishment for his Mur∣murs was so tormented by a wild Beast, that he became besotted, and pre∣cipitated himself into this Stream, which took its name from his death. Between Inachus and Saccania are seen the Rivers Linceus, Asteria or Stella and Erasinus, which rapidly▪ wash the Foot of Mount Strimphalus.
We must not forget the River Spir∣nazza, which is not the least conside∣rable: Stiled by Niger, Stomius; by Strabo and Pliny, Pamylus; and by Pto∣lomey, Panysus; it discharges it self into the Gulf of Coron near Calameta. Of the Confines and Frontiers of the Morea. THe Morea is bounded by the Ioni∣an Sea, that of Sapienza and the Aegean; which are known by seve∣ral names, as we shall shew in their order in the second Part of this Trea∣tise. We may take as a part of the Medi∣terranean, Plin. l. 8. c. 11. that Sea which Strabo and Pliny call the Ionian, and which was likewise named the Grecian, bounding Northwards upon the Mouth of the Gulf of Venice, on the West upon the Borders of Calabria and Sicilia, begin∣ning from the point of Santa Maria, and so on to the Cape of Passaro; its Eastern bounds are the Shores of Epi∣rus, and the Morea from Cape Lenguet∣ta
to Cape Matapan, and on the South it has the African Sea. This Sea on its Western extent, on which side it washes the Morea, com∣prehends the following Gulfs: The Ionian Sea com∣prehends The Gulf of Lepanto. The Gulf of Patras. The Gulf of Chiarenza. The Gulf of Arcadia. The Gulf of Zonchio. The Sea of Sapienza, which is also a part of the Mediterranean, takes its name from the Isles near Modon, and has on the West the Ionian, and on the East the Aegaean Seas: its South beat∣ing upon the Morea includes these Gulfs. The Sea of Sapienza includes The Gulf of Coron. The Gulf of Colochina. The Gulf of Beatico. The Aegean Sea a part likewise of the Mediterranean, contains within its whole extent a great many Gulfs, we will only mention those on the Morean Shore.
The Aegean Sea towards the Morea com∣prehends The Gulf of Napolidi Romania.   The Gulf of Engia. All Europe affords not a place com∣parable to this pleasant Peninsula, en∣richt by Nature with so many rare Qualities: Its fruitful Plains flourish with plenty, adorned with the charms of Variety; and its high Hills, which might be thought an unpleasing Ob∣ject for their cragginess, are yet made agreeable by the Verdant Crowns they wear of rare and excellent Plants and delicious Fruits. Its Inhabitants have a Genius fit for great Undertakings, and are inspired with a Martial Soul: Its Cities have all once had glorious Founders; and its Climate is soft, se∣rene and temperate. This Place has still had the Prero∣gative, and been chief over all Greece, and indeed its main Bulwark; a thousand Illustrious Monuments pre∣sent our Eyes with Objects of Beauty, Grandeur, Magnificence, Splendor, and Glory; on the one side Sumptu∣ous and Stately Buildings raise their
once proud Heads; on the other side we have the Melancholy pleasing view of the Imperial Seats of the My∣enians, Corinthians, Lacedemonians, Si∣yonians, Elians, Arcadians, Pyleans, and Messenians. Arms and Learning have always been the two famous Pil∣ars set up here amongst this People, of  Ne plus ultra to others. The Athe∣ian School had here its Foundation, n whose Front were engraven these words Mater Sermonum, the Mother f Eloquence: Here likewise, as in he true Field of Mars, the most He∣ick Captains of Greece have poured ut their Blood, for never-dying ame. War has here either been per∣etual, or at least frequent. Amongst all, the Athenians have ew'd themselves the valiantest con∣enders for Liberty; for from the year 23. in the LXXXVII. Olympiad, o the year 350. they still defended hemselves, tho they had then lost ome of their Power. This little Re∣ublique (its Government being only ltered) became after some Ages a reat and powerful Kingdom; when aving passed through several hands,
it at last met the beginnings and cau∣ses of its future Ruine under Emanuel the Grecian Emperor: For that Prince, ignorant of that Maxime, That the power of a Monarch is maintained by the Union of the Princes, and that a failure in this brings on the Ruine of Kings and Kingdoms, through a fatal Policy equally divided his Realms a∣mongst his seven Sons; and by that sowed the Seed of discord and in∣testine Broyls, which in the end pro∣duced the intire destruction of that Empire. The Princes that had the Govern∣ment of this Province were stiled De∣spotes; and though there happened a frequent alteration of Governours, and those of different Extractions, yet the Despotate was still continued in its Prosperity; for the Election de∣pending on the Emperours pleasure, he seldom promoted any to this Emi∣nent Employment but his Brothers or his own Sons, or some other of his Relations, or great Favorites, who by their good Services merited so high a Recompence.
Constantine Sirnamed Dragares, Brother to Theodore the Second, was Despot when Amurath the First made an irruption into the Morea, and be∣gan to exercise Acts of Hostility; a stop was for some time put to the pro∣ceedings of this terrible Enemy, but 'twas upon this Condition, which the prudent Emperour proposed, of pay∣ing an annual Tribute, and with that price bought his Peace; a while after this having taken the Imperial Crown in the City of Constantinople, he divi∣ded the Morea between his two Bro∣thers Demetrius and Thomas; Thomas had for his share the Despotate of Ca∣rinth, and Demetrius that of Sparta; there arose between these two Bre∣thren an irreconcileable Enmity and Division; possibly being both equally swayed with a secret wicked design, that by embroiling the Affairs of the Empire, they might lessen its Glory, and thereby encrease their own, and obtain by its Ruine the independence of their Government: Thomas had gained to his Party the Albanians and Latins, who were equally at his devo∣tion: Demetrius was assisted by the
Turks, and Turchan Beglerbey of Ro∣mania defired nothing more than to procure and forward the Ruine of this Empire. These unfortunate Princes went one after another to make their com∣plaints to Mahomet the Second; whose aid they implored, and did him Ho∣mage, never considering that thereby they lost so much of their Power; and gave it up as a Sacrifice to him who wisht but to devour them both: At last they came to be sensible of their Error, but too late; for Thomas perceiving that the Turks made In∣roads even to his Borders, and justly suspecting a design to surprize him, was forced to provide for his safety by flight; and Demetrius was made an example of the Turks cruel perfidious∣ness, and would have thought it a great Felicity if he could have preven∣ted a miserable Captivity by a glori∣ous Death. The first fled for refuge to Rome, where in consideration of his Royal Extraction, and the Present which he brought of the Head of the famous Apostle St. Andrew, he recei∣ved an honourable and advantagious
Entertainment. The other transpor∣ted to Adrianople, by a malicious surprize of the Ottomans, was forced not to think it his greatest Misfortune to Espouse his own Daughter, so to free her from the danger of losing her Honour with her Liberty. The Virtues which have rendered Greece so famous, have indeed had heir Birth there, but they could ne∣ver have grown to that height, if the Republick of Venice had not assisted and sustained them; for she has al∣ays been a good Mother, and signa∣z'd her tenderness, by that strict al∣ance she has always had with Greece. Tis an unquestionable Truth as ap∣ears by the Historys of Venice, and which any one may be easily satisfied n, that there is no Empire, Realm or rovince in all Greece where the Vene∣ans have not left some marks of heir Dominion. In the declining of he Greecian Empire, when it suffered everal dismembrings, the greatest arcels thereof submitted to the Ve∣etians; for under their dependance ere Arcadiopolis, Rodesto, Adriano∣e, Gallipoli in Thrace, and therewith
all the County about Prevesa and Arta part of Macedonia, the Province of Lacedaemon, and a great deal of the Morea; besides, they were acknow∣ledged Soveraigns of most of the Isle of the Archipelago. In fine, these were the Titles of the Venetian Empire born by the sole Person of the Doge Dux Venetiarum, Dalmatiae, Croatiae, Do∣minus quartae partis & dimidiae toti Imperii Romaniae; and if these Testi∣monies were not sufficient to evinc the vast extent of the Venetian Em∣pire, in Greece we need only bring an Epitome of what Historian have related in several great Vo∣lumes. The designing Turks having go footing in the Possessions of the Pro∣vinces of these two Princes, desire nothing more than to invade the rest of the Country, so to become sol Masters of the Peninsula. The Vene¦tians only could put a check to the height of Ambition, which was alto∣gether unjust, especially since they went about to violate the Faith o Treaties, and break the Peace con¦cluded. But 'tis a Maxime of the
Barbarous Nations, to count nothing inviolable, but the advancement of their Interests by any means whatso∣ever, and take occasion then to make War, when their Enemies think them∣selves most secured by Peace. Thus the Turks never making themselves Slaves to the Religious observance of the Peace, surprised Argos, and then behaved themselves as declared Ene∣mies. The Republick found by this first Attempt of the Enemy, that it was full time to provide for their de∣fence; and it being an Enterprize of great Importance, and that from Heaven only we expect the most powerful Aids and an happy Success, it was above all things resolved that the Standards should bear the Ensigns of our Redemption. Then Troops were raised, and the General Com∣mand given to Bertoldo d' Este: This great Captain armed with his utmost Courage for so great an Attempt, set sail for the Morea, and landed with his whole Army between the Gulfs of En∣gia and Lepanto. He at first applyed himself to get a perfect knowledg of the place, and to find means of put∣ting
a stop to the frequent irruptions of the Enemy; to which end he be∣gan that memorable Work, and in few days finished it, the famous Wall called Eximile; after which he em∣ployed his whole Forces in the de∣fence thereof, and in a thousand glo∣rious Actions, gave Proof of his great Courage, and perfect Experi∣ence in the Art of War: Neither his Head nor his Hands were idle, he was the first in all perilous Encounters, undervaluing his Life, so he might Sa∣crifice it to the Service of his Coun∣try, and at the same time forward the loss of his natural and sworn Enemy. He was arrived to the height of his hopes, and his Troops animated by his Example, had already gained several advantages promising a glorious Vi∣ctory, and entire defeat of his Ene∣mies; when God, whose Thoughts are not as our Thoughts are, and who when he pleases can give the greatest Conquerors their defeat, and Death in the Field where they expected to be Crowned with Victory, and ride Tri∣umphant; permitted by the secret or∣ders of his Providence, or Effects of
his Justice upon us, that our Gene∣ral sunk and dyed of several Glorious Wounds. The Head being thus cut off, the Members soon languisht, and the Enemy becoming more sierce through the weak resistance they found, renewed the Combat with greater Fury, and gained the Victory; after which setting no Bounds to their unjust Ambition, they ravaged and became Masters of all the Country, possessed for so many Years by our August Republique. After which they establish there a Governour of some Quality with the Title of Sangiac, or Morabegi, as much as to say, Lord of the Morea, and allowed him an Hundred thou∣sand Aspers a year, obliging him to keep a thousand Horse with all ne∣cessary Equipage, to be at the dispo∣sal of the Beglerbey of Greece. For all the advantages which this Sangiac enjoys, yet he is not with∣out his Thorns in his side; for there happen frequent Disputes with the Dins, the Beglerbey or Basha of the Sea, about certain rights he pre∣tends to in all Maritime places, upon
all Merchandizes imported or ex∣ported. Modon is the usual place of the San∣giac's Residence: the Republick of Ve∣nice, who only to maintain their Rights in this Kingdom, hath ever Valorously been at War with the Turk, has been the first that have attempted its Re-conquest: and its Arms had so great Success in the Campagne in 1685. as to be Victorious over almost all the Southern places, reckoning a∣mongst these Conquests the City and Fortress of Coron, the Towns of Cala∣mata, Zarnata, Passava, and Chielefa: besides the frequent in roads made by the Troops up in the Country, that were sent to succour any Fortress that was vigorously attacked; the Vene∣tian Army will make this next Cam∣pagne a more advantagious Progress; which we are the more assured of from this hopes, that its Arms are employed only for the great Glory of the Ca∣tholick Religion, and to promote the Ruine of Infidels.
OF THE MOREA. PART II. Wherein is given a particular De∣scription of the Maritime Towns, the Gulfs, Rocks under Water, and of the Isles, not only those on the Morea side, and which are in this Sea, but likewise in the Io∣nian. AFter having in the First Part of this Work treated of the Morea in general, I design here to Discourse in particular, and with all the exactness agreeable with my pro∣posed Brevity, of all the Maritime Places, of the Gulfs, hidden Rocks,
and Isles, as well on this side, as in the Ionian Sea. My Readers may take notice, that after having shewn the different Divisions that have been made of the Morea, I agree with the Sentiment of those who divide it into four Provinces, and that I shall refer to one of these Provinces each of the places whereof I shall have occasion to speak. The Isthmus of Corinth. THe Isthmus of Corinth, otherwise Geogr. Re∣form. Rici∣oli. l. 1. c. 16. called the straight of the Morea, or the Argolique straight, is a tongue of Land very rough and Stony; si∣tuated between the Gulf of Lepanto, and that of Engia, uniting the Morea with Achaia. This Isthmus is famous for the Isth∣mian Games, instituted by Theseus here, and which were Celebrated eve∣ry five years or Lustrum; as likewise for its Theatre, its furlong of white Marble, its Temple Dedicated to Neptune, and its Forest of Pines whose
Branches Crowned the Victorious Combatants. It were a great advantage to Navi∣gation, and which would make it ea∣sie and safe, if a Chanel of communi∣cation were cut between the two Seas; and what might promote this Design and encourage its Execution, is that it has been thought practicable, and attempted by several Princes; as A∣lexander Pausanias, Rannus. Nero would himself give the first stroak with a Mat∣tock, to make this famous Chanel. Zonora. p. 200. the Great, Pitias, King Deme∣trius, Caesar, the Emperor Caligula, Nero, Herodes the Athenian. 'Tis true indeed, these Princes, diverted from this Design by more important Af∣fairs, or disheartned by the tedious∣ness of the Work, have given it over, and desisted from bringing it to an End, that would much have advanced their Glory. To supply in some sort the want of Corinth was the first City which put great Vessels to Sea. Sabel. Hist. di Ve∣net. deca. 3. l. 8. this Chanel, the Emperour Emanuel in the Year 1413. caused a Wall to be there raised, by Volateran and Niger, called Hexameli, by Hermolaüs Heromi∣lion, and by Nischius Dioclos, which be∣ginning at Port 'Lecheé 16. Stadia from Corinth, 50. from the Gulf of Saronica (which according to Baudrand,
who differs from Lauremburgh is that which we now call Leste Jocori) situa∣ted at the Western edge of the Gulf of Corinth, was extended to Six miles length to the Port of Cenchrea, on the East towards the Gulf of Engia; the Commodiousness of these two Ports much advanced and facilitated the Ea∣stern Trade. Amurat the Second after the Siege of Constantinople in the Year 1424. not∣withstanding the Peace with the Greek Emperour, caused the Eximile to be demolished. The Republique o Venice highly resented these Infringe∣ments of the League, and the Violen∣ces of Amurat, perceiving that by this Action the Enemy had an open Li∣berty of invading all the Neighbour∣ing Countrys. Wherefore Luigi Lre∣dano General at Sea, had orders to land at this place with his whole Ar∣my, who joyning his Forces with Ber∣toldo d' Este, they employed 30000. There were 3600. according to Sagr. 69. Men with so much heat, that in the Year 1463. they finisht the Wall in fifteen days, and added to what was before, several very broad double Ditches, and 136. Towers, which made
his Wall of much greater strength nd more tenable than it was before; o implore a particular Blessing, and s it were an Establishment to this Edifice, and an happy success to the Arms of the Republique from Hea∣en, Bertoldo in the middle of the Wall caused an Altar to be Erected, where the whole Army assisted at Mass which was there solemnly sung. The General at Sea and Bertoldo lea∣ing a sufficient number for the de∣fence of the Wall, went to Encamp near Corinth, and there busied them∣selves in planting Artillery, and fit∣ing them for Service When the Spyes brought word that Amarbei Flambular of the Morea, had made an Inrode near them with a Party of 1200 Men: They immediately upon this advice, made a detachment of a good part of the Army, which was Encamped for the defence of the Ex∣imile, and made so hot a fireing with their great Artillery on the Turkish Forces, that their Commander was obliged to Retreat farther out of Gun∣shot; though he again shewed him∣self about Noon to the Venetians, and
took his Lodgments not far from thence. Bertoldo observed all the mo∣tions of Armabei while the other Ge∣ral went to prosecute the Siege: But perceiving that the Turk seemed to desist from his design, through the difficulty there was of executing it without too great a hazard, Bertoldo slighted him, and went to joyn him∣self with the other General to ad∣vance the Siege; it happened by a Misfortune, the forerunner of many others, that as soon as the General ar∣rived at the Camp, he was struck dead upon the place with a blow of a Stone, such was the end of this great Captain; and Bettino da Calci∣nato who succeeded him in the Com∣mand of the Troops, found them so discouraged by this fatal Accident, and was himself so frightned at the approach of the Beglerbey with an Ar∣my of Fourscore thousand Men, that he not only left the Camp before Co∣rinth, but neglected also the defence of the Eximile, after that Wall had been raised with so great a charge to the Republique.
Corinth. THe City of Corinth, which Strabo and Polybius call Corinthus, Lau∣rembergh Ephyro, the People Coranto, and the Turks Gerame, had its begin∣ing and foundation from Aletes, who lived in the time of Cecrops King of the Athenians Anno 3066. 'Tis situa∣ted as it were in the midst of the Isthmus, in the place where the Ionian and Aegean Seas commix their Waves: It is the See of an Archbishop, distant from Patras 80 Miles, 50 from Athens, 85 from Mysitra, 25 from Argos. It is Commanded by the Fortress of Acrocorinthus, which is near to it; it is so advantagiously seated, that some have thence taken occasion to term it the Eye of Greece, others the Band thereof, and the Bulwark of Pelopon∣nesus: Plutarch judged it the most ex∣cellent, and Cicero the most beautiful City, the splendor of all Greece; nay it arrived to that height of Glory, that Syracusa and Corfu thought it an Ho∣nour to be its Colonies.
The Romans under a pretence of re∣venging themselves on this City, for some violences committed upon some Roman Citizens sent the Consul L. Mamius Anno Mundi 38 18. to abate, as they said, their Pride, with express Order to raze the City to its Founda∣tions, and that giving the Spoil and Pillage to his Souldiers, the Women and Children should he made Slaves. By the Bounty and Care of Au∣gustus it was rebuilt and re-peopled, and again flourisht in Riches and Beauty; but through the hard fate of the Times and continual devouring Wars, it can now only shew the mi∣serable Remains of its past Glories, whose Ruines are now the Asylum to a few poor Inhabitants, forced by Necessity rather than Choice to live here. It has been twice the Theatre whereon the Barbarity of Amurat the Second and his Son Mahomet has been Acted; where the Turkish fury has been so Merciless, that at this day not above a score of Houses, or ra∣ther Huts, remain; the sad Image of its ancient Splendor: we may add that we yet see entire with their former
Beauty, 12 Columns of 5 Foot Dia∣meter, with a simple Cordon, or List for its Capital about 15 Paces from each other, standing on a little Hill in the Figure of an Amphitheater, at about a Miles distance from the Sea; from this Hill there goes an easie de∣scent to Port Leché, where as yet stands a Tower, formerly a Lanthorn or Sea-mark. The Corinthians imbraced the Ca∣tholick Religion by the preaching of St. Peter and Paul, and were therein confirmed in the year 169 by the care∣ful diligence of St. Denis the Second Bishop of this place, which they per∣severed in, till the time that the Greek Emperours refused longer Obedience to the See of Rome. Roger of Normandy King of Naples took Possession of this City, and might have raised his Glory to a great height, if he could have added this Flower to his Crown, and gained the Hearts of the Corinthians to a wil∣ling Obedience, and have made them pay him the same Homages that they did the Emperour Emanuel; but when he was in the greatest hopes of ob∣taining
this desire, the Army of the Venetians with the Troops of the van∣quisht Greeks, so opposed his Con∣quests, that after a defeat of the greatest part of his Forces, he was constrain'd to consult his own safety by a hasty flight. The Rout of this Prin∣ces Army, and the Disadvantages he thereby received were of great conse∣quence to his Enemies, as the rich Spoil of his Camp was very conside∣rable, which was divided amongst the Auxiliary Troops, there being but lit∣tle need to put them to more necessa∣ry uses after the regaining of Corinth. Scarce two Ages were past before this City submitted it self to the Despotes of Greece; they would willingly have yielded it to the Venetians, in consideration that they could not o∣therwise possess it than by usurpation, the just right thereof belonging only to the Venetian Republique, who had employed its own Forces and the Blood of its Subjects to deliver it from the hands of Strangers. Mahomet the Second could not make so just Reflections, whose mind was uncapable of any thing but a bound∣less
Ambition, he re-took Corinth; af∣ter several great endeavours made by the Venetians to regain this Conquest, they were not able to overcome the fury of the Barbarians, whose long re∣sistance made them at last sensible of the necessity of desisting from their Design. A Table of the Kings of Corinth. Year of the World.   2862. A Tletes the first King. Compend Ʋnivers. di Nic. Dogl. p. ult. 2897. Trion. 2934. Agilas. 2971. Primina. 3006. Baci. 3041. Agelas. 3071. Eudemus. 3096. Aristomedes. 3131. Egennomes. 3147. Alexander. 3172. Felesteus. 3184. Ansomenes was the last who ended his Reign in the Year of the World 3185.
Acrocorinthus. THe famous Fortress of the Acroco∣rinthus must not be passed by with out a particular remembrance, that i has remained a long time Victorious over the Forces of the Enemy that at∣tacqued it, though at the last it wa forced to yield to its assailants, tire out with the length of the Wars; its Situation was very advantagious for it overlookt and commanded the City, being built upon the point of a high Rock, where it had a sufficien space of Ground strengthened with a very stout Wall, having within it se∣veral Wells of excellent clear Water, taking its fource from the Pyrene Fountain, of which the Greek Poet Homer in Odyss. makes honourable mention. Nature and Art conspired to render this Ca∣stle strong and impregnable; 'twas ac∣cessible only on the side of the Port of Cenchrea, yet being but ill Garrisoned it has been several times taken, and in particular by the Sicilians, under the command of Nicephorus Calufo, in
PATRAS view of Patras
e time of the Emperour Emanuel mnenes. Patras. NEar the Cape of Rio appears an high Mountain, and on the op thereof a Fortress, North of hich is seated Patras, a very An∣ent City, and an Archbishops See. he Turks call it Badra and Blabu∣a; it has formerly had other Names; r in the first Age of its Foundation  was termed Roas, and afterwards paired by Pater the Son of Preuge∣s, it for a long time bore the Name  its Benefactor: Afterwards about e beginning of the Roman Empire, s Beauty increased with the number f its Inhabitants, besides it was bles∣ed with a most advantagious Situati∣n, both for the goodness of its Ter∣itories, and its commodiousness for Traffick and Navigation. The Ro∣ans knew it by the name of Augusta Aroe Patrensis; at other times it was alled Neupatria. It lyes about 700 Pa∣ces
from the Gulf of the same Name or from the Port Panorme. The Em∣perour Augustus made choice of thi place, as most proper for the retreat o his Navy; and as a mark of his Lov to the People of Patras, he permitte them to live as a free People, enjoy∣ing all the Priviledges, and exempt∣ons, as the true Citizens of Rome. The Goddess Diana was Adored i this City, under the Title of Dia Latria, and a Grove and Temple wa there dedicated to Diana Triclaria,  whom every year a young Man an Maid, the most beautiful that coul be chosen out of all the People, wer Sacrificed in expiation of the Crim committed by Melampue and Cimet who also were first Sacrificed them∣selves, for being married to one ano∣ther, in the time of Diana, against the Will of their Parents. This cruel Sa∣crifice had an end when Euripil came to Patras, and was there converted to the Christian Religio by the preaching of St. Andre the Apostle. Patras at that time was very well peopled, as at this day 'tis not thin; there are especially a
great number of Jews who much pro∣ote its Trade; and it is almost the nly Maritime Town on this side, here the Greeks of the neighbouring slands, the English and the French ome to Traffick. The Air is not very holesome by reason of its nearness o Mountains that are covered with now, and the great quantities of Wa∣r wherewith it is environed: The erritories once comprehended under s Rule in the time of the Greek Em∣erors bore the Title of a Duché, hich it kept till the Prince that en∣yed it, in the year 1408. not having fficient Forces for its guard and de∣nce, delivered it for a great Sum to e Venetian Republick, from whom e Turks took it. In the Year 1533. the General Do∣a attempted to make himself Ma∣er thereof, which he easily gained rough the bad Condition of its For∣ications, with an absolute Victory, hen at the same time the Castle sur∣ndered which Commanded the ity, though it once for a whole year sisted the Forces of Constantine Pa∣logus.
The Victor used great moderatio towards the Garrison, convoyin them to Lepanto, whither they desire to go with their Wives, not one o them recieving the least ill Treatmen from the Victorious Troops, no without their repining against the Ge¦neral, for taking out of their hands  Prey justly due to their Valour and Fortune. Chiarenza. ON the right side of the River Ina¦chus by Ptolomey called Penae, and on an Hill towards the Gulf o Patras is seen the City Chiarenza thought to be the Ancient Cyllene th Country of Mercury, whom the Po thence called Cyllenius Heros. Thi was the Capital City of the Duché o that name, and under the Govern∣ment of its Princes; it was as Illustri∣ous as its name Chiarenza speaks it▪ The Venetians justly possessed it, and although at that time it was in a flou∣rishing Estate, yet it has now under∣gon
so great a change, that its Moats nd some slight Traces of it are all at is visible. The Port belonging to  called likewise Chiarenza, which as near to it, a very commodious aven, capable of receiving many eat Vessels, is now quite choaked up ith Sand. Caminitza. N the middle of the way, between  the Cape of Chiarenza and Patras,  the right hand of the River, by e Ancients called Pirus; we see minitza which Strabo and Ptolomey me Olenus, and Pliny Olenum; 'tis ree Miles from the Gulf of Patras. enus the Son of Vulcan founded it, t though 'twas once a great City th a Bishop, who was Suffragan to e Archbishop of Patras, yet it is w reduced to a little Borough.
Castle of Torneze. CAstel Torneze is a Fortress built  on the outmost Promontory  the Duché of Chiarenza, on that side t looks towards the Province of Bel∣dere, between the Gulfs of Chiare and Arcadia, 'twas called as Baudr says, Chelonates, the same name whi Strábo gives to the Promontory whe on it stands. The Turks call it O¦mourzi; 'tis on a very high place ¦bout three miles from the Sea, as  be plainly seen by the Draught  have here given of it, taken upon  place by the Illustrious Neovin a Ge¦tleman near the Person of his Hig¦ness Prince Maximilian William D of Erunswick. Zunchio or Navarin ZUnchio, which Ptolomey calls Pyl Steven of Byzantium, Coryphas and Navarin, Ten miles distant fro Coron is built upon a rising Groun
NAVARIN view of Navarin
CASL. TORNESE. view of Castle Tornese
at the foot whereof is its The 21. of June 1245. Selistar Bassa was taken the Port of Navarin, with a great number of Ships which he com∣manded for the Siege of Candia. Port, wherein two thou∣sand Vessels may ride at Anchor; on the right hand of the same stands the new Navarin: The Ancient is a Fortress, which lying so much in the Eyes of the Enemies, has been no small Tem∣ptation to them, upon which account it has more than once changed its Master. In the Year 1498. while subject to Baudrand calls Nava∣rin Albaxi∣nus, Ne∣lea, Alba∣rinos & Javarin; 'tis thought to have been the Country of Nestor. the Venetians it underwe furious assault of the Turks, who sound there such resistance, that far from trium∣phing as they had flattered them∣selves, they were forced to put off their Enterprize to another Opportunity, when they might succeed better by surprise, as indeed they did some time after; for being made Masters of Modon, the Inhabitants of Zunchio ren∣dered themselves as soon as they had Encamped before it: But the Vene∣tians soon regained it from the Turks, by the means of one Demetrius of Mo∣don, who with one of his Friends, an Albanian, undertook to put the Garri∣son
to the Sword, by opening the Gates of the Fortress; yet the Turks stood obstinately to the defence of a place they had so lately gained, came with a re-inforcement on the side to∣ward the Land, with a great Detach∣ment of Cavalry, and with fourteen Gallies and five Fustes, under the Command of a Turkish Officer called Gamali. The Republique had before ordered three Gallies for the guard of the Port. But those who ought to have been watchful, never thinking the Enemy would have taken the first opportunity of repossessing the place, and being in a great uncertain∣ty what to do, when they saw them∣selves just ready to be attacqued, left the Entrance free to the Turk, who with a great deal of frankness decla∣red himself the Patron and Defender of any that would submit them∣selves to his discretion. But those who seemed to be of his Party, in great consternation at the change of their Fate, exposed themselves to the hazard of their Lives, embarquing themselves in little Boats, and they were happy that got aboard five great
MODON view of Modon
Gallies that returned from Baruty, la∣den with Merchandizes, and had cast Anchor within sight of the Port. The news of so strange an Adventure, gave them the alarm to provide for their safety by an hasty flight. The Inhabitants of Zunchio were Specta∣tors of all this Catastrophe, and find∣ing themselves attacked by Land, found no other expedient but to deli∣ver themselves up to the Enemy. Modon. IN the Frontiers of the Province of the so fertile and pleasant Belvedere, lying in that part of the Peloponnesus which was the Ancient Messenia, a∣mongst the rest of the Cities in the Archbishoprick of Patras the Episco∣pal and Staple Town, which Sophia∣nus calls Modon, is reckoned: The Turks name it Mutum, and Pliny Me∣thone, in Memory of Methena the Daughter of Honer: It is ten Miles off of Coron, an hundred and twenty from Napoli di Romania, and seventy
two from the Cape of Matapan: Its Situation favoured in several particu∣lars by Nature and Art, makes it very strong, and is upon a Promontory ad∣vanced into the Sea of Sapienza, fronting the Coasts of Africk; at its Foot is a safe and Commodious Ha∣ven, where usually resides the Sangiac of the Morea, much respected at the Port for his good Government. In several Ages this place has been exposed to the Assaults of those who, intending to make themselves Masters of the Realm, have thought of gain∣ing this City and Province; from hence it has happened that the famous Wall built at its entrance, and which for its breadth and solidity makes a considerable Opposition, has been of∣tentimes attacked and gained, and by that means the whole Province sub∣dued, and forced to pay a Tribute to keep themselves in any shew of Com∣mand. The People of Naples by means of the Spartans, made them∣selves Masters of Modon, and to sub∣ject it more easily to their Rule, they placed there a Colony of their own People.
Some time after the Illyriaus enter∣taining an Ambitious design of enlarg∣ing their Dominions by conquests, chose them a King, and having got together a very numerous Army, made an irruption into the neighbour∣ing Countrys. When they came near to Modon, they gave its Inhabitants to understand with feigned shews of A∣mity, that they desired but to buy the necessary Provisions which they wan∣ted. Those of Modon believing the matter to be so without any deceit or trick, took care to provide for them accordingly, some bringing them Bread, others Wine, and others Provi∣sions. When the Illyrians saw a great number of them without the Gates, they thought (as it really was) that they were so fool-hardy as to leave but a few to guard the Fortress, so they ran all at once to seize on all the Posts and Avenues, and fell on with their whole Army with that fury, that they put a great many to the Sword, and made the rest their Slaves, making the City a sad Example of their Perfidie and Devastation. The Emperor Trajan touch'd with the Misfortune of those
poor People that, escaping from the fury of their Traiterous Enemies, were returned thither, gave them Proofs of his Generosity, granting them several Priviledges and Freedoms. After this manner they lived in a kind of Aristocracy till the time of the Emperour Constantine, who left Rome for Constantinople; yet when subject to the Empire they kept so much of their first immunities, that the same form of Government remained; and as to the Homages paid the Emperor, they were rather protected by him, than entirely subjected to him. In the year 1124. this City was At∣tacked, and taken by the Doge Domi∣nico Michael, when he returned the third time Triumphant from the Holy∣land, over the Conquests of Tyre and Ascalon in Soria, and of Rhodes, Scio, Samos, Lesbos, and Andros, in the Ar∣chipelago; and to these memorable Exploits may be added the entire de∣feat of the Army of the Infidels, when he raised the Siege of Zaffo. And though the next year this place re∣turned under Dominion of the Empe∣ror of Greece, yet in the Division of
the Empire, Anno 1204. it again came under the Republique, out of whose hands it was forced by Leon Ve∣trane, a Genoese by Nation, who was a famous Pirat; he kept it not long, for soon after being made Prisoner on the Hellespont, he was transported to Corfu, and there received a violent Death from the hands of the Hang∣man, as a just reward for all his Ra∣pines. This Death of their Head dis∣heartened the whole Party, and by that means the Captains Dandolo, and Promarino without much trouble be∣came Masters of this Town. But Bajazet the Second burning with a desire to enlarge his Empire by the Conquest of some new Country: In the Year 1498. putting himself at the head of an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand Men, closely besieged Modon: His Cannon made so great a breach in the Wall of the Suburbs, that th Captains of the place were forced, after mature deliberation, to retire into the City, and carry with them what ever they could. But the Enemy pressed them in the City with more violence than ever; that they
were ready to demand a Capitulation, when at last the Venetian Army ap∣peared in view, which came from Zante, to their aid. As soon as the two Armies came within shot, there hapened a Cruel and doubtful Com∣bat, but in the end after various For∣tunes, the Venetians had so much ad∣vantage as to get in one of their Felu∣ques, to animate the besieged, to con∣tinue Couragiously in the defence of the place, in the full assurance that their Army would soon rid them out of their Danger; and it fell out at the same time, that four Gallies with all sorts of Ammunition from the Vene∣tian Army, passed through the Tur∣kish Squadrons, and in despight of the Infidels gained the Port very happy∣ly. This had been a matter of great Success, if the End had been less de∣plorable; for the besieged overjoyed at the receiving the so long expected Succours, abandoned the Posts they ought to have kept still guarded. The Turks on their side watching for all Opportunities of gaining the Victory, and finding no great difficulty of en∣tring the Town, laid hold of the Ad∣vantage
CORON plan of Coron
antage and gained the place, giving rrible Proofs of their Cruelty. In at furious slaughter, that was made, he Illustrious Prelate Andrew Falconi eceived his Death; who, cloathed in is Pontificalibus, had animated the eople to an obstinate resistance of he Infidels. It happened, for the common good of This was in the French Translati∣on. Christendom, that whilst these Memoires ere printing in French, we received the greeable news of the taking of Modon rom the Turks by the Venetian Army, nder the wise Conduct of the Valiant General Morosini. This will much ad∣vance the Conquest of the whole Morea, which justly belongs to that Triumphant Republick. Coron. COron has a strong and advantagi∣ous Situation in the Province of Belvedere, the most Fertile and Rich in the whole Kingdom, and which was part of the Ancient Messenia, at about ten Miles distance by Land, and
twenty by Sea from Modon; on the right side of Cape Gallo, by Ptolomey called Acritas Promontorium; Strabo and Pliny knew it by the same name, which was given it upon the account of what happened when its Founda∣tions were laid; for in digging they found a Sea Swallow, by the Greek called Coronis, and as an happy Pre∣sage of future Prosperity, they named this City from the Bird, Coron. It was once a Bishops Seat, Suffra∣gan Strabo l. 9. Plin. l. 4. c. 7. Giov. Bemb. Giust in Fer∣rari sub L. C. Baudrand Moreri Hofm. Ver∣dizz. Sa∣gredo. to the Bishop of Patras, and at an∣other time 'twas reckoned a Colony of the Thebans, which the Poets called Pedosus; Laurenberg, Nisi: and Pau∣sanias, Epea, and all the Ancient and Modern Historians make honourable mention thereof. It makes the Figure of a Scalen Triangle, and in one of its Angles i a great Tower, built by the Venetian Anno 1463. for a Magazin; the o∣ther two sides, which are not was by the Gulf of Coron, leave a suffici∣ent space fit for the Tower of th Fortress, which is encompass'd with an old Wall of an unequal thickness flanked with great Towers, and a
some Paces from thence on the North de there is a Suburbs of 500 Houses. Since it has been several times expo∣ed to the Assaults of the Enemy, so it as been often forced in different Ages o pay Tribute to different Nations. Baudrand has thought it was yielded up to the Venetian Republick by the Despotes, Princes of the Morea; and Verdizotti says that at the time of the Division of the Graecian Empire, and in the same year that this glorious Re∣publick, having made Alliances with several Princes, thought upon the gaining of this Kingdom, Coron was assigned for its Portion. It was surprised Anno 1204. by Le∣on Lexic. Geo∣gr. Baudr. sub lit. C. Verdizz. fatti Ven. l. 7. p. 152. Veteran, a Genoese by Nation, and Pirate by Profession, who enjoyed not long his unjust Triumph, for be∣ing taken on the Hellespont, as we said before, he was put to Death by the common Hangman at Corfu; whose death being known to his Compani∣ons, all in amazement and disorder, they sought safety by an hasty flight; at whose dispersion the Inhabitants of Coron after some slight Attempts sub∣mitted themselves to the Venetians.
Bajazet the Second Emperour of the East, all inflamed with the desire of extending the Bounds of his Empire Anno 1498. marched with a powerful Army strait to Modon, which having gained, he turned his Victorious Arms against Coron, which he could no otherwise win but by force. In the Year 1533. the General Do∣ria, who had under his command a Spanish Armado of 35 great Vessels, and 48 Gallies with a design of envi∣roning this City, caused a great num∣ber of Troops as well Spaniards as Ita∣lians, the later under two Captains, Girolamo Tuttavilla and the Count Sarno, and the Spaniards Command∣ed by Girolamo Mendozza. These three Commanders following the or∣der of their General, began with four∣teen Cannon to batter the City, and to gain Entrance by a large breach; but this Enterprize had not the Success that was hoped for: The Turkish de∣fenders obstinately withstood the At∣tack, and killed 300 Christian Soul∣diers; nevertheless those Forces by Sea performed what the Troops by Land failed in: for vigorously following
the Attack they got the Wall, and ob∣iged the Defendants to hang out the white Flag; so the Turks were per∣mitted upon Capitulation to go out, Bag and Baggage, and the Troops of Mendozza took Possession of the Place: some time after the Turks at∣tempted to form a Blocus, so to regain the Town: it then fell out that the Spanish Garrison being unwilling to en∣dure a Siege, shewed a resolution of going out to meet the Enemy, and what opposition soever Maccian Nova∣rese, who Commanded in Mendozza's place, made thereto, endeavouring to divert them there from, by putting them to the greatest Labours, yet he found himself constrained at last to yield to their Importunity; wherefore he marched out for that bold Attempt to attack the Enemy, near Andrusa, where they lay encamped with an Army of 3000 Foot, amongst which were 500 Janisaries, Commanded by Casan Aga. The Spaniards being come near the Enemys Camp, to give them the grea∣ter amazement, thought best to set on fire the Stables of the Horses, who be∣ing
inraged to free themselves from the Flames, made a strange noise, which soon gave the Turks the alarm; who putting themselves in a Posture of defence, and finding the Christian Ar∣my weak and few in number, endea∣voured to encompass it; then was be∣gan a very bloody Combat, and in the midst of the Press the Valiant Captain Maccian fell down dead of several Wounds; after that blow the Spaniards began to sink, and had been utterly routed if one of their Musque∣tiers had not returned to the Turkish Commander, the like Fate which their own had suffered; by whose Death the Turkish Courage began to cool, and the Spaniards made an Ho∣nourable retreat back to Coron, where they took a Resolution to embark and abandon the Place; and so the Em∣peror was willing not to raise new difficulties that might obstruct the making of the Peace in Hungary: After this manner that unfortunate City re∣turned under the Barbarian Yoak. In the midst of this Calm, and whilst the Forces of the Republick were not employed about any great
Enterprizes, the Procurator Francisco Morosini, Captain General of the Re∣publick, toucht with the Sentiments of Honour and his great Courage, conceived the design of making use of the present opportunity to regain those places in the Morca, which the Ottomans had ravisht from the Vene∣tians; for which purpose, considering that if once they were Masters of Co∣ron, which was no difficult matter, a means might be found of carrying on their Conquests; he set sail for this City Anno 1685. and sat down be∣fore it, but scarce had the Venetians ap∣proacht the Place, when a great Bo∣dy of Turks came down from the Country, and took up their Lodg∣ments within Pistol-shot of the Chri∣stians; by this bold Act the besieged were animated to a more Vigorous resistance, and it proved a great hin∣drance to the Valour and Designs of the besiegers, who nevertheless de∣sisted not from doing what ever they thought might advance the Siege and promote the taking of the Place. They gave Fire to a Mine of 100 Barrels of Powder, and were prepa∣red
for the Assault, if any Breach should be made, as they hoped there would; and notwithstanding the bad Success of their Mine, they proceed∣ed to advance their Lodgments, and repulse the Turks with an extraordina∣ry impetuosity. In this far advanced Post they defended themselves by their Dragoons, and were reinforced with some Troops of Malta; but in the end, after above three hours Combat, they were beat back and routed, and must all there have perisht, had they not found a means of escaping the Pursuit and Sword of the Enemy; yet for all this they carryed off from the Turks Seventeen Colours, and a Trophy of other rich Spoils: Being returned into their Retrenchments, to discourage the besieged, they set up at the end of their Pikes 130 Turks Heads; yet this abated not the Ardour of the Turks, who, although in continual Action, that they had scarce time to breath, yet would entertain no thoughts of Rendition, nor so much as Capitula∣tion, so much were they encouraged by the hopes of receiving a speedy Succour; and indeed a great number
of dispersed Fugitives and others got together from several parts of the Kingdom; or sent from the Turkish Army, came down, so that they were considerably encreased; and then they thought upon the readiest means to procure a speedy deliverance of the place. But their Efforts turned against them, for having attempted to force the Besiegers in their Retrenchments, they were briskly repulsed by a ter∣rible Volley of Musket-shot and Gra∣nado's; and being then pursued by a Regiment, and 200 Dragoons, they left 400 of their Men upon the place, and their Visier Calil Bassa was found amongst the rest of the Dead. After this blow, which was not a little advantagious to us, our General making Reflection, that the Enemies were often refresht with new Supplies, to the great disadvantage of his own Men, whereof he had lost a great number, without any hopes of re∣cruiting them, he at last concluded that the whole Success depended upon the Defeat of the Turkish Camp; where∣fore he applyed himself to whatever might contribute to make this At∣tempt
successful and advantagious, he animated his Troops, took his Mea∣sures, gave Orders and saw them Ex∣ecuted so well, that he not only for∣ced the Ottomans from their Camp, but put them to so great a rout, that flying with precipitation, there were a great number of them cut in pieces by our Forces in the pursuit. They left the Christians a considerable Boo∣ty, consisting of six Brass Guns and much other Arms, all sort of Ammu∣nition and Implements of War, 300 Horse, a great many Tents and Co∣lours, amongst which the General-Standard, shewing, by the Horse Tails that adorned it, the Quality of the Commander, who was Machumat Bas∣sa, who had the entire Conduct of the Army, and was killed, as we said before. After so fortunate an Adventure, the Venetians found themselves freed from the great Obstacles of the Turks that were encamped without the Place; and being Masters of the Field, they had hopes of soon putting the Besieged out of all thoughts of defence. They prepared for a general Assault,
springing a Mine, whose Effect rought them to an Attack for three Hours; the besieged withstood them with an incredible Valour and Oppo∣sition, fatal to a great many Nobles and Valiant Souldiers, who perisht there. This considerable loss gave a few moments breathing to the Attack, put the Courage wherewith they a∣gain fell on made the besieged think it high time to come to a Capitulation, as they testified by hanging out a white Standard on the Rampart: Arms then were laid down to regulate the Articles of the Capitulation, but this was only a trick of Ottoman Perfidi∣ousness, who made a feigned shew of Rendition, to procure a greater loss to the Besiegers, by a brisk and unex∣pected Assault: The Venetians also took a more firm Resolution than ever to put an end to the Siege, which had already continued Nine and forty days, and having swept the Ramparts with their Shot, mounted the Walls and entered the Town, where being heated as they were with the Assault, they made a dreadful slaughter of all the Inhabitants, without regard of
Sex or Age. They found there 128 Pieces of Canon, of which 66 were Brass, besides a great quantity o Ammunition and Victuals. There happened during the space of so long a Siege several Remarkable matters that would make a great Vo∣lum. I shall but touch at some of the most Considerable, and for those, my design is rather to beget an admirati∣on of the extraordinary Valour there shewn by its Assailants, who were distinguisht either by Birth or their great Employs, and fell there a Sacri∣fice for Glory; than to open our Wounds and renew our Grief for their loss and our Misfortunes: a∣mongst others was the Death of la Tour, Commander General by Land, and Knight of Malta; of the Prince of Brunswick, and of the Prince of Savoy: These Illustrious Warriours gave in the face of the Enemy suffi∣cient Proofs of the greatness of their Courage, answerable to the deserved high Thoughts conceived of their Merit. To these great Persons we may add, as he justly deserves a more than ordi∣nary
remembrance, that excellent aptain Francesco Ravagnini, but 34 ears old, Brother to Girolamo; e have been informed of this parti∣lar Circumstance of his Death, hich alone merits an eternal remem∣ance amongst Men. At the last Pe∣ods of his Life, after having made s Will for the distribution of his state, he earnestly desired, that after s death, his Body might be buried o where but in Coron, testifying, by at, his assurance, that the place ould be taken; and nothing can ore demonstrate with what ardor he ust necessarily go to the Attack, an this firm perswasion of their be∣g Crowned with an happy success. After being a little recovered of the reat fatigues of this Siege, the Gene∣al raised a Trophy of the great Stan∣ard taken from the Enemies, and an Explication was made of the words hat were upon it; with a general Ap∣lause the Ornament of the Golden tar was conferred by the Republick on his Brother Lorenzo, as a recom∣pence for his great Services. The ta∣king of Coron gave the People a per∣fect
joy and satisfaction, testified p¦lickly by them, especially in their ¦ving Thanks to the God of Arm and Supream Triumpher, who  given them so great a Victory o the Enemys of his Faith. The  accompanied by the whole Sen with an Infinite Concourse of Peop went to the Church of St. Mark, a after a Solemn Mass, Te Deum was sun and the same was done in all  Churches with all imaginable Po and Ceremony. The Relation of the Battel befo Coron, by the Venetian For against the Ottomans, the 7th. Aug. 1685. With the Descript¦on and Draught of the Standar and Horses Tails, taken from t Turks. WHen the Venetian Army w the Auxiliary Troops bega to form the Siege of Corn, there ca down from that side towards t
PLAN DELA VILLE ET FORTERESSE DE CORON Avec les Campems de plan of Coron
VEUE DE CORON view of Coron
VEUE DE CORON DU CÔTÉ DU GOLFE view of Coron
DESSEIN DES QUEUES Prises avec L'ENTENDARD par les VENE TIENS Sur les Tures a'la Bataille DEVANT CORON l'an. 1685. depiction of horse tails
Eendart pris Sur les Tures par l'arm o des Venetiens à la Bataille donneé devant Coron. 1685. depiction of standard
Land a powerful Succour of Turks, who lodging themselves within sight of ours, so much the more encouraged the Besieged, already sufficiently ani∣mated to make an obstinate defence, by the advantages of the steep and difficult Situation of the place, and the abundance of Provisions and Am∣munitions they were stored with, and maintained with a very strong and nu∣merous Garrison. They were in hopes with the aid of this new Army of Ottomans, which now were advan∣ced within Pistol-shot of our Tren∣ches, they might raise the Siege and spoil our design; and indeed the Turks that were encamped without the place acted for its defence what∣ever might be expected from desperate and bold Men. They attempted se∣veral times to become Masters of a Bonnet which commanded their Camp, but were still repulsed. This retarded the Besiegers, and was an hindrance to their Works and Endea∣vours to reduce the place; but the General took a Resolution to play a Mine of an hundred Barrels of Pow∣der: this was performed the 24 of July,
although with but little Effect, con¦trary to the hopes of the Success o this Work; then the Turks broke into the Venetians Lines to gain their de¦red Object, the aforesaid Bonnet, but when they thought themselves sun of it, the General poured upon them a Body of Foot and Dragoons, and reinforced by the Maltese Forces, wh Attacked them at the very entrance o the Bonnet with so much Force and Valour for three hours, for so long the Combat lasted, that in the end our Forces replanted there the white Colours. The Turks that were driven from it endeavoured to shelter them∣selves from our Shot, under the Co∣vert of some Trees, but they were for∣ced from thence also; there were left 400 of them dead upon the place, and as many wounded: Ours got by this Action several worthy Spoils, a∣mongst the rest seventeen Standards; and at their return into their Tren∣ches, they exposed to the view of the Besieged 130 Turks Heads, as a fright∣ful dismaying Spectacle. There were not above an hundred and thirty Christians killed and
wounded, amongst which the Gene∣l by Land ended his days; Com∣ander la Tour, of the Order of Mal∣ a Captain, well meriting the Grief f the whole Army; notwithstand∣g the loss sustained by the Turks, ey were not less obstinate in their efence: Ours on the other side to ve them more terrible Effects of eir Power, made a furious discharge f their Cannon, Bombes, and ones; at the same time the Turks July 30. llyed again after their slight, and creased by a great number of Soul∣ers got together from all Parts of the orea, and with the Forces of the aptain Bassa, again attempted with eater impetuosity than before, to row themselves into the Venetian renches; but so great a discharge of usket and Granadoes was made upon em, that they were obliged to re∣eat, and were followed by the Regi∣ent of Colonel Bianchli with 200 Dra∣ons up to their own Retrenchments:  this Action 400 of them were left ead; but what most increased their ss was, that a Cannon Shot took off alil Bassa Visier Commander Gene∣ral
of the Ottoman Army, and we lost but forty of our Men, yet all these losses would not abate the Turkish Pride, and bring them to yield; for they knew where to gather a recruit of fresh Troops, and omitted not daily to disturb the Venetians in their Tren∣ches. These frequent Attacks had much lessened our Men, who were besides much harrased with continual Action; so that doubtless 'twas very needful for the General to encourage them, which he did, shewing himself a fearless Example of Valour, being the first in all Dangers and fatigues. In the end this prudent Comman∣der finding the only means to reduce the place, was to force the Enemys Camp, proposed the Design to the Council of War, which was appro∣ved of by them. He drew out of the Gallies 1500 Voluntiers, who under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Magnani landed about Mid-night, and next day being the 7th. of August 1200 of them filed off to the left of the Enemys Retrenchments by the Entrance of a Valley, and the rest of them went to the right; at the
same time the other Troops had or∣der to follow their Motions, to be ready to give them a speedy Succour at necessary places, so to favour and promote the design. Twilight of the next Morning be∣ing come, two Barrels of Powder were fired, as a Signal, which was immediately followed with a dis∣charge of all the Cannon, and surious Salvo of all the Musketeers, with a continual siring on the Front and Flank of the Enemies Camp. This brisk and unexpected Assault put the Turks into an extream disorder, and the forwardest of them began to give back and sly, without being able to be retained by the Example of the most fearless, or the Commands of their Officers; all yield, and the Venetians find no more resistance, but make a continual Butchery of the Turks, scarce any escaping their Swords. The Event was such, that the Victory which the Venetians gain∣ed in a very short time, was accom∣panied with the entire Defeat of their Enemies, and the Ground was all co∣vered with dead and dying Men,
and Streams of the unbelieving Blood ran down; in this Action but few of the Christians were lost or wounded. A very rich Booty was found in the Turks Camp of Artillery, Arms, Ammunition and Provision, with a∣bove 300 Horses, Tents, Standards, six Brass Guns, three whereof were marked with St. Mark of Venice, be∣sides these the Imperial Standard a∣dorned with Horse Tails, the mark of a general Command and a nume∣rous Army. By the order of the Senate this Monument of their Victory was de∣signed for the Church of the Tolen∣tins of Venice, to be there for ever exposed to the Eyes of the People, over the Altar of St. Gaetan, as an Eternal Memorial that this Saints Festival was the day whereon the Venetians had so Glorious a Success against the Infidels; and at the same time it was Decreed that every year on the same day, this Festival should be kept with all the Solemnity pos∣sible, conformable to what was then done. The most Serene Doge, with
the whole Senate and a general Con∣course of all the City, went on Wed∣nesday the Twelfth of September, car∣rying the Standard with the Tails to that Church, where they sung a Te Deum, and a solemn Mass was Cele∣brated in Thanks to God, to the great Comfort and Edification of the People. The Figure which we have given represents the Magnificence of the Standard, and form of the Batons and Tails; the whole was designed and graved with so much care and exactness, that one who has the Skill of Blazonry, will easily comprehend not only its Grandeur, but likewise the Colours of this Standard; wherefore 'tis needless to particularise it here: It was thought best to oblige the Curi∣ous with the interpretation of the Turkish Characters that make the Moon, and the Faces of the Lance on the end of the Standard.
On the right side of the Standard are read these Words, In the Name of the most High and Almighty God, God the Lord of all, and of the holy Prophet above all other Saints, Maho∣met Abubechir, Homer, Osman, Ali. On the Reverse. There is no other God but one only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet: Our God; thou art the God of Nations; thou art the Soveraign Good and Dispencer of Good. Kalil Bassa. On the Face of the Standard are seen these Words repeated, There is no other God but one only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.
The Turks shew these Tails as a sign of their Resolution, to make new Levies, and that a great Army will march; and afterwards they give them to him that is to be the Commander in chief, as a sign of good Augury. This Custom took its rise amongst them, from an Adven∣ture that happened to them, when they first began to establish their Ty∣rannick Rule out of their own Coun∣try. In a Battel their Enemy made 6000 of them Prisoners, who took occasion to throw off the Victors Yoak, and set themselves at Liberty; and wanting Standards to range themselves under, they thought upon, and made use of some Horses Tails for that purpose, since which time they have still continued the Custom; calculating the future by their first Success, and think themselves, under these Colours, able to deal with the most Couragious of their Enemies, and resist their most furious Onsets. But as once when the Sabins, a proud and fierce People, planted their Stan∣dard in the Face of the Romans to af∣front them, with these words; Sabinis
Populis Quis Resistet; Who dares resist the Sabin People. The Romans an∣swered them with an equal fierceness, in words beginning with the same Let∣ters. Senatus Populus Que Romanus, The Senate and Roman People. So the Perfidious Ottomans will find their vain and ridiculous Sign opposed by the Sign that is revered in Paradise, which will one day procure their final Ruine, when we shall have made our selves worthy of this Favour from Heaven by our constant Prayers. Calamata. ON the left Bank of the River Spir∣nazza which Strabo calls Pamis∣sus, Ptolomey Pamissus, Niger Stronio, and Giovio Tifoo; on the hanging of a Hill lyes the Fortress of Calamata of a large extent, by Baudrand called Thelame, Theramme, Thuria and Abia, from the Nurse of Helles one of Hercu∣les's Sons: Its Situation is in an open place in the Province of Belvedere, it is well Peopled, and though the Town
CALAMATA view of Calamata
BATAILLE DEVAN CALAMATA depiction of battle at Calamata
has no Walls to repulse the Attacks of the Enemy, yet upon a mount near it stands a strong Castle, with regular Fortifications, able to guard it from all dangerous Incursions. Though Calamata be but a little way from Co∣ron, yet it stands not on the Gulf, which is indifferently called the Gulf of Coron, and Calamata. In the Year 1659. there was a very strong and numerous Garrison, who hindred Six thousand of the Magnotes who performed the Greek Rites, from shaking off the Barbarian Yoak, as they designed; they offered them∣selves to General Morosini, and testifi∣ed their great Zeal that they always had toward the Republick. The Ge∣neral respecting their Generous incli∣nation, and to take away all impedi∣ment of their deliverance, caused a sufficient number of Forces to land, under the Command of Chevalier de Gremouille, who caused them to ad∣vance to Attack the Castle; it hap∣pened at the time when our Troops drew near it, that they were met by a great Body of Turks that ha∣sted to its Succour. Captain Georgio
Cornaro had the Fortune to rout them, and that this Success might procure another of more importance, he cau∣sed some Venetians to enter into the Castle, together with the Turks, as if they had been all one; those of the Garrison never perceiving the Strata∣gem till it was too late to hinder its sad Effects, so that they thought only upon flight; and thus they became Masters of the place without striking a blow. They found in the place a great Provision of Victuals, and af∣ter they had taken as much as they could dispose of, and burnt the rest, with a good part of the Country, they left the Castle and returned to their Ships, leaving the place to be reinha∣bited by the Turks. This place was again taken by the Venetians, on the day of the Exaltati∣on of the holy Cross, Anno 1685. un∣der the command of the same Gene∣ral Morosini; he made Governour there, Baron General Degenfeld, who fterwards had Orders to raze it to the Ground. The Plan we give there∣of represents it as it was when it was taken.
ZARNATA view of Zarnata
VEUE DE ZARNATA. view of Zarnata
Zarnata. ZArnata is a Fortress much favou∣red by Nature, but made much ore considerable by Art; its Figure  almost round, and its Situation on  very pleasant Hill: in the Year 1685. he Captain Passa encamped within ive Miles of this place, and though he had a numerous and powerful Ar∣my, yet he contented himself in be∣ng an admirer of the Valour and Forces of the Venetian Army, with∣out daring to attempt any Act of Hostility; willing rather to expose the place to the Enemy without Suc∣cour, than himself by defending it to a Ruin, which he thought inevitable: After this manner the Garison delive∣red it self up to General Morosini, up∣on Conditions that were upon that account exactly observed; that they should carry off their Lives and Bag∣gage untoucht; for 60 of them who went out of the place the eleventh of September, were convoyed to a certain place prefixt, without receiving the
least violence or insulation from our Part. The Aga that Commanded them had no mind to go with them, for fear of losing his Head; but chose rather to submit himself to the Generosity of the Christians, and be∣ing retired into their Camp, he ob∣tained of Angelo Michieli Captain of the Slaves to stay aboard his Galley. The General gave the Govern∣ment of this place to two remarkable Voluntiers, in Qality of Represen∣tants, named Bartolomeo Contarini, and Angelo Emo, leaving a Garrison of One hundred and fifty Souldiers, un∣der the direction of Lieutenant Colo∣nel Prastini. Chielefa. CHielefa is a Fortress of great im∣portance, whether it be conside∣red for its advantages of Nature or Art; it has its Situation upon a steep Rock a Mile and half from the Sea, it is a Mile in Circuit of a Qua∣drangular Figure, and Flanked
CHIELAFA plan of Chielafa
with five great Towers about its Walls. It is not far from the place where once Vitulo stood, a famous Trading Town, from whence the Port that is near it took and retains the name of Vitulo, though it is now but little fre∣quented, being neither commodious nor safe. When General Morosini was upon his expedition by War, to increase the Venetian Conquests, he presented him∣self with his Army before this For∣tress, and began to Attack it with great Vigour; but the Garrison thinking it self not in a Condition to oppose so great a Captain, endeavou∣red to procure a favourable Capitu∣lation. The fearful Turks made humble re∣quest to the General to spare their Lives, and permit them to go out without suffering any Violence from the Christians. Assar Passa, who re∣sided there in quality of Comman∣der of the whole Province, went first our, carrying the Keys of the Place to the Generals Galley, followed by a thousand Persons, whereof Three
hundred and fifty embarked them∣selves on the Ships of Pisani, some∣time director of this Fortress, who transported them, with what Bag∣gage they had saved, to the Isle of Staggs. After they had returned Thanks to Heaven, and planted the Standard of the Cross, and the glorious St. Mark, the General establisht for Proveditor ordinary Bernardo Balbi, and Lorenzo Venier for extraordinary. A Relation of the Victory obtained by the Venetians, over the Turks; Before the Fortress of Chielefa, on the first of April 1686. THe Ottomans have now made Proof of what often happens, when by endeavouring to regain what we have lost, we draw upon us new and sometimes greater Losses. They intended at the beginning of the Campagn, to retake the Fortress of Chielefa, which the Venetians had justly taken from them the year be∣fore;
confiding in an Army which they had gotten together of Ten thousand Foot and fifteen hundred Horse: with a great number of Pio∣niers, they began to Attack the place, playing upon it with six great Pieces of Ordnance, fully perswad∣ed that they durst not, or at most could not maintain the place long; nevertheless they were ten days with∣out much advancing their Works, or finding the Besieged any thing in∣clined to Rendition; it fell out that the Venetian Army hasting to their aid Encountred the Turks, and the At∣tack was so brisk and furious, that the Insidels betook themselves to their Heels as their only refuge. The Defeat was so hasty, that they left a very Rich Booty to the Con∣querors; and a great many of their Men dead upon the place.
Passava. PAssava is a Fortification seated in the Province of Maina, near the Shore of the Gulf of Colochina, upon Cape Matapan, opposite to Chi∣elefa and Port Vitulo; its Figure is as we have represented it in our Draught thereof; it is built upon an Eminence, but is altogether irregular, and not in a condition to hinder the inroads of the Enemy into the Province. Captain General Morosini caused a Twenty fourth of September 1685. great Party of Magnotes to make an halt before this Fortress, at the same time that the Turks went out of Chielefa, to set up the Standard of St. Mark, but perceiving the Garri∣son ready to march out, and stayed but to transport the great Guns of the place, he sent a Detachment of five hundred Foot, under the Com∣mand of Sergeant Major Gregorevick a Forreigner, to reinforce the Magno∣tes, and hinder their design. The Turks discovering at a distance the
Venetian Colours, in a great fright and disorder ran and left their Post. So we became Masters of the place without a stroak: It was not judged worth the leaving a Garrison to maintain it; but on the contrary it was resolved to raze it, which was the more readily concluded on, in that it was an useless place, and that there was very near to it a strait passage where a few Men might put a stop to, and engage a very numerous Army. Mysitra. AS this place has had several ap∣pellations, so some have chose to call it rather by one than ano∣ther; it was at the first called Sparta, then Lacedaemon, and at last Mysitra; it is one of the most fa∣mous of all the Graecian Cities, and has been of so vast an extent, that in Forty eight Sta∣dia make 5440 Geo∣metrick Polybius's time it contained a Circuit of Eight and forty Furlongs. Its Fi∣gure was almost round, and its Situ∣ation
was partly upon an Eminence, and partly upon the declivity of the Hill. The Mountain Taygeta com∣mands it on the West. From that vastness it once had, it is now shrunk to a little Town, scarce∣ly shewing any remains of its for∣mer Glory: Although it had no Walls for Eight hundred Years, yet it maintained it self very well a∣gainst its Enemies, and of those that afterwards incompassed it, though they have been often rebuilt; there is now only the Castle and the Foun∣dations, where they once stood, to be seen. It has but two great Gates, one on the North side towards Na∣poli di Romania, the other on the West towards Exokorion, to which answer two High-ways or great Roads, one called Aphetais or grand Bazar, the other Hellerion. The Inhabitants are exposed to ex∣cessive heats during the Summer: for besides that the City lyes full South, being seated at the Foot of the Moun∣tain, the Suns Rays by this oppositi∣on are reflected and redouble the heat.
The Learned Monsieur La Guilleti∣ere being some years ago upon the place, took the height of the Pole three several days one after another, viz. the 19. 20, and 21, of June, and regulating himself by the Meridian height of the Sun, by the Shadow of a Cylindrical Body, divided into a thousand equal Parts, the difference of the Shadows at these three Ob∣servations was unperceivable, and the length of the Shadow was still found to be 211 Parts of the Cylinder; whence he concluded the Sun was 12 degrees and 56 Minutes from the Zenith, and the Latitude of Mysitra 35 degrees and 26 Minutes. The City is divided into four Quarters, each of which being sepa∣rated from the rest, makes of it self a disunited Body. The Castle is one of them, the City another, and two Suburbs the other; where∣of the one is called Melokerion, that is to say the middle Suburb, and the other is called Exokorion or the outward Suburb, by the Turks named likewise Maratche.
The Exokorion is separated from the other three by the River Vasli Potamos, and has no Communicati∣on with them but by a Stone Bge. The Castle named to Castron is seated on an Eminence, is of a conical Figure, and has good Walls; it had some years since Ten Pieces of Artillery, and a Garrison of Eighteen or Twenty Janisaries Com∣manded by a Disdar that seldom re∣sides there. There are always Magazines well stored with Corn for the Armies use, for each Turkish Family is ob∣liged to bring his Corn in to renew the Store every year. There are al∣so some Cisterns, and in the midst of the Castle a Mosque, once a Christian Church. This Citadel is so advantagiously situated, that Histories assure us it was never taken, though Mahomet the Second and the Venetians have At∣tacked it with great Vigour. It was a work of the Despotes in the declining of the Greek Empire, and that because the old Castle sea∣ted
on the opposite Hill, whereof now the Ruines are only to be seen, did not sufficiently Command the Town. It is not certain who was the first Founder of Sparta, Historians not yet agreeing thereon: Some say 'twas Spartus the Son of King Amiclas; others, the Princess, King Lacedaemon's Wife, who was called Sparta; many affirm 'twas Cecrops, who likewise founded Athens; and again others attribute its Foundation to Spartus the Son of Phoroneus, King of Argos, Contemporary with Jacob the Patriarch, 1763 Years be∣fore the Birth of Christ, since ac∣cording to the Calculation of Fa∣ther Petau, the Patriarch Jacob was born 1876 Years before the Year of our Redemption, so that to this present Year 1687, there are 3422 Years since the building of this Ci∣ty; therefore it is older than Rome 983 Years, than Carthage 867, than Syracusa 995, than Alexandria 1405, than Lyons 1639, and than Marseilles 1136.
There never was any Nation in the whole World that may be com∣pared to the Lacedaemonians for Poli∣ty, and they never had a King but one of their own People; and these People only have seen upon their Royal Throne two Virtuous and de∣serving Heads circled with the same Diadem; and often amongst them have been sound Prodigies for Wis∣dom and the Art of Governing, that they have been thought the only Politicians; and upon these Foun∣dations 'tis that it could endure and flourish 800 years; it declined in its Prosperity and Glory, when it lost Colemanes the third King of that name. Finally, the Eastern Empire ha∣ving been divided into Temata or general Governments, Lacedaemon was made an Appendant to the Em∣perors eldest Son; since when it lost its name of Lacedaemon, and was on∣ly called Sparta; and its Princes who had under their Dominion the whole Morea were called De∣spotes.
The Despote Theodorus, who E∣spoused the Daughter of Renier Prince of Athens, and was Brother to Andronicus and Emanuel, who succeeded each other in the Em∣pire; finding himself unable to at∣tempt to resist Bajazet, treated with Philibert de Naillac Prior of Aqui∣tain, and great Master of Rhodes, a∣bout the Sale of Sparta and Corinth; which Treaty was almost conclu∣ded, when Tamerlain Triumphing o∣ver Bajazet, the Spartans were so en∣couraged thereat, that they absolute∣ly refused to consent to Theodore's Alienation of Tzaconia, and the Peo∣ple being in a Tumult, the two De∣puties for the great Master, that were to take possession of the Go∣vernment had notice that it was their best way to retire, or other∣wise they should be treated as E∣nemies; and so they lost Corinth a∣gain, when they were already in possession thereof, and Theodore was not well pleased to refund the Money he had so lately singe∣red.
At last he dying, left the De∣spotate to one of his Nephews of his own name, Son to the Empe∣ror Emanuel: this new Despote mar∣ried an Italian Lady of the House of Malatesta, upon which that Fa∣mily grounds a right to the Duché of Sparta. Theodore the Second took a Resolution to go to Constantinople, to succeed his Brother John in the Empire, leaving his Despotate to his Brother Constantine; it was at this time that Amurath the First made an irruption into Tzaconia. Constan∣tine being raised to the Imperial Throne, Sparta fell to Demetrius, out of whose hands 'twas ravisht by Mahomet the Second, who barbarou∣sly sawed the Governour of the Ca∣stle in two. In the Year 1473 Benedetto Col∣leone, who had the command of the Venetian Army conquered Spar∣ta, and had well nigh reduced the Citadel. Sansovino shews us in his History, that this City toge∣ther with the whole Province was under the Republick, at the time
that Henry Dandolo was Prince of the Senate. A List of the Kings of Lacedae∣mon, in their Order, with the Years of their Reigns. Anno Mundi. 2862. EUristes the first King. Compend Hist. Ʋni∣vers. de Nic. Doglioni Part. ult. 2904. Agides. 2905. Achestrates. 2940. Labotes. 2977. Dosistes. 3006. Agesilaus. 3050. Archelaus. 3110. Telecus. 3150. Alcanenes, whose Reign ended in the Year 3187.
Maina at Cape Matapan. OF all the Promontories of Pelo∣ponnesus, that which shoots it self farthest into the Sea is the Cape of Matapan, which was once called Pliny, Se∣nec. Ptolom. Promontorium Taenarium, in the Bowels whereof is the Cave Taenarus, whose dreadful Mouth gave the Poets occasion to call it the en∣trance of Hell; and they added that the invincible Hercules came forth at this passage, Triumphant over Cerberus; from whence they say a∣mongst other Titles it had that of Taenarus, though others again will have its name from Taenarus, who sprung from Elaphus the Son of Ieanus, who marryed Elemanda the Daughter of Damasicles. The Sea is very deep round about Zonaro. Giovio. this Promontory, and there are two very Commodious Ports, as is well known to those who sail that way; the one is called the Port of Quails, from the prodigious number of
PLAN DE MAINA plan of Maina
CAP DE MATAPAN. view of Cape of Matapan
those fowl there found; the other the Port of Maina. Between these two Ports, and in the place of the Ruines where the Ancient Csare Campana Vol. 1. l. 1. Cersapo∣lis once stood; the Ottomans built a Fortress which they named As is seen in the Cart of the Plan of this For∣tress. Tur∣coogli Olimionas, which the Greeks interpret Castro di Maini, and the Turks Monige. Their design in this was thereby to bridle the Inhabi∣tants of Tzaconia; at this time this Province takes up an Baudrand Lex. Geog. Arm of the Maina, and extends it self a great way along the more Southern part of the Morea: The Men thereof are very Valiant, but some brisk Attempt of the Christians they would forward with their ut∣most power and good will; for at this time out of hatred to the Turks, and their Barbarous Government, as oft as they can they make their re∣treat into the dreadful holes of the Rocks, and hide themselves in the thick Forests, to avoid paying Tri∣bute and to breath a little Liber∣ty.
In the Year 1570. The Captain of the Gulf, Quirini, setting sail from Candia with twenty four Gallies, came to Anchor at Corfu, where be∣ing informed that this Fort was built upon that motive we have declared, immediately designed to Attack it; but before he attempted it he went into these two Ports, giving the Magnotes advice of his Magnati Campana. Design; who indeed on this occa∣sion gave good Proofs of their good Will and Courage. After a very sharp and brisk Combate, wherein the Turks had the worse, the Cap∣tain became Master of the Fort, and would not stir out of the Gulf, till he had taken away this Eye∣sore from a People so well in∣clined to the Republick: so having taken out whatever might be ser∣viceable, he caused it to be de∣molisht.
Malvasia or Malvoisie THe City commonly called Mal∣vasia, which Ptolomy named Epidaurus Limera, and Baudrand after Thucydides. others Monembasia, is situated on a Rock, from whence is a pleasant Prospect Eastwards over the Anci∣ent Laconia, a Region rude and un∣even, yet as Fertile as any part of Peloponnesus, this Province is at this day known by the name of Braccio di Maina, because it extends it self on the left side of that Arm where begins the Gulf, by Ptolomy called Argolicus Sinus, now the Gulf of Na∣poli di Romania. It has the Title of an Archbi∣shoprick; being blest with a very advantagious situation, for it is built on the Top of a Rock whose Bot∣tom is washt by the Waves of Ar∣chipelagus; yet it enjoys this benefit of Nature, that it has several sources of sweet clear Springs, which by watering the little Ground that is
about it, makes it so Fertile as to maintain the Garrison of the place, consisting of 50 or 60 Men, it is in∣accessible on all sides, but one place where it is defended with a very thick triple Wall, at which place is joyned to it a Suburb or Lower Town, of a considerable number of Houses, strengthened with a strong Rampart at that place, where the Inhabitants issue forth to go to the main Land, which is separated from the ground whereon this Town stands, and is united thereto by a Wooden Bridge of a good length; it has likewise a very spacious Port which is better defended than the Fortress. Its Territory bears a great quan∣tity of Raisins, and incomparable Wines are there made, not a whit yielding to any of the Wines of Candie. In times past the Graecians came from all Parts to this little Isle, to adore the God Aeculapius, whose Worship made the place famous through the World.
The People of Epidaurus when they were once deputed by their Commonalty to this place, as they sailed from Argos, which was their Country then, had several Dreams which made them hope for an hap∣py and prosperous Success in their Enterprize; and so being arrived at the Port, they determined there to settle a Colony and build a City, which they called Epidaurus; the Buildings are now wholly ruined by tim, that has been no more kind to that place than others, and the name is all that now remains. It is true that time and chance rules all things, an example where∣of is seen in the Fate of Malvasia or Epidaurus; for though its situa∣tion ought to render it invincible, yet it has for all that often by ill Fortune undergon several changes of Government. In the time when it was sub∣ject to the Emperors of Constan∣tinople it was taken from them; when the French and Venetians having made themselves Masters of that Empire,
and Baldwin Count of Flanders was Emperor, this place was given in Ann. 1204. Fee to a French Baron, called Guil∣laume, as a recompence for his great Services performed in that War; but at last Michael Paleologus having dispossessed the French, and being re∣installed in the Empire, he made the said Guillaume Prisoner, who at that time made a renunciation of all Right and Title to Epidaurus; the Baron being so escaped out of the Emperors hands came to Venice, and there made a donation of the same Rights and Pretensions to the Republick, affirming what he had done to Paleologus was extorted from him, and upon that account in∣valid, that Act being not volunta∣ry, but forced. So the Venetians re∣lying on this donation, set a great Army to Sea, and made them∣selves Masters of Malvasia, which they kept till the year 1537. when Solyman began to pass the bounds of Thrace, to invade the Graecian Empire, and endeavour the ruine of Christendom.
The Venetians most resented these Usurpations, and the Barbarous Conqueror not contented to have put several parts of their Dominions Ann. 1536. Paruta, p. 2. l. 9. to pay him Tribute, gave order to Cassin, Sangiac of the Morea, to lay Siege to and to reduce this People; who getting together a numerous Army began to execute his Orders. When Solyman reflecting upon the design, that to Attempt this place were to hazard the Reputation of his Forces and lose time, changed his mind and turned his Arms an∣other way; yet sometime after he Ann. 1537. returned thither, and reduced the place not by pure force but by assu∣rances of Peace. During the Wars of Candia and Dalmatia, when the Venetians, as much as in them lay, opposed the irruptions and violent inundations of the Enemy; General Foscolo being near Epidaurus with a Squadron of Twenty two Gallies, Eight tall Ships, and six Galeasses, went to At∣tack the Fort which the Ottomans had built without the Suburbs.
This Attack was very brisk, and the Venetians became Masters of the Fort in one day: but it happened as they put the Enemy to flight with loud shouts and crys, that a Mine took Fire under the Victorious, and left an Hundred and fifty of them dead, with as many hurt and wound∣ed. The Venetians revenged the Death of their Companions, entring the place with their Swords in their hands, and having demolisht the Fort, they left it, taking away with them Twenty two Cannons, wherewith the Enemies covered and defended the Saicks that came there to An∣chorage in the Port, waiting till a fit time to set sail for Candia offe∣red.
MALUASIA view of Maluasia
The Explication of the Letters in the Draught of Malva∣sia. A. THe old Tower. B. The Castle. C. The Gate of the For∣tress. D. The steep Rocks invi∣roning the place. E. The Suburb or lower Town. F. The Gate of the Sub∣urb. G. The Wooden Bridge which was broken by the Venetians. H. The Fort built by the Venetians to hinder all Succours.
Napoli di Romania. AMongst the celebrated Cities, once the glory of Argia, at this day called Saccania or Romania Minor, a very rich Part of the Morea, Napoli preserves to this time the re∣mains of its former Beauty; it is named by Sophianus, Napli, by the Greeks M. Spon. Voyage de Grace, l. 2. Anaplia, and by Ptolomey, Herod. Xenoph. Strab. Nauplia; this strong and trading Town was built by Nauplius the Son of Neptune, and Amimone in the innermost part of the Gulf, com∣monly called di Napoli, and by Pto∣lomey Argolicus Sinus, on the point of a little Promontory which ex∣tends it self on two sides; that which is towards the Sea makes a large Port and very safe, and the o∣ther is a great hindrance to the Com∣merce of those that pass that way, because they cannot climb up it but by one very steep narrow Path, which lies between mount Palamedes and the Sea.
The City is situated near to this place, and with very considerable advantages which it has on three sides, puts as it were a Bridle on the Waves of the Sea; whose Shores are so high and steep, that in all ha∣zardous Attempts they absolutely hinder the Enemy not only from landing, but likewise from battering the Walls of the City from their Gallies; the Bay is very spacious within, but it is stopt up at its en∣trance, and no Gallies can get in till they have passed through a Chanel, where they are exposed to the great Artillery. The City is defended by a Citadel well provided, and which being built upon a Shelf or Rock, about 300 Foot out in the Sea, cannot be Attacked on that side toward the Land, and the Rocks that surround it prevent all surprize: In fine, on which side soever one looks upon the Town, one shall find that Nature and Art have conspired as much as possible to render it strong: Nor Baudrand. Hofman. Laurem∣berg. has it wanted its honourable Titles, for it was once a Bishops Seat, whose
Metropolis was Corinth; and at this day it is an Archbishops it self, and one of the Chief. It is distant Fifty five Miles from Athens; sixty from Mysitra; Thirty six from Corinth: It is the Residence of the Governour of the Province, in which are reckon∣ed to be Sixty thousand Greeks, besides a great number of other In∣habitants, which according to Pau∣sanias were anciently Aegyptians, who inhabited there with Danaus, as in a Colony of their own. Napoli has tasted of the same Fate with o∣ther places, to pass under the Rule of several Princes and forms of Go∣vernment. As Paulus Ranusius reports, it was Paulo Ra∣nusio querra di Const. 1. 5. p. 160. taken Anno 1205. by the Venetians joyned with the French; but some time after King Giovanissa turning his Arms against this City, though he found it well furnisht with Am∣munition and Men, yet he gave so Vigorous an Assault to it, that he carryed it; where at his entrance he gave terrible Marks of his Rage, for he put the Commander and the
whole Garrison to the Sword, and Sacked the Town, which was at that time rich, powerful, and seated in the best part of the whole Romania. Verdizzoti is of Opinion, that in the 13. Century this City being in the Possession of Marie of Erigane, the Widow of Peter, the Son of Frederic Cornarus Piscopia, this Lady not finding her self able to oppose so many powerful Enemies, that had a mind to the place, especially Bajazet above the rest, made a grant of it to the Republick; under this new Rule Napoli quietly let some Ages pass over, yet not without of∣ten tasting those Misfortunes, whereto all places are subject, that are the aim of the Ottoman desire; for being several times Attacked by those Barbarians, it often proved the Misery of want and Famine, toge∣ther with the eating and tearing Misfortune of seditious Persons, cau∣sed by these frequent allarms. Mahomet the Second greatly thir∣sted to ravish it out of the Arms
of its lawful Prince; and thinking there was no other way to obtain his end, but by Arms, he gave Orders to Macmut Bassa, to go and Besiege it with a powerful Army; but this Siege was not Successful; for having found the Defendants very Valiant and able to resist him, armed with a constant resolution to withstand all his violences, he was obliged af∣ter several Attempts and great Los∣ses sustained to quit his Enter∣prize. Solyman the most Ambitious of all the Turkish Emperors, commanded Cassin, Sangiac of the Morea, to go and form a Siege before this place, with proportionable Forces to the strength thereof; but Cassin had not herein a more fortunate Success than Macmut; for after having obstinate∣ly indeavoured a long time to take the place, and sustained great loss from the Valour of the Inhabitants, he was forced to retire; yet scarce two years past ere he returned to the Attack, and won the place, though in reality it was not by force
VEUE DE NAPOLI D Romane du cot du Port view of Napoli di Romania
NAPOLI DE ROMANIE view of Napoli di Romania
Arms, for it still approved it lf invincible, but by an agreement ade by the Republick, which much ressed and tired out with continual ars and want, sought after some efreshments of Peace and Re∣ose. The Explication of the Letters in the Draught of Napoli di Romania. A. THe Fortress on that side towards the Sea. B. The Chain which shuts up the Port. C. A Cavalier raised upon the Fortress of the Sea. D. The Port capable of a Great Fleet. E. Another Chain to hinder the Entrance into the Port. F. A Battery of great Artillery. G. The Mosques. H. The City.
I. Another Battery of great ∣tillery. K. The Chanel three  broad. L. Part of the Gulf of Roman. M. Mount Palamedes. N. The Fort upon the main Land, to which the Chain that shuts up the Port is fastened. Argos. AS Baudrand the famous Geogra∣pher of our times reports, there have been three Cities called by the same name of Argos; one which Pliny calls Argos Amphilochium which is in Epirus. The Strabo. Second Argos Pe∣lasgicum in Macedonia, and the Third Argos Peloponnesiacum. Of the two first we will make mention each in their place; at present we will speak of the third, which was once called Phoronia of Phoroneus; Hippobote from the great numbers of Horses bred
ere; Jasia from the name of a Va∣nt Captain; besides these it was lled Diposia and Jappia; it is the apital City of the famous Argia, and ckoned amongst the noblest Cities  Peloponnesus. It is seated on the iver Planissa which the Latines name achus, at Thirty six miles distance om Corinth, Sixty from Sparta, and ive from Napoli di Romania, it is the at of a Bishop, Suffragan to the rchbishop of Corinth; it has on the West the Mountain Cronia, on the North Cleone, and on the South the Ruins of the Antient Mycenia, raised n the Ruines of some other Neigh∣bouring Cities, it vaunted that the World could not shew its like for Magnificence; and there is a Tradition that from her all the Greeks took the name of Argives, as if to testifie that she alone was enough to maintain the Glory and honour of the whole Nati∣on at the greatest height desirable. Its Rule began with Inachus its first Founder, in the year of the World 2197. and continued for 546. years till Acrisius who was slain by his Nephew
Perseus An. 2742. several Authors, a Patena, Clemens Alexandrinus, &c. ¦firm that this Inachus was contempo¦rary with Moses; but Eusebius sh the contrary, and proves that he lie 346 years before the Children of Isra went out of Aegypt. A Chronological Table of the King of Argos. Anno Mundi. 2197. I Nachus Reigned 50.   2247. Phoroneus Reign. 60.   2307. Apis Reigned 35.   2342. Argos Reigned 70.   2412. Ciraso Reigned 54.   2466. Phorbas Reigned 35.   2501. Triopas Reigned 46. Years. 2547. Crotopas Reigned 21.   2568. Sthenelas Reigned 11.   2579. Danaa Reigned 50.   2629. Linceus Reigned 41.   2670. Abbas Reigned 23.   2693. Proeto Reigned 17.   2710. Acrisius Reigned 31.   2741. Perseus was the last King.    
There are Authors who besides these, ake mention of Megaphentas, Anax∣goras, Melampus and Bias, which they dd to the Kings of Argos. After having been for a long time he principal City of the Morea, it be∣ame a Commonwealth, and in that quality had a part in all the Grecian Wars, as is seen in Pausanias, Moreri nd Lauremberg: At this day 'tis but a miserable hole giving shelter to a very few Inhabitants, and retains only the name of its past Glory. Now that this City belongs to the Venetians seve∣ral Historians affirm, and the Decrees ratifie; and if they agree not as to the manner, yet they all unanimously conclude it has been justly enjoyed by them. Baudrand pretends that the Duke of Sparta offering it to sale to them that would give most for it, 'twas purchased by the Republick for a great Sum of Money. It appears by a Decretal of the Se∣nate in the sixteenth of March, Anno 1383. which we have here rehearsed, That Peter, the Son of Frederick Cornaro, at the same time possessed Argos and Na∣poli di Romania. Verdizzoti assures the
same, adding that Marie d' Anguien,  Enguien, by corruption called d' Erig∣no, being left without Children, t Widow of Peter became Governess of Argos, as pretending a right to it; but not being in a condition to defend it against so many powerful Enemies, especially the ambitious Bajazet, who was the most to be feared, she offered to deliver it to the Senate: and this Act of Marie d' Erigano happ'ned in the Month of December, Anno 1388. as we shall prove by a Copy of the Ori∣ginal that is in the Library of that No∣ble and Honourable Seigneur Giov. Bap∣tista Cornaro Piscopia, Proveditor of St. Mark, the worthy Descendent of Peter, and the Father of that Illustrious He∣lena, the Beauties of whose Mind were much more surprising and admirable, than those of the Body of the fair Grecian Helen: who though cut off in the She died in the 31. year of her age, on the 26. of Ju∣ly, 1684. at Badova and is there bu∣ried in the Church of St. Justin. Flower of her Age, yet shewed the World prodigious Effects of her Knowledge and Parts. In the Year, 1463. the Republick sent to make its Complaints against Mahomet the Second then reigning, for that, contrary to the Faith of their
Treaties, he shewed himself as an Ene∣my, by putting Argos under the Go∣vernment of the Flambular or Sanza∣hei of Corinth. These Complaints produced no good effect with that bar∣barous Prince; wherefore deliberating on the Means to obtain Justice upon this his infringement of the Peace, War was concluded upon; and Bertoldo d' Estée, who commanded the Army of the Republick, was sent before the Place with fifteen thousand men, who soon won the Fort: The Cittadel made some resistance, but that likewise in a short time delivered up it self. It happ'ned afterwards that this General dying, Dauch Passa soon put to rout the Vene∣tian Army, his own consisting of twenty four thousand men. Thus Argos was presently retaken again by him, and threescore Cross-bow-men of Candia made Prisoners and cruelly put to death.
The Copy of the Writing before mentioned taken from the Ori∣ginal of the Act, contained in the Manuscript History of Ra∣phael Caresini Great Chancellor of Venice, added as a Continu∣ation of the Chronicle of the Doge Andreas Dandola. NObilis vir Petrus Cornario quon∣dam domini Federici, dominaba∣tur Terris, Castris, & Fortiliciis, Argos, & Neapolis, vigore dotis uxoris suae e∣gregiae dominae Mariae, siliae quondam e∣gregii viri domini Guidonis de Engino, quo quidem Petro Cornario florida aetate, absque liberis defuncto, ipsa loca manifesto discrimini subjacebant, ne ad manus Tur∣carum, seu Graecorum pervenirent, in evi∣dens damnum praefactae dominae Mariae, ad quam de jure spectabunt. Quare Du∣calis excellentia, 1388. indictione XII. die Sabbathi 12. Decembris, ad instantem supplicationem ejusdem dominae, ipsa loca, & terras emit ab ea jure proprio, duca∣torum boni auri, & justi ponderis quingen∣torum
solvendorum omni anno in perpetu∣m ipsi dominae Mariae de Engino, & suis aeredibus descendentibus. Ipsa potest te∣tari, & per testes dimittere singulis, & uibus sibi placuerit de pecunia Commu∣is Venetiarum ducatorum 200. auri: & in ipso casu illustrissimus dominus Dux, & Commune Venetiarum sint abso∣uti ab omni debito, & prestatione alicui acienda de pecunia, vel alia re pro dictis, uae remaneant, & sint, perpetuò, & liberè, & absolutè praefacti domini Ducis, & Communis Venetiarum. Insupèr praeliba∣us dominus Dux & Commune Venetia∣um promisit ipsi dominae Mariae dare, & solvere omni anno, in vita sua tantùm du∣atos 200 auri de provisione, ultrà supra∣script. duc. 500 auri. Si verò ipsa loca erderentur, illustrissimus dominus Dux, & Commune Venetiarum non teneatur in liquo haeredibus ipsius dominae Mariae, do∣ec ipse dominus Dux, & Commune Ve∣etiarum reacquisiverint, & iterum posse∣derint ipsa loca, & utrúmque eorum. In∣supèr ipsi dominae Mariae non potest impo∣i per excellentissimum dominum Ducem, & dominum Venetiarum aliquod grava∣men, sive onus faciendi imprestita, aut a∣lias impositiones, occasione istarum pecunia∣rum
quantitatum: Veruntamen remane in libertate Ducalis dominii providendi disponendo tantam pecuniam Commu Venetiarum ad officium Imprestitorum, a∣alibi, ex qua habeatur de proprio suo redi annuatim summa septingentorum ducat∣rum auri, scribendo ipsum capitale cùm ge∣tibus suprascriptis. Caeterum praefata domina Maria de En∣gino motu proprio, spontè, & certa anii scientia, considerans salutem, & conserva∣tionem personae, & status sui post dictum consistere in benignitate illustrissimi Duta∣lis dominii Venetiarum, à quo velut Fili benignissimè tractata est, & tractari digno∣scitur, promisit, & juravit absquè requi∣sitione alicujus, provido viro Marco de Raphaelis Notario, velut publicae Personae, & per eorumdem fieri fecit publicum in∣strumèntum 1388, die 17. Decembris, se toto tempore vitae suae non accipere mari∣tum, sive conjugem, nisi nobilem civem originarium Venetiarum, sub poena perden∣di statim ipso facto totaliter praetium, & provisionem praedictam ducatorum 500 annumeratim pro praetio dictorum locorum; & supra scriptos ducatorum 200 auri de provisione, & suprascripta 200 ducatos, quos per testamentum legare potest in casu,
quo ipsa moreretur absque haeredibus ab ea descendentibus. Exemplum. Mixtorum num 38. ad Cartas 14. 1383 Die 16. Martii in Rogatis, CAPTA. Cùm loca nobilis viri Ser. Petri Cor∣nario quondam Ser. Phaederici, scilicet Ar∣gos, & Neapolis fuerint, & sint ad ho∣norem nostri dominii, & pro omni bono respectu, pro statu nostro faciat, quod di∣cta loc conserventur in manibus dicti Ser. Petri ad honorem nostri dominii, & sicut sentitur, ad conservandum dicta loca ex∣pedit, ut Persona dicti Ser. Petri vadat ad dicta loca propter pericula, quae possent oc∣currere. Vadit pars, quod concedatur dicto Ser. Petro Cornario, quod ipse cùm illo numero Personarum, & familiae, quae videbuntur Dominis Consiliaris Capitibus, Sapientibus Ordimon, vel majori parti dicti Collegii possit ire, & conduci super Galeis Culphi in proximo exituris ad loca sua praedicta.
Etiam quia in numero istarum Galearu Culphi, quae armantur, erit una Gal grossa, potest ei optimè, & de nostra grati complaceri. Of the Confines of the MOREA. The Confines of this Peninsula are (as we have said) the Ionian Sea, that of Sapienza and the Aegean: To this we will add the Descriptions of the Gulfs of these Seas. The Gulfs of the Ionian Sea. AMongst the Gulfs of the Ionian Sea, that of Lepanto shall have the first place, which the An∣cients called Crisaeus; Strabo, Halcyonius; others Corinthiacus Sinus; and Sophianus the Gulf of Pedras. It is an hundred
miles long, and reaches on the North o the very Borders of Achaia, and on the South to those of the Morea. The Gulf, called that of Patras, from the name of a Maritime Town of the Morea, situated within the Dutchy of Chiarenza, being in part invironed by the firm Land, and in part by the Isles that are opposite thereto, resembles a great Lake. Taking its length North∣wards, it is 24 miles long, from the Isle of Santa Maura, to the mouth of the Gulf of Corinth. On the East it extends it self almost as much from one side of the Morea, beginning at the mouth of the said Gulf quite on to the Promontory of Castel Tornese. On the West, over a∣gainst it at a distance from each other, with a Strait of seven miles Sea be∣tween them, are seen the Isles of Cepha∣lonia and Santa Maura; this of fifteen, the other of forty miles length: The end of the Isle of Cephalonia comes with∣in twelve miles by Sea of the Isle of Zant; and this is separated from the utmost Cape of the Morea by a space of twenty five miles. The Gulf called that of Chiarenza, from the name of an Ancient Maritime
Town, has its length from the Cape of Chiarenza to Castel Tornese. The Gulf of Arcadia which Ptolemy calls Chelonates or Chelonites Sinus, and others Locardian, reaches from the Cape of Tornese to Cape Jardan. The Gulf of Zonchio, otherwise Cy∣parisius Sinus, extends it self from Cape Jardan to the Cape of Sapienza. The Gulfs of the Sea of Sapienza. THe Gulf of Coron which washes the City of that name, is like∣wise named that of Calamata, from a place not far distant from its Shores. Ptolemy and Pliny call it Meseniacus Si∣nus, because it was contiguous to the Ancient Province of Messenia; Strabo, Messenius, and others Coroneus and A∣sineus Sinus: It is between Cape Gallo and Cape Matapan. The Gulf of Colochine, or of Castel Rampani, or of Fleos, which Strabo and Ptolemy entitle Laconicus Sinus, beats up∣on Luconia with its Waves, and reach∣es from Cape Matapan to Cape Malio.
Though this Gulf be usually compre∣ended in the Sea of Sapienza; yet audrand places it to the Sea of Can∣ia. The Gulfs of the Aegean Sea on the side of the Morea. THe Gulf of Napoli di Romania named from the Town so called, extends it self a great way along the Morea, between the Capes of St. An∣gelo and Schilli. It once bore the name of Argolicus Sinus, washing the Ancient Argia. The Gulf of Engia is divided from that of Lepanto, by the Isthmus. It com∣prehends a great number of Isles and Rocks: 'Tis named Saronicus Sinus, from the River Saron that discharges it self into it. Ptolemy and Pliny call it Sala∣miniacus, from the Isle of Salamis: By Strabo 'tis named Eleusinus; and if we credit Pintianus, 'twas also called Her∣monicus Sinus, at last 'twas named Ege∣na, from an Isle of that name, that lies about the midst of the Gulf, and is ex∣tended
North and South between At∣tica and Saccania, of twenty four miles circumference, according to M. Spon. This is bounded by the Capes of Colon∣ne and Schilli. Of the Isles and Rocks that are round the Morea, and in the Io∣nian Sea. The Isle of Corfu. AMongst the Isles of the Ionian Sea that are under the Venetians, the Island of Corfu is not the least conside∣rable. It lies at the extreamity of the Gulf of Venice in the Ionian Sea. This Isle has Anciently had divers names; Homer calls it Scheria, Calimacus Drepanon, which in Greek signifies a Sickle: others have named it Efisa, Corintoa, and the Poets Phaeacia, and Macria from Macride the Nurse of Dionysius; Porcacchi, Effiso; others Cassi∣opea, Argos, Ceraunea; and Denis in his Commentaries, Corcyra; others Cercira,
ISLE DE CORFV map of Isle of Corfu
which name was at last changed into Corfu, as at this time 'tis called. If it cannot be reckoned the greatest Isle of the Mediterranean, yet it may of the Adriatick Sea: it was inhabited by Gi∣ants. Its length, according to Pliny, is ninety four miles; and as Volteran will have it, ninety seven Italian miles: but this measure does not at all agree with what it is at this day, it being found much less: Possibly they measured with it the Isle of Paxo; which as Paruta says, was joyned to Corfu, and was separated there-from by an Earth-quake for ten miles together; the like to which happ'ned to the Isles of St. Maura, Cy∣prus and Sicily: At present, from West to East, Corfu is but seventy miles, and from the one side to the other, at the West end, twenty miles, and but twelve at the other; in all other places more or less: so that its whole circumfe∣rence is a hundred and twenty miles; it is distant on the East from the Cape of Otranto about sixty miles, and from Venice 700. On the North, where is the Rock of the Serpent, it abutts upon Epire at about a mile's distance; and at the other end towards the East,
at about twenty miles distance. These two Promontories make a Sinus or Bay commonly called the Channel of Cor∣fu. The Isle is situated in the thirty first Degree of North Latitude, and in the forty fourth and forty fifth Degrees of Longitude, placing the first in the West part of the Isle of Ferro. Its shape, as we said, resembles a Sickle. Its City is seated in the midst of it up∣on an advanced Promontory. Its Fi∣gure gave occasion to the Poets to feign that the Goddess Ceres begged a Sickle of Vulcan to give to Titan, which having obtained, she hid it in the most inward part of this Isle; but after some time this Sickle being rusted and consumed by the Waves of the Sea, it left its Figure imprinted upon the Land. That which the Interpreter of the Tienian History reports is yet more fabulous, which is, that Saturn, having cut off the genital Parts of Coelum, or rather Jupiter having so served Saturn with a Sickle, cast them immediately into the Sea, upon which grew those two Mountains whereon were in time founded the two invincible Fortresses of Corfu; and that the Action might
be eternallized in the memory of men. The Isle it self had the Form of a Sic∣kle. This Isle is divided into four Parts, which those of the Place call Balie. The first towards the East is named Lefchi∣mo by Marmora, Leuchino by Porcac∣chi, and Leucimne by Thucidides. The second towards the West is named La∣ghiro or Agiru. The third Mezzo. The fourth Loros or Oros: Each of these Parts has its Territories. There is spread over all a very pure clear Air, and exceeding wholesome, as may be gathered from the Forests of Oranges and Cedars that there flourish: And with some reason the Poets sung so much of the Gardens of Alcinous, who dwelt in this Isle. The Country is al∣so very fruitful in all kinds of Grain, and Honey, and Wax, with Wine and Oyl of an extraordinary goodness; nor does it want pleasant Flats in its Northern Parts. In the first Territory of Lefchimo, where yet remains some Tracts of the Ancient and Episcopal City of Gardi∣chi; at two miles distance from the Sea of Garbino there is a Fountain
which made it famous, which after making a small River, runs down to the Sea; on which Stream are several Mills. This Territory contains about ten thousand Inhabitants in twenty five Burroughs, the biggest whereof is named Potamos from a Canal that di∣vides it in two. It is inhabited by very civil and gentile People. From thence is a Canal for Vessels down to the Sea. The Territory of Laghiro or Agiru on the East of the Isle abounds in all sorts of necessaries. It has eight thousand Inhabitants in twenty Villages. It had had more if the Africans had not come and demolished a City built in a Penin∣sule, where at present stands a Mona∣stery with a good number of Religi∣ous, whose Church is dedicated to the Holy Virgin, and is called Palio Castri∣za. The Castle called Angelo Castron, built by the Emperour Michael Comne∣nes upon the Promontory Palachrum, is at this time named St. Angelo. The third Territory called Mezzo, in which stands the City of Corfu, had once a larger City. In an extent of six∣ty miles Possession there are thirty Ca∣stles or Lordships and Villages, which
together with the Capital contain twen∣y five thousand Persons. The fourth Territory called Loros r Oros in forty five miles Country, and wenty five Towns, has about eight housand Inhabitants. Cassiopa now assiopo, a very famous City was ancient∣y its Capital. The whole Isle has pro∣perly no Rivers; for though on the ide of Garbinio there seems to be one which they name Mesongi, that takes ts source near the Fortress Cardicchi, yet it ought rather, as well as all the rest, to be reckoned a Brook than a River. Historians agree not as to the Origi∣nal of the Inhabitants of this Isle, as may be seen in the History of Corfu, writ by Marmora: yet all or most of the People at this day are Greeks, and observe the Rites of the Greek Church. One Historian observes, that this Isle was once of a considerable force Eustachio Sopra Di∣onigi. by Sea, and that, in the time of the War between the Greeks and Persians, it put thirty armed Galleys to Sea. The Greek are not the only Historians that make honourable mention of this
Isle; for besides what Thucidides say of it, speaking of the Wars of the Moreae, in which the Corcyreans had of∣ten their part, we find that Titus Livi∣us makes them to receive Orders in the Army of Q. Fulvius Flavus, to guard the Coast of Calabria, and that they went in pursuit of the Ambassadors of Carthage, who at the sollicitation of Hannibal were sent to make a League with Philip King of Macedon; and that these Ambassadors having been brought before the Captain General, he se them to Rome. The People of this Isle after having been long subject to the Kings of Na∣ples, weary at last of being still subject to the frequent Commotions of that Kingdom, offered to put themselves under the Obedience of the Venetian Republick. This their Design they communicated to Giov. Penelasco, then residing at Corfu in quality of Consul for the Venetians, who gave advice thereof to the Senate: and because the Prince of Tarentum made some pre∣tences, they sent to him the Secretary Pietro Compitelli or Campitelli, to shew him the danger that would ensue, if
the Isle should fall into the Enemies hands, and so with a good sum of mo∣ney they found means to satisfie that Prince. As Porcacchi reports, the Isle be∣came subject to the Republick in the Year 1322. though Giov. Miani, Cap∣tain of the Gulf, did not take the Pos∣session thereof from the hands of Riccar∣do Altavilla and Giov. Alessio Cavalila, till the ninth of June, 1327. yet Mar∣mora assures that Possession was taken on the twentieth of May, 1386. which last Author pretends he had it from the authentick Archives. This whole Affair was managed and transacted by a Religious of the Order of St. Francis, called Padre Maestro Giulio Vanello, a man of good parts and much esteemed. He so brought the business about, that he assembled the chief men of the place in the Church of the Convent, then called St. Angelo, and there caused the Keys of the Gates to be delivered into the hands of Captain Miani, with a grant of the Authority over the Ci∣ty. The Representants of the Re∣publick come every Year on the same day into this Church, accompanied
with the Body of the Officers, before whom the Protopapa renews the memo∣ry of this Action. I might add that the Prince has assigned to this Church, as a Mark of his acknowledgment to the Order, two Ducats, yearly to be taken out of the Fiscale Chamber of Corfu. The Venetians were after this manner possessed of it, till the Year 1401. when Ladislaus King of Naples, the Son of Charles, for thirty thousand Ducats left it quite free to the Republick. It has been still maintained under the Venetian Government, who have guard∣ed and defended it, as a place very ne∣cessary for the conservation of their Empire by Sea; for it has several very good Ports where the Navy may re∣fresh it self commodiously; besides it has a convenient Situation for the De∣fence of the other Isles and States of the Levant, and can hinder a great Ar∣my from entring the Gulf, who will hardly venture to pass by and leave so powerful an Enemy behind in so ad∣vantageous a Post. Wherefore 'tis well named the Gate of the Gulf and the Rampart of Italy against the barba∣rous.
In these last Ages that the Ottoman Forces are much increased, the Repub∣ick has, for the common benefit of Chri∣stendom, been at great expences in Works and Fortifications in this Isle, to make the Fortress impregnable: Wherein they have hitherto succeeded. On the middle of the Circle of the Isle, there raises it self up a solid Rock, on which is built the old Fortress, encom∣passed on all sides with the Sea, ex∣cept on that part which faces the Land, where 'tis Flanked with two Bulwarks, with their Curtain, and a good Ditch cut from one side of the Sea to the o∣ther. Under this Fortress is situated the City, joyning to which stands the new Fortress raised on the Mount of St. Mark, with infinite charge to front Mount Abram, that lies over against it, and which for some time has been much levelled. The City glories in the birth of Aene∣as, and has now the Title of an Arch-bi∣shoprick. The Republick sends thi∣ther six Nobles, who remain in their Government two years. The first has the Title of a Bail; the second of a Pro∣veditor; the third of a Captain, who
with the fourth are the Councillor One dwells in the Cittadel of the ol Fortress, the other in the City; th fifth is the Grand Captain, and has the new Fortress for his Lodgement, and the sixth is Lord Castellain of the Caste called Della Campana, in the old Tow. In the year 1537. Barbarossa shewed himself before Della Campana, with an Army of five and twenty thousand Turks, which he commanded by the order of Solyman. They had thirty great Guns, with which they planted a Bat∣tery against the place, but by reason of the great distance they were at, their Bullets were not able to make a breach in the Walls. But the Artillery of the great Fortress made terrible Distructi∣on in the Army and Fleet of the Turks; five of their Galleys went to the bot∣tom, and even that of Barbarossa was not out of the Cannons reach. Du∣ring thi Siege, the Republick sent an extraordinary Ambassadour to Rome, to represent to the Pope, and by him to the Emperour, of what consequence the loss of Corfu would be to the King∣dom of Naples, to Sicilia and all Italy. He endeavoured all he could in this Em∣bassage,
that the Emperour would send Fifty Galleys with Fifty other Ships as he had done once before against the Turks, to joyn with 100 Galleys and the Galleasses, and three Gallions and a good number of other Vessels that the Republick had then in the Sea. At first the Pope applyed himself to this affair, to procure so great a benefit to Christendom; but his endeavours were unsuccessful; so that the Repub∣lick were left alone to withstand the Ottomans, and they obliged them shame∣fully to raise the Siege: And thus that important place, Corfu, was delivered. The little Isles or Rocks that lie round about Corfu. FAnari, or Ottonus, is a little Isle on the West of Corfu, to which it is subject; it lies at 15. Miles distant from Cape Agiru of that Isle, and from that of Santa Maria or Otranto 50. 'Tis 8. Miles in Circuit, and contains 200. In∣habitants, in a Fertile Land. La Serra is a Rock in a strait to∣wards
Cassiopo, between Corfu and Epi It raises it self up above the Wav and at its Foot lie several other cr∣gy hidden Rocks, very dangerous  those that Sail by them. Sant Vido, or according to the Anc∣ents, the little Isle Pitia is a Rock fa∣ing the City of Corfu, from whence t is but a Mile and half: it is covered ll over with Olive Trees. Condilonisi, is a Rock on the West Or West-North-West. of Corfu, of solid Stone, whereon for∣merly grew Canes, which they used to write withal. There is a Church on it dedicated to the Holy Virgin. Sant Demetrio, is a small Island, in which is a Lazar-house, with all conve∣niences for those of Corfu, in case of ne∣cessity. Near this Isle is seen a white Rock above the Water, which at a di∣stance shews like a Ship under Sail: which figure gave ground to the Fable, that this Rock was formed of Ʋlysses's Ship, which being sunk in this place, was by the Gods turned into a Rock. Paxo, is a little Isle not inferiour to the rest that encompass Corfu, either as to Fruitfulness of any necessary for life, or as to the number of its Inhabi∣tants.
Bourdon calls it Pacsu, Porcacchi achiso, Pliny Ericusa, and others axu Major, 'tis seated on the South f Corfu, at 100. Miles distance from Cape St. Isidore in Cephalonia, and 12. rom Epire. Porcacchi takes it to be en Miles about, others make it five nd twenty. On the West-North-West de of it, is Port St. Nicolas, whereinto  Ship of any burden may enter; at its ntrance lies a Rock. On the West at Garbin is the Valley of St. Andrew, a commodious Haven for Galleys. The other Valley at Siroc, is called Ʋromo Lincione: On the side of Siroc, is the sle called Antipaxu, a Fertile but un∣nhabited place: between these two ittle Isles is a very deep Sea. In the Channel between these Isles and the firm Land lies a dreadful Rock almost even with the Waves, two Miles from Paxo. It has been thought by some, that Paxo was once joyned to Corfu, and was thence separated by the bea∣ting of the Waves.
The Isles called Curzolares. THE Curzolares, which Strabo and Pliny name Echinades, and S∣phanus Echinoe, are five Isles of the Ionian Sea, in the Gulf of Patras, the largest of which are Samos and Dulichi∣um. These being not above a Mile from the Continent, look towards Le∣panto on the East at 35. Miles distance: on the West 45. Miles off, is seen the Isle of Santa Maura, and in a strait Line the Canal Guiscardo, 60. Miles from it. On the North they respect the firm Land, and on the South they lie just over against the Channel of Zant, at a space of twenty four Miles. The smallness of them would doubtless have let them remain unregard, if the glorious Expedition of the Army, in the year 1571. had not made them fa∣mous. The Ancients thought these Isles had their beginning from the Sand and Mud that stuck, and was heaped up in this place, brought thither by the impetu∣ous Stream of the River Achelous. My∣thologists
S. MAURA plan of Santa Maura
say, that these were three beautiful Nymphs, who sacrificed to all the Gods, except the God Achelous, whom they refused to own, and ridi∣culed his Deity, scorning and disdain∣ing him. Wherefore as a revenge pro∣portionate to his Resentments, he threw them headlong into the Sea, where in fine they were transformed into these Isles. In the time of the Trojan Empire, as we find in Homer, these Isles were pos∣sessed by Megetes with the rest of the Isles thereabouts. The Isle of Lefcade, or Santa Maura. THE Isle which we at this day call Lefcade, or Santa Maura, Ptole∣mey named Leucus, Strabo, Pliny, and Mela Leucadia. It lies in the Ionian Sea, nine Miles distant from Cephalonia, and twenty five from the Curzolares. It was once United to Achaia, but was divi∣ded thence by the People that inhabi∣ted it, tho it remained not long so se∣parated;
for the Impetuosity of the Winds filled up the space between with Sand, which made a kind of Isthmus by which it was reunited, so it became a Peninsula. This Isthmus having bee worn away, 'twas supplied by a woo∣den Bridge over several little Islets, that are separated from each other by little Channels. This Isle is 70. Miles round; it brings forth abundance of Grain, Wine, Oyl, Tabaco, and all kinds of Fruits. Besides Santa Maura, to which it is joyned, it contains 30. Vil∣lages, the Principal of which are, Trini, Apolpena, Sfarchiotes, Caria, Azzani, Vurnica, Scuiro, San Pietro, Englovi, Dragano, Englimento; and still as they have been left by the Fugitive Turks, they have been and daily are re-peo∣pled by Greeks from the main Land. It has many Ports, which are, Demata, Santa Maura, Scivoto, Englimento, Val∣lone of Vasilichi; the two first of these are the most considerable. Beside these, this Isle has a Haven which serves for a Retreat to the Galleys and Galeasses of the Venetians in their present Wars with the Turks. There shoots forth likewise from its Continent three Pro∣montories,
FORTERESSE DE S. MAURA map of Santa Maura
one called Angusci, the two thers, Cape Englimento, and Cape Du∣ato. Round about it are the Rocks f St. Nicolas of Sparta, of the Scorpion, of Figlia, of Magnisci, and of Sessola, whereon is found great numbers of Rats; wherefore 'tis also called Scoglio de Sorci, or the Rock of Rats. The City and Fortress of Santa Maura. THe City and Fortress of Santa Maura is encompassed with the Waves of the Sea, and is seated be∣tween the Isle Lefcade, and the main Land, to which it is joyned by several little Islands, by Bridges from one to another, and by its own Bridge, and a sumptuous Aqueduct of Stone about a mile long, sustained by three hundred and sixty Arches. On the East there is a little Tongue of Land, which ex∣tending it self along makes the Port of Damata; its Walls make an irregular Heptagon flanked with five great Tow∣ers. Sancta Maura's distant from Pro∣visa, 19. mil from Pot Da∣mata, 6.
It has indured divers Sieges in its own Defence, and although it has vi∣gorously withstood its Enemies, yet has it often been forced to indure the Turkish Tyranny, and been as often subject to the Venetians. Anno 1479. it was attacked by the Turkish Forces, and then taken from certain Greek Princes that possessed it. Anno, 1502. The Venetian Army commanded by General Pesao (who in no Expedition came off without Glo∣ry) resolving upon the Conquest of Santa Maura, so hotly pursued this De∣sign, that they forced the Turks from it, and set up there the Lion of St. Mark in place of the Turkish Crescent. The taking of this place ended the War, and all Acts of Hostility ceased, when by Articles of Peace concluded on with Bajazet, the Place was again left in his Possession. After that it was inhabited by so cruel and base a The Pi∣rates of Santa Mau∣ra first put to Sea in Galleys and be∣came very famous for their Pi∣racies. Peo∣ple, that they were hated by all Chri∣stendom, which generally wished for their utter destruction. This univer∣sal desire was answered by General July 23. Anno, 1684. Morosini very happily, for he brought the Defendants to a Capitulation, and
CEFALONIA view of Cephalonia
map of Cephalonia
so they delivered up the Place, carry∣ing out only what they could upon their own backs. Since the Venetians have been Masters of it, they have made it of much more importance than it was before; for besides the great re∣pairs, they have very much increased the Fortifications. The Isle of Cephalonia. THat Isle in the Ionian Sea, called Cephalonia, was not long since by the Greeks named Cassa or Chieffali, to shew that it was the head of the Isles in that Sea: and because it once had four Cities, 'twas called likewise Tetrapolis. Besides these different names, Au∣thors have given it several others; as Pliny calls it Melena, Porcacchi and o∣thers Samo; some again Dulichium and Tilebi. 'Tis seated between the thirty seventh and thirty eight Degrees of North Latitude, and the forty sixth of Longitude, the West part of Ferro being the first. According to Porcacchi 'tis a hundred and sixty miles round: but
it is indeed 170. It is of a triangular Figure, its most advanced Angle being Northwards at Cape Guiscardo, other∣wise called Capo Capra: On the East it regards Chiarenza in the Morea, and on the North Corfu, on one side with the Point Schinori of the Isle of Zant; being at 18 miles distance, it forms the Chan∣nel of Zant, subject to frequent and dan∣gerous Tempests; and on the other from Cape Viscardo to Samo it makes with the Isle of Teacchi the Channel called that of Viscardo, which is three miles broad in the narrowest place, and very deep. There are several Creeks where Galleys may safely ride, tho' there be a good number of them man'd with a great Army; for the Bay of Alessandria, Port Argostoli (which is very considera∣ble, and whereof we will treat apart) the Port of Viscardo and that of Asso will each receive two or three; and have, as likewise the whole Channel, a sound Bottom. The whole Isle is divided into seven principal parts, which are Argostoli, Liscuri, Finea, Erisso, Pillaro, Samo, Luceto. In these are several large Burroughs which take their Names
from the chief Families that dwell in them. The least of these contains about 50 Houses: They are a very valiant and ingenious People. Under the Isle of Cephalonia lies that of Teacchi, it affords great Quantities of Raisins, whereof the English yearly take their Cargo, yielding a considera∣ble Revenue to the Republick; and from thence come extraordinary large Ci∣trons. The Corn that they sow in the Spring is reaped again in June; the Vines grow very low, near the Ground, they gather their Fruits in April and in November, but the latter are smaller than those of April: It produces also beautiful Narcissus's and Hyacinths, and it is common there to see Roses and Pinks all the Winter. When the South Wind blows there in the Summer it causes excessive Heat, which is tempered by the North. The Republick keeps a Noble Vene∣tian there as Governor, with the Ti∣tle of Proveditor; and two other No∣ble Men as Counsellors, who keep the publick Assizes alternately each their Month under the Proveditor; their Of∣fice lasts for two years. The City is
a Bishops Seat, and the Church belongs to Zant; in the twelfth Age it was rai∣sed to a Bishoprick by Marquis Rizzar∣do de Tochis Prince of Achaia, and of these Isles, who gave the Bishop the Tithes of several Possessions, as well of Cephalonia as of Zant, and to the Canons he gave the Tithes of several Lands in Cephalonia. Strabo says that in his time Caius An∣tonius the Uncle of Mark Antony being banish'd from Rome (after his Consul∣ship, which he officiated together with his Colleague Cicero) went to Cephalonia, and being there as Soveraign, he laid the Foundations of a City, where he made his Residence, but he had not time to bring these Designs to Perfection, for he was recalled from his Exile and im∣ployed in more important matters. Titus Livius reports, that the Consul Marcus Fulvius having overcome the Etolians, turned his victorious Arms a∣gainst the Isle of Cephalonia, and being ar∣rived near to it, he sent to the Islanders to know if they would deliver it up freely into his Hands or try the chance of War in its Defence; they were all presently for delivering, except the
People of Samo, who valiantly sustai∣ned four months Siege, at the End of which the Romans became Victorious and left dreadful Marks of their Rage against the Samians; for having pillaged the City, they sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves. In the Year 1224, the Isle was given to the Verdiz∣zotti fat∣ti Ven. l. 8. p. 163. And Mo∣rosini in a little Trea∣tise of Ce∣phal says it was given 1214. Republick of Venice by a gene∣rous and free Act of Gaius who was Lord and Governour thereof. Anno 1479, there came from Galli∣poli into the Ionian Sea, a great Ottoman Army which invaded Cephalonia, then in the Possession of a pety Toccho Napo. Prince, and took it out of his hands. An. 1499, the Spanish Fleet being joy∣ned, by the order of King Ferdinand, with the Venetian Forces, the Spaniards com∣manded by Consalvo, a valiant Com∣mander, the other by General Pisaro, they came both to anchor before Cepha∣lonia, with an Intention to reduce the City which was then maintained by a Turkish Garrison: At first they began to raise a very high Work against the Place, to which the besieged raised an∣other of a like height within; but the Christians kept themselves upon theirs
with so much Disadvantage to the Be∣sieged, that they were obliged to re∣treat, and at the same time ours advan∣ced to make themselves Masters of their Post, which they had abandoned; and the two Generals sent what help they could; mean while the Cannon played continually upon the Walls, but with little Effect, which was an Obsta∣cle to the Siege. But then the Cap∣tain of the Venetian Vessels, and a Spa∣niard of equal boldness, followed by a good number of Soldiers, ran on the first to plant the Scaling Ladders and mounted the Walls with so much Cou∣rage and Nimbleness, that they set up there the Standard of the Republick; at the same time they were followed by a great Number of Soldiers that got up after them; and the Turks not thinking themselves in a fit Posture to resist so great a Multitude of Men, betook them∣selves to their Heels; and being hotly pursued were all put to the Sword: Thus the whole Isle was won, and the Fort Della Rocca stayed but till the next Morning, and then delivered up it self. Immediately after this Victory the Ge∣neral Pisaro without losing time put a
FORTERESSE D'ASSO. plan of Fortress of Asso
good Garrison in the Town and For∣ress, nominating for Governour of the Town, Luigi Salomon, Giovanni Veniero for the Fortress, and Francesco Leone to command the whole Island. He also sent a great Vessel to Junoo to transport some of those People that in great numbers were retired thither, to re people and cultivate this Isle. There came besides several other People vo∣luntarily to dwell there; and so the hard and tyrannick Government of the Island was changed into a more mild and just; whence ensued a meliorating of the Place and manuring of the Grounds. The Fortress of Asso. THE important Fortress of Asso or Nasso in the Isle of Cephalonia, was built by the Venetians an. 1595 for the Defence of the Inhabitants, who in time of War could not all secure them∣selves in the City of Cephalonia: It is seat∣ed upon a Rock whose Point is very high and steep, environed with the Sea; so that 'tis hardly accessable by some
narrow Paths; its Fortifications were made to answer the Situation of the Place, which is altogether uneven, so that 'tis very irregularly built. There is a Tongue of Land about 20 Paces long, whereby 'tis joyned to the Isle, and which makes the way to the Fortress: It was once proposed to cut through it in the narrowest place and so to make a good Ditch there. It is composed of 60 publick Houses and 200 particular Habitations. At the Foot of it is a little Port which may shelter three Galleys, but it grows daily worse and worse, by reason that when ever any tempestuous and great Rains happen, the violent Torrents bring down with them from the Moun∣tain a great deal of Sand and Stones which choak it up, for which there is no Remedy. The Republick sends thither a Patri∣cian for Governour, with the Title of Proveditor, whose Office lasts thirty two Months; the first of them was sent thither on the 23d. of June, an. 1596.
Argostoli. WE must not pass by the Port of Argostoli in Silence, since it is of some Importance to the Republick; it took its name from the Ship Argo and the Argonauts, who came to land there. It has a Circuit of thirty Miles, and may contain the most numerous Army. The Venetian Galleys and the Proveditor Generals usually make a De∣scent there when they are upon any Ex∣pedition in these Quarters. There is no Fortress upon it, so that it is free for all Vessels to Land there: It has been proposed to build a Fort there which may command the Port and the Entrance into the Isle, and if ever the Design be put in Execution there is a very advantageous Situation for it upon a steep Rock. There is yet to be seen in the farthest part, the Remains of the ancient City built by the Corinthians, once called Cranea: Near to it towards the Sea is the Place now called il Cutego, where are to be seen the Foundations of great Caverns in the Earth, thought to
have been once the Arsenal for the Port of Argostoli. The Isle of Teacchi. THIS Isle has almost as many Names as it has had Authors who have described it. Strabo and Pliny call it Itaca, Porcacchi and Denis the Afri∣can Nerieia; Niger, Val di compagno; and Sophianus, Val di compare; the Greeks at present name it Thiachi; the Turks, Phiachi; and usually we call it Cefalonia Picciola, the Little Cephalonia. It looks towards Cephalonia, from which 'tis separated by the Arm of Vis∣cardo, which is a very deep Channel, 20 Miles long and five broad, and in the narrowest place, three. The Shape of this Isle is irregular and longer than broad; it is 40 miles round with seve∣ral Gaps and Creeks; it has several little Ports very necessary for taking in Fire-wood: But of all the rest that of Vathi has the best Anchorage, the firmest Bottom, and very deep, which will receive a great number of Vessels.
There are two others little inferiour to this, called Gidachi and Sarachinicco. I will not stay to give the Particulars of the others, being they are of so little Use and so bad Anchorage that it is not worth the while to treat of them. This Isle is thought to have been the Dwelling place of the chast Penelope and the Country of Ʋlysses; upon this Tra∣dition the Cephalonians have a Veneration for certain Remains that are thought to be in the place where that illustrious Couple dwelt. It had once a City cal∣led by Plutarch Alalcomene, but there are now but some Villages, the chief of which are Vathi, Annoi, Oxoi. The In∣habitants are about 15000, a good part whereof are banish'd People from the Isles of Zant, Corfu, and Cephalonia. The Citizens of Cephalonia elect every year one whom they call the Captain of Teacchi; but he cannot enter upon his Charge without the consent of the Rectors, who are obliged once in the Year to go to that Island, which they do in the month of March, to which time they remain in Office: the Autho∣rity of this Officer extends but to hear and decide Causes.
Andrew Morosini the Son of Peter, who was Proveditor of Cephalonia, anno 1622, tells us, that this Isle was taken by the Confederates of Michael, the Son of the Emperor Paleologus, out of the Hands of that Emperor, after he had taken it himself from Charles Tocco a Neapolitan; this Person had so great a kindness for the Republick, that he remitted to them as to the supreme Judges the Hearing of all Causes as well criminal as civil. The Isle of Zant. THE Isle of Zant has been always famous even from the first: It is but of a small Extent in the Ionian Sea; it was called Zacynthus from the Name of a Son of Dardanus; but as all things change in time, so that Name has been corrupted and changed into Zante. Yet there are some Authors who think it was called Zacynthus from the Flower almost of that Name, which flourishes extremely in that Isle; others say that it was called Jerusalem upon a Story of Ro∣bert
ISLE DE ZANTE map of Isle of Zant
FORTERESSE DE ZANTE plan of Fortress of Zant
Guiscardo Duke de la Pouille, who ha∣ing taken a resolution of going to visit he Holy Sepulchre, had a revelation that he should die in Jerusalem, and being arrived at this Isle he fell dange∣rously sick, wherefore he demanded the Name of the Place, and 'twas told him Jerusalem; whence he concluded he must end his Days there, as indeed it fell out presently after. This Isle has the Morea on the East at 80 miles Distance, on the West it borders on the Isle of Cephalonia, from whence tis 12 miles, on the South is the Coast of Barbary 150 miles off, and on the North it has another Part of the Morea about Castel Tornese at 16 miles Distance, and a little lower it looks towards the Country del Dichiamo, where are Natolico, the Curzolares, and Drago Mestre, Places at above 50 miles distance. The whole Isle is divided into three Parts, called Montagna, Pedimonte, and Pianura. Montagna begins on the East side, where lies Port Chieri, and makes the Circuit of the whole South and West side of the Isle even quite to the North, having in its middle a very
beautiful plain called Neruli, in the mid whereof was a great Lake of water from the Hills, till the Noble Angelo Bar∣barigo took the pains and care to drei it. At this time 'tis a fair and fruitful plain 10 miles long and five broad, and borders on two sides upon the Sea shore. Here stands the City Chieri giving name to the Port: from the waters of which comes the black Pitch, and there is an opinion among the Inhabitants that the Lake was anciently all of this Pitch. There are besides seen here the Towns called Littachio, Pigadachita, Sculicado with fourteen more, whose names for brevity I omit. On that part called Montagna are Ambelo, Chilomeno, Agelo, San Leo, Santa Maria, and other Towns to the number of nine. The farthest of them is called Volimes, lying towards the West. It contains above one thousand houses. There are besides in this part three Monasteries of Greek Caloieros called San Giovanni in Lancada, La Madonna Spiliotissa or Anafontria, and San Geor∣gio di Grebani, which is the most consi∣derable and commodious for situation. In that Part called Pianura, which is
on the North of the Isle, are the Towns f Gaetani, Curculidi, San Quirico, Farao nd San Dimetrio. Besides the great oted Mountain making a principal art of the Isle, there are two others which encompass the Isle, one on the East, the other on the North: On the first stand two Towns called Xerocastello, and Lambetti; on the other are four, Geracario, Bellusi, Calenzi, and Tragacchi. In the whole Isle there is but one River named the Camura, whose waters are brackish, being mixt with the waters of the Sea; but there is below the Castle, not far from the Sea, a source of fresh water, with all the qualifications of an excellent spring: It is at all times so plen∣tiful, that all the Ships that pass for Constantinople and Alexandria, as well going as coming, take fresh water there. On the North, the Isle is all precepi∣tious and steep, and on the South covered with all sorts of fruit-trees. On the Greek shore is built a Castle on an Emi∣nence which commands the whole Isle; where reside the Rector and the Gover∣nour. At the foot whereof lies the Town which stretches it self for two miles along the shore, and one mile in
breadth towards the Mountain. The are in this Town a great many houses which belong to the Citizens, Mer¦chants, Artizans, or Mariners. They cure great Quantities of Raisins there and make very strong wines, and ex∣cellent oyl, which one year with ano∣ther yields them the sum of fifty thou∣sand Ducats. There is also abundance of as delicious fruits and rare Plants, as in any other place. Its Port is like∣wise called Chieri, of good anchorage for all sorts of Vessels, Ships or Gal∣leys. On the North side is Cape Schinan and the Rock called San Nicolo, where nei∣ther great nor small Vessel can enter, except on the East side; the shallowness of the water and the want of a good bottom hindering that on the West. On the East is the Valley of the salt-Pits where Ships come to take in their Lading of Salt. A little nearer to the City is the Rock called fra Filippo, at pre∣sent Trenta Nova; and a little farther is the point Laugun very near to the Town. It is believed that Saint Veronica came to plant the Christian Faith in this Isle,
and that she converted the Inhabitants by showing them the Holy Handker∣chief, and thence preaching to them the Death and Passion of our Saviour. The Republick sends thither a No∣ble Man with the Quality of Proveditor, and two others for his Councellors, who all keep their charge two years. But the Inhabitants hold their Councils a∣part where they regulate Provisions, health, and other matters that concern the Policy of the City. They have power also in civil causes to give Judg∣ment under a certain Sum, and there lies an appeal from them to the Pro∣veditor. The most part of the Inhabitants are Greeks and live according to their rites; and there are but few Latins, com∣prehending amongst them even the Souldiery. There are about a thou∣sand Jews who have three Synagogues. Their business is trade, and they grow very rich all of them. The People of this place are more inclined to Arms than Learning but of the few that apply themselves to the Sciences, the brightness of that Elo∣quence shines forth, which is so natural
to the Greeks; and by a little study  the Laws and Rights, they soon becom great Orators and skilful Lawyer The People are in continual broils an Suits with one another; those of th Country hate the Citizens, the most o which live upon Traffick; the meane of the people are Sea-faring men an are always in their frigates going to th Morea, and other places that depen on the Turk, to get their living. The Isle is subject to Earthquak which destroies what ever is good and beautiful. Some years since they felt in one night sixty shakes, which were preceeded by a terrible noise: This noise usually lasts half a quarter of an hour, and is communicated to the Rocks, that are standing out of the Earth: and sometimes there happens an infectious stink. When the Earthquake is very great it raises an exceeding boisterous wind, upon which score their buildings are but low and of few Stories. There is a Bishop that makes his Residence in the Isle with the Title of Bishop of Zant, conferred on him by the Holy See: yet by the patents from the Senate of Venice, he is entitled the Bi∣shop
of Cephalonia. At first this Church cknowledged the Pope of Rome, till uch time as the Church of Constantino∣le had a Patriarch of her own; and hen the Patriarch, strengthened by the favour of the Emperour, caused several of the Greek Churches, and some of the talian to submit to his See. At the time, when several of the Western Princes associated themselves to war upon those that possessed the Holy Land, the Church of Zant returned to the obedience of the See of Rome. Se∣veral very noted persons have flourisht there, by reason of the great Revenues of the Bishoprick, which has amounted, as is seen in the Archives, to more than six thousand Crowns. Possibly the Bishops had then the force of the Laws and se∣cular Arm, more than the Authority of their See and zeal of their preaching, to assist them. Two Bishops of this Church successively went to the Council of Trent, where they were much distin∣guisht by their merit. The first was John Francis Comendon, who died during the time of the Coun∣cil, who was succeeded by Petro Delfi∣no, a Noble Venetian. The Parish
Churches of the Greeks comprehending those of the City, the Cittadel, and o∣thers that have been founded out of de∣votion are about forty four. There are likewise a great number in Cephalo∣nia that place being well Peopled. There are fifteen in the City, in each of which is a plain Altar, with the Altar∣piece towards the East, adorned with paintings after the Greek fashion, who permit no Images in Relievo, in their Temples. The Altar is of stone inclo∣sed with a Rail, whose entrance is for∣bidden to Laicks and Women. Nay the Women presently after Child-bed, and the Men that are found in any ill action, are forbid the Churches; but this custom is now neglected. When the Arch-bishop happens to die all the Greek Curates, of which there is a good number, assemble them∣selves; and according to a very ancient custom, authorized by the Holy See, they give their suffrages in secret, to proceed to the election of another. The Bishop has no fixt Revenue and maintains himself upon Casualties, which the Greeks yearly present to him as in a Quantity of Wheat and other
Grain: He likewise has a considerable gain by Ordinations; and by one way or other his Revenue is very large. As a Qualification of a Bishop of this City, a man must have been a Monk of the Order of St. Basil, upon which ac∣count there are so many Monasteries of that Saint's in these Isles. The most con∣siderable of which is built on the Rocks commonly called the Strophades; of which in their place. This Monastery has several Revenues in Zant and Cepha∣lonia; and the Greeks have these Monks in Great Veneration, because they live very retired from secular affairs. These Monks of St. Basil fast the whole year, except in case of infirmity or sickness, when they may have a dis∣pensation for three days in the week, Monday, Wednesday and Friday they eat nothing but milk, fish and oyl. They keep four Lents in the year; the first is that of Easter called, i Megali Tessara-costi; which lasts seven weeks; for which time they are not permitted to eat either fish or oyl, except two days in the week, viz. Saturday and Sunday, nor that, on Holy Saturday. Their nourish∣ment then is only fish that have no blood,
as oysters, dryed fish, Caveer, which is the Rows of fish salted; Botargo, which is made of the Row of a Sturgeon dryed and salted, &c. There are two other days on which they may eat, that is the 25 of March, being Annunciation-day, which they call Euangelismos, provided it happen before the Holy week; the o∣ther is Palm-Sunday, which they name Tou Vaghiou. The Second Lent, is of the Agioi Apo∣stoloi, in honour of the Holy Apostles, which lasts from the Munday sevennight after Whitsuntide, till the Vigil of St. Pe∣ter and Paul; so that some years it lasts three weeks, others more. The Third is called Tis agias Parthe∣nou, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which lasts from the first to the fifteenth of Au∣gust, in which time they eat no fish ex∣cept on the sixth, being the feast of the Transfiguration of Christ, which they observe with Solemnity, and call it Me∣tamorphosis tou Sotiros. The Fourth is called ton Christogenon, which begins forty days before Christ∣mass, to wit on the fifteenth of Novem∣ber and continues till the twenty fifth of December, for which time they may eat fish except on Wednesdays and Fridays.
The Caloieros, besides these four, ob∣serve three other Fasts; the first before St. Demetrius, which lasts twenty days; the second begins on the first of Septem∣ber, fourteen days before the Exaltation of the Holy Cross; the third eight days before the feast of St. Michael, Be∣side these all the Greeks in general fast on Wednesdays and Fridays, and several of the most zealous on Mondays also. Moreover on the day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and the Decolla∣tion of St. John the Baptist, they keep a more severe Fast. Except these times they eat flesh all the week after Easter-Sunday, and that whole week after Whit-sunday, and for twelve days together after Christmass, and a week before the great Lent. They keep likewise three other Vigils in the year, That of the E∣piphany, which they name Paramoni, on which day the Greeks baptize the Sea with a great Ceremony; the second is the Vi∣gil of St. John the Baptist, and the third that of the Cross whereon they are for∣bid to eat fish. Thus those Greeks, that are not Monks, fast about a hundred and thirty days in the year. All the Monasteries of the Religious, observe
the Rites of the Greek Church, and if there should be one amongst them of the Latin Church; yet they must observe the Greek Rites. It is permit∣ted to these Religious, on divers occasi∣ons, to visit their sick Relations; and to go about the Cities, living with∣out any Cloyster; which doubtless is contrary to the Institution of a Mona∣stick Life. There is not in these Isles any kind of Hospital for the Poor. Except only in Zant there are two little poor Alms∣houses, one for the Men and ano∣ther for the Women, under the dire∣ction of the Citizens of the Place: They used to receive into these houses Found∣lings and Bastards; but that custom is now left off. There are also, in these Isles, many Protestants, most of them English. There are four Convents, one of Preaching Friars, two of Friars Minors Conventuals, one in Zant, the other in Cephalonia; and one of Minors Observants in Zant, without reckon∣ing the Parish Church of Argostoli, which is a jus patronale of the most Serene Re∣publick; which it has bestowed on the Minor Observants.
These People live willingly under the obedience of the Republick, which watches continually for their defence against the powerful irruptions of the Turks: And besides for that they per∣mit them to live conformable to their own Rites, of which they are so zealous, being perswaded of their ancient and pure Institution. There grows in this Isle very extra∣ordinary Fruit; and that in as great a∣bundance as any Isle thereabouts. Caroldi reports, that the Isle of Zant was sold with the other Isles by Robert Prince of Tarentum, Anno 1350. Tarante. In the Year 1571. Ʋluzzali Passa sackt the City, wasted the Country, and laid the whole Isle extreme desolate. The Isles Strivales. THe Strivales are two Isles, by the Mariners called Stamfane, and which Authors have known by several names, for Strabo, Pliny, and Apollonius name them Strophades, Pausanias Strivali, Suidas Stromphides, and Camerarius Ca∣lydnes.
They are low, almost level with the water; their Port is distant from Zant above fifty miles; they are but of small extent, the bigest not above three or four miles in circuit. And tho they are so small, they produce a Prodigious quantity of Grapes; and the wine of them is extraordinary good. There are also many fresh Springs, all along which are found a great deal of Planc-Tree leaves; tho the nearest place, where any of those Trees grow, is in the Morea, at thirty miles distance; where∣fore doubtless they must be brought thither by subterranean passages. The Inhabitants are all Greek Caloieros, who for their defence against the Turk, have built their Convent in form of a Fortress, well provided with Cannon, with a Port-cullis at the Gate. The Poets feigned that Aello, Ocypite, and Celaeno, born of Thaumas and Teletra, inhabited the infernal Pit in the shape of Harpies, whence they went to tor∣ment wicked men at the command of the Gods: And they paint us these Har∣pies with lean, tho beautiful faces like Women; the rest of their bodies being like horrible Vultures, with large wings
and pointed talons. The Fable adds, that Phineus King of Arcadia, like an in∣humane Father, having pluckt out his own Childrens Eyes, the Gods return∣ed the same punishment upon him, by tearing out his, and leaving him to the terrible pursuit of the Harpies, which defiled his food with their ordure and stink. Jason touched with compassion for the miserable King, and willing to relieve him, caused Zetes and Calais to drive these Monsters from tormenting him and force them to retire into the Strophades. The Isle of Prodano. PRodano is a little Isle or Rock, which Pliny and Ptolemy call Prote, and o∣ther Proude, near the Morea, with which it makes a Channel of seventeen or eigh∣teen foot water, where Vessels may, commodiously ride safely under the Wind.
The Isles in the Sea of Sapienza. THere are three Isles in the Sea of Sa∣pienza, the first which Bordon calls Sphagia or Sphateria, and Porcacchi Sfra∣gia, and which is commonly named that of Sapienza. This gives name to the Sea which flows by its side, and washes the South part of the Morea. It lies directly over against Medon, and exceeds the two others in extent. The Second named Cabrera or Fus∣chella, or Teganusa and Cauriera, is but at a small distance from the First, and is much less than it. The Third called Venetico fronts Cape Gallo. It is so enclosed on all sides, that it may rather be accounted a Rock than an Isle. There lie about it several other Rocks, where the Pirates of Barbary lie in wait for the Ships that come from the Gulf of Venice and Sicily.
PORT DE CERIGO view of Port of Cerigo
FORTERESSE DE CERIGO plan of Fortress of Cerigo
The Isle of Cerigo. ON the West of the Archipelago lies the Isle at this day commonly called Cerigo. Ptolemy named it Cythera from Cy∣theron, the Son of Phenicus; Aristotle calls it Porphyrusa, from the great store of Porphyry dug out of its Mountains; and others again Scothera. 'Tis just against the Laconian Gulf, but five miles off the Mo∣rea, forty from Candia, and has sixty in circumference. It has several Rocks roundabout it, and good Ports on its sides. On the South is the Port of the Fortress, which is but little frequented, because 'tis but a narrow Bay, and lies much ex∣posed to the winds: The other, which is on the other side the Dragoniers, twelve miles from the Fortress, has a good bot∣tom, is deep, and will contain a great Fleet: Above all things the natural shape of the Bay is wonderful, which may be shut up, and where forty Galleys may lie in safety. There is a Church dedica∣ted to St. Nicholas, though no body dwells there. On the West at 25 miles distance from this Port, there is another little one called San Nicolo de modari,
proper for Galliots and small Barks, where is also a Church dedicated to St. Nicholas. There is in this Isle great quantities of wild fowl, but little corn, wine or oyl; and food is there very dear. There are several Villages, but of small or no account: And some Monasteries of Hie∣romonachi and Caloierros, of which one stands upon a Rock on the right side near to the Fortress, which they call San Giovanni della Grotta. It has been hewn out of the Rock by pure labour with the mattock. Tho 'tis very diffi∣cult to get up to it; yet the Greeks re∣fuse not that pains, when-ever the Re∣ligious are to perform their Vows, which they have made to God. The steep points of the Rock, affright all that look on them, for they hang over so, that they threaten to fall and over∣whelm those that approach them. But for all this the Inhabitants have a great Veneration for the place, upon a belief, that St. John began his Apocalypse there. The City of the same name with the Isle has the Title of a Bishoprick: It stands upon a steep Rock in a very ad∣vantageous situation, having towards the Sea an Esplanade well mounted
with Canon, where they keep Guard. The Republick of Venice has had the Some say ever since the De∣spots of Greece. Command of it ever since the division of the Empire of Constantinople, and sends thither, every two years, one of her Noble Men, in Quality of Chastelain, and Proveditor. Selim attempted with a powerful Army, commanded by Hali and Portau to conquer it, but he soon gave it over, finding his endeavours but vain. Some fabulous Writers say, that the Goddess Venus had her Birth in this place, others that she passed her first days there. And was there ac∣knowledged for a Goddess, and there was a beautiful Temple dedicated to her; under the name of Cytherea in the most Eastern part thereof: In which Temple was her Statue like a beautiful Woman holding in her right hand a Sea shell, and as if ready to leap into the Sea. She was all dressed with blushing Roses and snowy Pidgeons flying around her, which seemed to follow and attend her motion. Three young Virgins, re∣presenting the three Graces, hand in hand, went round her to serve her; two whereof were in action, as if they were
adorning her head, the third waited on her behind. Her Son Cupid was before her, armed with his bow, who, tho blind, yet wounded the God of Light, Apollo, with an Arrow from his bow. 'Twas in this Temple, that Paris, the amourous Son of Priam, met the fair Grecian Helen; and here they tempted each other to the fatal Rape, which armed the jealous Menelaus, and revenging Greece for the utter destruction of Troy. The Isle is of no great extent, being not above sixty miles; yet 'twas of great consequence to the Spar∣tans, when they were Masters of it; for it was to them as it were a Rampart and a shelter to their ships, which they sent to Aegypt. They sent thither eve∣ry year a President to regulate civil and military affairs; and the keeping of this Isle was then so necessary, that in the eighth year of the Peleponnesian War, the Athenians having won it, Sparta was without defence, and its Country lay open to the Enemy, till they hasted to fortifie and put Garrisons in the neigh∣bouring places. The little Isle, or rather Rock, called de Cervi, lies between Port Rapini and
Cape St. Angelo, where with the firm Land it makes a Channel, unnavigable by Reason of the Banks of Sand that are in it. The nearest Rocks to Cerigo are the Dragonier, which have a good Ancho∣rage, and may be sailed from with any Wind, the others that are seen be∣tween this Isle and Candia, are Ovo, otherwise called Eple, Oso, Doi, Poro, Poressa, Cicerigo, or Cerigotto, which the Ancients called Egila, or Egiale; it is the nearest to Cape Spada, and the largest of all. But there is none of all these that deserves a particular De∣scription, and serve only as Marks to the Sailer, being of no other use. The Isles of the Gulf of Engia. THE Isles in the Gulf of Engia, and which are a great Ornament to it, are first (beginning at Cape Co∣lonne) Patrocleia, which the People call Gaïdronisi, and Macronisi: It has like∣wise the Name Ebanonisi, from the E∣bany that grows there in great Plenty.
On a high Place there is a Marble Stone set up, which may be seen a great way, and serves for a Signal to the Ma∣riner. On the side blowed on by the Greek Wind, near to the Isle lie several dangerous Shelves of Sand. Sailing towards the Attick Shore we find the Isle of Elisso, thought to be the Eloussa of Strabo. Then is the Rock of Phlega, with five others contiguous to it, called Cumbo∣nisa. Between the Isle Culuri and Attica is the Isle Lipso Coutalia, or Psyttalce near to Port Lion, where there is a prodigious Number of Hares and Foxes. Between Culuri and Egena is seen the Isle called Laufa, near to which are three little Rocks. Between the Isle of Egena and the Ci∣ty of Corinth, are these Isles, Argios, Thomas, Diaporia, Ebroeo, Agiolani, Platonisi, and another little Rock that has no Name. Between Egena and the Continent of Saccania, lie Angistri; Metopi, Dorousi and Moni. Between Cape Colonne and Cape Skilli, are seen the two Isles called Kelevinais;
but of all these Isles we have named, Ege∣na, Culuri, and Poros, are only inhabited.  Culuri, so called by Sophianus, is by the Seamen named Santa Bursia, and is the same which was once called del Dragone, from a Dragon in this place that was killed by Ceroneus, the Son of Neptune and Salamona, the Daughter of Asopus, who gave to the Isle the Name of Salamis, by which Pliny and Strabo knew it: There is in it a Village of its own Name, Culuri, of 200 Houses, situated on its South side, at its Port; which, as Monsieur Spon says, is one of the bigest in the World, being two miles broad, and seven long; at its Entrance lie two Rocks, called Canuli, and Pra∣suli. Baudrand, who gives the Isle three. Names, Cychria, Scinar, Pityus∣sar, says 'tis 10 miles off from Egena, and two from Attica: It produces a∣bundance of Wheat, Pitch, Rosin, Coals, Sponges and Ashes, all which they carry to Athens to sell. The Islanders are much inclined to Fishing, and the rather for that their Shores are usually full of Fish. The old City of Salamene, once a Bi∣shops Seat, Suffragan to the Arch-Bi∣shop
of Athens, is situated four or five Miles off, a little Village of about 20 Houses, called Ambellachi, which has a small Port over against Athens, near which is seen a Building like a Mona∣stery, which has the Title of a Me∣tropolis, joyned to another House. The Circuit of the Isle is 35 miles, containing about a thousand Inhabi∣tants. Megalo-kira, and Micro-kira, that is, the great and little Kira, are two Rocks between Culuri and the Terra fir∣ma of Attica. Over against Cape S∣nio, otherwise Cape Colonne, is the Rock called Macronisi, which Homer mentions in his Iliads under the Name of Cranae. Its first Name was Helene, being the place where that Beauty of Greece was embraced by her enamour'd Ravisher, Paris. The Isle of Egena. EGena is an Isle distant from the At∣tick Coast 18 miles, 25 from Port Lion, 12 from the Morea, and 21
from Culuri. Strabo calls it Egina from Egine, the Mother of Eacus, the Daughter of Asopus: Baudrand, Ae∣oe; Brietius, Myrmidonia; and the Mariners, Engi; though this Isle has 36 miles Circuit, yet has it never a Port to receive any Vessels, and they are obliged to cast Anchor between Augistri and Dorusa, or between it and Moni; as the Venetian Navy did during the Wars with Candia. Par∣tridges there increase so, that the Islan∣ders are forced to search over the Island in the Spring to destroy their Eggs, lest so great a Production of this Game devour up their Corn. There are yet to be seen two fair Monuments of Antiquity, which are two Temples, the one situated in the North Part of the Isle, by Pausanias thought to be that, once dedicated to the goddess Venus; the other slands in a grove upon a little Hill of an admirable Aspect; 'twas built in the Honour of Jupiter, by Eacus, the first King of this Isle; there is still to be seen 20 Columns of the Dorique Order, canellated or fluted with their Architraves, placed in a good Proportion.
The City of the same Name with th Isle, Egena, was once honoured with a Bishops Seat suffragan to the Arch-Bi∣shop of Athens, and famous by the Birth of Paul de Medicis, but is now reduced to a small Burrough joyned to the Fon∣tress, considerable only for its situa∣tion upon a very high steep Rock, whence are discovered many of the Isles of the Archipelago, even to Ami∣milo. This Isle was once subject to Duke Galeotto Malatesta, by his Marriage with the Daughter of Anthony, King of Boeotia; whence it came afterwards to be under the Venetians. But Frederic Barbarossa, having entred the Isles of the Archipeldgo, advanced as far as Ege∣na, intending its Conquest, thinking doubtless, that all the rest would bring but little glory in Comparison of this, which was then full of People and well. desended under the Government of Francesco Sorian, who there ruled for the Republick. Anno 1674, Franoesco Morosini, Cap∣tain General of the Army of the Re∣publick, setting Sail in the Archipeldgo, for the Exaction of the Contributions,
being to refresh the Slaves of his Galley, as informed that Egena was full of a ort of barbarous People who waited ut for an opportune Season to trans∣ort themselves in small Barks to Ca∣a: This, back'd with the refusal they ade of paying the Imposition, made im take up a Resolution to reduce hem by Force; wherefore having lan∣ded his Forces, and begun the Attack, e soon repressed the boldness of the Defenders; and having brought them to yeild at Discretion, he pillaged the Place, and then demolish'd it, condem∣ning 300 of the Greeks, and 40 Turks to the Galleys.
Of the maritime Places be¦tween the Morea and th Negropont. Megara. MEgara is seated on a Mountain in Achaia, at an equal Distance of 26 miles between Athens and Corinth: 'Tis at present a Town, inhabited pro∣portionably to the Houses, which are a∣bout 400, very low and meanly built, for the most Part of Turves dried in the Sun, and covered with Boughs, and Earth upon them; all the Inhabitants are Greeks, zealous Observers of their Ceremonies. The Turks dare not dwell there since one of their Vayvodes was taken away by the Corsairs. It was once the Capital City of the Terri∣tory of Megara, confining on Eleusina, of old belonging to Athens, being the richest Part of their Dominions; Pan∣dion, dying, left it to King Pila, whereof these two Remains are the wit∣nesses,
MEGARE view of Megare
viz. the Tomb of Pandion yet be seen in this Territory, and that Nisus, who gave the Seigniory of hens to Egeus, as being the oldest of at Race; he had under his Command egara with all the Country as far as rinth; whence it comes that at this y a little Port is called Nisaea, hich is two miles from the Town on e Edge of the Gulf of Engia, once an arbour for the Ships of Megara. During the Reign of Codrus, those f Peloponnesus, having declared War gainst the Athenians, without gaining ny Fruit of their Attempts, in their Return surprized Megara; and so it ecame subject to the Corinthians, for hose that took it gave it to the Corin∣hians and others of their Confederates hat would go to dwell there; from which time the Megareans changed their Customs and Dialect into the Dorique. Authors speak diversly of the Origi∣nal of the Name; and there is an Opi∣nion, that it was called Megara in the Reign of Carus the Son of Phoroneus, who were the two first that consecra∣ted Temples to the Honour of the
Goddess Ceres. The Boeotians repo that Megarus the Son of Neptune, wh dwelt in Onchesto, hasting with an A¦my to the Succour of Nisus, beat  Minos, was killed in the Combat, an being buried in this place, gave the nam of Megara to the City before calle Nisa. The Chronicles of the Meg¦rians otherwise relate the Story o Megarus; for they affirm that he suc¦ceeded Nisus in the Government, ha¦ving espoused his Daughter called Finoes: So that 'tis not strange the should be named Megarians from their King, they being once called Lelegian from Lelegus, another of their Kings who coming from Egoto, was crowned King of this Place. On the North of the Town in the Plain, stand nine or ten Churches, a∣bout which stood once a Village called Paloeochorio, the old Village which is now forsaken and suffered to fall to ruin. If time had not worn away all that anciently was great and beautiful, we should yet see standing a great number of stately Edifices, once the Glory and Ornament of Megara, and whose broken Remains now surprise
those that look on them. Amongst o∣thers there was a Fountain, where the Work-man had bestowed all the Deli∣cacies and Beauties of Art. Not far from this Fountain was a Temple, in which stood the Images of the twelve Gods, the Work of Praxiteles, toge∣ther with the Effigies of the Emperors, the stateliest Show in the World. Me∣gara also boasted in the brass Statue of Diana, by the name of Salvatrix, by them erected to her, in acknow∣ledgment of the aid they believed they had from her, when their Ci∣ty was dangerously attacked by the Army of Mardonius. For it fell out, that this General marching in the Night lost his way, and in his errour taking a Mountain for his Enemies, which he sought after, he sent all his Arms and Warlike Machins that way: So the Megareans falling upon him without Arms, had the advantage that might be expected from such a mis∣chance. Near this was also the Mag∣nificent Temple of Olympick Jupiter, in which was the admirable Figure of that false God made of Gold, Ivory, and Clay; though that Statue was not
brought to its perfection, the Megar¦ans so unwillingly bearing the Athen¦an Yoke, that they could not thin upon any Work of Glory; and indee they were unable, being so charged wit Subsidies and Impositions, which th Athenians laid on them, to provide a new for the Peloponnesian War. Th rich Works that were to be the Orna¦ments of this Statue remained imper¦fect, and were laid in the back part o the Temple, where hung as a Troph the Rostrum of a Galley, which thos of Megara had won from the Atheni¦ans, when they retook the Isle of Sala∣mina, which had been forced from them. At Megara also one might have th Curiosity to go into the Rock called Caria, of Carus the Son of Phoroneus▪ where one might discover the Temple of Bacchus Nitelius, and at the same time that of Venus Epistrophia, called the Oracle of the Night.
map
Port Lion. POrt-Lion or Porto-Lione, is so na∣med from a marble Lion, ten foot high, that stands on the Shore of the Port. The Modern Greeks call it Por∣to Draco, and Cicero and Strabo Piraeus Portus. It has likewise had the name of Athenarus Portus, and is the Northern Part of the Gulf of Engia. The entrance into this Port is nar∣row, so that scarce two Galleys can get in at a time; but when one is in there is every where a good bottom, except in one of its Creeks, which is almost filled up. 'Tis capable of a great Pl. l. 7. c. 37. Porto∣lane is a Book in Folio of the descri∣ption of the Ports. number of Vessels, Pliny says a thou∣sand, and Sirabo four hundred, and the Portalane of the Mediterranean five hundred, allowing it ten braces depth, but Monsieur Spon, an exact Author, and of good reputation, has remarked, that as our Vessels are much larger than those of the Ancients, so now scarce a∣bove forty or fifty can be ranged there. The greatest Trade of this Port is
of the Velanede, that is gathered from the green Oaks of Eleusis, and of Goat hair. Before Themistocles was Prince of the Athenians, they kept not their Vessels in this Port, but in that of Phalerus, be∣cause it was not far from their City▪ And from this Port they say Meneste∣us set sail with a Fleet for Troy: and before him Theseus when he went to re∣venge himself on Minos for the death of Androgeus. But Themistocles being chosen Prince, and judging that the Pireus was the most commodious, for that it had three distinct Ports for Ves∣sels, he fell to work to make it tene∣ble, and made a wall three miles long, which reached quite to the City: these walls were called Macra Teichi, which were thrown down by Sylla, and of which yet the Foundations are to be seen. On the great Port of Pireus once stood the Tomb of Themistocles; the Place dedicated to Pallas and Jupiter, being a very long Lodgment for those that dwelt along the Sea side, and seve∣ral other Antiquities, as may be seen in Pausanias.
VILLE D'ATHENE view of Athens
ATEHNS. AThens is one of the most Ancient Cities of Greece, the Seat of an Archbishop, and the Capital of Attica. Its Situation is not far from the Gulf of Engia, which makes part of the Io∣nian Sea. King Cecrops first laid the Foundations, and called it from his own name Cecropia; but its perfection was owing to Theseus, who enlarged it, ob∣liging those in the Country to come and dwell there. The Cittadel still kept the name of Cecropia, till at last 'twas named Acropolis. 'Tis built up∣on a living Rock precipitious on all sides, except on the West where the entrance is. The East and South walls make two sides of a Square, the rest is not so regular, but answers to the Points and Windings of the Rock. 'Tis a thousand two hundred ordinary paces round; but at the bottom of the Hill plainly appear the Foundati∣ons of another wall, which encompas∣sed it almost round, and rendred it the more difficult to scale. The Souldiers
of the Garrison are in pay during their whole Lives, and dwell there with their Families. They still are upon the watch against all surprise, by reason of the frequent inroads of the Pirats. The Cittadel is almost at an equal distance, between two high Hills; one of an e∣qual height with it on the South-West, about a Falconet shot off, is called Mu∣seum; the other is Mount Anchesmus, which is so rugged, that 'twere hard to plant a Battery of great Guns there∣on against the City and Cittadel; be∣sides there is no Plain upon it, only sharp Points of the Rock; upon one of which is the Chapel of Agis Georgios, where once stood the Statue of An∣chesmian Jupiter. The lower part of the Town is on the North of the Citta∣del, and when one comes from the Sea∣wards it is so covered by it that the Houses of the Cittadel only can be seen, whence several, not having the curiosity to land, have thought, that of all the Grandure of Athens the Castle only now remained. This Situation is ve∣ry advantageons for it, as to the health of its Inhabitants; for the Climate be∣ing hot, 'tis much better to lie open to
the refreshing North Winds, than to the Southern Burnings. After all its Revolutions there is yet to be seen very fine Antiquities, the chief whereof are, the Temple of Vi∣ctory of the Ionick Order; which the Turks make now their Magazin of Pow∣der. The Arsenal of Licurgus of the Do∣rick Order, in which they lay up their Arms and Artillery. The Temple of Minerva of the Do∣rick Order changed now into a Maho∣metan Mosque. The Lantern of Demosthenes, now serving as a Receptacle to the P. P. Capuchins. The Tower of the Winds of an Octogonal Figure, whereof Androni∣cus Cyrrhestes gave the Model, and Vitru∣vius has described. The Temple of Theseus. The Foundations of Areopagus, &c. There is in Athens eight or nine thousand Inhabitants, three quarters whereof are Greeks, and the rest Turks, who have four Mosques in the City, and a fifth in the Castle. No Jews are permitted there, for the Athenians
are as cunning as they, whence the Pro∣verb, God defend us from the Jews of Sa∣lonica, the Greeks of Athens, and the Turks of Negropont. The Habit of the Greeks of Athens is very different from that of the Turks, for they wear only strait Gar∣ments of black, or some dark Colours. The City at present is divided into eight Parts, called Platomata, which are Placa Sotiras tu Cotaki Mono Calusi Roumbi Boreas Platoma Psiri Platoma Gerlada Agioi Colymboi, or Olympoi. As to its Terretory, it once contain∣ed an hundred seventy four Burroughs or Villages, whereof some were as big as Cities; at this time the most of them are in the Plain of Mesoia or Mesogia, wherein are the following Villages; Metropis Keratia Misochori near to Rafti Chovarades near to Rafti
Elada Marco-Poulo, there is another Marco-Poulo Coursala Phyglia Carela Alopeki Cocla Balambafi Boura Arvato Agoupi. And these that are almost ruined, and are now called only Zeugalatia or Far∣mes; Pikerni Bafi Lecambafi Lambriano Lambrica in the way to Athens, at Cape Colonne Palaeo Lambrica, the Ruins of the Anci∣ent Lampra Elimbo Egnapyrghi Spitia Ʋraona
In the other Territories of Athens, are, Caramamet, at the foot of Mount Thy∣mettus Marousi, near Penteli deserted Calandri, in the way to Penteli Gifissia, in the way to Marathon, for∣merly Cephyssia Basi Coumaria, behind Penteli Stamati, in the way to Marathon, now ruined Belousa, deserted Chiourka Grammatico Calingi, as you go from Marathon to Negropont Varnada on the Euripus. Limico on the Euripus. Calamo on the Euripus. Marcopoulo on the Euripus. Near to Athens amongst the Olive Grounds. Sepollia or Sopollia Mainidi Cacovaones Patischa
Ambelokipous, in the way to Penteli Callirhoe, a few Houses near the Foun∣tain. This City was once an Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a School of Ver∣tue; and all the Princes that have pos∣sessed it, have been ambitious to leave their Names upon some Monuments, thereby to gain an immortality in the Memory of man. Thus we find out upon a Portal, a Greek Verse, signify∣ing, that this is the City of Adrian, and not of Theseus. In the course of Time it has been subject to several Princes by divers Misfortunes, to which it has yielded. Sylla after a long Siege took it, and Anno 687. from the Foundati∣on of Rome. made it subject to the Common-wealth of Rome. Bajazet triumphed over it when it was under the command of A∣ristonicus the Epicurean Philosopher. Af∣ter that Renier Acciaioli having the Do∣minion of it, yielded it to the Venetian Republick; but it returned again under the Government of the same Acciaioli, who at once possessed Attica and Boeo∣tia. In the Year 1455. it was besieged by
Mahomet the Second, and reduced for want of Succours; since which it has still remained under the Ottomam Em∣pire. The Isle and Kingdom of Negro∣pont. THE Isle of Negropont is the most considerable of all the Isles in the Archipelago. It has had divers Names, and that of Negropont has by corrupti∣on been changed into Egripont; the Turks call it Egribos, the Latins Euboea, either from the Retreat of the Daugh∣ter of Asopus, or of Inachus thither, whom the Poets feign to be turned in∣to a Cow; which from its lowing is named Euboea. It has also been called Macris from the Channel called so in Greek, Aban∣tias from the People Abantides, Calcis and Chalcondantis: Pliny likewise gives it the name of Asopis, and Strabo says 'twas called Oche, and that once 'twas called Ellopia from Ellopus the Son of Jupiter.
NEGROPONT. view of Negropont
Some have thought that this Isle was once joyned to Boeotia, and thence sepa∣rated by Earth-quakes; or as others say, by the swift and impetuous course of the waves, which make the Canal called Euripus. The Isle is three hun∣dred sixty five miles round, in length, from South to North ninety miles, and forty broad, and twenty in the narrow∣est part. At which place it is joyned by a Bridge to the main Land. It is, as it were, encompassed with two Promontories, Cape Lithar, and Cape dell' Oro. The first facing the Gulf of Volo is by Ptolemy and Strabo, called Ce∣naeum Promontorium, by Pliny Caeneum, and by Niger Canaia. Near this Pro∣montory was the coast of Artemisia, so called from a Temple of that name there erected: At which place the Greeks shelter'd their naval forces, during their wars with the King of Persia. The second looking toward the East part of the Archipelago, Ptolemy calls Caphare∣um Promontorium, Sophianus Chymium, Niger Capo figera, Stephanus Cathereus, Lycophron Zarax, Isacius Xylophagos. Upon the Top of this Promontory, Nauplius King of Negropont made fires,
that the Grecian Army returning from Troy, might by the light thereof arrive safely at the Haven. There was for∣merly three cities in the Isle, which made it famous, Ellopia, Histiaea and O∣raeus Cities, that were joyned together by reason of their vicinity. The Capital City of the Kingdom of Negropont was at first called in the Athe∣nian Tongue Calcis; and then it took the name of the Kingdom it self. It was once the seat of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Athens; afterwards 'twas raised to an Arch-Bishoprick. 'Tis situated on the banks of the Eu∣ripus: The compass of its walls is about two miles, but there are more houses and people in the Suburbs, where the Christians dwell, than in the City, inha∣bited by Turks and Jews. The Turks have there two Mosques, and two o∣thers without, where the Christians also have their Churches. The Jews have an house, where they instruct the Youth. All the Inhabitants make about 15000. The City is divided from the Suburbs by a great Ditch with a flat bottom, in a smooth and even ground. There is a Captain Basha that com∣mands
the whole Isle, and part of Boeo∣tia, who has in his absence his Kiaja or Lieutenant, and his Subkiaja. There is also a Bey or Lord, who has some Reve∣nues, and is obliged to maintain a Gal∣ley. At the place where the strait of the Euripus is narrowest to pass over into the Isle, they go over a stone bridge of five little Arches not above thirty paces long, and so under a Tower in the middle of the Channel, built by the Venetians, where St. Mark is yet seen over the Gate. From the Tower to the City is but one Draw-bridge about twenty paces long, built on sharp bot∣tomed boats, which is raised half to the Tower, and the other half to the Ci∣ty, to give passage to the Galleys and o∣ther Vessels, which cannot easily be done without taking in their Oars. There is also to be seen the Episco∣pal City, at present called Carisso, once Chironia, which Strabo names Caristus and Caristos, Sophianus Castel Rosso, and the French Chateauroux, it acknowledges Calcis for its Metropolis, being sixty miles distant. It stands near Cape Caefa∣reo. There was besides another Epis∣copal City Eretria, which Moletius calls
Rocho, which in his time was not less famous than Calcis, which once was an Athenian Colony built on the banks of the Euripus before the first destruction of Troy: both these Cities have perisht by the falsness of their own Inhabitants; So that now their names only remain: They were once pillaged and burnt by Darius. The soil of the Isle is stony and sandy, but this is only upon the top, for digging deeper they find it very good. There are several Forests, where good ship timber may be cut. Near Caristus is a Mountain of the same name of very beautiful marble: And near to it is found the Asbestos stone, which may be spun and made into cloth, which by put∣ting in the fire grows white. There were formerly in the Territory of Cal∣cis Iron and copper Mines, which are now lost. The Isle produces cotton e∣nough to make Sails for a great Navy. There are several hot baths. It is wa∣tered with two Rivers, Fimileus and Ce∣reus, of which the Poets said, that one made the Sheep have black wool, the other white. In sine the Isle abounds in all things; and Pope Pius the fifth ad∣vised several great Captains to go and
begin the War with the Turk in this Kingdom; because it is capable of main∣taining a whole Army, besides it has good Ports on the side of the Continent. It is true indeed, that when one is once there, he can by no means get out to save himself. There are several places on the South part, the most considera∣ble whereof is called Spiritus. When Pietro Zani was Doge, the Re∣publick inlarged their Dominions by this beautiful Kingdom, which was yielded to them by the Emperor of Con∣stantinople, as a reward for the good ser∣vices they had done him. The first Go∣vernour that was sent was Pictro Barbo, named il Zanco. Anno 1469. the Turks attempting the Conquest of it, came with three hundred Sail. At first they made a Bridge upon the Euripus, that so they might land their Troops upon the Campaign of the Isle; but those of the Country so vigorously opposed them, that they were forced to return to their Galleys. Within a a Month Mahomet came himself with an Army of twelve thousand Men: He made a new Bridge over the Channel, from the Church of St. Mark, a mile off
of the City, and by this means made himself a way to attach Negropent. This City was in some sort fortified at that time, and had in it in Garrison twenty four thousand Men under Ludo∣vico Calbo and Paolo Erizzo Comman∣ders. The last had been Governour of the City, and tho his time was expired, yet he would not leave the place, when he might contribute by his Arms and Counsel, to its defence, and signalize his zeal for the Service of his Country. The Turks raised several Batteries in di∣vers places, and continually plaid upon the Walls. And four times march'd to the assault, where four thousand Turks were killed. The Place was besieged by Sea and Land, and extremely pressed on all hands; yet the besieged still defended themselves with advantage, and had already sustained a months Siege, when a treasonable practice was discovered. For a little Girl found a letter, wherein was mentioned the means and way of delivering up the place to the Ottomans. This letter was directed to Thomaso Schiava. Luigi Delfino transported with indignation against the Traitor, attacked him
openly, and by meer force made him discover all the base Intrigues he had with the Turks. The besieged still animated more and more in their defence, gave daily nota∣ble proofs of their courage and constan∣cy; but at last they were almost wea∣ried out with continual labour and fa∣tigue. In these extremeties, they, who had the Guard of Porte Bureliana, ran a∣way from their Post, and left the place the twelfth of July, 1649. The Enemy soon perceiving the place deserted, and the entrance of the Gate free for them, entered the Town, and gave in all places dreadful marks of their Barbarity. Calbo was killed in the Place, and Bondulmiero in his house. Paolo Erizzo beeing retrenched in an ad∣vantageous Post valiantly defended him∣self, and the Sultan promised him life if he would deliver himself up, which having done the cruel Turk broke his word, and caused him to be sawed in two. One of his Daughters a very beautiful Virgin chose rather to be stabb'd than receive the Sultans caresses. All were murdered above twenty years old. This done Mahomet left the City
with a Garrison for the Guard of the whole Isle and Kingdom. Of the Ebb and Flow of the Euripus. THe Euripus is a strait of the Egaean Sea, so narrow, that scarce one Gal∣ley can pass it (under a Bridge that is made over it) between the Cittadel and the Tower or Dungeon of Negro∣pont. It has been called Euripus Eubolcus, from the old name of the Isle, or Ghal∣cidicus from the ancient City Chalcis; the Latins named it Euripus, those of the place Egripos, the Italians Stretto di Ne∣greponte, and the French l' Euripe de Chal∣cidoine, or le detroit de l' Euripe. It is a∣bout sixty miles long with little Gulfs in divers places. Its Ebb and Flow is doubtless one of the greatest wonders in the World, and it is fabled, that Aristotle drowned himself in it out of grief that he could not find out the cause thereof. Antiphilus, a Native of Bizantium, says in a Greek Epigram, that the Euri∣pus rises and falls six times; Strabo, Pli∣ny
and Suidas, with several others, hold, that it flows and ebbs seven times a day. Pomponius Mela assures us, that this is done fourteen times a day, tho it seems by his words, that he means, that the Euripus continually ebbs and flows four∣teen times in 24 hours. These are his words, lib. 2. cap. 7. Mare rapidum et alterno cursu septies nocte fluctibus invicem versis, adeo immodicè fluens, ut ventos etiam ac plenis velis navigia frustretur. That is, the Sea is there very rapid, running sometimes one way, sometimes the other se∣ven times in a night, and as oft in the day with returning waves, with that violence that they prevail against the winds, and put a stop to ships under Sail. Seneca seems to be of the same Opini∣on in one of his Tragedies, where he thus speaks: Euripus undas flectit instabilis vagas, Septemque cursus flectit, & totidem refert Dum lassa Titan mergat Oceano Juga.
Swift Euripus receives within his breast Seven times the stoods, as oft are out∣ward prest, While Titan drives his weary Steeds to rest. It seems also that Pliny would express the same, that it flows and ebbs seven times a day, and as often at night, though his words are not very clear. Quorumdam Aestuariorum privata natura est, velut Taurominitani saepius et in Euboea septies die ac nocte reciprocantis: That is, there are Currents of a very peculiar Nature, as that of the Taurominians, which often goes, and returns, and that of the Euripus, which does so seven times in a day and night. Titus Livius thinks he has hit the truth better, than the rest. The Euri∣pus, says he, has not seven regular ebbs and flows in a day, as the common report is, but it runs sometimes one way, some∣times another, like the wind, as a Tor∣rent, falling with precipitation from a moun∣tain. This agrees very well with the irregular days, but he is mistaken when he adds, that there is no Port worse, than that of Calcis, by reason of the
Current; for this ebbing and flowing, does not at all disorder the Vessels, which have room enough to keep them∣selves from the Current, either in the great Port, which is covered with the walls of the Cittadel, or in that on the other side of the Bridge, as Father Babin the Jesuit observed, Anno 1669. when the Turkish Navy wintered at Negropont. The same Father, considered the course of the Euripus, at several times. There are eighteen or nineteen days each month, or to say better each Moon, whereon 'tis regular; and eleven others, wherein 'tis irregular, and broken. Such are the Terms, they use at Negropont, to describe this wonder of Nature. It is in its force and vigour, or to speak plainer, it is regular from the three lasts days of the old Moon, till the eighth of the new, and on the ninth 'tis irregular and broken, and remains so troubled, till the thirteenth inclu∣sively. On the fourteenth it comes to it self again, and resumes its Forces; but grows disorderly again, from the twenty first to the 27, as will be better understood by the following Table.
A Table of the Regular, and Irre∣gular flowing and ebbing of the Euripus, according to the Age of the Moon. New Moon. 1. Regular, as the Ocean.     2. Regular.     3. Regular.     4. Regular.     5. Regular.     6. Regular.     7. Regular.   First Quarter. 8. Regular.     9. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.     10. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.     11. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.     12. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.     13. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.     14. Regular.   Full Moon. 15. Regular.     16. Regular.     17. Regular.     18. Regular.     19. Regular.     20. Regular.     21. Irregular.  
Last Quarter. 22. Irregular.     23. Irregular.     24. Irregular.     25. Irregular.     26. Irregular.     27. Regular.     28. Regular.     29. Regular.   So each Moon there is eleven days of irregularity, and 18 or 19 others, that are regular. It is then irregular from the first Quarter, to about the full Moon, and after the last Quarter it begins a∣gain to be irregular. During the time of its Irregularity in one natural day, that is, in twenty four or twenty five hours, there is eleven, twelve, thirteen, and sometimes four∣teen Floods and Ebbs, according to the observations of the same Father; and as those assure us, that are daily at the Mills, and find the wheels alter often in a day, as the Stream turns. So that the Flood does not come only seven times in a day, as the Ancients wrote, but much frequenter. When the Course of the Euripus is regular for the other eighteen or
nineteen days; 'tis like the Ocean, and Gulf of Venice, that is in twenty four, or twenty five hours, it has but two Floods and Ebbs, and every day retards it one hour; as in the Ocean, it is six hours coming in, and as long going out, whether in Summer, or whether the wind be violent or calm. On the irregular days, it flows about half an hour, and ebbs three quarters of an hour. All the Tides of the Euripus, whether regular, or irregular, differ in two parti∣culars, from those of the Ocean; first, that in high water, it rises not above one Foot, and very rarely two, whereas the Ocean rises sometimes eighty cubits, as in the Ports of Britain, though in the Isles of America, it mounts not high∣er, than in the Euripus. The other difference, is that in the Ocean, when the water sinks and abates, it retires into the deep Sea, as on the contrary, it raises it self, and covers more ground, when it approaches the sides. The Euripus is quite after ano∣ther manner, for its Flood happens, when its waters run towards the Isles of the Archipelago, where is a much
greater Sea; and its Ebb is when it runs towards Thessaly, and through the Chan∣nel, by which the Galleys pass to go towards Thessalonica, as a shorter and safer way to Constantinople. Between high and low water, there is a short interval, when the water seems quiet and still, and like standing wa∣ter so that straws and feathers lie upon the water without motion, provided there be no wind. Caesar d' Arcons, who printed in French a Book in Quarto, concerning the Ebb and Flow of the Sea, has a particular Paragraph of the Tides of the Euripus. The Explication of the Draught of Volo. A. The Mole. B. The Magazines. C. The Gate on the Sea side. D. The Towers flanking the For∣tress. E. The Mosque. F. The sides of the Gulf of Volo.
The Fortress of Volo. THE Fortress of Volo, known to the Latins by the name of Pagasa, is situated in that Part of Thessaly, which is most joyned to Magnesia, a small Coun∣try of Maoedonia, nine miles from Di∣metrias; or as Livy and Pliny Demetrias and at the edge of the Gulf commonly called del Volo. Pliny names it Pagasi¦cus sinus, Pelasgicus sinus, Ptolemy Pagasi¦licus, Strabo Pagasaeus, Mela Jolciacus, O¦vid Demetriacus, Lucio Macedonicus, Oro∣sius Golfe d' Armiro. The Fortress is built after the old fa¦shion, and takes up a great space, a few paces from the Sea, where it has a larg Port, and of good Anchorage. I is according to Bleau. vol. 2. l. 7. pag. 9. Bleau at 31 deg. 31 min Lat. and according to Cast aldo at forty deg. fifty min. lat. and forty eight deg. forty min. Longitude. In this place, the Turks, lay up grea military Ammunitions, and provision of Corn and Bisket, brought them thi ther from all the Provinces round abou that abound in them. Captain Moro¦sini,
VEUE DE VOLO. view of Volo
FORTERESSE DE VOLO plan of Fortress of Volo
who was Proveditor of the Army, Anno 1655. being informed of the mat∣ter, resolved to turn his Arms against this Fortress, designing to raze it as soon as he had it, concluding by that means, he should deprive the Enemy of a great advantage, and at the same time furnish his Army with Provision for a long time. He neglected nothing, that might gain a good Success to his Enterprize. He lay with his whole Ar∣my before the Fortress, and began to attack it very briskly with great shot. These beginnings were of the greater advantage to the Besiegers, in that the Turks never expected so hot an onset. The danger increased every moment, and the loss grew more certain; but they could not as yet be brought to think up∣on a Capitulation, nor of rendering the place. But when they saw the Petard fastened to the Gate, and the Ladders at the walls, they had no more Courage to defend it. They, that were at the Gates, left them, and they upon the walls de∣serted them, all seeking safety in their heels. The Bassa that commanded it, and an Aga, at first thought to save themselves in a place built in the form
of a little Castle in the Fortress; but perceiving the Necssity of miserably Perishing there, lest they should be shut in, immediately went out of it. Thus General Morosini succeeded glo∣riously in this Expedition; he present∣ly ordered all the Bisket found in the Place, and which amounted to above four Millions of Livres, to be transpor∣ted; they also found there other Am∣munition, and 27 great Guns: Then he set on fire the Magazines, Houses, and Mosques; and wholly to raze it, before he left the Place, he levelled the Walls to the ground with his Cannon. The Gulf and City of Salonichi or Thessalonica. THE Gulf of Salonichi has an Ex∣tent of 140 Miles length; it is bounded by a very beautiful Plain, whence it is necessarily exposed to the Winds, and therefore very dangerous to the Sea-man: In that Place where it most wears away the Land, is a very advantageous and spacious Port. There
is situated, partly on an Hill, and partly on a Declivity, as the Ground goes, the famous City of Macedonia, called usually Salonichi, or otherwise Thessa∣lonique; near it, on the West side, glides down the River Vardar, which Ptole∣my and Strabo call Axius Fluvius, others Bardarus and Bardarius Fluvius, very full of Fish, and its Banks covered and adorned with goodly Trees. The Walls of the City are flanked with seve∣ral Towers, and as to its circuit some make it ten, others twelve miles. It has three Forts to defend it; the first, being the least, comes first in view at the Entrance or Landing-Place at some distance from the old City; 'tis Mouted with 20 great Guns. The two others are situated within View of the Sea, at the highest Part of the Wall, furnished with 30 or 40 Cannon; on the Land side is a Fortress like that of the seven Towers at Constantinople; this com∣mands the whole Town, being built on a little Hill, at the Foot whereof is a very great Number of Houses making a Suburbs, encompassed with a Wall apart, but which joyns to the City. There are in this place a numerous
People, and the great Number of Habi∣tations that are built in the Plain are but low and base, and not sufficient to contain the great Numbers of Jews that dwell in them: Besides they are not a little incommoded by the horrid stink that is in the Streets, they are so narrow. There is a considerable Trade, as well from the commodiousness of its Situation, as for the great Quantity of Silk, Wool, Skins of all sorts, Wax, Gun-powder, Corn, Cotton, and Iron. The Jews most busy themselves in Traffick, and have to themselves the Manufacture of Stuffs to cloath the Ja∣nizaries; and by this means they find a Way to employ the Tribute they are obliged to pay the Grand Seignior. There are in it 48 Mosques, in which is comprehended the Church of St. De∣metrius, of three Iles, born up with very fair Pillars, where St. Paul Prea∣ched once; and that of St. Sophia, built by the Emperour, Justinian, thir∣ty Greek Churches, thirty six great Synagogues, and many other small ones. The Governour has the Title of Mulà, and his Place makes him very considerable at the Port.
LES DARDANELLES DE LEPANTHE map of Dardanelles of Lepanto
In the Year 118, when Andronicus would have got the Empire, Thessalo∣nica was taken by William, King of Si∣cily; but at the end, being returned under the Dominion of its lawful So∣veraign, the Emperour of Constantinople, Andronicus Paleologus; he, to unite himself the more nearly to the Venetian Republick, gave them all the Right he had to this City: But scarce two years past e're the Turk seized on it without much Difficulty, by reason of its Di∣stance, and the ill State of Affairs in I∣taly, and the small Defence the Inhabi∣tants were able to make. The Gulf, and the Dardanelles of LEPANTO. THIS Gulf reaching on the North to the Shores of Achaia, and on the South to those of the Morea, divides from each other these two great Parts of Greece. It has had several Names which Authors have given it according to the different Times and particular Occasions they had to speak of it.
The Ancients called it Crisus; Strabo, the Sea of Alcion; Sophianus, Golfe de Pedras; some, Corintiacus Sinus, from the City Corinth; the Mariners, (as Niger reports) the Shores of the Bo∣stria, and now commonly Lepanto: It contains four Rocks in it, and receives its Water from the Ionian Sea by an Entrance between two Promontories, standing far out from the Continent, whereof one joyning to the Morea, is by Strabo called Anthirium Promontorium, and usually Cape Antirio, upon the top of which is a Fortress called of Morea, or of Patras; the other joy∣ning to Achaia, which Strabo calls Rhium Promontorium; and the Vulgar, Cap de Rhio, or Rio; this also is provided with a Fort called Romelie. These two Castles are otherwise called the Dardanelles of Lepanto: They are both built of a square Figure, en∣compassed with good Walls, and a strong Battery, level with the Water; there is no Fault to be found with them, but that the Ground being Sandy, they admit of an easy Approach from the Enemy. There is no landing any For∣ces on the side of Romelie, within two
Italian Miles of the Fortress, but it may be approached in small Barks within 100 Paces. The Plain to the little Hill is very large, but it grows less and less as you come nearer to the Castle. At the Foot of the Mountain is a great Valley, where those that de∣sign to attack the Fort may march for∣ward undiscovered. All Merchandises brought out of the Gulf, as Skins, Oyls, Tabaco, Rice, and Barly, pay three per cent. to the Emin, who is likewise obliged to dis∣burse six thousand Crowns a year, into the Coffers of the Grand Seignior. Once all Merchandises that came from the West, as likewise those from the East, after having passed the Gulf of Engia, were brought into this Port; but at this time the Entrance is forbid to all stranger Ships, which upon that Account are obliged to stay at Patras; and the most of those that put in here are Corsairs, and indeed one calls Le∣panto the little Algiers. The greatest part of the Inhabitants of this Place are Moors that have black Children like those of Barbary.
The City of Lepanto. THE City of Lepanto is by the La∣tins called Naupactus; by the Vulgar, Epactos; and by the Turks, Ei∣nebachti; 'tis situated in the Country of Livadia, on the Edge, not far from the Mouth of the Gulf of the same Name, invironed with an high conical Mountain, on the Top of which is built a Fortress with four strong thick Walls round it, separated from each o∣ther by little Distances, where the In∣habitants have their Dwellings; the Port is not above 60 Foot big, and which may be shut up with a Chain being but narrow at its Entrance, upon which Account, but a few Vessels can lie there; and at sometimes also they cannot get out of it for want of Wa∣ter: And if the famous Pirate, Du∣rach Bey, used to shelter himself there with his Galleys, he must have taken a special Care to keep it clear. In the times of Idolatrous Worship, there were four Temples in Lepanto, dedicated, one to Neptune, another to
LEPANTHE view of Lepanto
Venus, a third to Aesculapius, and a fourth to Diana. Falisius built that of Aesculapius, to acquit himself of a Vow he had made when he was troubled with sore Eyes. Under the Empire of the Turks 'tis governed by a Vaivode. There are se∣ven Mosques, two Greek Churches which are held in great Disdain by the Turks, and three Jewish Synagogues. If the Inhabitants want pleasant Pla∣ces within the Town, they have, with∣out, on the East side near the Sea, a plentiful Stream of Water, which after having served the Powder-Mills and the Tanners of Leather, in which con∣sists the Riches of the Place, waters about a dozen very great Plains, and makes the Place very delightful. There is likewise round about very pleasant Gardens and Fields covered with Li∣mons and Orange Trees: The Soil produces a Wine that surpasses all the Greek Wines in Goodness. The taking of this Place was very Difficult, before the Use of great Guns. In the Year 1408, it was subject to the Emperour of Constantinople, but the Emperour, Emanuel, finding it too hard
a Task for him to keep it, delivered it into the Hands of the Republick of Venice. Under this new Dominion, it received a new Form, and was fortified so as to be able to resist a powerful Ar∣my; and indeed, being besieged anno 1475, it destroied thirty thousand Turks, and their Army was forced shamefully to raise the Siege, after having sate down before it above four Months. The Inhabitants could not be better pleased with their Rulers, nor ever made more ardent Vows to be kept there and preserved from the barbarous Tyranny of the Turks, when Bajazet, 2. came to attack them by Sea and Land, with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, and brought them to the most deplorable State that can be ima∣gined. There is yet to be seen St. Mark of Venice, to shew us, that the Rights of the Republick are as well founded there as its Arms ineffaceable; and to give us Hopes, that trium∣phant Republick will add to the Con∣quests it has made these last Years, that of this Place; which will be crow∣ned with Glory and immortal Fame. FINIS▪
ADVERTISEMENT. ANgliae Notitia; or the pre∣sent State of England com∣pleat, with Reflections on the an∣cient State thereof, by Edward Chamberlain, Doctor of Laws; the sixteenth Edition, with Additions and Alterations, down to this time. Printed for Matt. Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster-Hall; and James Partridge at the Post-house between Charing-Cross and White-Hall.
