D1920 669.f.23[38] 99870265 163694
A true and perfect Copy of a LETTER Written by the LORD MARQUIS of DORCHESTER To the LORD ROOS. Sure you were in one of your Drunken Fits, the Pot flew high when you writ your Sottish and Clownish Paper to me, that rellishes of nothing but a Tippl'd Fool, and a Bragging Coward; and the latter in so poor and mean a manner, that I am ashamed it should come from one that bears the Name, though not the Nature of a Gentleman: Your owne fearful, guilty Soul knows that my late Letter, as well as a former to your self, together with all Passages between us, were almost as soon communicated to your Father and Mother, as to yourself, and after to some of your nearest Relations; Nay, many of the Servants of both your Families were privy thereunto, and knew as much as your self, and so did divers others in several places: All this I can prove by persons well reputed; and for the Letters, I dare swear, they were not kept very secret, for I have heard of divers passages in them, which I am sure came to no body by Revelation, and yet you have the frontless impudence to lay this aspersion upon me; I have fought before now, and I hope never came off with loss of honour; and must I now be afraid of such a Shadow, such a Half-man as you are? and 'tis well if you be so much: You remember I challenged you twice in one Week, and you poorly and basely refused both, pretending you would give me full satisfaction; you came indeed, but full sore against your will (and contrary to the Huffs you gave out in the Countrey in your Drink) and promised as much as I could expect, but afterwards perform'd nothing: And now be your owne Judge, whether it is possible for any one to believe, that I that knew you had poorly refused twice, should avoyd the Meeting you now: If you needs must lie, follow my advice, and hereafter lie Colourably, for these are such gross ones, that they are palpable, like the AEgyptian Darkness. I must needs say, it much troubles and afflicts me, to be compell'd by your barbarous and unmanly provocations, to use such speeches, contrary to my nature and disposition; but you began, and I do no more than retaliate, and the the law of Retaliation is just and equal: But (I believe) you'l bear it quietly, were it more; for you abound in Passive fortitude, though you have not in you one jot of the Active. If this any white galls, you know the way to London (no other place for the present being possible to be chosen without most apparent and evident suspition) There will be the most privacy, and who plays the Pultroon, will be most easily discover'd. But what do I talk of London to you, who will as soon come on your Head as on Horseback or in Coach, to meet me with a Sword in your hand: But, was it a Bottle, none would be more forward; and with such a weapon you may venture upon a Dutch-man: But if there be a spark of Fire in so dull a Flint, I will strike it. From the beginning to the end of your Letter you falsly lie, and if you dare appear, I will cram it down your Throat with my Sword; if there need any more, I say and resay, you are a base Coward. If you must have another Push, I will divulge it to the world in print what a Coward you are, and make publick all the passages between us; Your foolish bragging Letter shall not be omitted, which will speak you more than I have done, and this shall follow after it; then 'twill to all appear what a Captain Puff you are, fit for nothing but a Cudgel. For shame leave the Petticoat off, and put on Breeches; use my Argument against my self; if I was so mean to discover this, you may infalliblie conclude I will do so again; but you'l use none of this way of Argumentation, you too well know my innocence therein; if I may see a Miracle, that is, you with a Sword in your hand, I will before our Seconds, and your self, beseech God that what I wish'd in my Letter to your Second, may fall upon me, [viz.] That if in the least, directly or indirectly, I be guilty of this discovery, or any Circumstance that can but tend thereunto: Nay, I will go farther, If I did not my utmost to avoyd all suspicion, may I fall by your Sword, to my eternal shame and ruine. This, upon my Honor, I will declare upon our Meeting, in manner as I have said, which I am sure you dare not respectively do for your self; Your guiltie trembling Conscience will hold you off when you are so neer danger. Febr. 13. 1659.
