669.f.13[6] 99869628 162901
A DIARY of the Siege of Colchester by the Forces under the Command of his Excellency the Lord Generall FAIRFAX. Tuesday June 13. HIS Excellencie the Lord Fairfax engaged in the fields before Colchester, neer St. Maries, the Lord Gorings Forces, together with the Forces under Com∣mand of the Lord Capell, and Sir Charls Lucas, and beat them into the Town; Colonell Sir William Leyton, and between 4 and 500 of the Enemy were ta∣ken prisoners, (200 of them being of Colonel Farre (the Apostate) his Re∣giment,) and in pursuit of the rest, Col. Barkestead, with his Regiment, en∣tred the Suburbs as far as head-Gate, and entred the Gate, but being over∣powered there, and out of the Church yard, the Enemy Barracadoed the Gate, (leaving neer 500 men to our mercy;) yet notwithstanding those foot, and Col. Needhams fought many houres after, in hopes to gain the Town at that place, but could not, the enemy making good resistance; there were slain of the Enemies part, Colonel Sir William Campion, Colonel Cooke, and divers Officers of quality, and about 80 private souldiers; Colonel Panton, Capt. Brunkerd, Clifford, Worsop, and divers other Offi∣cers wounded. On the Lord Fairfax side, Col. Needham, Capt. Lawrence of Horse, Capt. Cox of foot, and neer 100 private souldiers and inferrior Officers were slaine: when we entered the Suburbs, the Lord Goring was Summoned, but returned an Answer not becomming a Gentleman: The Enemies word at the Fight was Charles, the ground they fought upon, Maries: Ours, God's our help. The Forces under the Command of his Excellencie the Lord Fairfax engaged in the Fight before Colchester, June 13.1648. As also the names of the chief Commanders and persons of Quality of the Lord Gorings Forces engaged at that Fight. His Excellencies forces engaged in that Fight. Part of His Excellencies Regiment of Horse, being four Troops, Com∣manded by Major Desbrough. Of Colonel whaleys Regiment, six Troops, Commanded by himself. Of Colonel Fleetwoods, five Troops, Commanded by Major Coleman. Three troops of Commissary General Iretons, Comman∣ded by Captain Cecill. Two Troops of Dragoons, Commanded by Cap∣tain Freeman and Captain Barrington. Of Foot. Col. Barksteeds Regiment Commanded by himself, consisting of ten com∣panies, about 800 men. Col. Needhams Regiment, lately the Tower Regi∣ment, Commanded by Col. Needham, being seven Companies, and about 400 men. Part of Colonel Inglesbies Regiment, of four Companies, Com∣manded by Capt. Grimes, 320 men. Of the Essex Forces. Col. Harlackendens Regiment, of four Troops of horse, Commanded by major Robert Sparrow; and Capt. Turners Troop of Dragoons. Sir Thomas Hunniwoods Regiment of Foot Colonell Cooks Regiment of Foot,both which said Regiments consisted of Auxiliaries, and Trained bands. The County Forces of Essex left to secure Chelmsford and Maulden, two considerable Passes, lest more Forces should resort from London to the Lord Goring. Colonel Henry Mildmaies Regiment of Horse, and two Troops of Dra∣goons. Part of Colonel Carew Mildmaies Regiment of Foot, Commanded by Major Bard. The Suffolk Forces, who made good the Passes over the River at Nailand, Stratford, and Cadaway, lest the Enemy should escape towards Suffolk and Norfolk, were under the Command of Captain Fisher, Captain Brandling, and Captain Sparrow, besides the assistance which Captain Ball, Captain Cox, and the rest of the Sea Commanders gave to secure the River. The Suffolk Forces that. came afterwards to help besiege this Town. Colonel Gourdons Regiment of horse. Of Foot Regiments. Colonell Sir Thomas Barnardistons, Colonell Fethergils, Colonell Har∣veys, Colonell Bloises. Of the Army that came up after the fight. Colonell Scroop, with three Troops of horse of his Regiment. The Lord Gorings Forces engaged in that Fight. Of Horse. Lord Gorings Regiment. Lord Capels Re∣giment. Sir William Comptons. Colonel Slings∣bies. Colonel Sir Bernard Gascoignes. Colo∣nell Hamonds. Colonel Culpeppers. Of Foot. Sir Charles Lucas his Regiment. Sir George Lisls Regiment. Colonel Tilleys Regiment. Colonel Tewk his Regiment. Colonel Farrs Regiment. Colonel Gil∣burds Regiment. Colonel Sir William Cam∣pions Regiment, himself slain. Colonel Burds Regiment. Colonel Bowmans Re∣giment. Colonel Chesters Regiment. Colonels who had no Command of Re∣giments, yet assisting at that Fight. Earl Louborough, Lord Hastings, Sir Wil∣liam Leyton, Colonel, taken Prisoner, and wounded, Colonel Sir Richard Hastings, Co∣lonel Iohn Heath, Colonel Lee of Kent, Co∣lonel Panton wounded, Colonel Cook slain, Colonel Sir Hugh Orelie, Quarterma∣ster Gen. Col. William Maxey, Col. Pilman, Col. Beal, Lieu. Col Hatch slaine, Major Jam∣mot, Adjutant Gen, besides divers Lieute∣nant Colonels and Majors who were as∣sistants, but had no Commands. Wednesday 14. His Excellency perceiving the Enemy would not stand the field, resolved to sit down before the Town in order to asiege (being too few to storm it) having not then, nor when be first enga∣ged, 1500 old foot, and but about 1500 horse, and two Troops of Dragoons, (besides the two Regi∣ments of the Trained Bands, under Col. Sir Thomas HunniWood, and Col. Cooke,) the Enemy at that time being about 6000 Horse and Foot in Town, and the Town and Suburbs larger in compasse then Oxford, and would require 5000 men to besiege it; appointed Lexden in the road to London for the Head-Quar∣ter, where the greatest body was to lie, to prevent more aid for coming from London to the Lord Goring, and kept strong Guards of Horse on Cambridge road, on the other side the River, that they might not e∣scape Northward, to joyn with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, leaving no place open to them, but towards the Sea, where they could not go far; and the same day his Excellency sent a party of Horse to secure Mersey Island, to prevent the Revolted ships from comming Into the River to relieve the Town; the Enemy sent Colonell Tuke with a strong party an hour after, but came too late. Thursday 15. The Enemies Canon from the Royall Fort at St. Maries, plaid very hard, killed severall of our men, as they did the day before; some, as they were raising the first Work; called Fort Essex, others as they were stragling in the field. Friday 16. Nothing of importance happened, but three of Captain Canons men killed with a Canon Bullet. Saturday 17. A Trumpet sent in about the Exchange of prisoners, and this day the Enemy got provisi∣ons out of Tendering Hundred, which we could not prevent till the Suffolk Forces marched to our assistance. Sunday 18. We took two of their Frigots, the one with ten, the other with eleven Guns. And this day Colonell Ewers came up with six Companies from Chepstow Castle: The Essex foot under Sir Thomas Hunniwood and Colonell Cooke endured many Canon shot this day, and were very ready upon an Alarm. Munday 19. The party of Horse sent from the Leaguer under Major Sparrow and Capt. Walling∣ton, engaged the Enemy at Linton, (coming to assist Goring,) where Major Muschampe and others of the Enemies side were slaine, and Master Reynolds, and others taken prisoners, the rest (about 500.) disperst. This day a Trumpet came from the Lord Goring, pretending to disre a Treaty of Peace. Tuesday 20. Answer returned, if a generall Peace was intended, that then it was proper for the Par∣liament to determine of that, and offered them in that answer Conditions, viz. The Gentlemen and Offi∣cers to go beyond sea, and the souldiers to go home, without prejudice. Wednesday 21. The Enemy returned a scornfull answer, moving for a free-trade for the Towns∣men. Thursday 22. A small party of the enemy sallied out to view a new Work (afterwards called Col. Ewers Fort) but were instantly beaten in by Musqueteers. Their Canon killed two men of ours. That day the Lord Goring sent a summons to the Suffolk Forces at Cattaway-Bridge, Commanded by Capt. Fisher, and Capt. Brandling, to joyne with him, which they refused, expressing their Resolution still to adhere to the Parliament and Army. Friday 23. The Guns began this day to play from our new Battery, which much annoyed the Enemy at north bridge. His Excellency sent a Reply concerning his former offer, offering the same Condtions a∣gain to all in the Towne, Except the Lord Goring, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas. Saturday 24. One of the Enemies Canoneers was killed. This day the Suffolk Forces advanced out of their owne County, and took up their quarters upon Mile-end, over against the North-gate, being about 2500. horse and foot, leaving a guard at Cattaway, and Nayland, to secure those passes. Sunday 25. Nothing of importance. Munday 26. A party of Col. Barkesteads Foot (the Enemy being drawne out neere the Almes-house) beate them from the Hedges, and from their Court of guard, fired the guard house, and brought away the houre glasse by which they stood Centry.
