A575 E451_34 99864702 161943
A cup for the Citie, AND Her ADHERENTS. For thus saith the Lord, I will even do with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the Oath, and broken the Covenant. Ezek. 16.59. Who makest mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness. Isa. 48.1 For thus saith the Lord, Wo to the bloudy City: Ezek. 24.9. For I will call for a sword, Eze. 38.21 And my sword shall be bathed in Heaven, it shall come down upon the People of my Curse to judge∣ment. Isai. 34.5. For behold in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the wine is red, & full of mixture, and all the wicked shall wring out the dregs thereof, and shall drink them. Psal. 75.8. Plague Famine depiction of knife and cup And they shall drink, and be drunk, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword that I will send among them. Ier. 25.27. Collected by Henry Adis, Prisoner in Tower cham∣ber of the Fleet by an Arbytrary Power. He that is in the Field shall die by the sword, and he that is in the City, Pestilence and Famine shall devour him. Ezek. 7.15. Printed in the Year, MDCXLVIII.
FOr thus saith the Lord,Ezek. 24.6, 7, 8 Wo to the bloudy City, to the pot whose scum is therein; 7. For her bloud is in the midst of her: 8. That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance. Therefore,Hab. 2. because thou hast spoiled many, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee, because of mens bloud: And for the violence of the Land, of the Citie, and of them that dwell therein.Isa. 33.1 Wo to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoyled: and dealest tre∣cherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoyled: and when thou shalt make an end of dealing trecherously, they shall deal trecherously with thee:Isa. 48. 1, 2, 4 who makest mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth nor in Righteousness. 2. For they call themselves the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel. 4. But I know that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is as an iron sinew, and thy brow as brass. Therefore, thus saith the LordIer. 4.6 I will bring evil from the North, and a great destruction: andEze. 24.9, 10.12 I will make the pile for fire great: 10. Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, for they shall be for fuel to the fire: Wo to the bloudy City, 12. for she hath wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her, her scum shall be in the fire:Iob 24.13 For they are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the Truth:Hos. 10.2, 3 Their heart is devided, now shall they be found faulty. 3. For now they shall say we have no King, because they feared not the Lord. AndLuke. 19.14 his Citizens hated him, and sent a Messenger after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign over us. O City,Prov. 31.29 Many daughters have done unworthily, but thou excellest them all. For it is found that this Citie of old time hath made insurrection against Kings, and that rebellion and sedition hath been made therein:Hab. 1.2 and there are that raise up strife and contention, for they areRom. 1.31, 32 without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, un∣merciful: 32. who knowing the judgements of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them,Ezek. 16.59 Therefore
will I deal with them as they have done, which have despised the oath, and broken the Covenant. ForHos. 10.4. They have spoken words, swearing falsly in making a Covenant. For thus saith the King, They have vowed to honour me: And thus saith the People of the Land, They have sworn and protested our Laws and our Liberties. Hos. 6.7, 8.But they like men have transgressed the Covenant, there have they dealt trecherously with me; For it is a Citie of them that work iniquity, and is poluted with bloud:Psal. 14.1. They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doth good: ForPsal. 14.4. I looked on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, and no man cared for my soul:Iob 19.7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no judgement: For t I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: YeaRom. 10.21, all day long have I stretch∣ed out my hand to a rebellious and gainsaying people;Titus 1.16. They profess they know God, but in works deny him, being abomi∣nable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. ForGen. 49.5.7. Simeon and Levi—are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. 7. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel.Psal. 71.4. But deliver me O Lord, out of the hands of the wicked, out of the hands of the bloudy and cruel man:Iob 1.9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17. For he hath stripped me of my glory, and hath taken my Crown from mine head. 10. He hath destroyed me on every side: 12. His Troops come to∣gether and encamp round about my Tabernacle. 13. He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are ut∣terly estranged. 15. They that dwell in my house count me for a stranger, I am an alien in their sight; I called for my servant, but he gave me no answer. 17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I entreat for the childrens sake of mine own body.Ier. 51.34. Thus hath he crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a Dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out. ForPsal. 31.11, 12, 13 I am a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance. 12. I am
forgotten as a dead man out of mind, I am like a broken vessel. 13. For I have heard the slanders of many, fear was on every side, whilst they take counsel together against me to take away my life. ButPsal. 14.. I cried unto the Lord and said, Thou art my refuge, thou art my portion in the land of the living.Ier. 51.38. Therefore, thus saith the Lord, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee:Psal. 6.. That thy foot may be dipped in the bloud of thine enemies.Psal. 4.1. Hear this all ye people, give ear all ye inhabitants of the world, both low and high, rich and poor together. For thus saith the Lord, They shall roar together like Lions,Ier. 51.38, 4. they shall yell like Lions whelps. For 40. I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like wolves with the goats.Ier. 4.1.1. As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neigh∣bouring Cities thereof, 15. For lo I will make thee small a∣mong the Heathen, and despised among men:Mic. 6.16. That I may make her a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing;Prov. 2.13, 14.15 Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the waies of darknes. 14. Who rejoyce to do evil, and delight in the frow∣ardnes of the wicked; whose waies are crooked, and they froward in their paths.Psal. 25.1. For they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred.Mat. 15.14. They are blind leaders of the blind:Amos 3.10 For they know not to do right;Psal. 82.5. They know not, neither will they understand. Though S. Peter adviseth that we1 Pet. 2: 17. Honour all men, and love the brotherhood; that we fear God, and honour the King And though S. Paul perswade,Rom, 13.1, 2, 4, 5, 7. That every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there be no powers but of God; The Powers that be, are ordained of God: 2. VVho so therefore resisteth the Powers, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and he that rsiesteth, shall receive to himself damnation; 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; For he beareth not the sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil. 5. VVherefore we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. 7. Render therefore to all men their dues, Tribute to whom
Tribute is due; Custome to whom Custome; Fear to whom Fear; Honour to whom honour.1 Pet. 2, 13, 14 Submit your selves to eve∣ry Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to Kings as supreme; 14. Or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.1 Tim. .1, 2, 3 I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. 2. For Kings and all that are in Authority; that we may lead a Peaceable and quiet life in Godliness and Honesty. 3. For this is good in the sight of God. Our Saviour who out of his own mouth also gave this charge, saying,Mat. 22.21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods.Mat. 7.12 And whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Yet theyPsal. 58.45 like the deaf Adder that stoppeth her ears, 5. will not hear the voice of these charmers, charm they never so wisely.Ier. 9.10 The word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it:Mark 4.15, 16 For so soon as they have heard it, Sa∣tan cometh immediately and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts: 16. Or the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, entring in choaketh the word, and it becometh altogether unfruitful.Ier 5.21 Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understand∣ing, which have eyes and see nor, which have ears and hear not.Numb. 30.1, 2 This is the thing the Lord hath commanded, If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, and swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do accord∣ing to all that proceedeth out of his mouth. Yea,Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6 when thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he hath no pleasure in fools. 5. Better it is that thou shouldest not vow, then that thou shouldest vow and not pay. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say it was an error.Deut. 23.23 Therefore that which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep, and perform even a free-wil offering as thou hast vowed. ForPsal. 15.1, 4, 5 Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? But 4. He that walketh uprightly, and
worketh righteousness, and speaketh the Truth in his heart. 5. He that sweareth to his own hurt and changeth not: who so doth these things shall never be moved. Ier. 5.23But this people have a revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolred: Therefore,Prov. 1.24, 25, 26.27, 28 because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man re∣garded. 25. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would have none of my reproofs. 26. I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear cometh, when your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction as a whirl-wind; when desolation and anguish cometh upon you. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer.Hos. 4.9. For I will pu∣nish them their waies, and reward them their doings.Ezek. 20.37, 38 And I will cause you to pass under the rod: 38. And I will purge out from amongst you the rebels, and them that transgress a∣gainst me:Prov. 10.7 For the name of the wicked shall rot, saith the Lord.Ier. 4.5 Therefore cry, gather together and say, let us go into the defenced Cities: ThenZeph. 3.1 wo to her that is filthy and polu∣ted, to the oppressing Citie, ForHos. 10.13.14 ye have plowed wickednes, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of lies; because thou hast trusted in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men. 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise against thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalmon spoiled Be∣thardel in the day of Battel.Ier. 6.2. For behold a people cometh from the North Countrey, and a great Nation shall be raised against thee from the sides of the earth; they shall lay hand on bow and spear, they have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea, they ride upon horses set in aray, as men of war against thee.Dan. 11.7 And shall enter into the Fortress of the King of the North, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail:Isa. 10.6 To take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them down like mire in the street: For they have forsaken me saith the Lord. Therefore,1 Chron. 34.24 Behold I will bring evil upon this place, and won the inhabitants: ForIer. 23.39.40 I will utterly forget you, and I the forsake you, and the City that I gave to your fathers, and  out of my presence. 40. And I will bring an ever∣lasting
reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.Ezek. .13.14 For in thy filthiness is leudness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthines any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. 14. I the Lord have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I will do it: I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent: according to thy doings they shall judge thee saith the Lord:Isa. 5.. For your hands are filled with bloud, and your fingers with iniquity, your lips have spoken lies, and your tongues have muttered perversness.Isa. 65.1: Therefore will I number you to the sword, and you shall bow down to the slaughter.Eze. 35.6. As I live saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto bloud, and bloud shall pursue thee, se∣ing thou hast not hated bloud, even bloud shall pursue thee:Psal. 55.. For I have seen violence and strife in the City;Psal. 74.. The earth is full of the habitations of cruelty;Ezek. 9.5. The land is full of bloud, and the City is full of perversness. ForIsa. 1.21.22, 23, 24. how is the faithful City become an Harlot? it was full of judgement, righteous∣nes lodged in it, but now murderers. 22. Thy silver is become brass, thy wine is mixed with water. 23. Thy Princes are re∣bellious, and companions of thieves, every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards. 24. Therefore, thus saith the Lord, the mighty One of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies.Io .. Then shall they run to and fro in the Citie, they shall run upon the wall, they shall climbe upon the Houses, they shall enter into the windows like thieves; ForAmos . I will deliver up the City and all that is therein. This will I doEzek. 5.14 in the sight of all that Pass by: Then shall they say,Zeph. 2.15 This is the rejoycing City, that dwelt carelesly, and said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me; every one that passeth by, shall hiss; and wag his head.Ezek 21.4.5 For thou art be∣come guilty of the bloud that thou hast shed, and thou hast caused thy day to draw neer: Therefore have I made thee  reproach unto the heathen, and a mock unto all Countries 5. Those that be neer, and those that be a far off shall m thee, which art infamous and much vexed. ForIer. 1.2 I will  ¦ver
thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear. Destruction cometh, and they shall seek peace,Ezek. 7.25, 26. and there shall be none: For mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor upon rumor;Deut. 32.25. the sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also, with the man of gray hairs.Isa. 9.17, 18, 19, 21 For the Lord hath no joy in their young men, neither will he have mercy on their fa∣therless and widdows; for every one is an hypocrite and an evil doer, and every mouth speaketh folly. 18 For wickednes burneth as a fire, it shall devour the briars and thorns. 19. For through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts the land is darkned, and the people shall be as fuel to the fire, no man shall spare his brother. 21 Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim a∣gainst Manasseh, and they together shall be against Judah: For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretch∣ed out still.Ier. 46.12 For the Nations have heard of thy shame, and thy Citie hath filled the land, for the mighty men have stum∣bled against the mighty, and they are fallen both together. ThereforeLuke 12.52, 53. from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, the father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother:Ier. 13.14. And I will dash them one a∣gainst the other, the father and the son together, saith the Lord.Mat. 10.36. And a mans enemies shall be them of his own houshold. Eze. 22.2, 7, 9, 12Wilt thou judge the bloudy City? yea, thou shalt tell her all her abominations. 7. In thee have they set light by father and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppressi∣on with the stranger; in thee have they vexed the fatherless and widow: 9. in thee are men that carry tales to shed bloud, in the midst of thee they commit lewdness: 12. in thee have they taken gifts to shed bloud, and thou hast greatly gained by extortion, and hast forgotten me saith the Lord.Mic. 7.2, 3, 4. For the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none up∣right among men; they all lie in wait for bloud, they hunt every man his brother with a net. 3. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly. 4. The best of them is as a briar, the most upright is sharper then a thorny hedge. ForIer. 9.2. they be
all adulterers, an assembly of trecherous men:Isa. 1.125 That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that repro∣veth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.Ier 6.28, 30. they are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders, they are brass and iron, they are all corrupters. 30. Reprobate silver shall men call them.Ezek. 22.13, 19 20, 21. Therefore I have smitten my hands at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy bloud which hath bin in the midst of thee: For thus saith the Lord God, because thou art become brass, 19. Therefore will I ga∣ther you, 20. As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin into the midst of a furnace, to blow the fire up∣on it, and to melt it. 21. So will I gather you, and blow up∣on you in my fury, and will melt you.Lev. 26.16. This also will I do unto you,Ier. 34.18. which have not performed the words of the Co∣venant which ye made before me.Lev. 26.16.19, 20, 7. 16. I will appoint over you terror, 19. and will break the pride of your power. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain. 37. For ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.Numb. 20.10. Hearken now ye re∣bels,Ier. 7.12. Go to my place which is in Shilo; where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel:Ier. 25.29.15, 16 For lo I bring evil upon the City that is called by my name, and shall ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword, 15. For thus saith the Lord, Take this wine-cup of my fury at my hands, and cause all the Nations to whom I shall send thee to drink it. 16. And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.Hos. 1.6. And the sword shall abide on their Cities, and shall consume the branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels.Prov. 12.6. For the words of the wicked are to lie in wait for bloud:Ier 25.27. Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord, drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword that I will send among them,Amos 9.2, 3, 4. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they clime up into heaven, thence will I bring them down. 3. Though they hide themselves upon the top of Carmel, 4. Thence will I call for a sword, and it shall slay them: And I
will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. For there shall beEzek, 7.15. the sword without, and pestilence and famine within, He that is in the field shall dy by the sword, and he that is in the City, famine and pestilence shall devour him, andAmos 9.1 he that fleeth of them, shall not flee away:Hos. 7.12, 13. For when they shall go, I will spread my net over them, I will bring them down as fowls of the heaven. 13. Wo unto them, for they have fled from me, destruction upon them, for they have sin∣ned against me: ThereforeIer. 8.13. I will surely consume them, saith the Lord:Ezek. 38.18. For my fury shall come up into my face,Ezek. 5.13. and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted when I have accomplished my fury in them, saith the Lord.Iudg. 5.31 Even so let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: And let all the Godly, Innocent, and Oppressed People of the Land say Amen. The AƲTHOR to the READER. Courteous Reader, BY the composing of this Tractate, haply thou maist suppose me to be what thou art not like to finde me: Therefore these are to let thee know, that I strike not at persons, but vices; Nor do I so plead for the greatest, as to overlook the faults of any; For I assure thee, (if occasion be offered) that out of the same Magazine of sacred Truth, I shall chuse out arrows of all sizes, fitted for the misdemeanors of all, of what degree soever; even from him that draweth water, to him that sitteth upon the Throne: the which (now I am so neer) I shall be bold in the words of that wise Solomon to say, That it is an abomination for Kings to do wickednes, for the Throne is established in righteousness. Prov. 16.12. And if a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. Prov. 29.12. And the Prince that wanteth un∣derstanding is a great oppressor. Prov. 28.16. And when the wicked bear rule the people mourn. Prov. 29.2. And he that oppresseth the poor, reprocheth his Maker. Prov. 14.31. And
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodli∣ness and unrighteousness of men. Rom. 1.18. For the day of the Lord cometh that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shal be as stubble, and the day that cometh shall burn them up saith the Lord, that it shall leave them nei∣ther root nor branch. Mal. 3.1. For Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King it is prepared. Isa. 30.33. (if he be unrighte∣ous,) For God is no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation he that feareth him and doth righteousness is accepted of him. Acts 10.34, 35. This also can I tell the people, That Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry: And our Apostle tells us, that there be no Powers but of God, who so therefore resisteth the Powers, resisteth the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damna∣tion. Rom. 13.1, 2. Therefore avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for vengeance is mine, and I will re∣pay it saith the Lord. Rom. 12.19. For it is righteousnes that exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to a people. Prov. 14.34. Therefore wo to them that call evil good, and good evil; Which justifie the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousnes of the righteous from him. 24. Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaffe, so their root shall be rottenness, and their blossome shall go up as dust; Be∣cause they have cast away the Law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the holy One of Israel. Isa. 5.20.24. From whom I have this my Commission, To rebuke my neighbour, and not to suffer sin upon him. Lev. 19.17. VVith this caution also from the Apostle in 1 Cor. 9.27. That I be careful that whilst I admonish others, I my self become not a reprobate. Thus earnestly wishing and desiring all in their several relati∣ons to mend one, I shall leave thee to the protection of the Almighty, who alone is able to work in every one both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, and rest Thine and every true Christians to his Ability. HENRY ADIS.
