B3046 669.f.11[84] 99869430 162736
BLACKE TOM, his Speech to the House, after the delivery of the City by a cowardly Southwarition crew. GOe on, brave Gallants, pray goe on, Seeme to consult for peace, But if you love your selves and me, My Army don't release. What though I doe pretend to bring The King into his Throne, Feare not I may do what I please, Militia that's our own? By crying up his Majesty The peoples hearts I gaine, What thinke you? that's the only way If ere we meane to raigne. Their twenty hundred thousand pound My souldiers for to pay, Which when they have they'l doe their best These warres for to delay▪ Wee'll tell them that the Citizens Poore CHARLES doe much despise, And should we state him in his throne, They suddenly would rise. When twenty hundred thousand pounds Againe to them is due, Weell stop their mouthes with flattering words, Which shall be for me and you. Then I brave Southwarke will requite, My promise to effect, Of all the Independents they A Major shall elect. Besides this, they shall suddenly A Corporation have, For that brave entertaynment which They to my souldiers gave. Thus having them now on our sides Weell make an insurrection Of all that Presbyterian crew. Not one shall finde protection▪ But when that Independency By us shall be promoted There is no need of Monarchy Its downefall shall be Voted. Weel then poore CHARLES send into France With his wife to abide, He absent, betwixt me and you The Kingdome wee'l divide. T'will be a conquest certainly If ere a conquest were, Wee'l rule in triumph and will cause All others us to feare. But as for English men who then Shall Independents be, Troubled by none they shall enjoy Their conscience Liberty. Then shall proud Massie stampe and stare, And Poyntz shall franticke be. Then will the Major of London flee, And all for feare of me. Then Peters shall a Bishop be, And Goodwin shall be Voted The chiefest man in England while King Thomas is promoted. Then downe shall goe the Steeple houses, That freeze in Winter night, And weell have Chimneyes in the Church Which people more delight. Weell Vote the Assembly null, and put Downe Cranford with his grace, Weell race out Calamy, and set Up Patience in his place. Weell banish Case with all his host, His converts shall returne Unto our Independency, Or else weel make them burne. Then you and I shall live at ease, And thinke that naught's a sin, Unlesse we doe in English coast Let Monarchy creepe in. If you desire that this my plot May have effect still still, Take dayly care that peoples hearts With thoughts of peace to fill. FINIS. 7ber 16. 1647
