B5310 E451_33 99864700 116932
THE DECLARATION OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The Duke of Buckingham, and the Earles of Holland, and Peterborough, and other Lords and Gentlemen now as∣sociated for the KING and Parliament, the Religion, Lawes, and Peace of His Ma∣jesties Kingdomes. WITH Three Letters (delivered July the 6.) One to the House of Peers; another to the House of Commons: And the third to the Ld. Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City, in Common-councell, Assembled. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1648.
THE DECLARATION OF The Right Honourable The Duke of BUCKINGHAM, and the Earles of HOLLAND and PETERBOROUGH, &c. FInding this conjuncture to be the proper time, when this wearied Kingdome may be delivered from those miseries, it both hath and may apprehend yet to feel, by such persons, as are il-affected to our peace; who at this time without authority or Commissions, dis∣perse themselves into all parts, to raise Forces, with no other intention, but to continue a bloudy and intestine war, which may prove dangerous to the whole King∣dome from the assistance they find by the Committees of the severall Counties, who have so abused their power and the people, by an arbitrary way of Government, as they
shun and apprehend nothing more then what we shall endeavour and seek, Peace, and a wel-setled Government; and therefore that the whole Kingdome may be satisfied upon what grounds and principles we go to oppose and prevent this mischief and danger, we do here declare that we do take up armes for the KING and Parliament, Religion and the known Laws, and peace of all His Ma∣jesties Kingdomes: professing before Almighty God, that we have no other designe in this undertaking, but to see this well, and speedily established, and will with readines and joy lay them down whensoever God shall give us the injoyment of this blessing, professing that whatsoever may be our successe and prosperity in this good Cause, we shall not say by way of menace to the Parliament, that we will use the power God hath put into our hands, but shall blesse God that he hath made us the instruments to serve the KING, the Parliament and Kingdome in the way of peace, in a just and equall composure between them; and we hope the City and the Kingdome, will well weigh and consider whether they may not more reasonably and con∣scionably joyne with us in these pious and peaceable reso∣lutions, then with those Forces that have by their breach of faith, and their disobedience, kept up the Sword, when those that delivered it into their hands, commanded the laying of it downe; which disobedience hath brought this fresh storm of bloud, that is now falling upon this Kingdome, and all those fears and confusions that Petiti∣ons daily shew to be in the thoughts and apprehensions both of the City and the whole Kingdome: we might adde sad circumstances that are of late discovered and broken out concerning HIS MAJESTIES Person, and like∣wise a confused and levelling undertaking to overthrow Monarchy, and to turn order that preserves all our lives
and fortunes into a wild and unlimited confusion; but we desire not to expresse any thing with sharpnesse, since our ends and pursuit is only peace; which shall appear to all the world, whensoever we may see a Personall Treaty so begun with His Majesty as we may expect a happy conclu∣sion by it, that cannot follow but by a Cessation of Armes, which in all parts of the world hath accompanied these Treaties, even between the bitterest enemies, Christians & Turks, much more to be expected in these our civill Di∣visions amongst our selves, for the Sword should not be in action as long as a Treaty of peace is in agitation, since accidents of hostility on both sides will sharpen and divide us rather then close and unite us. This we thought fit both to desire and to declare that the discourses that may be raised upon our actions, may not have power to abuse the Kingdome, as if we did only move in a way to set up His Majesty in a tyrannicall power, rather then in His just Regall government, the which hath been alwaies found in this Nation, very well consistent with the due rights and freedoms of Parliament, the which we do here most faith∣fully protest the endeavouring a preservation of, and call God to witnesse of our sincerity in this intention. Holland. G: Buckingham. Peterborough.
For the Right Honourable, the Speaker of the House of Peers. My Lord, WE doe here take away your jealousies by gi∣ving you a cleer knowledge of our designes; which if you shall be pleased to communi∣cate to the House of Peers, we hope they will find, we do not vary from those principles and grounds, we have been ingaged in, both from His Majesty and the Parliament, which God give them grace so to think, and advise upon it, as His Majesty may find His just rights, according to our Covenant and Declarations, and the Parliament rise and recover the dignity due unto them, by a speedy way of setling the peace of this distracted Kingdome. Your Lordships most humble Servants, G. BUCKINGHAM. HOLLAND. PETERBOROUGH. The same to the House of Commons.
To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the City in Common-Councell Assembled. HAving a long time beheld the sad calamities and miseries of these Kingdoms, and finding no o∣ther means for redresse, We are forced into this undertaking, which we desire may be rightly understood of all that are wel-affected, especially of this City, whose actions and endevours do sufficiently evidence their good affections. To this end we have inclosed a brief account of our intentions, which we hope may give satisfaction both to you, and the whole Kingdome, whose assistance, (with Gods blessing) we desire no farther, then our de∣signes are reall for the good and happinesse both of the KING, Parliament, and Kingdome, according to our Covenant, Your humble Servants, G. BUCKINGHAM. HOLLAND. PETERBOROUGH. FINIS.
