B6049 E808_3 99866563 167894
TRUTH DEFENDED. OR, Certain Accusations answered, cast upon us who are called Quakers; by the Teachers of the World, and the People of this Generation. With a cleare discovery, who are the false Pro∣phets, and when they came in. And who they are that deny Christ, and that Preach another Gospel. And who deny the Scriptures, Churches, Ministers, and Magistrates, whereby the Magistrates and People of this Nation may see they justifie that which the Scripture condemns, and condemne that which the holy Men of God justified. By a Servant of the Lord, whose Name in the Flesh is, Edward Burrough.
The Epistle. To all you who call your selves Ministers of the Gospel, and all People in all relations under what forme of Worship soever in England, or in all the World, who professe your selves Christians. THe mighty day of the Lord is come, according as he promi∣sed of old, and this day is witnessed, wherein he is establish∣ing his Mountaine, and exalting it above all Mountaines, and is gathering his people which have been scattered in the darke and long night of Apostacy, which Christ and his Apostles saw com∣ming into the Churches then, and hath had dominion long over the World, and hath raigned till now, and raignes now in all the Professors in all Formes every where. But now the time is come wherein the Kingdomes of the World are become the Kingdome of the Lord and of his Christ, and thousands witnesse it, to the prayse of his everlasting name. And therefore the Nations are angry, and the Princes of the Earth, because Michael our Prince is arisen to pleade with all who make warre against him. And now Herod and Pilate▪ and all Ierusalem are in an uproare, and Ammon▪ and Amaleck▪ and the Egyptians, and the Philistines are joyned now against him. And all you who live in Formes, and know not the power▪ doe now persecute and joyne your selves together, being in the same nature as the persecuters of old, which▪ were borne after the flesh. And now you sonnes of Bon∣dage▪ and of Hagar are to be cast out▪ and now you are all made manifest that you are in the flesh, for all your Bowes are bent, and all your Arrowes are shot at a people which are counted by
you as the filth of the World, and as the off-scouring of all things, whom the World calls Quakers, in whose Foreheads is Written the name of the living God; and unto you I say that make Warre against them, and now take part with the Dragon against the Lambe, you shall all drinke of the cup of fury and indignation of the Lord. And unto the living God, who is holy and jealous for his owne glory and his name, which hath manifested his minde and will by his Eternall Spirit unto us, shall you all bow and stoope. For now the Lord hath rent the vayle of the covering which hath beene spread over all the Na∣tions in all Professions, and you are all seen by the Eternall Eye which is opened in thousands, even all, from the highest to the lowest, who have stolen and painted your selves with other mens Words. And all your Images which you have set up, and all your traditions from men in which you have walked, are all seene to be stubble, and will not abide in the day of the Lord▪ And all your Churches which you have gathered together by imitation from the letter, shall all be scattered; and there you all are, for you all deny revelation, and say it is ceased; and so you call the letter, the light, and the Word; but with that which was before the Scripture, you are seen and judged, even with that which shall endure for ever. And seeing you have cast reproach upon the name of the God of Heaven and Earth, whom we worship, and which you call delusion. For the truths sake are we moved to lay open your nakednesse, that you may be judged by that which you say is your Rule: Here in this lit∣tle Booke, thou who hast any honesty in thee, or any desire of truth▪ and wilt search the Scripture, thou wilt see, that all the Teachers of the World in all Formes, and all professors ever cryed out (who had but the Forme) against them who had the life and power, as you all doe now against them who Worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. And therefore, in this following Discourse, which is Wretten by the same spirit that gave forth the Scripture, thou shalt see who are the false Prophets, and who they are that Preach another Gospel, and who they are that deny the Scriptures. And thou may see when the false Prophets came in, and who they are clearely proved to be, by their owne Rules. And all you who
call your selves Magistrates and Christians, you may see your selves to hold up that which Christ, the Prophets and Apo∣stles cryed out against, and persecute them who stand in the counsell of God, and them that declare against all the deceipt as the holy men of God did. And so you are the Beast, which holds up the false prophets, and thse whom the Scripture decla∣reth against. God is arisen, to dash to pieces all them who with∣stand him: And therefore come out of Babylon, and out of all your painted Formes, and come to own the first principle▪ which will change your mindes, even the light of Christ, which he hath enlightened every one withall; and by it you shall see what you are doing. Now if you deny this, you deny the cor∣ner stone, and you stumble, and shall be broken; and by that which you call naturall, shall all your Image of Gold and sil∣ver, and all your mixed invented Worship be dashed to peeces▪ and be for the pit: Therefore all be silent, and speake not evill of thse things you know not; for now you are all seen, you who say you are Iewes, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Sa∣tan, and your voyce is knowne, for none is turned from the evill of his way; and therefore is wrath comming upon you to the utmost, A lover of your Soules, but am a Witnesse against all your deceipt. Francis Howgill.
WHereas we are accused by the Teachers and People of this generation▪ That we are false Prophets, and deceivers, and that we deny the Christ which dyed at Ierusalem; and that we Preach another Gospel then the Apostles Preached; and that we deny the Scriptures, and the Ordinances of Iesus Christ; and that we hold Free-will, and establish selfe∣righteousnesse, and teach people to act in their owne strength to obtaine life; and that we deny Churches, Ministers, and Magi∣stracy. To these false accusations, I answer▪ It is no new thing nor no strange thing to the children of light, who are seperated from the World, and Worldly Worships, and from the Works of darkenesse, to be accused falsely, and to be slandered, by being called deceivers, and seducers, by the generation of chiefe Priests and Pharisees; in which generation are the Teachers and Professors of this age, who have a Forme of godlinesse, but deny the power. Christ was called a deceiver, and a blasphemer; and the Apostles were called, Movers of Se∣dition, Heretiques, and turners of the World upside downe, by them who professed in word what Christ was in substance, and what the Apostles witnessed, and so it is now. We who are scornefully called Quakers, doe live in, and declare forth no other thing but the substance of what the Priests have Preached upon, and the Professors have talked upon in their carnall mindes by their imaginations. He is a false Prophet, and a deceiver, which hath not the Word from the mouth of the Lord, but takes that which the Lord spoke to another, and calls it his, and useth his Tongue, and saith, The Lord saith it, when the Lord never spoke to him. And here are the Teachers of the World themselves, guilty of that, whereof they falsely accuse us; for they take the Prophets words▪ Christs▪ and the Apostles Words to talke upon, but have not received the Word from the mouth of the Lord; and their Prophesie and Preaching would soon be ended, if they had not the Scri∣pture, which is other mens Words, and that which was spoken to others, to speake their imaginations from. And these are
the false Prophets, and Deceivers, which runne, and are not sent, which speake to others, pretending to be sent of God, but walking contrary to all that ever God sent to declare his Name in former generations, and so are knowne to us by their fruits, having no example from the Prophets, Christ, nor his Apostles for their practice; but doe walke in the example of the false Prophets of Israel, of the Scribes and Pharisces, and of the false brethren. O foolish people, which have eyes and see not, which have hearts, and doe not understand: Is the Lord changed from what he was? Were they false Prophets and deceivers in Isayahs time▪ which he was sent to cry out against, which sought for their gaine from their quarter? and are not your Teachers false Prophets now which act the same things? Were they false Prophets and deceivers in Ezekiels time, which he was sent to cry against, that Fed themselves with the Fat, and cloathed themselves with the wooll, and made a prey up∣on the people? and are not your Teachers false Prophets and deceivers now, which act the same thing? Were they false Pro∣phets in Michas time, which he was sent to cry out against, which Preached for hire, and devined for money, and cryed peace to them that put into their mouthes, but prepared war against them that did not? and are not your Priests false Priests and Prophets which act the same things? Were they deceivers of the people in Christs time which he cryed woe against which were called of men Masters, and which had the chiefe place in the Assemblyes, and which stood Praying in the Synagogues, and which went in long robes, and which loved greetings in the Markets? and are not your Teachers decei∣vers of the people now, which are found acting the same things? Were they false Teachers▪ and false Brethren in the Apostles time, which they declared against, which through co∣vetousnesse, with fained words made merchandise of the peo∣ple, and went in the way of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and Preached for filthy lucre, and which Paul saw come & comming in his dayes, which were proud men▪ coveteous men, selfe∣willed, and fierce men, heady, high minded men, having a Forme of godlinesse, but denying the power▪ which alwayes taught people, but none were able to come to the knowledge of
the truth under their teaching? and are not your Teachers false Teachers now, which are walking in the same steps? To the light in all consciences I doe speake, which will witnes the truth. A sottish and ignorant people, which cannot discerne who the false Prophets, and deceivers, and false Teachers are; the Lord is the same as ever he was, and his spirit is no whi changed: Was it once an abomination to the Lord in the false Priests and Prophets of Israel to seek for their gaine from their quarter, and to Feed themselves with the Fat, and cloathe themselves with the wooll, and make a prey upon the people, and to Preach for hire, and to divine for money? and are not these things, and they that uphold them abomination to him now? Did the spirit of the Lord in his servants declare against these things then, and against them that upheld them then? and must not the same spirit where it is made manifest, declare a∣gainst these things, and against them that uphold them now? Was it once an abomination in the sight of Christ in them to be called of men Master, and to have the chiefe places in the Assemblyes, and to stand praying in the Synagogues, &c. and are not these things an abomination to him now in whom they are upheld? Did Christ cry woe against such things, and against them that upheld them then? and must not the spirit of Christ where it is made manifest, cry woe against such things, and against them that uphold them now? were these markes of false Teachers then, to make merchandise of the people, and to goe in the way of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and for filthy lucre, and to be proud▪ coveteous heady, high-minded, selfe-wil∣led, and fierce men? and are not they false Teachers now which beare these markes. Did the Apostles give warning to beware of such, and to turne away from such then? and must not the same spirit, where it is made manifest, give warning to beware of such, and to turne away from such now? We witnes to have received according to measure, the spirit of the Prophets from which they spoke▪ and the spirit of the Apostles from which they spoke, which is Christ made manifest in us, and happy are all they that receive our testimony. For by the same spirit of Christ doe we declare against these abominations now, as the holy men of God did then: For God and his spirit is the same
as ever was, and what he once hated, he hates for ever; and no other Christ doe we declare forth which we witnes to be made manifest within, but that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, which suffered by the Chiefe Priests and Elders of the people; he was, and is the true Christ, which said, He was the light of the world, and was the light which had enlightened every one that comes into the world; and which said, Except a man would deny the world and take up his dayly Crosse, and follow him, he could not be his Disci∣ple; and which cryed woe against them which were called of men Masters, and that had the chiefe places in the Assemblyes, and that stood praying in the Synagogues, &c. and they who denyed him to be the light of the world and which took not up the Crosse, and which were called of men Masters▪ and had the chiefest pla∣ces in the Assemblyes, and stood praying in the Synagogues, and went in long robes these were Anti-Christs▪ and were acted by a contrary spirit then the true Christ And here againe, I charge all the Teachers and people (in the presence of the Lord God, who doe deny Christ to be the light in every one which reproves for sin) and who are called of men Masters, and stand Praying in the Synagogues, and goe in long robes▪ and who up∣hold such things, and who take not up the dayly Crosse of Christ, but live at liberty in their wills and desires, that they are Anti-Christs, and that their spirit is not the spirit of the true Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, but the spirit of a false Christ, and so they are guilty of that themselves, whereof they falsely accuse us; and the same Christ doe we witnes which the saints of old witnessed▪ whose blood cleansed them from all sin▪ and in whose power, they had power over sin, death, and hell: And here again I charge the Teachers and people, who say that the saints must not be cleansed from sin, nor cease to commit sin while they are on the Earth, that the Christ which they possesse, is not the Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, but a spirit contrary, and not the Christ which the saints witnessed; and all the people are blinde which cannot see these things Did the true Christ once say. He was the light of the World, of every man that comes into the World? and is that his spirit in the Teachers and Professors now, which saith Every man hath not the light of Christ in them? Was that the true Christ which said, Except you take up
my Crosse dayly you cannot be my Disciple? and is that his spirit in the Teachers and people, that hath its liberty, and live in pride, in lust, and in vanity, and their own vvills? Was that the true Christ which cryed woe against them that were called of men Master, and that had the chiefe place in the Assemblyes, and stood praying in the Synagogues, &c. and is that his spirit in the Teach∣ers and people which act and uphold those things? Was that the true Christ which the saints witnessed, by whose blood they were cleansed from sin, and had power over sin? and is that his spirit in the Teachers and people, which saith, the saints must not be cleansed from sin, nor cease to commit sin while they are on Earth? Oh blinde and ignorant people, who cannot discerne between the true Christ, and Anti-christ, which is contrary to Christ, and which leades now to act, and speak contrary to what the true Christ once acted and spoake. And no other Gospel do we Preach, but that which the Apostle Preached, which they re∣ceived not from, nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, which was contrary to man, and which suffered by man for the Preaching of it, who Preached to the spirit in prison, to redeeme the captives, and by which the fleshly man was judged in the flesh, that man might live according to God in spirit. And this Gospel we witnes to have received not from man, but by the revelation of Iesus Christ, which is contrary to man; for which we are persecuted and suffer by man: neither doe we speake to the wisedome and reason, but we preach to the spirits in prison, that the fleshly man may be judged in the flesh, that man may live according to God in the spirit▪ this will many witnes with us, that by the preaching of our Gospel, liberty is brought to the captives, and the fleshly man is judged, and the spirit which was in prison is set free. And here again I charge the teachers of this generation, that their Gospel which they Preach is not the Gospel which the saints preached, but another Gospel, and they are guilty of that themselves, whereof they falsely accuse us; for they have received their Gospel from man, and by man from the Printers and Stationers; and are made Ministers of it by the will of man at Schooles and Ʋni∣versities; and their Preaching is in the will of man▪ a limited time and place; neither doe they suffer by man, but are set
up with man, and seed the wisedome and reason of man; and the fleshly man is not judged, nor the captives redeemed by their Gospel which they Preach; here they are accursed which Preach another Gospel according to the Scripture. And ye are a blinde and ignorant people, which cannot see these things. Did they that Preached the true Gospel receive it contrary to the will of man? and can it now be received by the will of man? Did they which Preached it, suffer for it by man? and can they now who Preach it be set up by man, who lives in the same persecuting nature? Did the true Gospel once judge the fleshly man, and leade to live according to God in the spi∣rit? and doh it now give liberty to the fleshly man to live after the Flesh in the lusts of it, as the Teachers and professors of this generation doe, who profes the Gospel, but are disco∣vered not to be come to the Law? And the Scriptures we own to be a true Declaration of the life which they lived in which spoke them forth, and by the same spirit from which they were spoken (which we have received) doe we set to our Seales that they are true, and the Scripture is ours, who walke in the life of it; proud men spoke it not forth, nor they that sought for their gaine from their quarter; nor they that Preached for hire; nor they that were called of men Master; but persecuted them that spoke it forth, and denyed it. And here againe I charge it upon the Teachers and professors of this generation, that they deny the Scripture, and are guilty of that them∣selves, whereof they falsely accuse us. For they say, None must be perfect upon the Earth; when as the Scripture declares of such as were perfect. And they say, None must be free from sinne, when as the Scripture declares of such, as were free from sinne, and were the servants of righteousnesse. They say, Christ hath not enlightened every one; The Scripture saith, He is the light of the World, and hath lightened every one &c. Can they now who live in the same persecuting nature, and walke in the same steps as they did which persecuted them who spoke forth the Scripture (as the Teachers and people doe) owne the Scriptures in truth? Their professing of the Scripture is as theirs was, which made a great profession of it in the outward appearance, but put him to death who had
the life, and was the substance of it. They then, as the Teach∣ers of the world, doe now, denyed the spirit and life, which gave forth the Scriptures. And the Ordinances of Jesus Christ we owne and witnesse, Preaching, Praying▪ Baptisme, Communion, Singing, and whatsoever was ordained for his Saints, to practice in life and power; we witnesse these things in the Eternall substance, ha∣ving passed through the Earthly figures, which was but to stand for its time; by the Eternall have we been led, by the com∣mand of it within us, and not by tradition, from the Scripture without us. And we deny all such who have taken up these things in their owne wills, by conforming the outward man to the outward letter, and have not entered in at the doore. True Preaching we owne, and doe witnesse it, which is the Crosse of Christ, and in the power of God, and it is foolish∣nesse to the World, and its wisedome now, as ever it was; and we deny all speaking of imaginations from Scripture▪ which is in the wisedome of the World, and which stands in the will of man, limitted to a set time, or day▪ or place. Prayer by the spirit, and in the spirit we owne and witnesse, whih is not limitted to a time and place. And we deny all the worlds formall customary Preaching, and Praying for a pre∣tence. Baptisme we owne, and witnesse, wich is with one spirit, into one body, into the death of Christ. And we de∣ny all Baptismes which are imagined and immitated by con∣forming the outward man to the outward letter, which is but a likenesse of the true Baptisme Communion we live in, which is in the light by the spirit, which will endure Eter∣nally. And we deny the Worlds imitation, which is in word and declaration▪ and visible carnall things which will passe away. Singing which is with the spirit, and with under∣standing of the Redeemed of the Lord, we owne and Wit∣nesse: but the Worlds singing in Rime and Meeter; proud men singing, That they are not pufe in minde; and prophane men singing▪ That the Law of God is deare to them; this singing we deny, for it must be turned into howling, the Lord hath said it. And here againe I charge it upon the Teachers of the World, That they deny the substance and
power of what Christ commands his saints to practice by, upholding their owne imitations, and so deceiving the sim∣ple: but where the substance is witnessed, the figure is in∣deed, and the false imitations are discovered, and denyed. And mans free-will we doe deny, for the will of man shall never enter to God, but leades out from God into the lust, and into the Flesh, and keeps in the power of the Devill: And man hath free will unto that which is evill, but not to that which is good; and all who follow Christ, the light of the World, must deny their owne wills, and take up the crosse of Christ which is to the will, and walke in the light con∣trary to the will, in the straite way which leades unto life, which is out of the will of man in the will of God, which the will of man doth resist and oppose. And I charge it up∣on the Teachers and professors who doe not witnesse the day∣ly Crosse of Christ, that they live in their owne free-will, and holds it up, and are led by it into pride and covetousnesse, and the lusts of the Flesh which stand in the will. And here they are guilty of that themselves whereof they falsely accuse us, living in their owne free-will, and walke not in the dayly Crosse of Christ. And selfe-righteousnesse we have denyed, and have seen it in the same light which Isayah did to be as filthy raggs; and we declare against it▪ and against them which live in it; for selfe must not be saved▪ it is accursed from God, it is wholly unrighteous (and makes the best of actions so) and is▪ and must be cast out from God Christ Jesus made ma∣nifest and revealed in us, is our righteousnesse, and selfe is judged and condemned by him who is made unto us righte∣ousnesse; neiher doe we teach people to labour in their owne strength to obtaine life▪ but doe direct people to the light of Christ within them, which walking in▪ will be strength to them to leade them to life, the light which is of Christ, to which we direct all to waite in to be taught by; it will leade out of selfe-righteousnesse, and from under the power of selfe, to witnesse the power of God, to leade, and to act, and to wit∣nesse Christ Jesus revealed the righteousnesse of God And the Church which is in God, which is the body of Christ whereof Christ is head, we witnesse▪ and are members of it,
gathered and joyned by the Eternall spirit, and not by tradi∣tion in the wisedome of man. And we deny all the VVorlds Churches whereof they were made members by, by visible things without, and were gathered by tradition▪ whereof the serpent is head, and not Christ, and which is the body of Anti-Christ, some of whom commit Idolatry in an Idols Temple: And the Ministry of this Church we deny, for it stands in the will of man▪ and the Ministers of it are such as all the servants of the Lord witnessed against; the Churches the Ministry, and the Ministers, are contrary to God; but the Ministry which is to the seed▪ which is out of the will of man, we owne and witnesse, which ministers life unto life, and death unto death, and divides the word aright, judgement to the fat, and to the strong; and feeds the hungry, and looseth the bands of wickednesse, and breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the smoaking flax; this Ministry we deny not, but are friends unto it; and who are Ministers here▪ we have union withall; but proud men and such as are called of men Master, are cast out of this Ministry, and are Ministers to the body of Anti-Christ, and know not the Ministery of the Ministry of Jesus Christ as this to the spirit in prison. Magistrates and Magistracy we deny not, but doe give re∣spect unto for conscience sake; for who beares the sword of justice▪ who use their power to be a terror to the wicked, and for the prayse of them that doe well, are Ministers of God, and we desire that there were more Magistracy here, and that the Magistrate would more use his power to be a terror to ly∣ers, to swearers, to drunkards, to raylers, to false accusers, and to proud men and oppressors, this we are friends unto: but to such as act by their owne wills in corrupt Lawes, and doe thereby violence to the Innocent, and strengthens the hands of evill doers▪ we cannot be subject, but choose rather (then to transgresse the Law of God which is written in our hearts, by submitting to such mens wills and Lawes) to suffer by the corrupt wills of men▪ under corrupt Lawes. And thus I have answered those false accusations which are cast upon us, and doe declare it be the same spirit in the Teachers and people of this generation which accuseth us▪
as it was in the Scribes and Pharisees which accused Christ and his Disciples. And this the Scripture witnesseth unto, as they did unto him, so would they doe unto us. A further Answer to that Accusation of being false Prophets and Deceivers. JEsus Christ Prophesied and said, That in the last dayes should many false Prophets arise, and should deceive many, if it were possible the very Elect. Now the Teachers and peo∣ple of this generation doe say▪ That we (who by the world are called Quakers) are those false Prophets and Deceivers, which Christ Prophefied of. Of this their false accusation have they drunkards, lyars, swearers, and all the ungodly people in eve∣ry profession to witnesse them. But their accusation, and their witnesses we doe deny, though they preach it among the people for doctrine. And now in answer to this false accusation and slander I am moved to write a little, and shall to that principle of God in every mans conscience cleare my conscience, and de∣clare what I know from God concerning those false Prophets, who they are▪ when they came in, and how they may be knowne; and shall leave it to every honest heart to consider of. The Apostles▪ and Ministers of Jesus Christ saw the same false Prophets which Christ Prophesied of to be come, and comming in, in their dayes; Iohn said, by that they knew it was the last time; For▪ said he, Even now are there many Anti-Christs and false Prophets gone out into the World; such vvere they, who confessed not Christ to be come in the Flesh, and they were of the world and spoke of the world and the world heard them. Now here I charge it upon the Teachers of the world▪ that they are of that generetion which went out into the world then; for as they then confessed not Christ to be come in the Flesh, so these uphold those things vvhich vvere under the Law▪ vvhich vvas before Christ came in the Flesh outwardly, and so confesse him not to be come in the Flesh; and so they
are Anti-Christ. They uphold an outward Temple, and an outward Worship, and take Tythes, as the Priests under the Law did, as a Type and Figure of Christ; but when he vvas come, and sacrificed, these things (which were to stand for a time) were put to an end. And none who witnessed Christ come, and were sent by him to Preach the Gospel, did uphold those things, but witnessed forth the substance, and denyed the figure; they denyed the outward Temple, and witnessed they were the Temples of God, and that God dwelt in them, and denyed the outward worship and witnessed the worship of God in spirit, and in truth within them, (for they who worshipped without, worshipped they knew not what, as they doe now) And they desired to take Tythes, and lived of the Gospel, and said, they that Preached it, should live of it; but the Teachers of this generation are of the world, living in its pride, lusts, and vanities; and they who live in the same worldly nature, uphold them, and heare them. Iohn also said, Every spirit that confesseth not Christ to be come in the Flesh, is Anti-christ. And here I charge it upon the Teachers of the world that their spirit of pride, and covetousnesse, and envy, and hypocrysie which rules in them, is the spirit of Anti-Christ, and confesseth not Christ to be come in the Flesh, for where he is made manifest, and come in the Flesh, this spirit is destroyed; For (as saith the Scripture) he was made manifest to destroy the workes of the Devill. Paul was also a vvitnesse of the false prophets and deceivers which Christ Prophefied of in his time, For he gave warning, to beware of such▪ and to turne away from such whom he saw then come, and comming in, but came more fully in after his dayes; he said of this sort, They were lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, heady, high∣minded, fierce men, and despisers of those that were good given to filthy lucre, and to pleasure, and were false accusers and blasphe∣mers, and without naturall affection, and unthankefull, and un∣holy, and taught filly Women, who were led with divers lusts, but were not able to come to the knowledge of the truth by their teaching: they were men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concer∣ing Faith. And here againe I charge it upon the Teachers of
the vvorld, that they are of that generation which came in then, For they are lovers of themselves, they take money of poore people to whom they are more able to give; and they are proud and covetous men▪ they goe in their Ribbons and Cuffes, and gaudy attire; and they Preach to them vvhere they can get most money; and some takes money of them, and sues them at the Law, to vvhom they Preach not at all: they are heady and high-minded men, for poore people bow to them in the streets, and call them Masters: they are fierce men, and despise those that are good; if any speake a∣gainst them (of the truth) they are fierce against, and despise such; and they are given to filthy lucre, and are lovers of pleasure, for vvhere they can have most money, there they will abide; and they live in pleasure▪ in idlenesse, and lust, and vanity; they are false accusers, they vvill call them deceivers which are not; and that blasphemy, which is not; and they are blasphemers, and vvithout naturall affection. They say the Letter is the Word, and the Scripture the light, vvhich is blasphemy; for God is the Word, and Christ is the light; and they vvill suffer the rude multitude, and some vvill set them upon it to haile, beate, and strike out of their Assem∣blyes, vvhich is vvithout naturall affection; they are un∣thankefull, and unholy; they have great summes of money from the people, and are not thankefull, but compell them by a Law to pay them; and herein they are unholy by their actions vvhich are declared; and they Teach alwayes, but men and vvomen are ignorant still, and none able to come to the knowledge of the truth by them: and they have a Forme of godlinesse: they professe the Scriptures that the children of the Lord are taught of the Lord; and that Christ said, Take no thought what to eate, nor what to drinke, nor where∣with to be cloathed. But vvho vvitnesse themselves taught of God, and that they need no man to teach them; and that take no care vvhat to eate, nor vvhat to drinke, nor vvhat to put on, and so vvitnesse the promise of God, and abide in the Doctrine of Christ, these you call deceivers, and idle, and carelesse persons, and thus deny the power of vvhat they
have professed; and herein their minds are corrupt and re∣probate concerning Faith; for Faith is the substance, and purifies the heart from these things vvhich they are guilty of. And Peter and jude also vvere vvitnesses of those de∣ceivers and false Prophets vvhich Christ prophefied of in their time; for, they saw such vvere come, and comming in, which should bring in damnable Heresies▪ and through covetousnesse, with faigned words, make merchandise of the people; they walke after the flesh in the lust▪ of uncleannesse, and despise Govern∣ment, and Dominion: Presumptuous are they, selfe▪ willed, they are not afraid to speake evill of Dignities  they speake evill of the things that they understand not; they have eyes full of adul∣tery, and that cannot cease from sinne, begniling unstable soules; an heart▪ they have exercised with covetous practises; cursed children, which have▪ forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighte∣ousnesse, they themselves are the servants of corruption, ungodly men, turning the grace of God into laciviousnesse, and defile the flesh: these are murmurers, complainers, walking after their owne lusts, and their mouthes speaking great swelling words, having mens persons in admiration because of advantage; there be they who seperate themselves, sensuall, having not the spirit. And here againe I charge it upon the Teachers of this age, that they are of that generation vvhich came into the world then; for they have brought in, and doe uphold damnable Heresies, telling people, that sprinkling Infants with Water is the Baptisme into the Faith; and that singing Davids ex∣periences in Rime and Meeter, is singing to the glory of God; and that a house of stone is the Temple and Church of God; these are damnable Heresies: and they doe through covetousnesse, make merchandise of the people; if they can get more money at another place, thither they will goe; and thus people are their merchandise: they walke after the Flesh in the lusts of uncleannesse; they walke in pride and in lust, and som of hem will be drunke, and lye, and sweare, and talke nly▪ and they despise the Saints Government and D for they walke in the wayes of the world, in
the customes and traditions of men, and follow their owne wills) And whom the spirit of God governes, and hath do∣minion over, followes Christ for their example, whose Go∣vernment and Dominion they are under. But they live in pride, lust, and vanity, and according to the Flesh, and here∣in they despise government and dominion, and speake evill of this dignity, and of the mysteries of God revealed in his saints, which they know not, nor understand not, calling it error; they are presumptuous and selfe-willed; they have presumed to call themselves Ministers of Christ, and all the Townes where they live must serve, and be subject to their wills. And they are adulterated from God after honour and riches, and the vanities of the World; and they cannot cease from sinne themselves; for they say, None must cease from it while they are on the Earth; and herein they beguile ma∣ny soules; for, till sin be ceased from the soule, it is beguiled▪ they have a heart exercised with covetous practises, and they follow the way of Balaam, and goe for gifts and rewards▪ and love the wages of unrighteousnesse: they take money of poore people for sprinkling Infants▪ and for burying the dead, which are covetous practises: they take money for Henns and Eggs, and for Smoake passing up the Chimney, which are unrighteous wages; and thus they have forsaken the right way, the way of God, and of all the saints which spoke forth the Scripture; and in these things, they are servants of cor∣ruption, and are dgodly men, and turne the grace of God, (which shines in their consciences, which shewes them their ungodly wayes) into laciviousnesse; and through their lust they defile the Flesh: and many of them will murmure, and complaine for want of wages, even to spend upon their lusts; and they speake great swelling words, speaking of the Fame of Christ, of his Life, and Death, and Resurrection, but can∣not witnesse by the spirit of Christ within them what they speake of him: and they have mens persons in admiration, because of advantage: some of them had the Bishops in ad∣miration, and some the King in admiration▪ and now they have others who beare rule in admiration; and thus they de∣ceitfully
have twined to admire mens persons onely because of advantage, many of them have seperated themselves, none who are not of their judgement, must joyne with them in their worship, but neither they, nor their seperates have the spirit of the living God, but doe deny an infallible spirit: and they are sensuall in their wisedome, and wayes, and practises, and these have deceived many, even whole Nations. And here you see plainely when the deceivers and false Prophets came in; they were come, and comming in, in the Apostles dayes, and then was the Prophesie of Christ fulfilling and fulfilled: and the Apostles suffered under Tyrants, and were put to cru∣ell deaths, and then they came in more fully; for since the Apostles dayes hath been a great Apostacy, and many Formes of worship and wayes of Religion have been imitated from the letter through imaginations, and but one generation of Teachers▪ though one above another, in the comprehension and sensuall wisedome, and at enmity one against another, though all in one birth and nature. But they are all discovered by the light, Prayses (from all that know God) unto him for ever Since the Apostles dayes hath darknesse been spread over all, though the Lord had some which he preserved for himselfe in the middest of Apostacy and darkenesse; who the false Pro∣phets are which Christ Prophesied of to every honest heart and single eye may be known; Christ said▪ By their fruits should they be knowne; And the fruits of the Teachers of the world are plainely made appeare to be the fruits of deceivers, and not of the Ministers of Christ; none have gathered Grapes nor Figgs from them. And thus I have cleared my conscience in the presence of God concerning the false slander and accusa∣tion which the Teachers and people of the World doe cast upon us; and to that in every ones conscience it is made ap∣peare who they are to whom this accusation justly belongs. Woe unto all you who strive against the Lord, and justifie that which the holy men of God which spoke forth the Scri∣pture in the Scripture, declared against; and which con∣demne that which the holy men of God in the Scripture ju∣stified▪ and witnessed for: you who live in pride, in covetous∣nesse,
in double-dealing, and in hypocrysie, and in the lusts of the Flesh,▪ you strive against the Lord God, and against the light of God which is in your consciences, which shewes you these things to be sinne; you resist the drawings of the Fa∣ther, which would draw you by the light to follow the sound: Woe and desolation is to come upon all you who will not be taught by the light of Christ which he hath lightened you withall; which light all the holy men of God were taught by, who gave forth the Scriptures, but doe set up Teachers without you, such as all the holy men of God, the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles declared against. Oh blinded, stiffe∣necked people, which are not ashamed to call such Ministers of Christ▪ and of the Gospel (and by your corrupt wills and Laws to▪ defend them) which seeke for their gaine from their Quarter, and which feed themselves with the Fat, and cloathe themselves with the Wooll; and which Preach for hire, and divine for money, and prepare Warre against them that put not into their mouthes: here you justifie such as the Pro∣phets of the Lord were sent to cry against, and deny Isayah, Ezechiel, and Micha to be true Prophets; for if you did beleeve that they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, the word of the Lord, then would you not uphold them which act those things which they declared against; for that which was abomination to the Lord then, is abomination to him now; and that spirit which declared against these things then, cannot uphold them now. And here the Teachers and peo∣ple are tryed, not to have the same spirit which was in the holy Prophets of the Lord, but the spirit of the false Pro∣phets▪ acting by it that which they acted, which the true Pro∣phets cryed against; and thus by upholding that which the Lord sent his servants to declare against. you striue against the Lord ye Magistrates and People. And you are not ashamed to call such Ministers of Christ which (walk in the same steps, and act those things that they did, which Christ cryed woe against) are called of men Masters, and have the chiefe places in the Assemblyes, and stand Praying in the Synagogues, and goe in long Robes, and love greetings in the Markets, as they did;
here you justifie such as Christ cryed woe against, and deny that Christ spoke the truth what was the minde of his Father; for if you did beleeve that he spoke the will of his Father, then would ye not uphold these that act the same things which he cryed woe against. And he changes not, that which he once cryed against, the same spirit where it is witnessed, cryes a∣gainst the same things. And here againe the Teachers of the world are tryed not to have the spirit of Christ, but the spirit of the Scribes and Pharisces, who act that which they acted, which he cryed woe against. And herein Magistrates and peo∣ple strive against the Lord God, by upholding that which Christ cryed woe against. And such who are Ministers of Christ, and walke in his Doctrine, and in the same steps, which he and his Apostles walked in, witnessing for that which they witnessed, for and against that which they witnessed against them you call deceivers, and false Prophets, and accuse them for vagabonds, and wandering Beggars, and Idle, and carelesse Persons; and that they have left their Families, and carelessely wander up and downe. And herein you Magistrates and peo∣ple strive against the Lord, by persecuting, and slandering▪ and falsely accusing▪ and condemning such as the Scripture justifies, and the servants of the Lord which spoke forth the Scripture doe witnesse of to be true. What would you have called Christ, who had no where to lay his head? he was no vaga∣bond, nor Idle, not carelesse Person. And what would you have called the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who had lost their Families and Callings, and went up and downe, and had no certaine dwelling place, but went from City to City, and cared not for the World; not what to eate, nor what to drink, nor wherewith to be cloathed? this they did, and yet were no vagabonds, nor Idle, nor carelesse Persons, but abode in the Doctrine of Christ; they were hated by your generation, as we are now by you: And they were called pestilent fellowes, and movers of Sedition, and Haretiques, and men of erronious judgements: And they said, they were troublers of their Cities, as you doe now call us false Prophets and Deceivers I doe declare this generation to be the same which persecuted the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, as it doth persecute us; for by the same power we stand, as they did; and by the same power we are commanded and acted, as they were: And to the power by which we stand, and are commanded, shall all the powers of men, and of the Earth bow, and be subject. O all you magistrates and people consider of your blindenesse, and Ignorance, who doe absolutely justifie and uphold such as the Scripture declares and witnesses against; and doe con∣demne and persecute such as the Scripture justifies, and wit∣nesses of; and doe put them out of your Synagogues and Vil∣lages; search the Prophets, and Christs, and the Apostles Writings, in them you may reade your example, and our ex∣ample. The vengeance of God you cannot fly, his fierce wrath will come upon you, and weeping, and bowling, and lamentation, and misery will be your portion. O tremble to thinke upon your Ignorance, to what purpose have you made a profession of the Scriptures, who justifie those things, and those men, which it plainely Declares against; and con∣demne those practises and those men, which it plainly witnes∣seth of. Repent, and take warning betime, before the De∣cree of the Lord of Hosts be sealed against you, for I have cleared my conscience, in letting you see your owne Igno∣rance, and blindenesse, ye magistrates and people: And thus you are left without excuse, whether you will heare, or for∣beare. FINIS.
