C1120 99896997 136908
THE CASE OF THE Orphans and Creditors OF THE CITY of LONDON. MR. John Dowse and the rest of the Orphans, who by the Favour of the Right Honourable the Lord Chancellor, presented their Humble Address to His Majesty at Wind∣sor, and were most Graciously Received: Attended at Guild-Hall the 29th. of October last to present the Petition following; but through the Favour of His Majesties Vice-Chamberlain, it was that Evening presented to His Majesty at Whitehall: And He Graci∣ously Accepted it, and directed the said Mr. Dowse to read It. To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of about 1400. Poor Orphans within Your City of London. SHEWETH, THat Your Petitioners withall Humility of Gratitude acknow∣ledge the great Obligations they are under to Your Sacred Ma∣jesty, for the Royal Expressions You have Graciously, and so often been pleas'd to make of Your Compassionate Resentments of their De∣plorable Condition, and for the Renowned Charity you have already begun to extend towards some of them.
That Your Petitioners have treated with Nathaniel Reading Esq con∣cerning several Proposals which he had humbly to make to Your Ma∣jesty for payment of the Respective Summes due to us: And Your Peti∣tioners humbly hope that the same will meet with your Royal Appro∣bation and Establishment. For as much that nothing can contribute more to the Immenseness of that Glory which Your Majesty hath acquired, since the Blessing we have had of Your being our Soveraign; Than Your being the Father of the Fatherless in Your continued Imitation of our Heavenly Father. Your Petitioners in all Submissive and Avow'd Obedience prostrate and be∣seech Your Benigne Consideration of the said Proposals: And if Your Majesty approve of them, that they may be Establish'd and pursu'd ac∣cordingly. And your Petitioners, &c. HIS Majesty Graciously refer'd the Consideration of the Propo∣sals to the Right Honourable the Earl of Sunderland, the Earl of Castlemain, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, and Mr. Brent; who, (in re∣gard that His Majesty had by His Letters Patents granted to the Trustees of the City, what ever they formerly enjoy'd before the Judgment against their Charter) conceiv'd it proper to present them to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen. Pursuant thereunto, upon the 19th. of December last, the Orphans shew'd their Petition following to Sir Basil Firebrass, and pray'd his procuring the same to be Read by the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men. He inform'd them, that he had communicated the same, but that his Lordship thought not fit that the same should be Offer'd, till after the Holy-days; that Court being particularly appointed for the Business of the Stewardship of Southwark: And that several Widows and Orphans appeard the Court before, and were very Clamorous; and his Lordship apprehended, that they were set on by the Promoters of that Petition. Mr. Finch, Mr. Herne and others, who then appear'd, assur'd him that they resolv'd against Appearing with the said Widows, fearing their Importunities might give Offence: And that they came withall Duty and Respect to the Court, and humbly hoped the Court would not refuse Reading their Petition, especially when it contain'd Proposals of as great Advantage to the City, as to themselves. Sir Basil having acquainted his Lordship therewith, told the Petitioners, it should be Read. And they being call'd in, Mr. Recorder told them, The Petition had been Read; and that after the Holy-Days, the Court
would consider of it; and desir'd Mr. Reading to put his Proposal in Writting. The Lord Mayor said, That they needed not be Petition'd to pay the Orphans, they had already Order'd the taking them into their Protection, and as soon as any Moneys came into the Chamber, they should have notice of it. Mr. Reading thereupon said, That the Petition of the Orphans, he easily believ'd, was no less Surprizing to his Lordship and every Mem∣ber of that Honourable Court, than the hearing, That it was in their Power to pay the Petitioners, was to them; especially since their desire to pay what they so justly Owed, was equal to the Petitioners desire of receiving what they so severely wanted. That the Honour he had for their Renowned City, had put him upon great Pains for preparing the Proposals in the Petition; and that he allow'd himself to believe, they would have been very Acceptable. That the Methods he had taken, and the Measures which were to be taken for the effecting this Miracle, he would make out with Demonstrations: And where the Blame would lye if the Honour of the City and Credit of the Cham∣ber was not by the due prosecuting of the said Proposals, Improv'd to a far greater height than ever yet they reach'd to. As to the putting off the Considering of the said Proposals till after the Adjournment; he said, The Season indeed commanded Adjourn∣ment, and very Happily; Because the time of Adjournment was fittest for proceeding on the Proposals: For to do Acts of Piety and Justice was the Specifick Work of a Holy-Day; and then to do them, was to do, Opus diei in die suo. And if to Relieve the poor of your own Bread was a Duty requir'd to be done at all Times, certainly to help the Starving Fatherless, and the Perishing Widows to their own Bread, which had been so long with held, and lately was so Importunely prayed for, ought to be reckon'd among the Chiefest Businesses of a Christmass. He concluded, That if his Lordship would then appoint Referrees, and they would please to give but a little of their Leisure to hear him in that Affair, according to the Petition, he doubted not, but within a very few days to make out what he undertook; that so a Report may be fit for the Court against their next Meeting; and a happy Entrance would thereby be made to the approaching New-year, which would exceedingly tend to the Honour of the City, and the Pe∣titioners Relief.
To the Right Honourable Sir John Shorter Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen of London. The Humble Petition of about 1400 Orphans. SHEWETH, THat in Obedience to the Commands of your Honourable Court, the Portions of your Petitioners were pay'd into your Chamber for Securing them against their coming out of their respective Mino∣rities; and there remains above 500000 l. due thereupon. That the Methods formerly taken for paying the said Debt, having been much Obstructed by the Judgment lately obtain'd against your Charter: Application was made to the late Parliament for their Re∣lief; and Nathaniel Reading Esq was of Councel with your Peti∣tioners therein; but it not taking Effect: And the said Mr. Reading being duly inform'd on the Behalf of the said Orphans, that great Numbers of them were in a most deplorable and perishing Condition; and his further Assistance being earnestly besought, he acquainted your Petitioners that he had taken very great pains therein, and had Proposals humbly to make to His Majesty for paying their respective Portions. That His Majesty was thereupon Petition'd to refer the Examina∣tion thereof, who gave a Gracious Answer thereunto. And the said Mr. Reading informs us, That great Deliberation hath been had con∣cerning the same: And that he is ready to make it appear, that your Honourable Court and your Trustees, by His Majesties Letters Pattents since the said Judgment, stand Impowered to give your Petitioners sa∣tisfaction out of what His Majesty hath already granted to you; an Honourable Provision for the constant support of your Government of the City, being first Established and Secured. For as much that the severe Circumstances which your Petitioners are reduc'd to, permit them not to lye down under their Ruines; while so happy a Discovery can enable them to contribute any thing towards their own preservation. And for as much that your Petitioners can in no sort doubt; But that your Honourable Court will cheerfully endeavour to redeem the Glory of your once Renowned Chamber, and to the utmost of your Powers promote so just a Work; especially since the fresh and great Demonstrations which our Gracious Soveraign, who hath Commis∣sionated you thereunto, hath given of his transcendent Charity towards the Relief of some Orphans; assures us of his Royal Inclinations to Relieve us all, in case you shall find it necessary to be Address'd for on our Behalfes. Your Petitioners beseech your Lordship that a Committe of your Honourable Court may be appointed for meeting some of your Worthy Trustees, in the presence of some of your Petitioners for Hearing the said Mr. Reading therein; and that they may be attended with what they shall conceive needful to Enable them to make a speedy Report concerning the same. And your Petitioners, &c.
The Proposition of Mr. Reading made on the 17th. of January 1687. To the Right Honourable Sir John Shorter Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, on Behalf of 1400 Orphans of the City of London. SEveral of the Orphans to whom great Summes were due from your Chamber dying in Prison and Starving for Want; and their Friends not able to get Money out of your Chamber to Bury them. And upon the 18th. of December last, several Widows being told by you in Court, that you could not pay them half a Crown per Pound; and many offering to take six Shillings per Pound: And Importuning Mr. Reading, who had long been their Councel, to study their Relief: And a Petition having been presented to your Honourable Court the 19th. following, purporting his having happily discover'd a way to Enable you to pay them their Principal and Interest. And their ha∣ving Subscrib'd an Agreement for allowing him five Shillings per Pound for a Reward; and praying your Referring his Proposals to the Consideration of a Committee: But the same being put off to the 22th following; and he then being violently Oppos'd and Discourag'd therein, and Order'd to bring his Proposals in Writing upon this day: And thereupon divers refusing to Subscribe to the said Agreement, though they had Faithfully promis'd it: And others Unconscionably de∣signing to take the advantage of the said Proposals; and not to give him any Reward; and thereby Obstructing his Proceedings thereup∣on, not only to their own, but to the Damage of others also. And he being ready to make out the certainty and the particulars of his Proposals, to the everlasting Renown of His Majesties Charity to the said Orphans, and to the great Advantage of the City also: In case your Court, will according to their Oaths and Trust, do what in you lyes to the Encouragement of the said Subscriptions. Mr. Reading proposeth, thas upon your Ordering this day such En∣couragement to be given, that Subscriptions may be gain'd to half the Sum due to the said Orphans, which long since would have been done, had it not been obstructed, He will in the presence of the Right Honourable the Earl of Castle∣main, Sir Nicholas Butler, the Kings Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. Brent on the behalf of His Majesty; and of Sir William Turner, Sir William Prichard, Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Alderman Herne on the behalf of the said Orphans, fully and plainly discover to the Committee for your Revenues. First, How you may make an Honourable Provision for the Support of the Covernment of the City.
Secondly, How that being Establish'd, you are Enabled to pay the said Or∣phans. Thirdly, And lastly, How to raise a Noble Fund for your Chamber; and to pay its other Debts. In order whereunto, he proposeth that no new Lease be made un∣der the City Seal, before the said Honourable Persons have the Offer thereof, for the Benefit of the said Orphans: And that in the presence of the Keeper of your Records, he may have Liberty to Inspect them, in order to the making it manifest to your Selves; that you have such powers to pay the said Orphans. In case of Non-complyance herewith, Mr. Reading declares, That he will never attend you more therein; but take such other Mea∣sures for Relieving the said Orphans, as His Majesty shall please to direct. Shorter Mayor. Martis 17 die Januarii 1687/8 Anno{que} Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi An∣gliae, &c. Tertio. WHereas this Court hath often taken into Consideration the great Debt due to Orphans from the Chamber of London: And be∣ing desirous to examine the State of the Cities Revenue, and to understand what Provision may be thence made for payment of the said Orphans, doth re∣fer it to Sir Peter Daniel, Sir Humphrey Edwin, Mr. Alderman Mau∣son, Sir William Ashurst, Mr. Alderman Gardiner, Sir John Eyles, Mr. Alderman Chamberlain and Mr. Sheriffes, or any three of them, to Inspect and Examine the State of the Cities Revenue, and Inform themselves in the best manner they can, what Provision may be made thereby, or what other Method may well be used for payment of the Orphans: And afterwards, this Court receiving this day a Petition from several Orphans of this City, taking notice of Proposals offer'd to be made by Mr. Reading, for payment of their Portions due from the Chamber, any Praying a publick Encourage∣ment for proceeding thereupon: And in a Paper now deliver'd to this Court in Writing by the said Mr. Reading; it being propos'd, That he will in pre∣sence of certain Honourable Persons, and some Eminent Citizens of this City, discover to a Committee of this Court, how all the Orphans may be pay'd, and a sufficient Provision left to Maintain the Cities Government out of the Cities Revenue, with some particulars therein desired in order thereunto: This Court being willing and ready to give all Encouragement to any Disco∣very that can be made, or Means devis'd, by him or any other Person for
payment of the said Orphans: And also to Gratify and Reward all such Persons as shall do any Service therein; doth refer it to the said Committee, to Receive and Consider of any Proposals the said Mr. Reading, or any other Person, or any of the said Orphans, or their Friends shall make touching pay∣ment of their Portions: And all particulars they shall represent or desire in order thereunto; and they to give any Directions they shall judge requisite in the prosecution of this matter; and from time to time make Report unto this Court of their Opinion and Proceedings: And Samuel Kendall, Mr. Chamberlain's Clark to attend, and Daniel Man to Warn them, and any Mem∣bers of this Court may be present, and joyn with the said Committee at any of their Meetings. And it is Ordered, That Mr. Chamberlain, Mr. Common-Serjeant, Mr. Town Clark and Mr. Comptroller of the Chamber, and all other Officers and Persons the said Committee shall require, do from time to time Attend and Assist the said Committee: And the said Committe are to Meet every Wednesday at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, and oftner if they shall see Cause; and also at such other Times as the Honourable Per∣sons before mention'd shall be pleased to appoint, to the end they may wait on them, in order to the receiving or proceeding upon the said Mr. Reading's Proposals. Wagstaffe. Mr. Reading's further Proposition on the Behalf of the Orphans, delivered unto the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Alderman on the 24th. day of January 1687. MR. Reading in his former Attendances on you, on the Behalf of the Orphans, having upon your Importunities Discover'd to you some of the particulars of the Methods he propos'd for the Enabling you to pay them: And you having upon the 17th. Instant Ordered up∣on the Petition of the Orphans; and the proposition he then deliver'd, that you being desirous to Examine the State of your Revenue, and to understand what provision might thence be made for payment of them; that it should be referr'd to a Commmtitee of several of your Mem∣bers to inform themselves in the best manner they could, what Provi∣sion might be made thereby, or what other Methods might well be us'd for payment of them; and declar'd that you were willing and ready to give all Encouragement to any Discovery that could be made, or Means devis'd by him, or any other person for payment of them; and also to Gratify and Reward the Service done therein: And the Committee were to receive and consider of his Proposals, and all par∣ticulars he should represent or desire in order thereunto, and to give any
Directions they should judge requisite in the Prosecution thereof, and to Report their Opinions and Proceedings; and to meet at such time as the Right Honourable the Earl of Castlemain, Sir Nicholas Butler, the Kings Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. Brent should appoint, and to wait on them in order to the renewing and proceeding on his said Proposals. And His Majesties Vice Chamberlain having upon Saturday last At∣tended your Committee, and excus'd the Absence of the other Honour∣able persons, by reason of their being upon his Majesties other Ser∣vice, and assur'd them, as they had all taken great pains in contriving and promoting the Orphans relief, so they would readily Attend at any other time, and to their utmost improve his Majesties Sacred Cha∣rity towards them upon all occasions: And Sir William Turner, Sir William Pritchard, and Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Alderman Herne, in their publick zeal to carry on so Pious and good a Work, Attending there also on the Behalf of the said Orphans: Mr, Reading pray'd, that according to the express Condition of the Discovery in his said Proposal, and your Order thereupon, some publick Encouragement may be given fur Subscribing to the Agreement for his Reward therein men∣tioned; and that such of the Orphans who Subscrib'd thereto might re∣ceive the Benefit of his said Service, before those who refused to concern themselves therein, and that he may have the liberty of Inspecting your Records, and your several Orders and proceedings thereupon re∣lating to your Revenue: And it being solemnly declar'd by your Re∣ferrees, that they would be so far from discouraging any of the Orphans from Rewarding him; that in case he could enable them to Improve their Revenue, their Court would certainly give him an Honourable Reward, according to what Mr. Vice-Chamberlain himself should con∣ceive Fitting: And that their several Officers should permit him from time to time to inspect the Charters, Rentalls, Surveys, Tittles, Leases, Orders, and all matters whatsoever relating to their Revenue, and whereby the same may be any ways Improv'd: And Mr. Reading rest∣ing thereupon, and Mr. Alderman Chamberlain then importuning him to give some further particulars, whereby their Revenue might be Im∣prov'd; he with great freedom gave several Instances rhereof, but the said Alderman declar'd, that nothing he said was New; the several particulars he mention'd were entred in their Book upon the Table. Mr. Reading replyed, That the knowledge of those particulars was an Aggravation of the Breach of Trust in not Improving them, and that the Entries in the Book were made not only since his Proposals, but since the very Order by which they then sat: And that however, he had several other Matters for their Service, which themselves would Confess were new to them; and that notwithstanding the Term, and all his other business, he would withal Dispatch and Diligence apply himself to the Inspection, and then attend them further; and there∣upon Mr. Vice-Chamberlain took his leave and the Committee rose.
Several of the Orphans attending without to pay their Acknowledg∣ments to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain; and declaring that they would imme∣diatly Subscribe, Mr. Alderman Ghamberlain told them (as they infor∣med Mr. Reading) that Mr. Reading had deluded them; that there was nothing in his undertaking but Words, and us'd several other unkind Reflections to that effect. Mr. Reading resolving upon 23th. Instant to give himself up to the Inspection, and being told by Mr. Comptroller, that it was necessary he should first have the Order which the Committee had made, he sent to Mr. Kendall for it, but could not have it; and Mr. Town-Glark told Mr. Reading, that he was ordered not to deliver it, without the Di∣rection of the Court this day. Mr. Reading for avoiding all mistakes, and to the end the Orphans may loose no more time; in case Mr. Alderman Ghamberlain shall con∣tinue to oppose their Relief, and to Affront Mr, Vice-Chamberlain, and the other Honourable Persons, and to Contradict not only the Orders of your Honourable Court, but of the Committee also; Humbly de∣livers this, and Prayes your positive Order for Encouragement and Inspection, or your denyal thereof. Mr. Reading's Third Proposal delivered to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen on 21th. of February 1687. on the Behalf of the Orphans: Which containing only the True and Necessary State of their Case: He Prayes that nothing in it may be look'd upon as Reflective. THere being by Account deliver'd into the Committeee of the last House of Commons 500000 l. Principal, and near 100000 l. Interest thereof due to about 1400 Orphans, which under pain of Imprisonment, your Court compell'd to be pay'd into your Chamber: And there being likewise due to several other Orphans and Creditors upon Bond under your Common-Seal, about 100000 l. more, besides Interest; the greatest part whereof was Artificially gain'd from Or∣phans (upon Promise of paying them ready Moneys, in case they would acknow∣ledge Satisfaction; but that being obtain'd, and Fees pay'd as for actual Receipts, nothing but your Bond could be got for their respective Summes:) And the residue thereof being at the Instance of your Court borrow'd upon Interest, upon Suggesti∣on to Pay the same among the said Orphans: And the common Interest of the said Moneys being above 30000 l. per Annum, and no Penny Profit made by you of any of the Principal. And the yearly Revenues brought into your Chamber Com∣munibus Annis, not exceeding 12000 l. and near 10000 l. thereof yearly pay'd out in Salaries, Officers Bills, and several other Particulars which your Circumstances might well dispense with: So that the said Interest you were to pay yearly, ex∣ceed your Income above 28000 l. per Annum. And it necessarily following there∣upon, that the poor Orphans (whose Right each of you have Solemnly Sworn that you would maintain) have no prospect of being redeem'd from Perishing; nor the other Creditors any hopes of getting any part of Interest, you having lately turn'd Interest into Principal, as a stated Debt; and actually pay'd six Pence per Pound to them, with intenr to pay no further Interest; had not Mr. Attorney General de∣clar'd His Majesties Gracious Pleasure to have Interest pay'd on, whereupon you vacated your former Order, and directed the said 6 d. per Pound to be allow'd on∣ly
as part of Interest: And you having lately in Court deny'd to hear any but Women on the Orphans Behalf; and declar'd that you could not pay them 2 s. 6 d. per Pound. And Mr. Reading having about two Months since offer'd in case you would per∣mit him to Inspect your Books, Rentalls, &c. He would Demonstrate to you, that by your due ordering the Revenue which His Majesty hath Intrusted you to Man∣nage for the publick Good of your City, the Government of it might be Nobly Supported: The Orphans and Creditors might by fully pay'd; and a real Fund for your Chamber rais'd: As by his first Proposal deliver'd to you. And he receiving great Discouragements and Unkindnesses from you in return, and the Inspection being contradicted, after it was solemnly Ordered in the Pre∣sence of His Majesties Vice-Chamberlain, Sir William Turner, Sir William Pritchard, Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Alderman Herne: As by his further Proposal deliver'd to you upn the 24th. of January last. And no Answer being given thereunto, by reason of rhe Absence of Sir Peter Daniel who was Chairman. And the day following Mr. Reading attending the Committee: And an Order for Inspecting what related to Queen-Hyth being pro∣mised, by them to be obtain'd for him at your Court the next Morning: And he being earnestly press'd to discover some further Particulars of his design'd Improve∣ments, or otherwise they would meet no more. Notwithstanding no Order for Inspection can be obtain'd: Notwithstanding that upon the first of February Sir Peter Daniel told him, the Committee thought it neither fit that he should Inspect any of their Books relating to Queen Hyth; nor the account of the Cole-Duty: Notwithstanding that he hath since also met with fresh Discouragements and Unkindnesses: And that Mr. Robert Murray hath pub∣lickly and falsly accus'd Mr. Reading, by saying, That he being of Councel with Mr. Murray had made use of his Projects: And notwithstanding that, Mr. Murray hath vainly pretended to pay the Orphans, and to Improve your Revenue to 40000 l. per Annum. Yet so ready is Mr. Reading to promote the for ever to be Renowned Charity of His Sacred Majesty toward the said Orphans: And so great is the value he hath for the Honour of your Court, which you have Solemnly oblig'd to Reward his Service herein, that without more reserve, He humbly layes before you these par∣ticulars following. (viz.) I. The Breach of publick Trust by the Male-Executions of the Acts of Parlia∣ment, for raising of Moneys for the Re-building your City, hath been exceedingly to the Damage of the said Orphans: Not only by suffering great Summes of their Moneys to be pay'd out of your Chamber upon the Credit of the said Acts, towards raising unnecessary and unwarrantable Buildings, and the making extravagant Pur∣chases at unconscionable Rates; (while several of the said Orphans, whose Por∣tions were so Imbezil'd, lay Perishing for want of Bread) but by not making any Persons Pay for Melioration of their Houses; by taking away, Churches, Cysterns, Standards, Middle-Rows; and other ways, which long since ought to have been done, and at this day will justly bring in many Thousands of Pounds. And also, by not bringing into your Chamber any Moneys for the Fraudulent Concealment of the Cole-Duties: And yet allowing many Thousands of Pounds out of your Chamber to Mr. Bridges and his Partners, for Detecting the said Concealments. If you please to permit a due Inspection to be made into the Contracts and Ac∣counts of the Works, for which the Orphans Moneys were Advanced; and into the great Mis-applications of Moneys about Fleet-Ditch, which is said to have Cost near 140000 l. and scarcely yeilds you 100 l. per Annum Rent: About the Mo∣nument, which 'tis said Cost near 20000 l. and scarcely yeilds you 20 l. per Annum Rent. And about Bridewell-Hospital and New-Bethelem, which 'tis said, Cost scores of Thousands of Pounds, under the Fraudulent disguise of Prisons; and yeilds but 12 d. per Annum Rent; while Thousands of Pounds might have been rais'd for your Chamber, by the Ground it stands on; And no one Penny is answered to you for the vast Improvements of the Mannor of Old-Bethlem.
And if you please that the Contracts, Accounts and Mis-applications of Mo∣neys in like manner advanced for Building Guild-hall, the Houses about it, the Chappel, the Lombard-Office, Blackwell-hall, the Compters, the Exchange, and o∣ther places which were Burn'd, and about Leaden-Hall, and other places which were not Burn'd, may be Inspected also. And that due Prosecution may be made of all Meliorations, Concealments of the said Duties, Frauds and Fraudulent Detainers of Moneys for the pretended Detections thereof. Through your Kindness and Justice to the Orphans, the same will conduce not a little to their Relief. II. The Priviledges of the Freemen of your City through His Majesties wh Dominions at Home, and beyond the Seas; by reason of the many Royal Favours formerly granted to it, and at this day Confirm'd and Enlarg'd, are very great, and Antienly have been very Valuable. The Trusts which your Court and the rest of the Freemen have been Honour'd with have been no less: And as their due Obedience to the Crown, obtain'd from it, the Government of the City; so their prudent Managing thereof, ob∣tain'd to your Court, the Guardianship of the Orphans of your Freemen: And while no Penny of their respective Portions was medled with, but they were Sa∣credly kept, as dead Deposits, till they could safely be dispos'd of for the Benefit of the Infants; the Blessings of the Father, of the Fatherless, were so multiply'd up∣on your City, that you were further Intrusted with the Government of the Tower, with the Fortifying your Wall; and with the Cleansing of the large Ditch which Encompass'd them, and whereby they were then Impregnable: Nay the Crown it self, and consequently the whole Kingdom were so at ease, under the Loyalty and Greatness of your City: That not only the Conservacy of the Rivers of Thames, Ley and Medway, but of the Narrow-Seas, also was committed to it. And so ex∣ceedingly successful was your City in the Service of the Crown, both against Enemies and Rebels; that the London Laudamus instead of Te Deum, was pub∣lickly Sung for it: And the Reverse of your Antient Seal, shews the great Esteem was had for you. For the Admittance of each Apprentice to this Priviledge after seven Years Faithful Service, the Antient Fee pay'd by the Master, to your Chamber, is but four Shillings; but it was appointed in those days, when Money was so Dear, that they who Built your first Hall, had but Pence a piece for for their daily Wages. The Orphans Patrimony having amongst other things been lately profain'd, to the laying out near 100000 l. thereof in Fortifying your City against the Kings Blessed Father (who Graciously Enlarg'd your Priviledges, and declar'd in his Royal Charter to you, That his Soul Affected your Prosperity;) and in Pensions, Thanks∣giving-Dinners, Presents to the great Officers of the Rebels, &c. for the Success of your Arms against Him; and your publick Debts doubling, while the Mem∣bers of your Court were intent upon Improving their own Nine-pences into Nobles. And in the particular Companies of which some of you are Free, and by reason thereof take Apprentices with several Hundreds of Pounds, and gain considerably by their seven Years Serving you; the taking far greater Summes than 4 s. for Freedoms hath been advis'd, and is practis'd: And every person praying the Free∣dom of any of those Companies, Payes it with Thanks, and something to the Poors Box also; and yet cannot obtain being a Fellow-Citizen with you, with∣out your Order; and some other small inconsiderable Fees to your Officers. If you please therefore, that each Person taking his Freedom from you may pay for it; and do what in you lyes to Establish a Table of Fees for Freedoms, somewhat propor∣tionable to the Advantages thereof — To the values of their respective Companies— To your publick Exigencies— And to the present value of Money: By doing whereof, se∣veral of the said Companies, have to their great Honour, pay'd their Debts, and rais'd their Funds. And if you will pursue the legal Powers you stand Intrusted to see perform'd concern∣ing Freedoms: And each Freeman stands Sworn to observe.
And if you will not continue to grant Freedoms to Aliens, whereby His Majesty is defrauded of His Customes; your Rights are prejudic'd, your Leasses are Disabled from paying your Rents; and vast Numbers of your Fellow-Citizens and their Families are reduc'd to Beggary. You will then make one further good step towards relieving the Orphans. III. The Duties of the Water-Baylage which were in Lease to Mrs. Carpenter, are by the Consent of the Kings Vice-Chamberlain, (in whom the true Interest of that Lease is) capable of being Improv'd considerably: So are the Lands which were granted to you under the Royal Contracts, for Disposal whereof, Mr. Brand∣rith and others were Commissionated by you. IV. The Kings-Beam, by reason of your not duely Managing the same; is so far from bringing any Moneys into your Chamber, that it occasions taking Moneys from other Branches of your Revenue. The Courts of Conservacy of the Rivers, by reason of the Neglects and Abuses committed by your Officers; have not only been to the Scandalous Destruction of Fish, but instead of bringing any Moneys into your Chamber, (as it was once order'd) have by keeping them, semetimes cost your Chamber near 1000 l. per Annum, and seldom under 300 l. per Annum. And the Antient Duties for Barges passing from Gravesend, &c. have not been so much as ask'd for. The Green-Wax-Duties are so far from being Collected for the good ends for which they were Granted to your City, that the Justice of His Majesties Govern∣ment, the Welfare of the Subject, and the Honour of the City; exceedingly suffer by the undue Prosecution of them: And so far are they from bringing in 300 l. per Annum (which hath been offer'd for them) that they are a Burthen to your Chamber. The Chamber Receives no Penny Profit by Penalties Incurr'd for Transgressing the Antient and Establish'd Laws of your City; which are, or ought to be Pre∣sented in your several Sessions, or in the several Ward-Motes, or by your Officers. Nor by the Presentments of the Dissolved Monastery of Christ Church, commonly call'd Dukes-Place. Nor by those of the Mannor of Finsbury: And yet the Al∣lowances you give for looking after them, are a constant Burthen to your Chamber. If you please that due Amendment may be made in these Particulars; the Orphans will not only be Advantag'd by saving these Expensive Exhaustings, but by the great Improvements which may arise to them thereby also. V. The vast and numerous Charities which have been given to Pious and pub∣lick Uses; and which were conceiv'd to be happily committed to the Care and Comptrol of your Court; are not only sufficient to maintain and Answer the ne∣glected good Ends for which they were respectively given: But also by due Improve∣ment, to contribute towards the payment of the Moneys due from you to divers of the starving Orphans, who stand Related to their Religious Donors. And yet some about you, instead of doing their Duties therein, make a very ill Advantage of the late Alterations which have been among your Members; several of whom have been altogether Ignorant of the Transactions of your Court; and either Imbezil, or Connive at the undue Managing of those Sacred Revenues, and permit the other Moneys of your Chamber, which should buy the poor Orphans Bread; to be Squandred away, even at this present, under the Notion of publick Works, the which when finish'd, will neither bring in one Penny of Profit to the poor Orphans, or your Chamber. VI. If you please that the 1000 l. per Ann. which is allow'd for the single Mouth of one of your Domestick Officers, may go towards the Feeding of the Starving Orphans; while your Doggs are plentifully provided for out of their Estates. And that the Liveryes which are yearly given out of the Chamber, may go to∣wards covering their Nakedness. If the great Summes, which without any shaddow of Reason are yearly pay'd out of your Chamber, to Mrs— To your Market-Clarks, To your Fruit-Meters, To your Water Bailiffs; and others out of your Market-Rents.
If the Frauds and Surplusage of the Revenues of the Bridge-house, above the just and necessary Expences relating thereunto. If the Frauds and Surplusage of the Revenues of the several Hospitals under your Government; due regard being first had for the just support of them accord∣ing to their respective Institutions. If the great Dammage sustain'd by your Chamber by Non-performance of the Covenants of the Purchasers from you of what was granted you under the said Royal Contracts be justly answered to you: And the Concealments and Frauds relating thereunto, be Prosecuted and duly apply'd to the Relief of the Orphans. If Morefields, which cost your Chamber 20 l. per Annum to the Keepers, besides Repairs, were likewise duly Improv'd: And also the New Artillery-Ground which you Lett but at 6 s. 8 d. per annum and some years costs you above 100 l. besides. If the vast Expences your Chamber is at in Ley-stalls (which was never heard of before the Rebuilding of your City) besides the Fines for Purchasing: And the Fraudulent Managing of them were Retrench'd. If the Mannor of Finsbury,—the Conduit-Meads and Fields,—the Gates and City-houses— the several Incroachments and Wasts belonging to your City be Improv'd, and their Arrears brought in for the Benefit of the Orphans. If the several publick Waters, Grounds and Buildings relating to them were Im∣prov'd also: And the Charges of the publick Stairs, Docks, &c. belonging to your City (for the due maintaining whereof, Fifteens were Antiently Assess'd and rais'd upon the Inhabitants of the respective Wards) were not born out of the Moneys which your Chamber should pay the Orphans. If the Office of Out-Roper, which is justly granted to you, but hath been utterly neglected by you, were duly managed. If the Notorious and Scandalous Oppression of the poor by Tally-men, were Re∣dress'd by Establishing the Lombard-Office for accommodating those that desire to take up Moneys upon Pawns: And a Registery of Sales, and Pawns to Retailing Brokers were set up for discovering Felonies and Clandestine Thefts, according to the Powers which His Majesties Blessed Father gave you: And the Profits arising by them apply'd to the Orphans. If none of the late Fines for Aldermen and Sheriffs; appropriated by His Ma∣jesty for the Relief of the Orphans, be misapply'd. And the good Summes of Moneys which may at this present be had for Vacancies, were Expiatorily, and by way of Accommodation generously added thereunto. And if the Garniture of your Hall upon your late Entertaining His Majesty, be pay'd to your Officers out of your own Purses, for Re-imbursement of your Chamber. If the Box money of your Chamber: And of the several Ward-Motes. If the Trophy-money: And the vast Summes which have been receiv'd for Tolls and Duties, were duly accounted for: If the Profits arising by Wool, Leather, and Commodities according to yourt undoubted Rights were justly Improv'd and ap∣pleyed to the Orphans; they would have great reason to Bless God for you. Not to make further Instances, though many more are ready; and these are too many, if ridicul'd instead of being accepted. To conclude, If you shall please to accept of 2000 l. per Annum for the Support of the Chair: And 7000 l. per Annum for the Sheriffs, Salaries, and Accidental Charges. And vest all the Interest you have in all sorts of Profits under His Majesties Let∣ters Patents to you, upon the Honourable persons in the said first Proposal named, on the behalf of His Majesty and the said Orphans; and do what in you lyes to have the same Improv'd to the best Advantage of your City and the said Orphans. Mr. Reading proposeth. That Security above all Exception shall be given you for paying the said 9000 l. per Annum into your Chamber for the Uses aforesaid; and for Discharging the several Summes you owe to the said Orphans: And after∣wards to the rest of your Creditors upon Bond also. What the Consequences of suffering any one of your Orphans or Creditors to Perish for want of Bread, after this Address, must Inevitably be; Mr. Reading in humble Deference to your great Court, omits to mention.
The Principles your Lordship acts Piety, Charity and Justice upon, are Ver∣tuous and Noble. Your Lordship Cheerfully Improves the Happy, though short Opportunities of doing them, for the sakes of God and the King, who put them into your Hands. But since we are allow'd in the best of our Actions to have an Eye to Reward, your Lordship will most certainly find, that by a due Prosecuting of these Propo∣sals, and what attends them, (whereby (into the Bargain) the future Glory of your Chamber will like that of the New-Temple, exceed your former; Nay, the Banks of Amsterdam and Venice too.) The Orphans will Erect a Monument for you, Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis, shall ever Efface: And shall not only be Aere Perennius, but out last Malice it self, as well as all Sinister Opposition. Mr Reading's last Proposal on the Behalf of the Orphans, deliver'd to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, March 13. 1688 THe repeated Assurances you have in Court and severally given of your Zeal for Relieving the Orphans; commanded them, even against their Sense to believe you were in Earnest: And Encourag'd Mr. Reading to drudge on to con∣trive the Enabling you thereunto: And to Insert in the last publick Occurences, viz. Guild-hall March 1. The Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men, in Answer to Mr. Reading's Proposals (which terminated in an Offer to give them Security to pay 9000 l. per Annum into their Chamber for the Support of the Govern∣ment of their City, and out of the rest of their Revenues to pay the Orphans and Creditors upon Bond also,) did this day declare by Mr. Recorder, Nemine Contradicente, That they would give free liberty to Inspect whatever related to their Revenue; and Cheer∣fully do what lay in their Power towards that good work of paying the Orphans, which themselves so heartily desir'd: For which Mr. Reading and divers of the Orphans pre∣sent, return'd their humble Thanks to his Lordship and the whole Court— In the mean time, all Orphans, and persons concern'd for Orphans, are desired to repair forthwith to the house of Mr. Unwin Scrivner in Lombard-street London, in order to their Subscribing to the Proposals made by the said Mr. Reading for their Relief. The four Months for doing the same being almost Elapsed, otherwise they are not to expect the same Advantages as those are to have, who several Months since have subscribed thereunto. But the unkind usage which the profess'd Enemies of the Orphans procur'd that day to be made to them, and him, was of infinite Surprize. Instead of having your Answer in writing to his third Proposal, which your Lordship solemnly pro∣mised, and that it should be shewn the Orphans upon the Saturday following; the Order was the next Morning hudled up in the absence of Mr. Recorder, who had taken great pains in digesting the said Proposal) and refus'd to be shewn till it came out in the Gazette; and before the Orphans could see it, a Committee was privately held the Wednesday following, and Mr. Alderman Chamberlain, by un∣derstanding with Mr. Robert Murry, struck up a Bargain with him for the Profits of the Office of Out-Roper in Mr. Reading's Third Proposal mentioned, (and which Mr. Murry never before so much as Dreamt of) and was intended to have raised immediately for the Orphans, several Thousands of Pounds per An' And the next morning your Lordship confirmed it, and ordered a Lease to be made thereof to Mr. Thomas Puckle for 21 years, paying into the Chamber one Third part of the clear Profits thereof, for the first seven years, a Moiety for the second seven years, and two Third parts for the last seven years of the said Term; whereby they al∣ready brag of getting above 40000 l. and no manner of care is taken that the Poor Orphans shall receive one Penny by it. Nor is this all, the Order of the 1st. Instant which your Lordship published in he Gazette, being as followeth. (This Court, out of their deep sence of the deplora∣le Condition of the State of the Chamber of London, and the great Debt from hence due to Orphans and others, having formerly appointed a Committee to inspect
the same, and consider by what means any Branch of its Revenues may be improved, and then to make Report thereof unto this Court; The said Committee was now by this Court earnestly desired to proceed thereupon, with the utmost Diligence and Dispatch. And whereas there have been several Insinuations made, That the Estate and Revenue belonging to this City, is sufficient both to pay the said Orphans, and also defray the necessary Charge of the Cities Government. This Court did now firmly resolve and de∣clare, That all Improvements that can be made (over and above the Charge of the Go∣vernment,) shall be duly applied towards Payment and Relief of the said Orphans and others. And that if any of the said Orphans, or others, can make any discovery un∣to the said Committee, how any part of the said Revenues may improved, they shall be recompenced for the same, propotionable to such Discovery.) Is not only in con∣tradiction to that of the 17th. of January, but is in no sort an Answer to the said Third Proposal, or your Lordships Promise. The Orphans expected that upon the sense, and Condition, and Debt, and Consideration, and Inspecting in your Prin∣ted Order mentioned, your Lordship would peremptorily have ordered the In∣spection so long laboured for.— That the Quantum of the necessary Charge of the Government should have been therein inserted.— That you would firmly have resolved and declared, that you would for the Honour of your Court, and the sa∣tisfaction of the World, have at least experimented the offer, which though your Lordship terms but an Insinuation, you well know 'tis proposed to be made good by Security above all exception.— They expected you should have said that 9000 l. per An' had been exceedingly too much for the Orphans to allow to the Charge of that Government, by the Male-Administration whereof, so many Hundreds of them have been Ruin'd, and at present want Bread.— But they expected not, that by the recompence you promise, you would give a half part to a Discoverer, when but a Third is asked you.— Nor that you designed the Second part of the Cole-Du∣ty-Concealment, and give a prodigious Reward for Defrauding the Orphans. The Orphans however are not singly disappointed: Mr. Reading expected that after his having laboured day and night in this admirable Undertaking, and been at great Charge, and suffered great Damage thereby, and never received more than a 40 s. Fee, your Lordship and all about you, would at least have recom∣penced him with Thanks, and that the lean Encouragement which your first Order gave him, would not have been omitted in that of the Gazette. Yet in∣stead thereof, and in Ill performance of the kind professions your Lordship made him, some about the Chair, to gratifie your transport against him, because he Friendly advised your Lordship to give the Moneys for the late Vacancies among the perishing Orphans, by way of Expiation, have publickly told the Orphans, that Mr. Reading had deluded and inveigled them, that your Lordship had dis∣carded him, and threatnened, in case they Subscribed to his Proposals, they should never receive 6 d. And reproached, for his Sufferings in the late days, of Perjury and Persecution, and for his being unrewarded since. Would your Lordship and they have been so just as to have declared at the same time that Mr. Reading was offered great Sums, and Preferments to have shed Royal and Innocent Blood by Swearing falsely; and that he rather chose to be Ruin'd here, than to wrong his Conscience, and had your Lordship Published the follow∣ing Address of the House of Commons in the same Gazette, Mr. Reading who is a very ill Advocate for himself, would have silently submitted to his being disregarded for his Indefatigableness in the Service of the Crown, he valuing him∣self upon having done his Duty, and the Feast of a good Conscience, while others drink Muscadine and Orphans, and daily devour Widows and Houses at their se∣cond Courses. The Address was thus, 8 April, 1679. May it please Your MAJESTY, WE Your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parlia∣ment Assembled, having according to our Duty, made enquiry into the Dam∣nable and Hellish Plot against Your Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, and for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, have upon Examination, discovered that Nat. Reading Esq hath Industriously, and against the Duty of a Loyal Subject, held fre∣quent
Correspondences with several Lords and other Persons that stand Committed for High Treason. And also used his utmost Endeavours to prevent and suppress Your Majesty's Evidence: And as much as in him lay, to stifle the Discovery of the said Plot; and thereby to render the same fictitious and of no reallity. And by such undue means to prevent the Malefactors from coming to Justice. Therefore We Your said Commons, do most humbly beseech Your Majesty, that You will be graciously pleased to Command that a Commission of Oyer and Terminer do imediately issue forth for the Tryal of the said Nathaniel Reading, that so he may be brought to publick Justice. Mr. Reading Humbly Proposeth on the Behalf of the Orphans. 1st. That the Lease which you have ordered to be made for the Office of Out-Roper may not be Executed, the Orphans being ready to allow three full fourth parts during the whole Term for the same, which is muh more than Mr. Murry offers you. 2dly. That no new Lease be granted, but to the Orphans, they allowing the value for the same. And that all Vacancies of Places which you pretend to be in your Gift, may for the future be offer'd to the Orphans, they being duly quali∣fied, and allowing valuably for the same. 3dly. That the many Thousands of Pounds which you are laying out about Dowgate, Leystall and other matters equally inconsiderable, while your Chamberlain declares to the Orphans, he hath not 500 l. in Cash, may be apply'd to their Re∣lief— That your Lordship would afcertain the necessary Charges of the City Go∣vernment, and that you would joyn in Petitioning His Majesty, that He would Graciously please to Grant His Commission to the Persons undernamed, or such others as He shall approve of for the due managing of all Profits, any ways arising by His Letters Patents to your Tustees; and out of the same to pay such yearly Sum into your Chamber, as His Royal Wisdom shall direct: And that the remainder may be applied for the Payment of the said Orphans and Creditors. On the Behalf of His MAJETY. The Right Honourable The Lord Chancellor. The Earl of Sunderland. The Earl of Castlemain. Sir Nicholas Butler. Collonel James Porter. The King's Vice-Chamberl. and Robert Brent Esq On the Behalf of the CITY. Sir John Shorter. Sir Bartholomew Shore. Sir Humphry Edwin. Mr. Alderman Mawson. Mr. Alderm. St. Aumand. Sir John Parsons. On the Behalf of the ORPHANS Sir William Turner. Sir William Pritchard. Sir Peter Rich. Alderman Hern. Sir Thomas Vernon. Sir Henry Tulse. Sir William Russel. Alderman Duncombe. Mr. George Finch. Mr. Percival Gilborn. Mr. Thomas Farmyn. Mr. Francis Chamberlain. Mr. Peter Pickering. Mr. Ralph Box. Mr. Joseph Bowles. Mr. Robert Midgly. Mr. Deputy Carpenter. Mr. Joseph Smart. Mr. John Short. Mr. Thomas Langhorn. Mr. Michael Warring. Lastly, If your Lordship will well consider the Judgment against your Charter. And be content with the Governing part under His Majesty. And take from the Orphans that large Allowance fer it; and repay them what hath been pocketed contrary to Trust. Mr. Reading doubts not but so to improve His Majesty's Chari∣ty to the Orphans, that the greatest number of them may be pay'd within a very short time. Should not your Lordship oppose this Innocent Experiment, you would make this 88 happily remarkable, and avert that Desolation which otherwise must over∣whealm this Flourishing City, and which will not be in the power of the Ligislature to Repair. For the Crys of the Oppressed increase daily, they are gone up, and their Avenger is Mighty. Bene facere, Et male Audire, Regium est. NATHANIEL READING.
