C4087B 45504431 171736
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the DIOCESE of WINCHESTER, In the VISITATION of the Right Reverend Father in God GEORGE By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of WINCHESTER. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, 1668.
The Tenor of the Oath to be Administred to the Church-wardens, and Sidemen, of every Parish. YOU shall Swear diligently to enquire and to make a true answer unto every Article in this Book now given you in Charge, and to Present every Person that now is, or of late was, inhabiting within your Parish, that hath done any Offence, or omit∣ted any Duty, therein mentioned. And this you shall do, uprightly and truly, with∣out Favour or Malice, Hope of Reward, or fear of Displeasure, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of WINCHESTER. TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereunto belonging. I. IS your Parish-Church or Chappel, kept in good and sufficient repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slate? the Windows well Glaed, the Floors well Paved, the Seats well fastned, and conveniently placed; and all things so decently ordered, as becometh the house of God? II. HATH the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto been imbezelled, sold, or made away? In whose hands or custody doth the same, or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard herein.
III. IS there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, stand∣ing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church, for the Administration of Baptisme? And is there in your Chan∣cel, a decent Communion-Table, for the Administration of the Lords Supper, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen cloth, and another Covering of white and pure Linnen to sprend thereup∣on? And have you a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Co∣ver of Silver, and one or more Flagone o Silver, or Powter, there∣unto belonging? IV. HAVE you in your said Church or Chappel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the sums? A Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volume, and the Book of Common-Prayer late Published Anno 1662. both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Hominies, set forth by Au∣thority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? And a Printed Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohi∣bited? V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his Publick Ministration in the Church provibed, and to be duly washed at the Charge of the Parish? VI. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Re∣gister the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are Married, Christned, or Buried within your Parish? together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, expressing the day, month, and year, of all such Christnings, Mar∣riages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly, within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Re∣gistry. VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and Licensee of all such Strangers as are admit∣ted at any time to Preach in your Church or Chappel? As also, a third Book wherein to write down the Church-Wardens Ac∣compts: Together, with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementi∣oned Furniture in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hears-cloth, for the Burial of the Dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently senced with Walls, Railes, or Pales, and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattel? Hath any person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own ground or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing, been cut down? how long since? by whom? and to whose use and bene∣fit? II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the out-houses thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the said Houses, or Out-houses, been defaced or pulled down without Licence from the Ordinary? and by whom? Hath any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house? or cut up any Trees growing thereon? or changed, or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same? III. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also, a note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other yearly Profits (either within, or without your Parish) as belonging thereunto? Have any of the same been with-held from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have heard? IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent of the incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonaical compact? II. HATH he been legally Iuducted into his Benefice? III. Did he within two months after his Induction, publickly in the Church, upon some Sunday, or Holy-day, in the time of Di∣vine
Service, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there publickly declare his assent thereunto? IV. HATH he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he con∣stantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many weeks in any one year hath he been absent from it? V. HATH your Minister a Curate to assist him? and who is that Curate? Is he conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? And doth he serve in any other Church beside? and what yearly stipend doth your Minister allow him? VI. DOTH your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child-birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pro∣nouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer with∣out any addition, omission or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book, performing his Office in all things according to the Rubrick of the Book of Common-Prayer lately Published, so far as you have observ'd? VII. DOTH your Minister, at the Reading or Celebrating the Divine Offices in your Church or Chappel, wear the Sur∣plice? VIII. DOTH he observe the Holy-daies and Fasting-daies, as also the Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the Common-Prayer-book, or by the Ccclesiastical Ca∣nons is appointed? giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same, in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sun∣day next before? IX. HATH your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bi∣shop? If so, Doth he then constantly (unless in case of sickness, necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your Church or Chappel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed Preacher, or being so Licensed, be hindred by sickness or otherwise, as aforesaid; doth he procure a Sermon to be so Preached, or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority, to be there read by a Priest or Deacon, lawfully Ordained? X. DOTH your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Parish, in the Church-Catechism? and doth he prepare and present
them, being so instructed, to be Confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries, (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion establish∣ed in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof? XI. DOTH he refuse, or neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of Death? Is there any Child past Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he Baptize any without God-fathers and God-mothers, or admit ei∣ther of the Parents to be God-father, or God-mother to their own Children? XII. HATH he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preach∣ed any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, there∣by to seduce the people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the publick peace and unity, either of Church or State? XIII. HATH he presumed to Marry any persons in private hou∣ses? or such as, being under age, have not the consent of their Pa∣rents, or without the Banes first published on three Sundaies or Holy-daies in the Church? or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the Morning; unless he had a License or Dispensation so to do? XIV. DOTH any person Preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture, read Divine Service, according to the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. HATH your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts, Prophesyings, or Excercises not appoint∣ed by Authority? or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay∣person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private Houses with∣in your Parish for people of several Families to resort unto under the pretence of Preaching, Praying. Thanksgiving, or Humilia∣tion, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provined? XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of sober, unblameable, and exemplary Life? Doth he familiarly con∣verse with ungodly, vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns, or Ale-houses? a common Game∣ster? a Swearer, Rayler, or Quareller? Doth he se Neigh∣bours at variance one with another? or encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drin∣ker?
or vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any person, ei∣ther within your Parish, or without? Is his apparel grave and de∣cent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or Scanda∣lous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Iesus Christ? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretick or Schismatick? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary that refuse to come unto the publick assemblies, prayers, or services of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion then what is established in the Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names? II. IS there any person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame, or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common drunkards within your Parish, or common swearers, or blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be railers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction, and discord amongst their neighbours? III. DO any of your Parish upon the Sundaies or Holy-dayes, follow their bodily and ordinary labour? or permit their servants so to do? are any shops kept open, or wares sold? IV. DOTH every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish, duly resort unto your Church or Chappel, upon every Sun∣day and Holy-day appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common-Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God there used? and are there any among you that come only to the Preaching, and not to the Common-Prayers of the Church? V. DOTH every person reverently uncover his head, and so con∣tinue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Iesus is mentioned? VI. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant Children to be Baptized publickly in the Church, unless in
case of urgent danger; in which case, the child may be baptized at home, by a lawful Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them from their own Minister to be baptized, in any other Parishes, or after any other form than is ap∣pointed? Or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time than the Church alloweth? And are there any Infants or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? VII. DOTH every Housholder in your Parish cause their children and servants to come to Church and learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall re∣quire it of them, openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holy-days, as in the Book of Common-Prayer is appointed: that when they are well Instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bi∣shop? VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, who being 16 years of age, doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Doth any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling? or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers not of your Pa∣rish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? IX. HAVE you any among you, that be denounced and declared excommunicate for any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved? X. ARE there any living in your Parish, as Man and Wife, who are within Degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? XI. ARE there any married Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from the peril of Child-birth, refuse to make their publick thanksgiving to God in the Church? and when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and make their offerings according to custom? XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to py their duty for Easter offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, and pay the rate assessed upon them, for the repair of your Church or Chappel, and for the providing of such books, furni∣ture and ornaments, as be requisite for the performance of all Di∣vine offices there?
XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? And are there any Wills or Testaments, of persons dead in your Parish, that be yet unproved? Or any goods administred, without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dy∣ing in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel? What were those Legacies? XIV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews béen erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons. I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry, a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 years at the least? Is be of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? and doth he only attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto him? or who with-holdeth the same from him? II. DOTH he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at due time? And doth he keep your Church or Chappel clean from dust, cobwebs, and other annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before the begin∣ning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is pas∣sing out of this life, doth he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell as hath been accustomed, that the Neighbours may thereby be war∣ned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God?
TIT. VI Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-Masters, Physitians, Chi∣rurgeons, and Midwives. I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free-School not of the King's foundation, or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the year∣ly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors, or Masters, of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, accor∣ding to the intention of the Founder, and of such Grants and Ordi∣nances as have been made concerning the same? II. DOTH any man keep a publick or private School in your Parish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Doth your Schoool-master teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authority? Doth he cause them, upon Sundays and Holy-days, orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel, and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine Servics and Sermon? III. DOTH any man in your Parish, practise Physick, or Chirur∣gery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Mid∣wife, without approbation and license from the Ordinary. TIT. VII. Queries to be put to the Ministers. I. ARE the Church-Wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joynt cousent of the Minister and Parishio∣ners; or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Pa∣rishioners? II. HAVE the former and last Church-Wardens given up their due Accompts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-Wardens the Moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. DO the Church-Wardens and Side-men take diligent care, and see who of your Parishioners be absent from the Divine Ser∣vice and Sermon in your Church or Chappel, upon Sundays and Holy-days? And if they find any to have absented themselves with∣out a sufficient cause, do they by Warrant from some of the Iustices of Peace, levie of them, by way of distress upon their goods, the sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act
of Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the se∣veral sums so levied, among the poor of your Parish, according to the Law? IV. DO they present those that come late to Church after Di∣vine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk to Jether in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church, or Church-yard, during the time of Prayers, Prea∣ching, or other Sacred Offices? V. DO they suffer no misbehaviour or disorder to be done by men women, or servants, or children, in your Church or Chappel? Are they careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion-Table? Do they permit no Minstrels, no Morris, dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. DO they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, & of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants? VII. DO they cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chappel, to subscribe their names the same day in a Book pro∣vided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocess? and do they permit no other to preach? VIII. HAVE they (the Church-wardens and Side-men) now sworn to give in a true answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your faithful assist∣ance? FOR know you assuredly, That as true discharging of your Office is the chief means whereby publick Disorders, Sins, and Offences in your Parish may be reformed and punished: So, if you wilfully refuse to present such c imes and faults as either you know to have been commit∣ted, or otherwise have heard of by publick fame; That in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and Perjury. GEO. WINTON. THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the younger sort, in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive Confirmation from the Bishop, and to prefent them to be confirmed; especially such as having competently learned that Catechism, have not yet received the Holy Communion.
