C7058 E441_16 99864351 161674
THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL CONCERNING His present Design and Engagement against Col. Poyer and his Adherents in South wales, and his Resolution and Protestation thereupon. Delivered at the head of each Regiment upon Munday last▪ being the 8. of this instant May, at a Randezvouz neer the City of Glouceer. And the Souldiers Resolution touching the Lieutenant Generall, and Collonel Poyer. Also, very sad Newes from the Isle of VVight, concerning the Kings Majesty. May 9. 1648. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbott. London, Printed for G. Wharton, 1648.
A DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL Delivered At the Head of each Regiment upon Munday last being the 8. of this instant May, at a Randezvouz neere the City of Gloucester. Honoured Sir, YOur last, dated the 5. of May I received; for which I return you thanks, and according to my former obligements, to your vouchsafed clemency and goodness I can do no lesse, then to impart my self at this present, and present to your view these ensuing lines, viz. Sir, Upon Satterday last we received intelligence,
that Lieut. Gen. Cromwel was vpon his march with a considerable party of horse and foot, and that he inten∣ded to have a generall Randezvouz neer this city vp∣on Munday and so to advance with all expedition to∣ward South-Wales, against Poyer and his confede∣rates, which report was soon made apparent; for vpon Munday morning about 9. of the clock in the fore noon, we discovered the Horse, and immediatly the Foot marched after them, who had a randezvouz within 2. miles of this city, and continued in the field till about two of the clock in the afternoon; but in the intrim, se∣verall passages worthy your observation, passed a∣mongst them; for as each Regiment marched vp to the place appointed, they demean'd themselvs so civilly & cam vp in such an excellent posture of Discipline, that it was admired; for as each Regiment came into the field they drew up into severall distinct bodies, and so soon as the Rear was come up, and each Regiment pla∣ced in order, Lieut. Gen. Cromwel rode to the head of each, making a short speech touching their present De∣sign and Engagement, which done, he further declared, that he had often times ventured his life with them, & they with him, against the common Enemy of this king∣dome, and a farre more potent power and strength then now they are to ingage withall; and therefore desired them to arm themselves with the same resolution as formerly, and to go on with the same courage, faithful∣nesse,
& fidelity, as sundry times they had done, and vp∣on severall desperate attempts and engagements & that for his part, he protested to live and dy with them: the Lieut. Gen had no sooner declared himselfe, but they all threw up their caps, giving a great shout and hallow, cry∣ing out with one unanimous consent, that they would ventrr their lives and fortunes under his conduct and command, against any enemy either dome∣stique or forraign. After the Lieut. Gen. had taken a view of each Regiment, hee gave Orders to march and accordingly about 3 of the clock they advanced: their number doth consist of about 6500. Horse and Foot, ex∣ceeding well armed, and brave resolute men. We doubt not but to hear of their happy suc∣cesse very suddenly, for it is very probable, there will be speedy action. Divers of our Glosterians listed themselves at the Randezvouz, under the command of the Lieu. Generall, and there marched about 100. Volun∣tiers with him from this City, with blew Rib∣bands in their hats, which is all for rhe present; from Your oblieged friend and servant, John Hancock. Gloucester the 8. of May, 1648.
SIR, Upon the close of this Letter, here arri∣ved a Messenger from Swansey, who certified, that col Powel is retreated from thence with all his Forces, but upon what grounds we cannot learn, unlesse it be occasioned by the advance of L. Gen. Cromwell that way, who now is upon his march. Col. Horton is said to be about 3000. and hath had severall skirmishes with the enemy, but will not engage▪ till the additional Forces come up. Vale, vale. Letters from the North. SIR, Sir Arthur Haslerig is very diligent in fortify∣ing of Newcastle. Some Gentlemen of these parts are gone up to London, to acquaint the Parliament with the affairs and conduction of these Northern Counties, and we hear the Parl. are about to asso∣ciate these Counties again, and to put 10000. men more into a posture of defence against the Cava∣leer party, which are entred Berwicke, and begin to overspread the Country. By the next, I pray, let us hear what news at London, for which you shall command Your affectionate friend, S. J.
Some English are already come to Barwick, their Leader is Sir Marmaduke Langdale, a great Malignant; but former∣ly a Justice of Peace in this County; they intend to forti∣fie the town, that if they are put to the way, they may with the more conveniency run into Scotland: the coming of these Forces to Barwicke, is almost like to overjoy the malignants in these parts; so that they begin to sandalize the parliament, and use their endeavours to insence the coun∣try both against the parliament and army; but the Forces appointed to secure the North may do much good, then the malignants wil be glad to pull in their hornes again, and may be made to repeat their monstrous slanders. A Committee hath already met to consider of the affairs of this and the Northern Counties, they have likewise ap∣pointed a day and place of meeting; upon which time they will consult about the condition of the North, and of put∣ting those parts into a posture of defence: this is all for the present I can acquaint you with, only one thing I shal fur∣ther make mention of, that the Northerne Counties ingene∣ral have joyntly declared, that they will rise as one man a∣gainst the Scottish Army, and that they wil use their utmost endeavours for the preservation and defence of those partes, against all opposition whatsoever. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, sir Charles Lucas, and sir Tho. Tilsley, with divers other Royalists do increase, their num∣ber is said to be about 600. Horse, they have lately posses∣sed themselves of the Town and Castle of Carlisle, and are now very active in fortifying and strengthning of the said place. Divers of the Gentry in these parts resort vnto them, e∣specially those who have formerly engaged for the King, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale erects new Officers, and gives them Commissions in Prince Charles his name. We heare that Sir Philip Musgrave is with a party of 500. Horse between Carlisle and Appleby, and that he hath a design for surprizing of the said castle. Richmond 6. of May, 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from the Isle of Wight, touching the state and condition of the Kings Majesty. SIR, SInce my last, bearing date the 3. of May, here hath beene a great alteration in these parts, and the Inhabitants are much perplexed, occasioned by the great distractions both in the West and North of England; but that which doth the most trouble Us, is, the great melancholiness which hath now posses'd his Majesty; for indeed, he is not half so mer∣ry as formerly, and takes little delight in walking abroad, but gives his mind to much study and reading. He discour∣ses very little, unlesse it be now and than with Sir Oliver Cromwell, which is all for the present, from Your assured friend to serve you, F. W. Imprimatur G. M. Newport 8. of May 1648. FINIS.
