D1346 E122_7 99872768 125214
A DIALOGVE BETVVIXT A COƲRTIER AND A SCHOLLER: Wherein severall Passages of State are briefly discuste for the further satisfaction of the Common People.Octob: 13. 1642 Courtier. SIR, YOu are well overtaken, your habit renders you to be a Scholler, and (for the present) a traveller likewise; I suppose you have been at London, and elsewhere, to visit friends, as well as I that am an honest Cour∣tier. Scholler. Sir, I am a meane Scholler, and as you conjectured, have been in London, and other parts of the Kingdome, to see some old acquain∣tance, which now I did the rather, least my purpose should have been prevented by the great concourse of Cavaliers that doe daily in∣crease in all parts, which is a meanes of begetting and increasing jea∣lousies and feares in the hearts of travellers. Court. What say people in those parts where you have been, con∣cerning the differences betwixt the King and Parliament? Schol. Truely Sir, they tell me that they are amazed about those differences, in regard both King and Parliament, doe solemnly pro∣fesse in their Declarations, &c. that they doe chiefely and solely in∣tend the good both of Church and Common-wealth, and yet not∣withstanding, have now at last after the losse of much time, and ex∣pence
of a vast summe of the publique treasure, argued themselves into a civill combustion; and ingaged the Kingdome in an unnturall and bloudy warre. Court. I pray thee Scholler tell me, since both pretend to make the common good the end that all their undertakings drive at, and yet goe two wayes, directly contrary to effect t, whether of the two is best beleeved by the Vulgar? Schol. Sir, they tell us in the generall, that they never heard of any Parliament, being rightly chosen and assembled, that did ever pre∣judice the Common-wealth, and therefore they dare not entertaine dishonourable thoughts of this, especially since the experience they have had of some, and the information they have had of others of these Worthies, hath rendered them faithfull to their Countrey, in∣somuch, that what ever pretences may be made by the one partie or the other, yet they are resolved to follow our Saviours rule, in judg∣ing of the Tree by its fruit. Now Sir, I must needs tell you, they ha∣ving lately seene our stately Cedar invironed with the fluttering Ivie of Prelacie, Popery, and Delinquencie, it makes them jealous; for they sticke not to demand, why a King of England (being seduced by evill Counsell) may not say, he hath done, and will doe that, which he neither hath done, nor intends to doe, as well as a King of Israel, whom God had appointed to be annointed over the people, boasted that he had done that, which afterwards he confest he had not done. Court. Hath not the King of late both fully and frequently decla∣red himselfe, that he will maintaine the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Land, the Liberies of the Subject, and the Priviledges of Parliaments. I hope he is beleeved, and none make question of the reall performance of what he hath promised? Schol. Beleeve it Sir, the people distinguish betwixt those promi∣ses that are made by a King seduced by evill Counsell, and those that are made by him when such Counsellours are removed from him your selfe will say, I suppose, that, that man is very unlikely to per∣forme his promise, that puts himselfe into such a condition wherein he will be necessitated to breake it; His Majestie hath heretofore decla∣red, that he will maintaine the Protestant Religion, and yet by reason of the negligence (wilfull negligence its to be feared) of those Coun∣sellours about his Majestie, we have seene that Popery hath been tole∣rated, Masses frequented, Popish Priests and Jesuites favoured; and
if at any time they have been questioned by some, and brought upon the stage of Justice, authoritie hath fetcht them off againe, as not suf∣fering a haire of their heads to perish; whilst in the meane time, many of the faithfull Ministers of Christ, faithfull to their flocks, have been suspended, imprisoned, and unnaturally used, and Popish idle drones and such like, advanced and promoted: Sir, the people mutter at these things. Court. Its strange that the people should have no more confidence in his Majesties personall promises and protestations, then to draw up such conclusions as these are, and that about Religion too, which is of such everlasting concernment to us all. Prethee what cause have they to thinke, that the Lawes of the Land, and the Liberties of the Sub∣jects should miscarry, notwithstanding the Kings solemne assurances, that he will innovate nothing? Schol. The small satisfaction that people receive, notwithstanding these reitterated protestations, fetches its rice from this ground; They say, that those Councellours which heretofore have so often flattered his Majestic into errour, they remaining still neere unto his person, and their whisperings having a chiefe influence into his proceedings, may prove fatall both to himselfe, and his good people, and in a short time wooe his Majesties resolutions out of his sacred breast, and di∣vert his good intentions that he had towards his people. Sir, they have had large experience of the accursed fruits of these counsells, the mul∣titude of Monopoles, the exaction of Loane-money, Ship-money, Goate and Conduct-money doc sufficiently witnesse this: Besides their endeavours to advance the Prerogative beyond its due limits, and their suppressing of the Subjects Liberties, their attempts to para∣lell the Government of this Kingdome with that of France, and this (as some conceive) hath usher'd in this intestine broyle, that so in case his Majestie conquer, our old and new Lawes may be destroyed, and he reigne over us as a conquer'd people by his will. And now of late their drawing of his Majestie from the Parliament, which hath been an unspeakable impediment to their proceedings; the manifest retarding of supplyes for Ireland, if not countenancing of the rebelli∣on there; the late executing of the Commission of Array, the inlet of beggery and slavery; their plundering, and firering of the houses of his Majesties Subjects, their slaying of their persons, and exercising of most barbarous and inhumane cruelties, and all because people will not renounce their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties, and all that can be
called theirs. Sir, these notorious acts of injustice are not the Kings' but his Ministers, who then can expect that these unnatural Vines should ever bring forth good grapes, or that a Prince looking through the false glasse of their counsels, should possibly discerne, or be ina∣bled to judge what may be good for his people. Court. I but Scholler, thou knowst the King hath done much in the pursuance of his promise made to maintaine the Protestant Religion by two late Proclamations, the one for disarming of Papists, and the other for prohibiting any to be of his Army, unlesse they should first take the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleageance? Schol. But Sir, what satisfaction can this give the people, since it is notoriously knowne, that many Papists are ingaged in this service, and some too necre His Majesties person, and that in many places they have had their Armes restored, and been themselves incouraged: pray Sir, who is it that rejoyces more in the divisions and distracti∣ons of this Kingdome then they? Assure your selfe, their continuall countenancing, supplying and assisting of his Majesties Forces, ren∣ders them to stand a tip-toe, expecting a bootie in the issue if that partie prevaile. Besides Sir, we know the shifts of many of them for the present, their good service here hath merited dispensations from the Pope, that will tolerate them to goe to our Church, and receive the Sacrament, and to take the aforementioned Oaths, and any thing else, so they can but destroy the Protestants. Court. Well, letting those things passe, thou knowst Sholler, that of late the King hath sent to the Parliament Propositions of Pacifi∣cation, that some might meete on both sides, to avoyd the shedding of bloud, and the Parliament refuses to appoint any; what thinkst thou now, at whose hands shall all that bloud be required that already hath been and is like to be spilt? Sc. The Parliament hath sufficiently answered the grounds of that denial; Sir the intent of those Propositions may be guest at by that pre∣cedent Declaration, which at one clap rendred the whole Parliament an assembly of Traytors, and in that respect not capable to treat, and yet this must usher in Propositions of a Treatie; Sir the Parliament desires that justice may be done for Justice sake, without leaning to the right hand or to the left: besides Sir, where to find fit parties to treat betwixt the King and his Parliament I know not; but this I am sure of, that if it would please his Majestie to concurre with his great
and best Councell, that treatie would soon be ended; believe it Sir, the strongest Bulwarks his Majestie can make to secure his royall Person, Crown and Dignitie, must have their foundations laid in the affections of his Parliament and liege people, and not in the tottering pollicies of some Malignant and Delinquent Counsellours, backt by the undi∣stinguishing vulgar. Court. Prethee Scholler what wouldst thou have the King to do? what doest thou conceive would give thy self and other his good peo∣ple (as thou callst them) satisfaction? Schol. Truly Sir, I am confidently assured, that if his Majestie would be pleased to return to his Parliament, and to concurre with their Counsels, they would make him the happiest Prince this day in Christendome; and this I doubt not would give satisfaction to himself, and his Subjects also. Court. Doest thou think this would bury all acts of injustice (occa∣sioned by his evill Counsell) in oblivion, and exalt him in the affecti∣ons of his Subjects: so, that upon all lawfull occasions he may com∣mand their hearts, persons, and estates? Schol. For my part sir, I am confident it would, especially when some few scruples are removed, as the pretended passage of those let∣ters twixt his Majestie and the Pope; and further to vindicate his in∣nocencie from those unhappie acts wherein those wicked Counsellors had most dishonourably ingaged him (by setting the sadle upon the right horse) as the publishing of the book that gave libertie to the ex∣ercising of sports and pastimes upon the Lords Day, the authorizing of the late popish prejudiciall Canons, the delaying to send forth Pro∣clamations about the Irish Rebellion, the Commissions or other au∣thority that the Rebels pretend to have from his Majestie, the staying of the Lord Deputie of Ireland; and the stopping of provisions sent by the Parliament for the reliefe of the Protestants there. Sir, would his Majestie be pleased to clear himself of these and such like things, which have bred jealousies in the hearts of his Subjects it would be a means to gain infinitely upon the affections of his people, and to adde a glorious lustre to his undertakings, which will the more facillie be effected when it shall once please his Majestie to conclude his interest to be, to unite, and not to divide his Subjects, by which meanes he may lay a stable foundation of peace to himself, his posteritie, and his people. Would he say to his great Councell as David did to his Coun∣sellours, What seemeth you best that will I do:2 Sam 18.4 then no doubt but that all
his Majesties sayings and doings would be so acceptable to his people, that it should be said of him as it was of David, That whatsoever the King did pleased all the people. 2 Sam. 3.36. Court. Thou speakst honestly, hast thou any thing more to adde? Schol. Yes sir, a word concerning your self, and that is about Da∣vids resolution laid down in the 101. Psalme, where he speaks of a Court-reformation, Sir I am of opinion, that if it would please his Majestie to cashiere such Courtiers as David there resolved to cast out of his presence, there would be but a few left with our King, and then what would become of you and many of my Coat I know not. Court. Well no more of that, but now thou speakst of Scripture, prethee tell me, Parson, what wouldst thou make the subject of thy discourse if thou were to preach before the King? Schol. I would make choice of that portion of Scripture in the 1. King. 12.7, 8. hence I would urge the excellencie of that advice which was given by the Counsellors of Solomon to Rehoboam, laid down in the 7. verse, viz. And they said, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever. Then having demonstrated the worth of that advice in sundrie respects, I would proceed to the following verse, and therein would shew the sad and dangerous con∣sequence of Rehoboam: disserting of the counsell of the old man, and adhering to, and confiding in the destructive advice of the young men, which was to speak roughly to the people, and to make their yoke heavier, by adding to their former oppressions; and thus I would spend the whole houre in explicating this Scripture, for I beleeve the weakest of my auditory would be able to apply it. Court. Beleeve it, Parson, the Courtiers would judge thee to be a Schismaticall factious fellow. Schol. I care not for that, if ever there were a time for Gods Mini∣sters to cry aloud, and to tell the people of their sins; I am sure sir a Kingdom divided in it self cannot stand. Court. I have but a word or two more to speak, and then I'le leave thee; Prethee tell me truly what in thy judgement thou conceiv'st to be the cause, that may of those great Statesmen and Counsellours now with the King are so averse to the Parliament? For I do ingeni∣ously confesse, that I am convinc'd in this, that how ever they pre∣rend to retain honourable thoughts of Parliaments, yet their actions
carry in them a bitter malignitie to Parliaments. Schol. Sir, many of the Counsellors of State (his Majesties unhap∣pie Favourites and flatterers) whose consultations and actions ought principally to have respected the common-good, they have most un∣naturally betrayed (as much as in them lies) the liberties of the subject, and most notoriously abused the trust reposed in them, by which meanes they have rendred themselves friends and favourers of in∣justice and tyrannie, which makes them now afraid to look their spotted faces in the true glasse of a Parliament; shunning the remedy that thereby they might increase the disease: And certainly sir, their treacherous dealings are now boyld up to such a height, that rather then acknowledge any unlawfull act, they will strive for an unlawfull power to give it countenance. Court. I am well satisfied upon thy answer. Yet I think this might have been added, for their envie and malice seems partly to spring from this: They tell us that lived peaceably and quictly before such time as this and the last Parliament were called; but now questi∣ons are raised, and differences fomented, and the peace of the King∣dome disturbed, &c. Schol. Truly sir, it was a miserable peace that they and others like∣wise injoyed, being it was built upon the ruines of Law and Libertie; and I beleeve that there are few so besotted but they can tell you of tho great inrode that these men had made upon the Liberties of the sub∣ject; their perverting of the Laws of the Land, and their tyrannizing over mens consciences, did crie out most vehemently for reformation, which could onely be hopte for in a Parliament: And I am perswaded sir, that had not this Parliament been called, and continued as it hath been, we had been most of us long since either dead men, or living slaves. Sir, this happie constitution of Parliaments is so essentiall to the well being of this Kingdom, that neither the just Prerogative of the King, nor the rightfull priviledges of the Subjects, could be main∣tained without it. It was a wittie similie of his, that said the Prero∣gative was like unto a Stag, and the Liberties of the Subject unto a Corn-field, and the Parliament like unto the Park pale that keeps the Stag out of the Corn. Now sir, I suppose you would account it folly and madnesse in him that should condescend to have the pale puld up, and take the Stags word that he will not come into the corn. Court. I give thee hearty thanks for thy good company; yet this I'le tell thee before I leave thee, that though thou hast perswaded me,
yet I will not be perswaded: and though thou hast convinc'd me, yet I will not be convinced, for I am a Courtier. Schol. Sir take this with you, such hath been the corruption of Courtiers, and some State-Counsellors, that it hath begot a universall diffidence in the people; Insomuch that all the honest and true-heart∣ed Commons in England do now seem joyntly to look both for their safetie, their well being, yea and being it self, from the Parliament. And so adieu Courtier. FINIS.
