D1571 E330_26 99861394 113527
THE DISCOURSE AND SAD COMPLAINTS BETWIXT The FRENCH-MAN and the IRISH-MAN: EVIDENTLY Declaring, that the KING was the onely cause of the progresse and continuation of the warres in Ireland, to be brought over into England; And that the Queen was the onely occasion of the Recruits and Monies which have been levied, to be transpoted over from France. With a true Narration of the sad successe that hath followed His Majesties Armies and doth still keep them company; not onely in the West, but in divers other pl∣ces, and the great possibility wherein the Parliaments Forces are of putting a speedy period to these long and unnaturall Wars. VVith a full Account of the svrall remarkable Victories which it hath pleased God of  divers places to confer on the Army of the Parliament. Aprill  L, Prited by nard Alsop, 1646.
A Discourse betwixt the Frenchman and an Irish-man. French. STand! and give the word! Irish. 'Tis life. French. Villain thou liest; 'tis death. Irish. Then life for life or death for both: Take to thy arms; give me the lye: Ile drive that lye through thy heart; of what Nation art thou? speak. French. A French-man and Ensigne to the Regiment of Colonell Ianuats. Irish. The same Regiment that plundered all about Lanceston that lived onely upon Rapine and Ruine whose Religion was prophane∣nesse, whose life intemperance and whose end damnation, whose ho∣nest recreation was Sodomy and the ravishing of wives, and maides: It was your common Exercise, to force the women from their hus∣bands Arms and before their faces to ravish them to death; neither could you be satisfied in this your villany, until unto your Lust you added Murder: Is not this true? French. Yes, the murder of their husbands, and that was mercy; for what a grief of heart would it be to them, to remember what was done and with a tame patience to look on us that did it; have you done? Irish. The same French you are whose sear'd consciences will ad∣mit of any impiety, and entertaine it with delight and greedinesse, whose dicourse is altogether oaths and lyes; oaths as high as Hea∣ven, and lyes as deep as Hell who after you have sworn a prayer for the King, at the next word with a curse will damn your selves into Hell and like a Legion of Divels and not a Regiment of Men, turn
all te houses you come to into Stowes, and the Churches into Sta∣bles? French. Have you done yet? Irish. The same French you are one of whose Officers being quar∣tered lately at a Widowes house in Torrington had all the Dainties provided for him that the countrey could afford; but this bold and unruly Mounsier would not be satisfied, but so tormented the mise∣rable poor woman that she was altogether weary of her life and ha∣ving endeavoured to the utmost of her power to content him in all things she came one day unto him, beseeching him to be more pati∣ent & assuring him that any viands that could be had for mony shold be prepared for him: The French-man fuming and swearing in great choller did fling away: she came unto him again with a chid in her arms, and with tears in her eyes, and with much importunity desired to know what his pleasure was promising him that if it lay within the compasse of her ability, and complyed either with reason or with honesty that he should have it. The inhumane Monster com∣manded her to rost her child, and said that it was onely that that would please him for his supper. The miserable mother amazed at the horror of the injunction did fall down dead at his foot, and could ne∣ver again be awakened or recovered unto life. French. Tis like enough; it shews how true a Cannibal is warre where one devours another: but say, of what country art thou? Irsh. Ask my sword; see how the Crimson-die dwels on the blade, I am a naturall Irish. French. Naturall: unnaturall Irish; the shame of Heaven, the scourge and plague of Nature: Twas you that first let war and fury loose, where at the foot of peace they sate on arms, on cruell armes, their hands bound behind them fast with a thousand brazen chaines, and roaring forth with bloudy mouths destruction: 'Twas you who as inhumane as you are blind make no distinction at all betwixt things sacred and prophane; but as if you would fight with Heaven as well as Man, with most impious hands have broke open the Tem∣ples of God and tore to pieces the Records of his sacred Truth, have flung them in the charnels and scared them before the wind who have heard your blasphemies, and carryed the sound thereof into every corner of the world. Irish. It was a zeale that did become us; for which our
Priests have praised us, & the Pope hath sent us many ben . French. Twas you that spared neither Sex nor person, the old, the infants and the middle aged must all dy together. Irish. An act of Iustice on the Heretikes. French. The woman great with child you have ript up nd thrown their off-springs in the fire before their faces. There is not such ano∣ther Legend to be read in Hell, as what you have acted. Irish. Yours is much like it. French. It is: And since we are so near of kin in sin, we will a∣gree in affection; put up your sword, and give me your hand: For Ʋice in friendship shall with Ʋice do dwell. And Divels amongst them∣selves agree in Hell: What Spell brought you hither? Irish. The desire of Honour, and the hope of Gain, that which courts all the world pleasure: you may adde to this the conscience of my Allegeance, and the ambition which I nourish'd to stand high and faire at Court in the eye of Majesty. French. How can that be and you so strong a Catholick: the King hath often made imprecation upon imprecations, that God to deal with Him and His Posterity, if He will not maintaine the Protestant Religion, how can He countenance and imploy us Catholicks, yet swear to his last to defend the Religion of Geneva. Irish. Friend you are not so ignorant, but you know that te is no conscience to be made in keeping oaths with Hereticks; especi∣ally for the promotion of the Church of Rome, and how easily par∣dons are not only granted, but promotions gained from his Holinesse for such who in this nature shall adventure to advance the Catholick Faith is most apparent; And this hath not only bin practised by Kings and Prelates, and divers others of all Degrees, but the Pope himselfe hath given an Example for it: For the Pope who hath taken his oath for the advancement of the Church of Rome hath given a speciall prohibition to the Catholicks in England not to take the Oath of Allegeance: And yet on the beginning of the Parliament it being found that this Oath would conduce much to the good of the Catho∣licks in England the Pope himself dispenced with his former Orders and with his Bulls that were sent  to give  right unto thm, And the English Res were all permit  take the Oath of Allegeance; which the storm being gone, would again be forbidden to them: so that Religion of Rome, and the ing looketh onely up∣on
expediency, and depends more upon policy then conscience. A King (as I have heard) was the Author of this Verse: Religion is the Righ of Kings. And they know best what good it brings. At the peace of Sens in France, King H. 3. made an Oath with the Protestants, and alowed them in some places the free exercise of their Religion; but this being but a meer Art of State to draw from them his brother Duke of Alenson, the Oath immediatly after was broken, And this was done by the counsell of no lesse then three Bishops, the B. of Lyons, the B. of Valenciennes, and the B. of Ambrum, and they received this counsell from the Sea and Bishop of Rome, who at this time was a favourer to this Prince, and afterwards a great Agent in the murder of him, and an applauder of it. So that we see in these mi∣steries of State-affairs, that Popes and Kings do no more regard an Oath then we souldier do. And this is one reason why we of the Irish Nation have bin induced to side with his Majesty, and although we are Catholicks, to adhere to him who is a Protestant; For should we have prevailed against the Parliament, it were no difficult matter to bring the Religion of Rome into England the King being so much obliged to us for our assistance, and in acknowledgment of it having given us in Ireland the free exercise of our Religion so that so much favour being shew'd to us, who would not fight for such a Kin, we being induced thereunto by a Nuntio from Rome, and that whosoe∣ver shall lose his life in this service shall be sure to go to Heaven and be numbred in the Catalogue of the Saints. We aso hear that the Popes Holinesse doth call the King of England his beloved Son, and doth always give him his Apostolicall Benediction. But alas! to the great grief of our Nation and my self I speak it, the Parliaments Ar∣my do prevail; all our hopes are frustrate; our Saints grown deafe; and our fears grown strong: we see the Enemy before us, the Sea be∣hind us and on each side Destruction with out-stretched armes rea∣dy to receive us the vengeance aswell as the horror of our gult doth pursue us; and despair from below doth hallow to us, to descend into that Lake. French. The same great Argument which imbark'd you in this bloody and unfortunate service, did at the first encourage me: The King perswaded you; and the Queen perswaded us: The King pre∣vailed in Ireland, and the Queen in France; And her Agents told us
that it was a religious and loyall War: religious for the honour of God, and loyall for the safety of the Crown, I remember our Priests and Iesuits would preach unto us, that the late warre with Scotland was Bellum Episcopale; but this war against the Parliament was Bel∣lum Papale; wherein if the Forces of the Parliament should prevail the ruine of the Roman Religion would ensue; for what likelihood was there, but that those who were so violent against the seats of Bi∣shops, would be more eager against the Chaire of Rome. Hereupon by the solicitation and importunity of the Queen of England, the Pul∣pits in France became as Prostitutes, all complexions and conditi∣ons of men were wrought upon. To the young men, the pleasures of Beauty were commended which were said to flourish no where more then in this Kingdom. To the Covetous, treasures of gold. To the Ambitious, hopes of honor and preferment. Had not so many recruits arrived from France and Ireland, the war had not continued so long; But tell me what shall become of these Recruits: Instead of hopes we are now full of despair; for riches we enjoy poverty; for plun∣der nakednesse; and whatsoever the iron hand of war can inflict we are sure to partake off: Our health, our strength, our joy is turned in∣to sicknesse weaknesse, sorrow, and confusion of face: Having made such spoyl in this, what other Kingdome will receive us; whither shall we cary the burden of our shame: is there no hope left? Is there no remainder of hope depends on the Lord Hoptons Army? French. None at all! you see the Horse are all disbanded: first our owne Brigade and then afterwards the other 8. England is a place too hot for the Caveleires of the King, therefore they flie into France not so much for succour as for safety, and to be out of the power of these who are to mighty for them. In the meane time his Majesties Forces in the North, West about Worcester are vtterly routed and the Lord Ashly, on whoes courage and Experience his Majestie depended so much upon is taken priso∣ner, he was heard to say to the Parliament souldiers as he sat upon a Drum-head, and was invirouned with them round about: Gentle∣men you may now sit downe and fall to play, for you this morning have done all your worke, meaning that he being beaten the King had no Army in the field. You see our owne souldiers with us are a∣shamed of their owne cowardis, and timorous hearts, and much magnify the civility, the resolution, and the temper of their Adversa∣ries,
and confesse them to be an Army invincible, and not to be fought with. Irish. But are there no Forces that can come to our assistance from Oxford, and the Garisons of the Kings in those parts? Alas! poore ouldiers: whither shall we go? French. Not a man. In the last Defeat given to the Lord Astley: there were taken, The Lord Astley Commander in chief. 3 Colonels, 3 Majors, one Lieut-Colonell 17 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, The Mar∣shall Generall, 5 Cornets, 11 Ensigns, 3 quarter-masters, The Chyrur∣geon, and Sir William Vaughan; Chaplain, 2000 Armes; All their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage. Irish. In the mean time the recruits expected from France move not at all, they are imployed upon another Designe: the Numbers that are going into France are many; those that are coming out of France into England are very few. French. This is not all; for from Newark it is certain, that all things are in preparation for a sudden storm, and Sir Thomas Fair∣fax being marched Eastward (as he will lose no opportunity) I can∣not see how Oxford will be able long to hold out; so that of those many Countries, Cities, Towns, and Garisons, which the King was master of not long since, all now are contracted into a short, a weak, and a most inconsiderable Number: And Scepters devolved from Age to Age which did promise themselves to know no period; doe find all strength is vain that fights against GOD. Irish. Since this, Exceter is summoned, and in great hope they are that it is by this time surrendred: The onely strength of the Kings Horse in the field is beaten, 300 Horse taken, and almost as mny pri∣soners: 3000 of their horse are commanded Eastward, at the news of which Oxford begins to tremble: Its time to be gone from thence, And so they say the King is; for the report is, that the King mistru∣sting himself in England, is secretly gone into Wales. FINIS.
