D2054 E450_28 R205244 99864661 161916
A DECLARATION Delivered into the House of Lords, by Mr: Abraham Dowcet, on Monday the 3 of July, 1648. Against Major Edward Rolph whom hee charges to have laine in waite three houres to have pistold the King. With his speech at the Barre in the House of Peers; And the Lords Order for Tryall of Major Rolph. And severall ORDERS of the House of Commons for apprehending Delinquents. depiction of King Charles I on his throne London Printed for A. H. ner Pye-corner, July 4th 1648.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE the English royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other Die Lunae 3 July, 1648. MR: Abraham Dowcet, being brought by the Keeper of Peter-House, where hee is a prisoner, was by Order of the House of Peeres, called to the Lords Barre, to give in evidence against Major Edward Rolph, concerning the businesse wherein Mr. Richard Osburne accu∣seth him to have had a designe to have taken away the Kings life. Mr: Dowcet being at the Barre, The Right Honourable the Lord Hundsdon (by Order of the House of Lords,) asked him what hee could say concerning any thing that hee
knew of a Designe by Major Rolph to take away the life of the King: Mr. Abraham Dowcets Speech before the Lords in Parliament assembled, the 3 of July 1648. My Lords, I Humbly desire your Lordships favourable constructi∣on towards me, in that I cannot deliver my selfe in good language, being that I am not an Enlsh mn; And therefore I doe desire your Honourr: that you will bee pleased to give mee leave to deliver in writing, what I shall testifie upon Oath, in this businesse propounded to mee by your Honours. The Lords Ordered that according as was desired by Mr. Abraham Dowcet, he should deliver in the case in paper, under his hand-writing, upon Oath. A Declaration delivered into the House of Lords against Major Edward Rolph, July 3. 1648. Ʋnder the hand-writing of Mr. Abraham Dowcet, concerning the designe a∣gainst the King. My Lords, I Am ready to make Oath that Mr. Richard Osburn, told me, the Kings person was in danger, and that
the said Major Rolph, had a designe for conveying his Majesties person to some place of secresie, where on∣ly three should goe with him, and where they might dispose of his Majesties person as they shuld think fit, Which informations from Mr. Osburn, and the assurance I had of his Majesties intenions forthwith to come to his Parliament, was the cause of my in∣gagement in this businesse. I am ready likewise to depose, that the said Rolph came to me, when I was a prisoner in the Castle, and in a jearing manner asked mee why the King came not down according to his appointment▪ And then in great indignation and fury said he waited three houres under the new Plat orm, with a good pistoll ready charged, to have received him if hee had come, Your Lordships humble servant, Abraham Dowcet. Westminster the 3 of July, 1648. Mr. Abraham Dowcet, delivered this upon Oath, to bee all truth, before their Lordships. Major Rolphs Letter to the Lords. My Lords, KNowing my self (I speaking in the presence of that God who searcheth all hearts) to be so perfectly clear and innocent of that foule and horrid crime charged upon me, that I abhorre the very thoughts of it: Earnestly de∣siring an opportunity of appearing for vindication of my innocency, or what ever else malce in wicked men can lay against me; resting fully assured that whatsoever a∣ward I shall find at the hands of men, I shall injoy the
happinesse of an upright and peaceable conscience with the same God, in whose presence I stand. Edward Rolph. Die Lunae 3 of July. 1648. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That it be referred to the Kings learn∣ed Councell to bring in an impeachment of High-Treason, against Major Edward Rolph. BY vertue of an Order of the House of Commons, These are to require you, your Deputy or Depu∣ties forthwith to make repaire to the abodes or dwel∣ings of Mr: Richard Bankes, and Mris: Mary Hanmer, and them there, or where they may be found to appre∣hend and bring to the House of Commons as Delin∣quents to answer their contempt and breach of the pri∣viledge of Parliament, in breaking open or causing to be broken open the chamber doors of Mr. Robert Charlton a Member of the said House, taking away his goods, and forceably conveying away the body of Francis Charlton his Ward, and his Servants, even sitting the House, and Mr. Charlton then attending in the House the publique service of the Kingdome. These are further to require (if need be) all Mayors Sheriffes, Justices of Peace, Constables and all other His Majesties Officers and loving Subjects (in break∣ing open doores locks or any place or places (to bee aiding to the Serjeants Deputies in the execution of
this warrant, And for so doing, this shal be your War∣rant. William Lenthall Speaker. To Edward Birkhead Esq; Serjeant at Armes attend∣ing on this House, his Deputie and Deputies. I doe nominate and appoint Marmaduke Sanders Edm. Cooper and Richard Action my lawfull Deputies for the execution of this Warrant Ed. Birkehead Serjeant at Armes. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Richard Bancks a Mercer or Silke-man at the inner Temple-gate, and Mris. Mary Hanmer widow, and all other person or persons in whose custody the body of Francis Charlton, an Infant, now is, doe forthwith make restitution of the body of the said Francis Charlton, to Mr. Robert Charlton a Member of this house, and Guardi∣an to the said child, he having been force∣ably taken out of his custody, whilst he was sitting in the House of Commons upon the publique service of the Kingdome, And that the Serjeant at Armes attending on this House doe forthwith make search after the said Francis Charlton, and seize and apprehend him wheresoever hee shall bee found, and
bring him, and restore him to Mr. Robert Charlton. Henry Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom Com. To Edward Birkhead Esq; Serjeant at Armes attending on the House of Commons, his Deputy or Deputies. Die Lunae, &c. Resolved &c. THat this House doth declare, That the force∣able taking away of Mr. Francis Charlton out of the Chamber of Mr. Robert Charlton (a Member of this House) and breaking open his Chamber whilst he was attending the service of the publick, is a breach of priviledge; And it is Ordered, That Will Taun∣ton, Ioseph Rogers and Andrew Bateley actrs in the said Businesse be co to the Serjeant at Armes attending this House, and that they remaine in custo∣dy untill the body of Mr. Francis Charlton  deli∣vered unto Mr. Robert Charlton or this House take further Order. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom. Com. FINIS.
