E1176 E394_7 99862122 160327
An Additionall ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Concerning dayes of Recreation, allowed unto Schollers, Apprentices and other Servants. Die Lunae 28 Junii. 1647. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
Die Lunae 28 Junii 1647. An additionall Ordinance concer∣ning daies of Recreation, allowed unto Schollers. Appentices, and other Servants. WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament, bearing date the eleventh day of this instant June, 1647. It is provided and Ordained, That every second Tuesday in every Moneth throughout the yeare, shall be allotted to Schollers, Apprentices, and other Ser∣vants, for recreation, and relaxation from their constant and ordinary labours, as formerly they have used to have on Festi∣vals, commonly called Holy-dayes, as
by the said Ordinance more at large ap∣peareth: and least such daies of Recrea∣tion might be abused, to the dishonour of God, scandall to Religion, and detri∣ment both of Masters and Servants, and for the more orderly proceeding in the strict observation of the said day of Re∣creation, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance; It is fur∣ther Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That all windowes of Shops, Warehouses, and other places, where Wares or Commodities are usually sold, shall be kept shut on the said day of Re∣creation, from eight of the clock in the morning untill eight of the clock at even∣ing, on the said day; And that no Ma∣ster shall wilfully detaine or with-hold his Apprentice or other Servant within doores, or from his Recreation in his usu∣all duty or service on the said day of Re∣creation, unlesse Market daies, Faire daies, or other extraordinary occasion; yet so as such Master shall allow unto such Ap∣prentice
or other Servant one other day instead of such day imployed in the Ser∣vice of his Master, upon such occasion as aforesaid. And be it likewise provided and Ordained, That if such Apprentice or other Servant shall ryotously spend or abuse such day of Recreation, either to his owne hurt, or the dammage of his Master, and being thereof lawfully con∣victed and found guilty before any one Justice of the Peace; It shall and may be lawfull for such Master at his pleasure to detaine and with-hold such Apprentice or other Servant from their Recreation on such allowed daies. And be it also pro∣vided and Ordained, That if such Ap∣prentice or other Servant shall cause any ryotous or tumultuous assembly, to the disturbance of the Peace on such day of Recreation, such Apprentice or other Servant being thereof lawfully convicted and found guilty, upon the testimony of two Witnesses upon Oath, before one Justice of the Peace in any County, Ci∣ty,
or Towne Corporate, where such Offence shall be committed, or before the Chamberlaine of the City of London, for the time being, within the said City, who shall have power to administer such Oath, such Justices of Peace, and the said Chamberlaine of the City of London respectively shall, and may at their dis∣cretion inflict on such Apprentice, or o∣ther Servant so convicted as aforesaid any Corporall punishment, by imprison∣ment or otherwise, so as the same im∣prisonment exceed not the space of three dayes. And it is lastly Ordained, That all Mayors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and all o∣ther Officers and Ministers are hereby Authorized to make, or cause to be made diligent Searches for such Appren∣tices or other Servants in Tavernes, Ale∣houses, or Gaming-houses, and such Apprentices or other Servants as shall be found in any such place after eight of the Clock in the Evening, or being drunke,
or otherwise disorderly, or shall there re∣maine after eight of the Clocke in the Evening on such day of Recreation, shall bring, or cause to be brought such Apprentice or other Servant before any Justice of the Peace in any County, Ci∣ty, or Towne Corporate, or before the said Chamberlaine of London within their respective Limits as aforesaid, who shall cause the Statutes to be executed upon them that are in such case provided for the punishment of such Offenders. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliam. FINIS.
The Apprentices Petition and Propo∣sitions, presented unto the Honourable House of Commons in Parliament Assem∣bled, June 22. 1647. To the Right Honourable the Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the well-affected Appren∣tices of the City of London, &c. Right Honourable, VPon a due neglect and slight regard of certaine Festivalls and Holy-dayes, for∣merly authorized and observed, which was effected through their superstiti∣ous use; we were emboldened (being hereby deprived of all times of law∣full pleasure and recreation) to Petition your Honours for an establishment and confirmation of some other set times for the supplying our ordinary pleasure, (which indeed though Your Honours were pleased in
some measure to satisfie us in this our request) yet your Petitioners finde, and humbly conceive, that so full satisfaction is not contained in that late pub∣lished Ordinance from this House, as is by the gene∣rall expected; neither is an observance of the day so firmly authorized, as, if Your Honours pleases, may be vouchsafed. We are bold therefore to renew our desires, and humbly present unto your Honours con∣sideration, these following Propositions, or Heads, which we desire may be specified and included in a renewed Ordinance from your Honours. Which shall oblige us uncessently to pray, &c. The Heads or Propositions presented to the Honourable House of COMMONS, &c. 1. THat every second Tuesday monethly be strictly observed with Shop-shutting, and that no Master detaine his Servant on such day or dayes in his usuall imployment unlesse extraordinary occasion happen, (which if it shall so be) that then the servant be allowed some other day in stead thereof. 2 That no Apprentice or Servant disobay his Ma∣ster herein (when extraordinary occasion shall re∣quire his service on such dayes.) 3. That whatsoever Apprentice shall be found to abuse such day or dayes, to his owne hurt, or damage
of his Master, that then he be deprived of the benefit of the next day. 4 That none exceed the usuall houres of eight in the morning to eight at night. 5. That whatsoever Apprentice be found the cause of any tumultuous assembly to the disturbance of the peace, or through his distemper shall cause any dis∣orderly rout, or seditious company, that upon exami∣nation before the next Justice, if found notorious Offenders, Justice be duly executed upon them. 6 That all Constables and Officers, &c. be autho∣rized to search all Tavernes, Ale-houses, and seize upon such Apprentices or Servants as shall be found at unseasonable houres, either Gaming, Carding, Dice, or any other lawfull Games, whereby any disturbance may happen, or fallings out, to the great disquiet of the City and such places, &c. These and such like heads we leave to your ho∣nours prudence and judgement, to be comprised in the renewed Ordinance, which we doubt not but will greatly prevent distractions, which otherwise may arise.
Die Jovis 24 Junii, 1647. AN Ordinance concerning daies of Recreation for Schollers and Apprentices was this day read the first and second time, and upon the question com∣mitted unto Sir Walter Erle. Mr. Beddingfield. Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Edward Ashe. Mr. Knightley. Mr. Gell. Mr. Nelthorp. Mr. Love. Colonell Ven. Mr. Trenchard. Sir Robert Pye. Mr. Scewen. Mr. Jesson. Mr. Vaughan. Mr. Dennis Bond. Sir John Curson. Mr. Vassall. Col. Mountague. Sir Henry Mildmay. Mr. Francis Allen. Mr. Lawrence Whittacre. Mr. Lemman. Mr. Reyonlds. Mr. Serjant Wilde. Or unto any five of them; who are to meet upon it to morrow in the afternoone, at two of the clock, in the Queenes Court. And the care hereof is more espe∣cially referred unto Master Wheeler. FINIS. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1647.
