e3128a e270_19 99870969 123367
The last Speeches AND CONFESSION OF THE Lord Maguire: The Jrish REBELL, that was Hang∣ed at Tyburne, and Drawne, and Quartered on Thursday last, the 20th. of February, 1644. With all the Questions that were put to him, and his severall Answers. And the Coppies of those Letters, and other Papers which he then had in his hands and made use of, that were afterwards delivered to Sheriffe Gibbs. And his Directory from the Romish Priests that gave him notice by the said papers to know them, in passing to Tiburne with him; Also his severall Absoluti∣ons secretly given him, and all other pas∣sages at his death. Printed and Published according to Order. Imprinted at London, by Iane Coe.
The last speeches, and confession of the Lord Maguire the Irish Rebell. On Thursday, Feb. 20. the Lord Maguire was drawne upon a sledge from the Tower of London, through the citie unto Tyburne which being ce and the cart set ready he kneeled upon the sledge and prayed for sometime after which the Sheriffe spake to him as followeth. viz. Sheriffe Gibs. MY Lord Maguire; It is now the last Declaration you are like to make in this world; Here you stand justly condemned to be executed for a very hainous crime, as is not paraleld by any History that was ever mentioned in the Christian world, taking all circumstances and their manner of proceedings, if you have done this, that you have done without any confession, why then certainly you have much innocent blood lies upon you, and much to answer for at the judgement Seat of God: It is one of the ten Commandments. Thou shalt not kill. There are many thousands, yea I may say hundred of thousands whose blood you & your complices have taken away: Men, and women, and children, such as you never saw, such as ne∣ver did you any injury, and not onely so, but they were your fel∣low Subjects, and were of the same cohabitation with you: you have now to answer for all this, as 'twas a confederacy wherein you were ingaged, My Lord, you have been an ingenious man as I have been told: you have been bred in Magdalene Colledge in Oxford, where you took the oath of Allegiance to our Soveraign Lord the King: contrary to this oath; you took upon you to sur∣prize His Castles and slay his subjects without any Commission as you declare your selfe, therefore now make some acknow∣ledgement, and give us the best satisfaction that you can that you doe hold it a very grievous sinne, and that you are heartily sorry for it. Maguire. God Almighty forgive me. Sher. Sir we desire you before this people here to expresse your sence of those horrid actions.
Maguire. I desire Almighty God to forgive me my fi. Sheriffe Gibs. Doe you beleeve you did well in those wicked actions. Mag. I have but a short time doe not trouble me. Sher. Gibs. Sir, It is just I should trouble you, that you may not be troubled for ever. Mag. I beseech you Sir, trouble me not I have but a little time to spend. Sher. Gibs. Sir, I shall give you as much time after as you shall spend to give satisfaction to the people: I doe require you as an instrument set in Gods stead here to make an acknowledgement to the people, whether you are sorry for what you have done or no? Whether it be good or no? Maguire. I beseech you, doe not trouble me. Sheriffe. I have told you, I would give you as much time after∣ward as I shall take up. Mag. I am not disposed to give you any Account. Doctor Sibbalds. If the blood of one Man, of Abel, cried to hea∣ven for vengeance, how much more shall the blood of many thousands: Oh give glory to God by confession of your sinnes, never any perished for want of mercy: Christ Jesus is full of mercy. Make a faithfull and humble confession, and there is par∣don with God: God pardoned Manasseh the greatest Idolater that ever was; the sea of his Mercy is bottomelesse. Mag. Pray give me leave to pray. Doctor Sibbalds. Give glory to God that your soul may not be presented to God with the blood of so many thousand people. Sheriffe. You are either to goe to heaven or hell, if you not make an ingenious confession, your case is desperate. Had you any commission or no. Mag. I tell you that there was no Commission that ever I saw. Doctor Sib. How then doe you think to escape the judgement of the great God, when you shall live, and die in such an outragious sinne as this is; Sher. Who were actors or plotters with you, or gave you any Com∣mission? Mag. For God sake give me leave that I may depart in pce. D. Sib. There is no dissembling now: you are with in a few mins
to be presented before the Tribull of that great Judge who will re∣ward every man according to their deeds. There is mercy with God, the penitent received mercy at the houre of death. Christ Jesus Armes are still open with mercy for the penitent. Sher. Had you not some pardon or Bull from the Pope for what you did? I desire you as a Minister of God to declare the truth? Mag. I am not of the same Religion with you. Doct. Sib. All your Religions agree in that: without confession there is no salvation. Alder. Bunch. My Lord, Be pleased to remember that text in the Re∣velation of the soules that lie under the Altar crying for God to avenge their blood; those souls that are in heaven now, where your soul must go or else go to hell. Pray therefore, That God would give you a reall and unfained repentance for all your sinnes: Beleeve that there is a God will bring vengeance upon you if you confesse not; Doe you know of any Bull or pardon. Mag. I saw none of it. All that I knew of I delivered in my exami∣nations. Sher. Have you any pardon from the Pope. Mag. I saw none. Doct. Sib. I beseech you my Lord in the name of God to discover the truth. Mag. What will you have me to speak? Sher. What inducements moved you to it? Mag. All that I said in my examinations are true, all that I said is right. I beseech you. Let me depart in peace. Sher. What grounds moved you first to attempt this? Mag. I have delivered all this in my examination; Gentlemen I be∣seech you to let me depart in peace. Sher. Whither was that a sin or no to shed so much innocent blood. Mag. For Gods sake Gentlemen I have— Sher. Sir will you die like a stock, will you go to hell without mercy, and not acknowledge your sorrowfulnesse for that foul crime? D. Sib. Do you think a Jesuit will pardon you when you will not con∣fesse: The question is, whether your Honour do think you did well or ill in this bloody Act? Here he answered not but continued mumbling over a paper as he had done from his coming; whereupon it being asked what the paper was. Sher. It is a Directory for his Devotion. D. Sib. You are going to hell or heaven; oh discharge your conscience: Doe you know any plot or any thing is prejudiciall to the State of England, Discover it now. Mag. I know nothing indeed.
Sher. Do you know any thing that is hurtfull to the Parliament  State? Mag. I know nothing, I have been a close prisoner. Sher. I but since you were abroad, since you broke prison. Mag. Truely I know nothing of it. D. Sib. His crime is blood especially the blood of so many thousand souls. He makes use of his paper to pore on, Its a dead letter unlesse you read it. Sher. Search his pockets whether he hath no Bull or pardon. Here his pockets were searched where they found some Beads and a Crucifixe which were taken from him. D. Sib. Come my Lord, Leave those and acknowledge your offence to God and the world: one drop of the blood of Iesus Christ is able to purge away all the heavy load of blood that is upon you. Sher. You do not desire such favour from our hands, unlesse you were more ingenious then you are. D. Sib. My Lord, no more of these it is not your Ave-Maries not these things will doe you any good but it is Agnus Dei qui tollit pea mundi. Then the L. Maguire read out of a paper as followeth. Mag. Since I am here to dye I desire to depart with a quiet minde; and with the marks of a good Christian, that is, asking forgivenesse, first of God, and next of the world. And I do forgive (from the bottom of my heart) all my enemies, and Offenders even those that have a hand in my death I die a Romane Catholike, and although I have been a great sinner yet am I now by God grace heartily sorry for all my sins, and I do most confidently trust to be saved (not by my own works but onely by the Passion, Merits, and mercy, of my dear Saviour Jesus Christ Into whose hands I commend my soule. I beseech you Gentlemen let me have a little time to say my prayers. Sher. Sir, if you will answer ingeniously to those questions wee shall aske you, you shall have time afterwards: Whether do you ac∣count the shedding of the protestants blood to be a sin or not? And whe∣ther do you desire pardon of God for that sin. Mag. I do desire pardon of God for all my sins. I cannot resolve you in any thing for my part. Sher. You can tell what your conscience Dictates to you; Doe you thinke it was a sin or not; Declare it, and when you have dealt ingeni∣ously and faithfully with us, we will deal well with you. Mag. For my part I cannot determine it. Sher. Then now it seemes nothing to you to kill so many. Mag. How do you mean killing of them? To tell you my minde di∣rectly
for the killing I do not know that, but I thinke the Irish had a just cause for their Warres. Sher. Was there any assault made upon you, had you not en∣tred into a Covenant; had you not engaged by oath your self to your King? Mag. For Iesus Christ I beseech you to give me a little time to prepare my selfe. Sher. Have pitty upon your owne Soule. Mag. For God sake have pitty upon me and let me say my prayers. Sher. I say the like to you, in relation to your own Soul; whe∣ther do you think the massacre of so many 1000. Protestants was a good act, for Iesus Christs sake have pitty upon your own soul. Mag. Pray let me have a litle time to say my prayers. Sher. So much good bloud spilt and spent by you, and yet no remorse? Heere one of the Sheriffes demanding his paper which he had in his hand, he threw it downe and thereupon it was taken up and given to the Sheriffe. D. Sib. Acknowledge your owne crimes and bloodshed; is it a sinne or not that massacre that hath bin committed? Mag. I tould you my opinion that I thought the Irish had just cause for the War, in what they had done, Sher. Ch. You that have murthered so many as you have done with your owne hands, and no more penitent? D. Sib. No, he was taken before hee could act his designes, he was a prime engine and confederate amongst them. Sher. If this be all we can get of you, you must stand or fall to your owne master. Heere he expected to be suddenly turned off, and thereupon fell to his prayers: uttering the word Jesus about 20. or 30. times together Sher. My Lord before you die, we desire but one question and that is this: whether there were not some Agreement made by the Comissioners that came over out of Ireland before the Rebellion first broke out with the Recusants heere in England and whether they did not come back for further advice.
Mag. I take it upon my death I doe not know that any man knew of it. Sh. Then you cake it upon your death you do not remember it. Mag. Of this fact wherein I am in barqued, in that I am brought into this trouble for, for which I was taken in Dublyn; to my best memorie or remembrance there was never a one in England, either Catholique or Protestant but one, and he was an Irish man and a Protestant. Sher. Where is he now, is he in England? Mag. I know not where he is, but he was in this Towne. D. Sib. Doe you not know of any English man or Sctch man that did know of it? you will doe very well to declare it. Sher. It was one of your Country men that was in this Towne your Conscience doth make you intimate thus much that he is in England, tell us his name and where he is. Mac. Nay in that excuse me Sher. Is he a Lord or what is he? Mag. He is but a Gentleman, a Gentleman. Sher. Where does he lie, or what manner of man is he? discover, discharge your Conscience and then you will die with more mercy and comfort I hope. Sher. Ch. My Lord, will you declare that Gentlemans name? Mag. You must excuse me, I will accuse no man; he was never any man that came to know of it but by chance, not as he was an Actor in it. Shr. Will you goe to Hell for him and your selfe, he may live to doe more mischiefe, prepare your selfe for death. Mag. I doe beseech all the Catholiques that are heere to pray for me, I beseech God to have mercie upon my Soule. Here when the Cart was going away, notice was given him of a Lord who was there. Ald. Bunch. Heere is a Baron of Ireland, a Lord of Jreland that sat in Parliament with your Honour, if you have any thing to say to him, or will discover any thing to him. Mag. I have nothing to say to him. After this the Executioner did his office
A copie of the Papers which the L. Mac∣quire carried in his hand to the place of execution, which were delivered to the Sheriffe. A Letter of some of the friends of the L. Macguire, who (it seems) intended to attend him to the place of Execution. Most loving Sir, MY Master his Coach shall wait on you infallibly. That day your friend William shall go by the Coach all the way, upon a red horse, with a white hat, and in a gray jacket,We may see what need there is that the Officers of Prisons (that looke to the Pri∣sons) be purged. and then you cannot choose (by the grace of God) but to know the Coach, of two whitish gray horses, and then you may doe or shew that token only, as to lift up to your face your hand, nodding (or inclining down) your head, and there shall go two or three (divers) Coaches for the same purpose, and bee sure to have plenary Phy∣sicke as you desire. I send you this holy stone, by the vertue whereof you may gaine a plenary Physicke, in saying any certain prayer, I beseech you deare Sir, be of good courage, for you shall not want any thing, for that happie journey, and offer you your selfe wholly for him, who did the same for you. Pray earnestly for your Coun∣try, and for your own sonnes, that God may prosper them, I do humbly intreat you to pray for me. Yours own poore afflicted servant. Your poore Gray. This was in the margin of the Let∣ter, as it were a post∣script.You shall do well to send your letters to morrow to that young man that comes to me, and the wooden Crosse that I have sent there of late, I beseech you send me word, whe∣ther the Reliquary that came along with those two Crosses was your or your companionsMacmohan- Hugh.
These words following were in an Irish Character. Mo mhile beannacht chugad a mhic mhanma. In English, My thousand blessings unto you, son of my soule. This following was in a paper in Latin, (being, as it seems, the advice of his Confessour to him) which is here translated. BEloved son in Christ, be∣lieve, almighty God, who governes all the world by his eternall providence, hath ap∣pointed this way to thy salva∣tion, and this manner of death, though he could have brought thee to the land of blesse by an∣other way, knew this to be more expedient. Therefore (my son) thou shouldest suffer this glorious kinde of death which thy God hath ordained for thee, with an elevated mind, yea thou shouldest desire it certain∣ly this kind of death is a great mercy of God. Is it not a spe∣ciall gift of God, to have a certaine time of sorrow and re∣pentance for offences commit∣ted? O with how great a desire did the Kingly Prophet David wish, that he might know the length of his dayes! expostu∣lating thus with God, Make me O Lord to know my end and the number of my days.
This kind of death is gran∣ted to many,Psal. 36. who rather with a perverse mind with an impro∣vident death falt to suffer e∣verlasting punishment. David being weary of the miseries and dangers of the present life, said, Woe is me, be∣cause my pilgrimage is pro∣longed, as if the time of his banishment seemed long; be∣sides Paul sayes, O wretched man that I am, who shall de∣liver me from this body of death?Rom. 7. And out of a desire of living in the land of the li∣ving, he said, I desire to be dissolved,Plil. 1. and to bee with Christ. Therefore (my Lord) beare this death which now hangs over your head, with a quiet mind, for Christ died for you; therefore fervently meditate with the eyes of your heart, upon this bitter death of Christ, and his torments. See, — These Lines following were written on the back-side of the paper, part of it being before come, and no more brought by him then what is here. —his kingdome shall move thee, and sar, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
Thou hast redeemed me O Lord God of Truth; Thou hast created me, oh my God, Thou hast redeemed me, O most holy Father I am all thine: let thy will be done in me; illumi∣nate mine eyes that I may ne∣ver sleep in death: Thou shalt invocate blessed Mary, for thy helper, saying: Mary the Mo∣ther of grace, the Mother of mercy; do thou protect us, from the enemy, and receive us in the houre of death, thou shalt invocate also Saint Michael, the Archangell, and the Angell thy keeper, and the holy Pa∣trons. And lastly, all the Saints, that they may intercede for thee and helpe thee with their prayers and merits, thou shalt also recite these words: O Lord Jesus Christ, I believe, that thou art my God and my Redeemer; and I firmely be∣lieve whatsoever the holy ca∣tholike Church propounds to be believed, and professe that I will live and die in this faith. It grieves me that I have of∣fended so great goodnesse, and it grieves mee that I can grieve no more for my offen∣ces committed against thee,
my Creatour and Saviour, in thought, word and deed, and by omission: and I humbly be∣seech thee to pardon me by thy bloud, which thou hast powred out for my salvation; and if I have forgot any thing which hath offended thy Majesty, or do not know it, I desire to know it, and repent of it. And in the meane time I ask forgive∣nesse of all: and likewise for thy sake doe from my heart passe by all offences whereby o∣thers have offended me: Also I pray them to forgive me, & if I have detained any thing from any man, my heires shal make restitution to them, to whom ought is due. CRede (dilecte in Christo fili) Deum optimum maximum, qui mundum hunc universum aeterna qua∣dam mentis provisione mo∣deratur; hanc salutis turew∣am, & hunc modu moriendi statuisse: qui quidem quamvis te ad foelicitatis patriam alio tramite ducere potuisset, ma∣gis hoc tibi expedire prae∣cognovit. Ergo (mi fili) hoc genus gloriosum motis, quod Dominus Deus sic tibi ordinavit, erecto animo per∣feras, quinetiam cxoptes. Certe hujusmodi mors mag∣num Der beneficium est; nonne speciase donum Dei est, habere certum tempus dolendi & poenitendi de of∣fensis commissis contra suam divinam Majestatem? O quanto desiderio expostula∣vit sibi dari certum & notum vitae suae. spatium regius Propheta David, expostu∣lans
a Deo sic! Notum fac mihi Domine finem meum, & numerum drerum meorum. Hoc genus mortis enim quāplurimis est concessum, qui perverso potius animo improvisa morte ceciderunt, poenas daturi sempiternas. David pertaesus miserias, & pericula praesentis vitae, dice∣bat, Heu mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus est; quasi longum illi videretur tempus cxilii. Beatus Paulus dice∣bat, Infelix ego, quis me libe∣rabit à corpore mortis hujus? Et ex desiderio vivendi in terra viventium, dicebat, Cupio dissolui, & esse cum Christo. Ideo (mi Domine) hanc mortem, quae tibi jam imminet, aquo animo pro Christo acerbiter pro te mortuo, seras. Hanc ama∣riffimam Christi mortem, tormenta, & caeteras oculis tui cordis serventer medi∣tare. Vide,— These Lines following were written on the back-side of the paper, part of it being before come, and no more brought by him then what is here. —gni sui tepromo∣vent, & dicas, In manus tu∣as Domine commendo spiri∣tum
meum, redemisti me Domine Deus veritatis: Tu me creasti Deus meus, tu me redemisti: Pater sanctissime, totus sum tuus, fiat in me vo∣luntas tua; illumina oculos meos, ne unquam obdormi∣am in morte. Beatam Mari∣am invoces in auxiliatricem, dicendo, Maria mater gra∣tiae, mater misericordiae, tu nos ab hoste protege, & in hora mortis suscipe. Invoces etiam Sanctum Michaelem Archangelum, & Angelum custodem, & sanctos Patro∣nos, & demum omnes San∣ctos, ut intercedent prote, & adjuvent te suis suffragiis & meritis. Recites etiam haec verba: Domine Jesu Chri∣ste, credo quod Deus meus, & Redemptor meus es tu, & credo firmiter quicquid san∣cta Ecclesia catholica pro∣ponit credendum, & in hac protestor me velle vivere & mori. Domine Jesu, dolet mihi, quod tantam bonita∣tem offenderim, & dolet, quod amplius non doleo de offensis, contrate Creatorem & Salvatorem meum, cogi∣tatione, verbo, & opere, &
omissione perpetratis, & hu∣militer peto mihi condonari per sanguinem tuum quem pro mea salute profudisti. Et si quid oblitus sum, vel non cognosco quod Majestatem tuam offenderit, de eo illu∣minari cupio, & poenitere; & interim de omnibus veniam peto: omnibus qui me of∣fenderunt, ex corde meo, & similiter omnes offensas pro∣pter te dimitto, & si quem ego offendi, precor etiam ve∣niam mihi dari, & si aliquid alicujus est apud me, volo sa∣tisfacere per haeredem me∣um, omnibus quibus de∣beo. The Copie of another paper, containing a di∣rection for his devotion in his passage to, and at the place of execution, sent from his ghostly Father with the former. Jesus. IHS Maria. In your passage to execution remember as followeth. To think on our Lord carrying his Crosse to Mount Calvarie.
Or on the proper meditation against the devils temptations. Think that the paine is short, the reward eternall and ever∣lasting. Have mercy on me O God, &c. Miserere mei Deus, &c. Lord not in thy wrath. Domine ne in furore tuo. The first penitentiall Psalme. Our Father. Haile Mary. Pater noster. Ave Maria. In thee O Lord have I trusted, let me never be confounded in thy justice. In te Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum in tua justitia. By the mystery of thy holy in∣carnation, O Lord deliver us. Per mysterium sanctae incar∣nationis tuae libera nos Do∣mine. Sanctifie me with the Spirit of Christ. Anima Christi sanctifica me Thou sought'st me being weary Quaerens me sedisti lassus. I humbly pray. Oro supplex. O holy Angels. Sancti Angeli. We flie to thee for aid, ô holy Mother of God. Subatuum praesidium confu∣gimus sancta Dei genet Remember ô maker of al things Memento rerum conditor. Remember the promises of God, That none shall be tem∣pted, &c. Call upon me in the day of &c. Come to me all ye that be heavie, &c. It is very probable this paper might be sent to him from some of those Priests that are in New∣gate.When you come to Newgate make your Token for an Absolution. When come to the place of Execution, doe as fol∣loweth. O Lord Jesus Christ, I worship thee in the Crosse &c. O Domine Jesu Christe, ad∣oro to in Cruce, &c. Haile sweet Mother of Christ, &c. Ave dulcis Mater Christi, &c. O holy Lady Mary.— Domina mea Sancta Maria. Lord now let thy servant de∣part, &c. Nunc dimittis servum tuum Domine.
Miserere mei Deus. Have mere you me ô God. Quaerens me sedisti lassus. Thou sought'st me being weary Oro supplex & acclivis. I humbly pray on my knees. Tu fons misericordia. Thou art the fountain of mercy This was written but crossd out again, and a∣nother pa∣per pinned upon it, written in another manner, which also doth followPray for the Church of Ireland, M. Grea, say, Jesus Maria three times for an Indulgence, also a Pater, and an Ave, and Iesus Maria three times for the same end. Then make either of these tokens, stretch out your hands in forme of a Crosse, or (if you cannot) do so, joyne them together before your brest, with a handkerchiefe twisted a∣bout your hand, (with sorrow for your sinnes, and earnest∣ly desiuing absolution of the Church) and God will absolve you. Before you make this token, settle on your desire and say, I desire an absolution &c. and say, Confiteor Deo omnipotemi, I confesse me to Almightie God, and then make your to∣ken &c.This paper was pinned upon that which was crossed out. Then say, O Amabilissima Bonitas! Confiteor Dea, with sorrow for your sinnes, and settle your heart earnestly to de∣sire an absolution from the Church (and I desire an absoluti∣on) make your token (or marke) of lifting both your hands to your face, and letting fall your hand kerchief, God will absolve you. After that pray for you menemies and persecuters, and forgive them from the bottome of your heart. Then willingly resigne your selfe wholly to the B. will of God and trust only to be saved by the merits of our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. Then say these words following (publikely) that you may be heard.Did not Canterbury die just in this māner? Since I am here to die, I desire to depart with a quiet minde, and with the markes of a good Christian, that is, asking forgivenesse first of God, and next of the world. And
I do forgive (from the bottom of my heart) all my enemies offenders, even those that have had a hand in my death. Say moreover. I die a Romane Catholike, and although I have been a great sinner, yet am I now (by Gods grace) heartily sorry for all my sinnes. And I do most confidently trust to be fa∣ved not by any of my own workes, but only by the passion merits and mercy of my deare Saviour Jesus Christ, into whose hands I commend my soule. Offer to God for your sinnes the merits of his Sonne Jesus. Offer all thy sufferings to our Saviour in union of what he suffered. Lastly say, O Lord Iesus Christ. Domine Jesu Christe. For that bitternesse. Propter illam amaritudinem. Thou sought'st me being weary Quaerens me sedisti lassus. I humbly pray on my knees. Oro supplex & acclivis. Thou art the fountain of mercy Tu fons misericordiae. It seems the Priest was in sight to give it him.Resigne your selfe willing∣ly and wholly to God. Upon the ladder make your signe for an Absolution, and say, I desire with all my heart an absolution from my mother the Catholike Church for my sins. The whole Triall of the L. Macquire should have been pub∣lished ere this, but it could not be ready so suddenly: this being of such concernment, is thought fit to be published in the interim.
FINIS.
