E3083 E1035_3 99867965 168929
THE English Devil: OR, CROMWEL AND HIS Monstrous Witch Discover'd at White-Hall: With the strange and damnable Speech of this Hellish Monster, by way of Revelation, touching King and Kingdom; And a Nar∣rative of the Infernal Plots, Inhumane Actings, and Barbarous Con∣spiracies of this grand Impostor, and most audacious Rebel, that durst aspire from a Brew-house to the Throne, washing his accursed Hands in the Blood of his Royal Soveraign; and trampling over the Heads of the most Loyal Subjects, making a Foot-ball of a Crown, and endeavouring utterly to extir∣pate the ROYAL PROGENY, Root and Kinde, Stem and Stock. LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood, for George Horton; and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1660.
The English Devil; Or, The Bloody Traytor, &c. AS for that Hellish Monster, and damnable Machiavilian, that first gave rise to our new-fangled Models of Go∣vernment, we shall onely de∣monstrate him to be the De∣vil of later Times, who But∣cher-like made cruelty his profession, & was never bet∣ter then when he had his Sword sheathed in his Coun∣trey-mens bowels; such an andacious Reble was this Oliver Cromwel, that durst aspire from the mean condi∣tion of a private person, to the Throne, though he first wash'd his hands in the blood of his Soveraign: He represented the real Tragedy of a King and no King; whose mouth water'd after that Title, but that he durst not assume it, having fought so long against it, and was sworn to the deposition of all Kingship for the fature. He, to raise himself on the top of the Pyramid of ho∣nour, trampled over the heads of the most Loyal Subjects of the Realm; made a foot-ball of a Crown, and endeavoured utterly to extirpate the Royal Progeny, Root and Kind, Stem and Stock: Nay, I may be bold to say, if that an innocent Babe had been born with Vive le Roy in his mouth, he must have been food for his Sword, as well as the first-born were for Horods. It is credibly re∣ported, that Hugh Peters, that spiritual Dragooner, and Nol, hatch;d this Government as they were walking together in a field: A brace of  Devils! The whole Nation was enchained in a more than AEgyptian Bondage; who were compelled to submit to this Tyrant Nol, or be cut off by him; nothing but a word and a blow, his Will was his Law; tell him of Magna Charta, he would lay his hand on his sword, and cry Magna Farta. No Liberty was granted to the Subject, unless it were that of the Conscience; and that too was denied the more Orthodox and Loyal Party. The People were
rob'd of all Laws, Rights, and Priviledges, and sometimes of their lives; whilest he, like a Tyrant, insulted with a Quis contradicet? The Citizens were so fleeced and pilled, that had this inhumane barbarous Wretch continued much longer, he had sent London in∣to the Country a begging. To say God save the King, was a crime as black as any forbidden in the Decalogue: but so long as that was prohibited publikely and privately, it was in vain to cry out, God speed the Plough, or expect any blessing from the Superiour Power. His infernal Plots and Machinations had wrought the utter ruine and desolation of the Country, had not Providence divine cut him off, to the general benefit and rejoycing of the Nation. English ground groaned with the burthen of this inhumane Tyrant. It was not enough that the English should be scourged, but the whip must lye before them; it is not sufficient that he should be the Author of all their Woes while living, but they must live subject to his Tyranny and Oppression, and like so many Mutes, condes∣cend unto all his Actions by silence, not daring to mention the least dislike, though it thwarted their disposition never so much: He was a Rod of their own making, and they were content to Ʋntruss whilest he Whipt them. In vain it was for the most accurate Wit to Plead Reason or Law against the Sword; the Tongue is too weak a Weapon for the Dagger. During the Usurpation of this same Hellish Tyrant, what a Chaos of confusion bespread the whole Na∣tion? How was all the Land Benegro'd with more than the Egiptian darkness of Persecution? The whole Countrey was inveloped in Clouds, and Ruine hung over the Heads of the People, by as slen∣der a Thrid, as the Sword did over the Head of Damocles at the Banquet. The whole Land was Entombed in despair, and little or no hope of a Resurrection, till a Divine Hand wrought it by his long-expected Death: And it is the Cordial wish and Hearty de∣sire of the Loyal Pen-man, that all his Majesties and the Kingdoms Enemies were as stately interred as he was. Had he deserved an Epitaph, We would have stretched hard but our Brain should have furnished him with one; but since he was so unworthy, We hold it as great a disparagement to our Quill to bestow a Copy of Verses on him, as he was a grief and trouble to the Loyal party of the Nation And indeed, how can any Son of Phoebus imploy his time so ill, as to salute his dead Corps with an Epitaph, that was so great an Enemy to them whilest living; Who had a real design to extirpiate all literature, and implunge us into as deep a Gulph of ignorance and prophaness as the Turk is cast into? He hated
all Learning, and the Learned, because his Crimes were so black and horrid, that they went far beyond the mercy of the Book. He granted a tolleration for all Religions, because his own was to choose; and that he might not offend the Tender Consciences of his pretended Zealots and Favorites, who were true Vassels to the Lust and Villainy of such an Imperious Usurper. Honesty was so much out of fashion, that he that was Vertuous was a Malefactor, and deserved Death; for Knavery was a la mode; and you know the old saying, It is as good to be out of the World, as out of the Fashion. An honest loyal Subject was as much hooted and pointed at, and judged as ridiculous an Object, as a Spanish Don in his Country Garb at Paris. An honest man was as strange a fight in England, as a Horse in Venice, or a Beggar in Holland, and he was as like to be preferred to his favour, as a Spurier was to Queen Elizabeth. But since he is in his Grave, We will not rake up his Ashes any further: if he can find any rest there now dead, who living I am sure had little or none in his Conscience (for he ever carried a Civil War in his Breast, of Fears, Suspicions, and Jealousies) he shall lye secure, for we intend to disturb him no farther. After the death of this Brittish Idol, Richard the 4th. his Son pee∣ped out; who had no fault so great as that he had him to his Father, for it was generally believed, he vvould be but Tenant to the Right Landlord, or the Stuarts Steward, to set all things in Order till he was restored. But, alas! he proved but a fortnights wonder; no sooner up, but dovvn; his disposition. (if vve may credit re∣port) vvas the Womanish plot of Weeping Fleetwoods Lady; who stomached it that his preferment should be greater then her Hus∣bands, though it proved to little purpose: And Indeed, it is sel∣dome known that Females councel ever arrives to any better success; nor is there any reason that the Distaff should be a com∣panion for the Scepter. A Kitchin was a great deal more fit for her than a Throne, though she had Ambition enough to perswade her self that she deserved the name of a Princess. Yet had Richard  Heir of his Fathers parts (though it was well he was not) he would have soon frustrated their designs, and came to as much heigth and greatness: But he had not enough of the Rogue in his Com∣position, to make up a Damned Politician. He was fitter to bear a Hawk on his Fist, than to hold a Scepter in his Hand. A sedentary, retired, Country-life, was far more suitable to his Temper and Disposition, than a Tumultuous City-life. He was altogether ig∣norant in that so much practised profession of peircing the
with the Foxes Tail; which no doubt he might have done, had he been as vvell read in Machiavil as his Sire vvas. He vvas not much read in Politicks, as appears by the small term of time that was allotted him to play the Protector. But no matter, it was well it fell out so, he is like to fare the better for it, in the judgement of the most censorious: Besides, it was vvhat suited vvith his fancie (according to relation) better then all the Usurped Povver and Authority of his Predecessor. Exit Protector, he vvas but like a Pageant, a King in a Play; he onely appears upon the Stage, makes a Legg, and takes his leave of you. But what comes next? A Resolve here intervenes! No less then the Bloody Tragedy of OLIƲER the Traytor, who to Unite firmly the Council of War to him, which consisted of a few able Head-pieces, to whom he laid himself open so far, as to shew them their profit and preferment in the designe, which United them fast to him, the other, who were soft Heads, and had a good meaning to do no evil, but to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and throw down Anti-christ, and then according to their duty, [as they were taught] to take possession of, and [as Saints] Reign over the Kingdom; Cromwel provided fit food to feed such fantasies, for he had provided a Monstrous Witch full of all deceitful craft, who being put into brave cloaths, pretended she was a Lady come from a far Countrey, being sent by God to the Army with a Revelation, which she must make known to the Ar∣my, for necessity was laid upon her: This Witch had a fair Lod∣ging prepared for her in White-hall. Now having had her Lesson taught her before by Cromwel and Ireton, by whose order she was entertained, desired to have audience at the Council of War, for to them (she said) she was sent. Cromwel and Ireton to beget the more attention and belief in the Officers of the Council of War, began to extoll the excel∣lency of Revelation, and conceived that this Prophetess being a precious Saint, and having much of God in her, ought for to be heard, and that with all intention; because (said they) in such glorious dayes as these God doth manifest himself extraordina∣rily; and especially to his Saints, in chalking out their way be∣fore them, when they came into straights and difficulties; such as they were in at that time. By this time the Witch was come to the door, and forthwith had admittance; where all the Officers beheld her strange po∣stures, expressing high Devotion: Cromwel and Ireton fixing their
Eyes upon her in most solemn manner (to beget in the rest of the Officers (who were ready to laugh) an apprehension of some serious thing) fell both of them to weeping; the Witch looking in their Faces, and seeing them weep, fell to weeping likewise; and began to tell them what acquaintance she had with God by Revelation, and how such a Day, such an Hour, after such a manner she had a Revelation, which she was to reveal on∣ly to them; and that was, That the glorious time of setting up Christs Kingdom was near at hand, and that Anti-christ must be speedily thrown down, and that they were the Instruments that were by God ordained to throw him down, and how they were about that great work, and that if they would prosper in it, they must first remove the KING out of the way, which they must do first by proceeding to Try him, and then to Con∣demn him, and then to Depose him, but not to put him to Death: This Relation I had from one that was strongly of the Armies party, but related this shamefull story with much indig∣nation. A Lillonian was taught at this time with Bribes to Print his o∣pinion, which was much according to the opinion of his Sister Witch. Some of the Soberer and more Religious of the Officers being much startled at these Revelations, but not at all satisfied, repai∣red to some of the most Religious and able Independents to know their opinion of these things, and to defire advice what to do; they replyed (I am informed Thomas Goodwin in particular) that since they had gone so far, they must now carry it on, though with the Blood of those that stood in their way, for if they now made a stop, farewel their Cause for ever: This was good in Politicks, but bad in Divinity: It was a true Politick Aphorism of Machiavells, but false Doctrine in the Divinity Schools; however they made use of this Doctrine to proceed in their designs, for the promo∣ting of the Independent Cause. By this time John Lilburn and his party, who sate at White-hall to draw up their desires, had brought their business to some ma∣turity, which was, as I conceive, inserted in the Paper called, The Agreement of the People, the sum whereof, was no other then this, to Throw down KING , Lords, and Commons, as then established, to Throw down the Lawes, Inns of Court, Courts of Judicature, Church Government, as also the Ʋniversities, and Function of the Clergie.
This Agreement being debated at the General Council, Crom∣wel (whose design was to set up another Government, and was then about it) opposed this Agreement, because it opposed his design; for though he sate in Councel with the General Officers, yet he consulted altogether with the Popish Faction, to set up a Government according to the Government of Spain, (viz.) by a Councel of State, and a High Court of Justice. The General Councel of War was hereby divided about this Agreement of the people, and so equally divided, that onely one Voice carryed it, or two at the most in the Negative, which gave ocaasion to Col. Hwson to say, How can we call this the Agreement of the People, when we our selves are divided about it? Cromwel being now to shoot the greatest Gulf, having now the Work to do, which he had been all this while by force and policy making way unto; he saw but two main rubs in the way, which he durst not meddle with in a boysterous way, and those were the Presbyterian Mini∣sters of the Kingdom, vvho preached vehemently against the Treasonable practises of the Army. The other whom he durst not at this time meddle with, were those down-right dealers cal∣led Levellers: What he could not do by Flattery, he did by Threats; but could not in the least terrifie the Presbyterians, who declared against his vvicked and open Rebellion, detesting those illegal proceedings of the Army, in offering violence to the Par∣liament, and going about to overthrow the King. FINIS.
