F1118 669.f.21[28] 99869898 163523
Five PROPOSALS PRESENTED To the General COUNCIL of the OFFICERS of the ARMIES Of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND. Friends and Gentlemen: THe wise man tells us, that Hope defer'd, makes the heart sick: as our hands are weakned by your delayes, so our hearts would faint, except something satisfactory be speedily done by you. For the common safety of the Good Old Cause, and the Assertors of it, are in emi∣nent danger to be swallowed up by the Common Enemie; and great Reason we have to fear, that while you thus slowly proceed to purge your Army, our destruction, and yours also, (de∣signed by the friends to the first Monarchique Family) will like an overflowing scourge, break in upon us; except he that neither slumbers nor sleepes, by no lesse then a Miracle pre∣vent it. Our Apostacies having rid Post, and our Repentance scarce going a Foot-pace, gives small ground of hope that his speciall presence will so Eminently appeare for us. If you on∣ly were imbarqued in the bottom, and that the Cause were not common, we should be silent; but since our blood, Prayers and Purses challenge and claim a Share in the Purchase, and since we must breathe under that bondage or freedom you are now bringing forth, we humbly pro∣pose, 1. That you vigorously and unpartially proceed in the speedy and total Purging of the Army; remembring that Right stands in a direct opposition to Wrong, in all Persons and all Cases; and let no Allegations or pretences sway your judgement to the contrary. 2. That the Old Parliament may have the Door opened unto them, and that by you they be invited to re-possess that place where they in some measure honourably Asserted our Rights, both as Men and Christians. 3. That you would no longer tamper with the Petition and Advice; but cast it aside as abominable, dangerous, and destructive to the common safety of the Na∣tion. 4. That you would lay aside the thoughts of a Government by a single Per∣son, in any sence whatsoever; as being repugnant to your own Engagements, and the Publique Liberty. 5. That some faithful Persons, and Friends to the Good Old Cause, be added to your Councils and Conventions, that these things may be effected, that so our Fears and Jealousies may be removed. In performance of these things, you will encourage us to assist you in our Prayers unto the most High, and with our Persons and Purses also, in any Exigent or Straits you may be brought unto: But by your temporizing, and denying to follow God fully; you will meet with his re∣bukes in your way, and Reproach and Infamy from all good men in the end. From many thousands Well-affected to the Good Old Cause in and about the City of London. London, Printed by J. C. for L. Chapman. 1659.
