F2311AA 36282160 150065
A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Strange Discovery of the Supposed Murther, OF Mr. Thomas Tedder In Black Swan-Alley in Pauls-Church-Yard, who hath not been heard of this 5 Years. With the manner of the Discovery, By Letters to several Persons of Note, to search a Vault in the House of Mr. Allen, where he formerly Lodg'd, where was found the Bones, and part of the Scull of the supposed Murthered Person. With Mr. Allvens Examination, Before the Lord Mayhr on Saturday last, and of his being Bound over to Answer it at the next Sessions. UPon account of some Letters arrived here, whereof one to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, one to— Andger Esq Counsellor at Law, and the rest to se∣veral other Persons of Note, giving an Account of a suspitious Murder, thought to be committed by one Mr. Allen, who keeps a great Toy-Shop near Deans-Court in Paul's Church-yard, upon a certain Gentleman, who lodged at his House, a Justice of Peace in Ireland, who has not been heard of these since these five or six Years past; about which time, he was known to be at the said Allen's House in Black-swan-Alley, in Paul's-Church∣yard, and the said Letters particularly insisting, that the said Allen's House of Office should be emptied and searched; and the said Esq Andger going to the Lord-Mayor, to acquaint him with the purport of the Letter, his Lordship finding it to agree with that sent to him, gave orders on last Friday for emptying the said Vault, and ordered the other Gentlemen concerned to take care to see all that came out carefully examined: Which being done accordingly, we are told that the said Night-men found a piece of a Scull with Hair upon it, and several other Bones, which were carefully kept and carried; together with Mr. Allen and the Night-men, before his Lordship; where the Night-men declared, That besides the Soil which they took out, they brought also a good quantity of Lime, which gave some suspition that the said Lime had been thrown in to consume the Flesh of the party supposed to be Murdered. Mr. Allen owned, as I am told, that he put in the said Lime, but alledged, that it was to save the charge of emptyng the Vault, because he did not think of living long there, and to prevent annoy∣ing his Neighbours by the Stench. Some Surgeons were summon∣ed to give their Verdict upon the Bones this Night, which all agreed that it was the Scull and Bones of some Person, thought to be mur∣dered. However, upon the whole, the said Allen is bound over to answer the same the next Sessions, and has given Six Hundred Pound Bail to answer it accordingly. Licens'd according to Order. London, Printed for B. H. in Grace-Church-street, 1699.
