F244 E397_15 99862171 114322
TWO LETTERS From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, ONE To both Houses of PARLIAMENT; Giving an Accompt of what Transactions and Proceedings have been betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Army, since His coming into their Quarters. WITH Some farther Proposals in relation to His Majesty, and the speedy settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom. THE OTHER A LETTER to the Lord Major, Aldermen and Com∣mon-Councel of the City of LONDON, With some PAPERS of the Proceedings of the Treaty with the ARMY. BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Councel of War. Reading, July 8. 1647. Signed JONN RUSHWORTH. London, Printed for Laurence Chapman. IULY 9. 1647.
Mr. Speaker, I Was sent unto by the King on Friday last, to desire the Parliament to give way to Him to see His Children; and that they might for that purpose be sent to Him: If I may be bold humbly to offer my Opinion, I think the allow∣ance of such a thing may be without the least pre∣judice to the Kingdom, and yet gain more upon His Majesty then denying it; and if it be in the prayers of every good man, That His heart may be gained, the performance of such civilities to Him is very sutable to those Desires, and will hear well with all men, who (if they can imagine it to be their own case) cannot but be sorry, if His Ma∣jesties natural affections to His Children, in so small a thing should not be complyed with; and if any question should be concerning the assurance of their return, I shall ingage for their return with∣in what time the Parliament shall limit. Upon this occasion give me leave, I beseech you, to take notice of some Reports spread abroad, as if my self and the Officers of the Army were up∣on some underhand Contract or Bargain with the King; and from thence occasion is taken to slan∣der our Integrities, and endeavor a misunderstand∣ing betwixt the Parliament and their Army, the fidelity of which to the Parliament and Kingdom, and their affection to it, are the great objects of ma∣ny
mens Envies, because they see nothing so likely to settle Right and Freedom, with Truth and Peace to us and posterity, & to hinder their Designs against the same, as an Harmony or good accord between the Parliament and Army, which is the joy of good men, and it shall be our study to preserve against all Designs and Designers to the contrary. To prevent therefore all misunderstandings of that kinde, I thought fit with all clearness to de∣clare unto you, That we have done nothing, nor shall do any thing which we desire to hide from you or the world, or shall not avow to the faces of our greatest Adversaries. Our Desires concerning a just consideration and settlement of the Kings Rights (His Majesty first giving His concurrence to settle and secure the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom) We have already publiquely declared in our Representation and Remonstrance. Since the first of those Papers sent to the Parliament, there have been several Of∣ficers of the Army upon several occasions sent to His Majesty, the first to present to Him a copy of the Representation, and after that some others to render Him a copy of the Remonstrance; upon both which, the Officers sent were appointed to clear the sence and intention of any thing in either Paper, whereupon His Majesty might make any question. Since then, there have also been some Officers at several times sent to His Majesty about
His remove from Hayfield, to disswade (if possibly) from Windsor or any place so near London, to some place of further distance, answerable to what we had desired of the Parliament. In all which addresses to His Majesty. We care not who knows what hath been said or done; for as We have nothing to bargain for or to ask, either from His Majesty or the Parliament, for advantage to our selves, or any particular party or interest of our own, so in all those Addresses to His Majesty We have utterly disclaimed and disavowed any such thing, or any Overtures or Thoughts tending that way; But the onely intent and effect of those our Addresses hath been, to desire and endeavor His Majesties free concurrence with the Parlia∣ment, for establishing and securing the common Rights and Liberties, and settling the peace of the Kingdom; and to assure Him, That (the Publique being so provided for, with such His Majesties con∣currence) it is fully agreeable to our Principles, and should be our desires and endeavor, That (with, and in such settling of the Publique) the Rights of His Majesties Royal Family should be also provi∣ded for, so as a lasting Peace and Agreement might be settled in this Nation: And that, as We had publiquely declared for the same in general terms, so (if things came to a way of settlement) We should not be wanting (in our sphaeres) to own that general Desire, in any particulars of natural or ci∣vil right to His Majesties Person or Family, which
might not prejudice or again indanger the Pub∣lique: and in the mean time, That His Majesty should finde all personal civilities and respects from us, with all reasonable freedom that might stand with safety, and with the trust or charge lying upon us concerning His Person. You have here the utmost sum of what hath pass'd from us to His Majesty; and We could wish all men did rightly understand (without misrepre∣sentations) every particular wherein (as We know nothing not agreeable to Reason, Justice, Honesty or Conscience, so) We thought our selves con∣cerned the rather to say and do, as We have to∣wards His Majesty since He came within our quar∣ters, because of those common prejudices suggest∣ed against us, as if We were utter Enemies to Mo∣narchy, and all Civil Order or Government. And for that particular of the Duke of Richmond and the Two Chapleins lately permitted to attend His Majesty, It was not done without much relu∣ctancy, because therein We doubted We might be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best friends. But upon His Majesties continuing importunity for it (as a thing very nearly concerning His pre∣sent inward and outward contentment; and con∣ceiving those persons such (as we hoped) would not do ill offices to prejudice the Peace of the Kingdom, We did give way to it, and the persons (before they came) had notice of the permission: And as We then thought, so We still do think,
That to allow him some such company of persons least dangerous, whom former acquaintance may make him take pleasure in; and the allowance of some such Chapleins of His own, are things both reasonable and just; and the debarring of that li∣berty in the latter (We doubt) will but make Him more prejudiced against other Ministers. In general, We humbly conceive, that to avoid all harshness, and afford all kinde usage to His Ma∣jesties Person, in things consisting with the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, is the most Christian, Honorable and Prudent way: And in all things (as the Representation and Remonstrance of the Ar∣my doth express) We think that tender, equitable and moderate dealing, both towards His Majesty, His Royal Family, and His late party (so far as may stand with safety to the Kingdom, and secu∣rity to our common Rights and Liberties) is the most hopeful course to take away the seeds of War or future Feuds amongst us for posterity, and to procure a lasting Peace and Agreement in this now distracted Nation; To the effecting and set∣ling whereof (with a secure provision first to be made for the common Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and a due care to preserve and propagate the Gospel of Truth & Peace amongst us) we shall hope that neither the Parliament nor His Majesty will be wanting: And if God shall see it good to make us any way instrumental thereunto, or that We may otherwise see the same accomplisht, We
shall then think our selves indeed discharged from the publique ingagements We have been called out unto, more clearly and effectually then (before such things were settled) We could have though our selves to be, and (to demonstrate our clearness from seeking self-advantages in what We did) We shall thenceforth account it our greatest happiness and Honor (if God see it good) to be disingaged and dismist, not onely from our Military charges, but from all other matters of Power or publique imployment whatsoever. I have in these things spoke, not in my own Name alone, but in the Name (because I finde it to be the clear sence of the generality, or at least of the most considerable part) of the Army, and I am confident you and the Kingdom will never finde it other∣wise: I shall leave it to your favorable constru∣ction, and commit all to the goodness of God for an happy issue. I remain Reading, July 8. 1647. Your most humble Servant, T. Fairfax. For the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
For the Right Honourable the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Common-Councel of the City of LONDON. My Lord and Gentlemen, TO the end we may continue a right understanding betwixt you and us all along in the management of this great businesse with the Parliament, (the happie proceedings thereof so much concerning the safety and peace of this Kingdom) we have given your Commissioners this day the copie of a Paper which we present∣ed to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with us; wherein we take notice of the true rea∣sons of the slowe progresse in the Treaty, and declare where the stop remains. And to the end that nothing may be wanting in us which might work toward the speedie settlement of the quiet of this Kingdom; we have humbly offered what we can say will most effectually tend to remove
those incumbrances and letts which stand be∣tween us and the universal good of the King∣dom; and till that be done, it cannot be expect∣ed that we should procure the Peace of this Kingdom by a Treaty, but rather give occasion and opportunity thereby to others to engage us in a second War, which must necessarily hazard the ruine of this Kingdom, as also the certain de∣struction of Ireland, the relief whereof we shoud most effectually apply unto you, were the af∣fairs of England but once put into an hopeful posture. It is a sudden and substantial settlement of the whole we desire, in a general, safe, and well-grounded Peace, and the establishment of such good Laws as may duely and readily render to every man their just Rights and Liberties: And for the obtaining of these, not onely our in∣tentions had led us to, but we think that all the Blood, Treasure and Labour spent in this War, was for the accomplishing those very things which are of that concernment both to our selves and posterity, that neither we nor they can live comfortably without them; and thereof we hope your selves will have the same sense, and therefore improve your interest for the obtain∣ing our just Desires in the Proposals now sent unto the Parliament; which being granted, and we secured from the danger of a War, we shall proceed with cheerfulnesse to the Treaty, and doubt not in a short time to see an happie Con∣clusion,
to the satisfaction of all honest ms Expectation, and that in all our undertakings we shall be found men of truth, fully and singly an∣swering the things we have held forth to the Kingdom in our several Declarations and Pa∣pers, without by or base respects to any private end or interest whatsoever. READING, July 8. 1647. By the Appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of War. Signed, JO. RUSHWORTH, Secretary.
A Paper delivered in by the Commissio∣ners of Parliament, Wednesday, July 7. 1647. THat finding the Expectation of the Parliament and Kingdom to be very great upon the speedy progresse and happie issue of this Treaty; in con∣sideration whereof, we have made it our Care constantly to attend at the appointed times of meeting, and to presse all dispatch there∣in: And we cannot but take notice that the pro∣ceedings on your part have been and are very slowe, and that little or nothing hath been done in the Treaty since our entrance thereupon: and therefore in discharge of our Duty, and the Trust reposed in us, we do very earnestly desire that the Treaty may be effectually proceeded on with all expedition, and the times for meeting punctually kept; there being nothing that shall be wanting in us, according to the power given us, to further a work of so great importance, and which may perfect a right understanding be∣twixt the Parliament and the Army. Reading, July 7. 1647. By the appointment of the Commissioners residing with the Army. Signed, GEO. PYKE, Secretary.
An Answer of the Commissioners of the Army to the Paper of the Commissio∣ners of Parliament about a speedie proceeding. BY the last Paper delivered in unto us from your Lordships at Reading the 7 of July, we perceive you finde, That the Expectati∣on of the Parliament and Kingdom is great upon the speedie progresse and happie issue of this Treatie. We answer, That we do really apprehend the same things with you; neither can we but witnesse that you have constantly at∣tended the appointed times of meeting, and prest dispatch therein: Neverthelesse we can∣not but be very sensible, that you seem to reflect upon us further then there is just cause, in your taking notice that the proceedings herein should be slowe and dilatory on our part, as if we should not seem to desire and labour the quick and speedie settlement of the affairs of the King∣dom in a safe and well-grounded Peace as cordi∣ally as any persons whatsoever. We shall there∣fore desire you to remember with what forward∣nesse we have in the first place presented to you
those things which we did in our hearts conceive necessary in order to a Treaty, and without which being granted, we could not with safety to the Kingdom and satisfaction to our selves proceed in Treaty; and further prest you to pre∣sent them to the Parliament with speed, that a quick dispatch might be had therein, as being in our thoughts the chiefest and surest way to pre∣vent the engaging this Kingdom in a second War; when contrary to our expectation we have found little effectually done in relation to our Desires in those things most concerning the safety and peace of the Kingdom. To the end therefore wee may acquit our selves from being guilty of the delay you mention, and that it may appear to all men where the stick is of not proceeding in the Treaty to a settlement of the peace of the Kingdome so much thirsted after by us all, we thought fit to reminde you of these fol∣lowing proposals, which we have formerly insi∣sisted upon, and to which satisfaction is not gi∣ven. I. That there is nothing done with effect, notwithstanding the Votes of the House, to the dispersing of the Reformado Officers, who still continue in and about London, ready to head Forces, to the apparent hazzard of a new Warre.
II. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House for the speedy sending into Ireland, or disbanding those Forces which left the Ar∣my, and their speciall Order to the Committee at Derby House to take speedy care therein, yet they are still continued in bodies in and a∣bout London, and as wee hear, are daily li∣sting more Forces, pretending the Service of Ireland. III. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House of the tenth of June, and those since of the fifth of July, for the present pur∣ging the of House, yet divers persons compri∣sed in these Votes continue still to sit there. So long as wee remain unsatisfied in the two first of these particulars, wee cannot be secured from those doubts we have experessed of the dan∣ger of a new Warre, especially if it be consider∣ed, that the end of inviting so many Reformado Officers to London, was to lay a foundation of a new Warre, and was principally carried on by the designe of some of those Members of the House of Commons we have impeached. And likewise that divers of the Officers and Souldiers which left this Army were procured by promi∣ses
of pay, and other ingagements, which were likewise designed by the same persons aforemen∣tioned, if possibly they might thereby have broken this Army. And for the last; What comfortable effect may wee expect of a Treaty, so long as the Par∣liament (the supreme Judicatory of the King∣dome) is constituted of some that are men of interests contrary to the common good there∣of, from whom wee can expect nothing but banding and designing, to obstruct and fru∣strate all proceedings. (contrary to their interest) though never so essentiall to the happy settlement of the Kingdome: and if a seasonable remedy be not given herein, wee despair of any good to the Kingdome by way of Treaty. Reading, 7o Julii, 1647. Signed, By the appointment of the Com∣missioners of the Army. WILLIAM CLERK Secretary. FINIS.
