G1071 E112_29 99873632 126112
GOOD NEWES FROM WESTCHESTER; BY GOOD INTELLIGENCE: SHEWING The Resolution of that City to adventure their lives and fortunes in defence of the King and Parliament, being lately opposed by the Cavaliers. ALSO A perfect Reltaion of the Lord Brooke his fidelity to the Parliament, going down to Warwick Castle for the defence of his Countrey. Also the manner of Sir Iohn Sackvills apprehension neere Seaven-Oake in Kent. With the number of horse lately taken by the Earle of Warwick coming from Flanders. AND The description of a great combustion at Brainford on tuesday last, being the 16. of this instant August. wherein many of the Cavaliers had much mischiefe. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Iohn Iackson. August 18. 1642.
GOOD NEWES FROM WESTCHESTER, By true Intelligence. NEwes is so conformable and agreeable an object to the understanding, that good subjects earnestly thirst for the relation thereof, especially when it is true, and such as reflects on the pro∣sperity and good of the King, the Parliament, and the Commonwealth. The true Protestant Religion, for which the Parliament stands, hath a secret quality to attract the good wils and resolutions of this land to expose themselves in defence of the King and Parli∣ment. This occult influence of religion, working su∣pernaturally on humane affections, is the adamant that doth attract such a numerous confluence of fide∣lious subiects to maintaine the pious and religious proceedings of the Parliament. Amongst the rest, the brave & magnanimous resolution of the town of Westchester deserves commemoration: for they (not∣withstanding that many townes have been assaulted, and suffered much by the Cavaliers, who rove about in all parts, to give the countrey a sensible taste of the bitter effects of a civill war) not fearing any opposi∣tion that can be made against them, are fully resol∣ved to maintain the Kings honour, and the Parlia∣ments priviledge against the malignant Party, and have in a Petition presented to the Commons deli∣vered their readinesse to serve the King and Parlia∣ment
with their lives and fortunes; and their  for hindring the drawing up of that Petition is sent for as a delinquent. Much opposition they have had by the new disorderly order of Cavaliers; who de∣light to be the incendiaries of the Commonwealth. But the undaunted courage of the Citizens of West∣chester is firmly contracted and setled upon the King and Parliament, for whom they account their lives but a cheap sacrifice. And that it may be further known how the love and affection of the Commonalty, and the well-affe∣cted Nobility are really and strongly united unto the Parliament; certaine intelligence being given that Banbury is taken by the Earle of Northampton, and that fine Peeces of Ordnance left by the L. Brook in the custody of his sonne M. Fines were forced from him and carried to Warwick, the L. Brook taking this indignity in high indignation, hath now very lately rai∣sed a great and well appointed troupe of horse, that may couragiously encounter with the L. of Northam∣ptons forces; and without all question he will perform noble and heroicall exploits against the ruining flash∣ing valour of the Cavaliers. The L. Brook himselfe, that he may infuse the greater magnanimity into his troupes, doth with his presence give animation and incouragement to their and his resolution: and for that purpose is now (exasperated with the iniuries and affronts offered to him gone down to desend his countrey against the violent oppressions of the ma∣lignant part, that their malice may be daunted at the first apparition of his warlike troupes, intending, by the favour and auspicious appointment of the Parlia∣ment,
not onely to secure his much distracted Coun∣trey from all divellish oppositions and machinations plotted by the malignants; but also to the uttermost hazard of his estate and Fortunes to defend his Castle at Warwick, being an ancient structure rightfully un∣to him belonging; God send him prosperous successe and crowne his attempts with victory, since the grounds of his resolution are pious and honourable, being in defence of his King, Countrey, and Parlia∣ment. And as God hath made this Kingdome resolute and full of fidelity in adhering to the Parliament, so doth he daily demonstrate his miraculous power in the discovery of all pernicious plots and designes against this land, all the purposes and secret preparations of the malignants and Papists being digito Dei, by the finger of almighty God shewed and pointed out unto us before they come to any maturity; and thus by the divine providence of God, some having a great suspi∣tion that Sir Iohn Sackvill was Popishly inclined and ill-affected to the Protestant Religion. Vpon this supposition, he dwelling at, or neere unto the towne of Seven-Oakes in Kent, was by many of the inha∣bitants on Sunday last, when he least suspected it, laid wait for as he was at Church, being a neutrall or Church-Papists, the towne of Seaven-Oakes stood a while in his defence, endeavouring to rescue him from them, that so he might not be taken; but when they perceived that the other who came to apprehend him were too strong for them, they fearing to endan∣ger themselves in such a combustion, and to give of∣fence to the high Court of Parliament, unto whom
he was to be sent as a Delinquent, suffered them to carry him away, afterward having put him in safe cu∣stody, his house being diligently searched, there was found therein all sorts of warlike ammunition; and especially great saddles, all which were conveyed in five waggons upto London; and brought with much ioyfull exultation through the City unto the Parlia∣ment, and besides many horses were also found out, which the said Sir Iohn Sackvill had obscurely kept a long time in a cave underground, which being disco∣vered, they also with the aforesaid ammunition were speedily brought up to London, for without question this Knight had no good intention in providing and secretly keeping such ammunition, saddles and hor∣ses; but (as it may be probably conjectured, did pur∣pose to use them in time of need, and with this un∣known strength to aid the malignant party against the Parliament; but his malicious designe, as others of the like nature, were brought to light, himselfe be∣ing apprehended, and his warlike ammunition and his warlike ammunition and horses seized on as a most happy discovery. Moreover as God hath protected this Parliament and the Kingdome by land, so by his auspicious fa∣vour the Earle of Warwick through his vigilant care and industry hath surprized certain ships coming from Flanders, wherein many great horses were to bee brought over into England, and so to be sent unto his Maiesty, to strengthen the malignant party against the Parliament, but thanks be to God, they are come far short of their intended iourney, though it is likely they were sent from the Queen, or some Catholikes
in Flanders, there being many of the Popish malig∣nant party in forraigne countreys, who would be ex∣ceeding glad to add fuell to the civill war in England, and to send any forces or money to advance the ca∣tholike cause; thereby to subvert the true Protestant Religion, and induce Poperie, as they have alwayes endeavoured by many contrived plots hitherto disco∣vered. This Kingdome is at this present put into great amazement and terrour by the Cavaliers, especially in countrey villages, taking away the armour of all that refuse to go with them or assist them, and slaying them that refuse to give up their armes, robbing carriers and passengers, and taking all the booty that they can get wheresoever they come. But the Parliament hath now sent diverse troupes of horse to relieve the countrey. Westchester also is and hath been much trou∣bled in this common calamity, by reason that His Maiesty had sent thither divers Captains to raise vo∣luntiers, which do much hurt in the city and coun∣trey by their insolencies and evill demeanours to the inhabitants that refuse to obey their commands; but the Maior of Westchester, Sir Iohn Brewerton, and the other Deputy Lieutenants have raised forces to sup∣presse all their attempts and traiterous endeavours tending to disturb the peace of the countrey, and moreover Westchester (as aforesaid) is most loyally and lovingly resolved to shew their courage and magna∣nimity in maintaining the true Protestant Religion, as it evidently appeares by a Petition lately by them presented to the Parliament, wherein they declare their cheerfull willingnesse to defend the King and Parliament against all those who endeavour to ingage
this Kingdome in a civill warre, but hitherto (as the Relation hath shewed) the Commons are fully resol∣ved to withstand all opposers of the Parliament, all their plots and proiects being hitherto by Gods pro∣vidence found out and discoverd. Every day brings forth some new accident. It is reported for certain, that on tuesday last at Brainford there was a great contention between the Cavaliers and the Parliaments souldies, in which skirmish many of the Cavaliers were cut and wounded, some their hands cut off, some their elbowes cut, besides diverse other wounds which they received. Also how Ca∣ptaine De la Barr a French man hath entred into a Pa∣pists house, in whose defence he stands, having resolved there to live and die: which resistance of his gave oc∣casion to the former quarrell between the Cavaliers and our souldiers. Ordered, that Sir Iohn Girlington, Sir George Mid∣dleton, and Sir Edward Fitton be sent for as delin∣quents. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
