G1651 E679_3 99865851 166343
A Great and Famous VICTORY Obtained by the Parliaments Navy Near the Isle of VVIGHT, AGAINST Fifty Sail of Hollanders: With the paticulars of this great and desperate Engagement, the manner of the Fight, and the number of ships sunk and taken, and the great loss on both sides. ALSO The King of Denmarks Declaration, touching the Hol∣landers, the setting forth of his great Armado, the drawing down of all his Land-Forces to the Sea-Coast; and the Queen of Swedens Proclamation, touching the King of Scots, the Parliament of England, and their Fleet at Sea. Published according to Order. Novemb. 2 LONDON: Printed for Georg Horton, Anno 1652.
A great VICTORY Obtained By the English against the Hollander on Thursday near the Isle of Wight. Honoured Sir, ON Sunday last, from very clean hands, we re∣eived a most exact and fair account of the pro∣ceedings of our Navy at sea, and that they are again put forth, and became Masters of several prizes: but purchased at too dear a rate; for one of our Frigots hath been extreamly ingaged, with the Hollander, and her main-mast, and misn, both taken off by chain-shot; she maintained a very gallant dispute for many hours, but at last being overpowred was forced to tack about, and strike into Portsmouth, with the losse of some men; the Free-booters are extream busie, and have trussed up some of our ships near Berwick; laden with excellent commo∣dities; but on the contrary we have taken divers of the
Flemings; amongst the rest divers Amsterdam Merchants laden with Wines, Sugar, Salt, and other considerable prize: yet notwithstanding the enemy seems as resolute as potent; for on Thursday last, a great fleet, consisting of about 50 sail, began to act a new Tragedy upon the Neptune Ocean, neer the Isle of Wight; which the Eng∣lish perceiving, prepared to receive them, and according∣ly 30 gallant men of war hoisted sail, and bore up to them: and after a sharp conflict expelled their powers, and forced them to decline engagement, and after two hours chase, sunk four, took eleven, and dissipated the rest: but not without losse. From severall parts beyond the sea this week thus. The Senatours with the King of Denmark are yet at Copenhagen, and the rest of those that make up the Na∣tional Senate, are summoned to appear within a time li∣mited. His Majesty of Denmark hath also sent Com∣missioners to view all the fortifications on the sea side, and to provide with all necessaries, as also given Com∣mission to all the Officers of the Navy may be in a readi∣nesse to set forth upon any occasion; some of the Dutch ships riding near Copenhagen did lately seize upon three Dantzick ships which were bound for Ostend, and having detained them some days upon pretence that they were bound for London, the parties grieved having made their addresses to the King, and made it appear that there was no such thing intended, the said ships and goods were set at liberty, and remained under the Kings protection, wai∣ting for a fair wind to depart thence. The Queen of Swe∣den and her Councel are very busie in giving audience to several Embassadours both from Germany, as also from divers other Kings and States, they have made a Procla∣mation to all the Senatours which are absent to repair within a set time to Stockholm, that so with all conveni∣ency
they may proceed to the choice of new Senatours, in lieu of those that are lately dead: all things are now wor∣king towards the general meeting at the Imperial Dyet at Ratisbon. The long siege of Barcelona is now come to an end, the Generallissimo Don Juan de Austria, and the Marquesse of Mortara, General of the Spanish army by land, having brought that City for want of provisions to make a com∣position, and thereupon to surrender, which was done a∣bout the latter end of September, after they had endured a very hard siege for the space of fifteen moneths within which time there hath perished a very great number of people, of all ages and sexes, by the sword, the Pestilence, and famine, and the first and last of these hath likewise destroyed many of the besiegers, so that considering mo∣ny spent and men lost, the place is dear bought, as for par∣ticulars we can say no more, but that they have honour∣able terms granted. The French Vice-King with the Go∣vernour of the City have liberty to march out with the rest mentioned in the articles and are both gone to Perpig∣nan, by the next we shall give you a more particular ac∣count. You have heard of the surrender of the City of Casal to the Duke of Mantua the true owner thereof, but the Citadel stood out, being kept by a French garison commanded by Monsier S. Angelo, who having refused to surrender upon the summons, the batteries were there∣upon made ready, and the place being stormed twice, the besieged considering their condition, and how little hopes there was of any relief, did at last come to composition. which was granted them upon honourable terms, and so they marched out, and had a convoy to bring them into Pi∣edmont.
By Letters from Edenburgh, October 24. came thus. On Wednesday the 20 instant, the English Commission∣ers for administration of Justice sate upon criminal mat∣ters at Edenburgh: The first day was spent in reading their Commission from the Commissioners at Dalkieth, calling the Sheriffs of the several Counties on this side the Frith, viz. Barwick, Selkirk, Pebles, Linlithgow, Had∣ington, Lothian and Roxborough. Those Sheriffs that ap∣peared not, were fined 200 l. Scotch each. Afterwards the Gentlemen of the Counties, who were to do their service were called, and such as appeared not, fined 100 l. Scotch; and then several Delinquents were called, and set down for tryal. Since that, these three days have been spent in the tryal, and fining of several persons for Adul∣tery, Incest, and Fornication, for which there were above threescore persons brought before the Judges in a day. And it is observable, That (such is the malice of these people) that most of them were accused for facts done divers years since, and the chief proof against them was their own Confession before the Kirk, who are in this worse than those of the Romish Religion, who do not make so ill an use of their Auricular Confession, some of the facts committed 5, some 6, 10, 16, 18, and 21 years since. There was one Ephraim Bennet, a Gunner in Lieth, indicted, convicted, and condemned for coyning of Six∣pences, Shillings, and half Crowns; also two English-men, Wilkinson and Newcome, condemned for robbing and killing one Scotch man near Haddington in March last. But that which is most observable is, that some were brought before them for Witches, two whereof had been brought before the Kirk, about the time of the Armies comming into Scotland, and having confest it, were turned over to the Civil Magistrates. The Court
demanding how they came to be proved Witches, they declared that they were forced to do it by the exceeding torture they were put to, which was by tying their Thumbs behind them, and then hanging them up by them, whiles two Highlanders whipt them; after which they set lighted Candles to the soles of their feet, and between their toes, then burned them by putting lighted Candles into their mouths, and then burning them in the head; there were 6 of them accused in all, four whereof died of the torture. The Judges are resolved to enquire into the business, and have appointed the Sheriff, Ministers, and Tormentors to be found out, and to have an accompt of the ground of this cruelty. Another woman that was sus∣pected (according to their thought) to be a Witch, was kept 28 days and nights with bread and water, being stript naked and laid upon a cold stone, with onely a hair cloth over her. Others had hairy shirts dipped in vinegar put on them to fetch off the skin. It is very probable there will shortly be more discoveries of this kind of Amboyna usage, but here is enough for reasonable men to comment upon. On Wednesday last, the Marquess of Argyle came to Edenburgh, he had so far perfected the work in the High∣lands, that our prisoners are released out of Carversara Castle, (where about 60 of them were kept) 20 miles from Innerrara, where they had near perished, had not they been allowed some of their own Bisket and Cheese. The Marquess of Argyle used them very civilly at their comming by his house, allowing them good quarters, some money to bear their charges, and giving them Pas∣ses through his Countrey.
The most illustrius Princess, the Queen of Sweden, hath set forth a Proclamation, adjuring and commanding all her Captains and Officers of her Navy Royal, to yeeld obedience unto her special Edict and Decree, for the protection and preservation of the English ships (commissioned either by the titular King of Scots, or the Parliament) from the violence of the Hollander: and that they shall likewise receive protection as well upon their Naval Affairs throughout the Baltick Seas, as with∣in their own confines and territories; In pursuance whereof, her Majesty hath given Order for 50 sail of Men of War to be immediately set forth, to attend the motion of the English and Dutch. FINIS.
