G1774 E669_1 99866088 118349
A Great VICTORY OBTAINED By his Excellency the Lord Gen: BLAKE, Commander in chief of the Parliaments Navy at Sea; against the Lord Admiral Vantrump, Lieutenant-General for the States of Holland. With the manner of their Engagement; the particulars of the Fight on Sunday last up∣on the Dutch-Coast; the number of ships sunk, fir'd, and taken; the beating of the Hollan∣ders into their Harbors; and Generall Blakes Resolution to fall in upon them with fire and sword. Likewise, the Dutch-mens new Oath and Protestation, to fight it out to the last man; the shipping of their Land-forces; the double man∣ning of their Navy; a perfect List of the English Fleet; and the Royal Soveraign putting forth to Sea for their assistance. Published by Authority. London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.
Another bloudy Fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch upon the Coast of Holland: With the desperate assail∣ing of Vantrump, by Gen. Blake; the boarding of the Flemmins; the dispersing of the Navy; and the re-inforcing of di∣vers gallant ships into their Harbors. SIR, ON Thursday being the 25 of this instant June, 1652. His Excellency Generall Blake weighed anchor with sixty four Men of War; and having double man'd each ship, hoysted sayl about eight of the clock in the forenoon, to find out Vantrump; and (accord∣ing to his Commission, and Instructions, to fight
him: The whole Fleet being upon their motion, his Excellency gave Orders to Captain Holland, and Captain Mooton, to scout forth with their two Fri∣gats, the Star and Signet; but they had not sailed many leagues, before they made a discovery of cer∣tain Hollanders; and bearing up to them, the rest of our Fleet being about a league distance, Captain Holland gave them abroad side with ten Guns: the Dutch-men answer'd him with the like salute: No sooner had they exchanged four broad sides, but im∣mediatly came up the Star-Frigat, presenting them with seven broad sides one after another: and com∣ing to grapling, the musketiers on both sides, main∣tained the Dispute with great gallantry and resolu∣tion; till at last, the English Red-coats, consisting of Col. Ingoldsbys Regiment of Foot, plaid so fast up∣on them with small shot and hand-granadoes, that they soon cleered the Decks, fired the Misle and Main-sail; and afterwards boarded two of the Hol∣landers, killing 47, and surprized about one hundred and twenty: Many there were that leapt out of the Port-holes into the Sea, and drowned themselves, by reason that they bid defiance to the English, and chose rather to sacrifice their lives in the merciless Ocean, then yield obedience unto them. The rest of the Hollanders, being eleven in number, after a sharp
conflict, declined Engagement, and struck into their Harbors: This sudden Onset hath caused Vantrump to call in several Squadrons; to the end, that his Fleet may be in an intire posture to receive the Enemy: Gen. Blake with his whole Navy lies about New∣port point, within three leagues of the Dutch; and on Sunday last we hear that they fought; a List of the English ships that engaged I have sent you here inclosed, viz. A List of the Parliaments Fleet now upon the Coast of Holland, engaged with Vantrump. Resolution, J. Blake, Ge∣neral of the Navy, 68 pieces of Ordnance, & man'd with 800 Sea∣men and souldiers. James, Captain William Pen, Vice-Admiral, 60 Guns, and 700 men. Andrew, Major Bourn, Rear-Admirall, 700 men, and 60 Guns. Tryumph, Capt. Blake, 68 Guns. Victory, Captain Man, 60 Guns. Rainbow, Sir G. Ayscue 60 Guns Fairfax, Cap. Lawson, 62 Guns. Speaker, Capt. Coppin, 62 Guns Garland, Capt. Osburn, 48 Guns.
Diamond. 42 Guns. Rubey. 42 Guns. Worcester, capt. Young, 42 Guns. Dragon, captain Stokes, 42 Guns. Tyger, captain Peacock, 40 Guns. Adventure, captain Ball, 40 Guns. Assurance, captain Sanders 40 Guns. Saphire, captain Moulton, 30 Guns. Nightingale, captain Rey∣nolds, 26 guns Maremaid, capt. Staynard, Convertine, 46 guns Convert, 24 guns Star, captain Moulton, 24 guns. Signet, captain Holland, 24 guns. Old-Warwick, 28 guns. Revenge, 36 guns. Thunder-Frigat 22 guns. Senturion, 40 guns. Primrose 14 guns. WeymoutL 14 guns. Lilly 12 guns. Vanguard 46 guns. Portsmouth Frigat, 46 guns. Nonsuch, 40 guns. Pellican, captain Jorden, 42 guns. Foresight. 42 guns. Lyon 42 guns. The ten Whelps, thirty guns in each. Marchants ships. Hannibal, capt. Tatum. 32 guns. Prosperous 40 guns. Hercules 34 guns Charles 32 guns Giles 32 guns Society 40 guns Elizabeth 40 guns London-Mary 40 guns
These have been deeply engaged in the Commonwealths service; and have deport∣ed themselves with singular dexterity a∣gainst Van-Trump, who, after a bloudy & great engagement, was enforced to decline, and get off, to the protection of their Forts and Sconces; but not without great loss, for we have received advertisements, that Gen. Blake hath taken seven, sunk two, and fired three, with the loss of one ship. Van∣trump is preparing for another engagement and shipping from several Ports and towns are coming to him: He hath also double man'd his ships, both with Sea-men and Land-men, who hath taken an Oath and Protestation to live and die together, and to fight it out to the last man. The General hath sent for six more fire∣ships out of the Downs, and is resolved to fire and destroy the Enemy in their Har∣bors,
if they wil not come out to fight him at sea. We have a squadron of ships lies scouting up and down the Channel in seve∣ral places; and often way lay the Holland∣ers. The Royal soveraign, alias the Com∣monwealth, is putting forth to sea, being new cork'd, tallow'd, and rig'd: she is taken one deck lower; and hath one hundred brass Guns in her: she is an excellent swift sayler, notwithstanding the greatness of her burthen, and carrieth fourteen hundred men. From Dover, June 30. 1652. FINIS.
