M2802 E324_3 99861312 113444
THE SOULES Own evidence, for its own IMMORTALITY. In a very pleasant and learned discourse, Selected out of that excellent Treatise entituled, The trunesse of Christian Religion, against Atheists, Epicures, &c. First compiled in French by Famous Phillip Mornay, Lord of Plessie Marlie, afterward turned into English by Eloquent Sir Phillip Sydney, and his assistant, Master Arthur Golden, Anno Domini MDLXXXVIII. And now re-published. By John Bachiler Master of Arts, somtimes of Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton in Popes-head Ally, 1646.
To the Reader. IUdicious Reader, the iniquity of the times, having so far corrupted the minds of some, that the very innate and inbred principles of Nature (especially about a Deity, the sove∣reigne welfare and the Immortality of the Soule) seeme in a manner to be quite obliterated and extinct in them; I thought it would not be unseasonable, to recommend to thy most serious Meditations, that excellent Trea∣tise mentioned in the Frontispiece, as an Antidote a∣gainst the Atheisticall and dangerous Tenets now a∣broad. The Noble Authour of it thou wilt soone find was a man of no meane parts, and of no common Learning. De∣licacy of Wit, strength of Reason, streams of Eloquence, with varieties both of solid and curious notions, come all flowing from him. Hee will tell thee more, even from the Ancient doctrine of the very Heathen, than happily thou ever heard'st of, or (at leastwise) evertook∣est much notice of, though borne and bred in so bright an Age, and among such too, as passe for no meane Pro∣ficients in Christianity. Those Mysterious (though glo∣rious) Truths, which like Mines of Gold under ground, run along more hiddenly, through the letter of the Scriptures, thou maist there meet with discussed at large, with as much sobriety as cleernesse.
Dost thou desire to know by what arguments, even of reason, thou maist prove a Deity? that Deity to be but one only? and yet distinguished by a Trinity of Beings, that which wee call a Trinity of persons, viz. Father, Son, and Spirit? if thou wilt take the pains, (I might say, the pleasure rather) to gaine the knowledge of such high (yet necessary) points: In the first six Chapters of the said Treatise, thou maist (more fully than thou art aware) instruct thy self. Dost thou enquire after the highest and most sove∣reigne Good? wherein it lyeth, and wherein it lyeth not? in the 18 and 19 Chapters thou findest that also very sweetly and fully resolved. Lastly, next unto the knowledge of God what hee is in Himself, and what to His creatures, dost thou seek to understand thy Self, what once thou wert, and what still thou art; Read but this ensuing Paragraph, peculiarly selected out for thy present use, and thou shalt easily per∣ceive what DivineIgniculi scin∣tillantes. O∣nuphr. de Anima. sparks lye raked up under ashes, within thine own bosome, sparks which (when. Homer. Odys. 5. once stirred up) do but blow a little, and thou shalt know far∣ther, as well what the duration as the excellencie of thy being is, And that thou art a creature bearing in thee, be∣sides a plurality Gen. 2 7. of present lives, the very seed of Immor∣tality. In all which severall enquiries whilst thou readest and considerest, thou maist expect that, the reasonable part (darke and cloudy, notwithstanding as it may be) shall quickly receive an Irradiation, and that not onely from the intrinsecall operations of thine own minde, but also from the consent of the wisest men among all Nations.
Zoroastres the Chaldean, Trismegistus the Aegyptian, Orpheus the Greeke, Pherecides the Syrian, after them, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Porphyri∣us, Amelius, &c, all teach thee in their severall ages. And if that be not sufficient, Thou hast the confession of the very Devils; viz. that there is a God, and but one God, with Trinity of persons in unitie of Essence. That the Soul is an Immortall substance, and the aforesaid Deity, The sovereigne welfare of it, according to what thou believest from the only true sacred Oracle. Let not then that Treatise, rare and singular, as it is be neglected by thee, for though it hath a long time layn obscurely, as a Diamond in the dark, little knowne and lesse looked after, yet I dare say, by that time thou hast well examined it, and shalt have tasted the sublime Hea∣venly matter conteined in it, thou wilt estimate it at a very great value, even worthy (many passages of it) to be written in characters of gold. Buy it therefore and read it, that from the very light of nature, thou mayst be enabled to confute blasphe∣mers: Judge the whole by this little piece, which if thou readest thorough, and with diligent attention, thou mayst benefit thy selfe, and therein answer the desire of him, who heartily wisheth the true good of Thine Immortall soul: JOHN BACHILER.
CHAP. I. That the Soul of Man is immortall, or dyeth not. HItherto I have treated of the world that is to be conceived in understanding, and of the sensible World (as the Pla∣tonists tearm them) that is to say, of God and of this World. Now followeth the examining of the little World (as they terme it) that is to say, of man. Concerning God, we have ac∣knowledged him to be a Spirit: and as touching the world we have found it to be a body. In man we have an abridgement of both, namely of God in respect of spirit,Man is both Soul and body. and of the world in composition of body as though the Creator of purpose to set forth a mirrour of his works, intended to bring into one little compasse both the infi∣nitenesse of his own nature, and also the hugenesse of the whole world together. We see in mans body a wonderfull mixture of the foure Elements, the veyns spreading forth like Rivers to the uttermost members; as many instruments of sense, as there be sensible na∣tures in the world, a great number of sinews, flesh-strings and knitters; a head by speciall priviledge directed up to Heaven∣ward, and hands serving to all manner of services. Whatsoever he is that shall consider no more but onely this instrument, without life, without sense and without moving; cannot but thinke verily that it is made to very great purpose; and he must needs cry out as Hermes or as the Sarzin Abala doth, that man is a miracle which far surmounteth, not onely these lower Elements, but also the very Heaven and all the ornaments thereof. But if he could (as it were out of himselfe) behold this body receiving life, and entering into the use of all his motions with such forwardnesse, hands be∣stirring themselves so nimbly, and after so sundry fashions, and the Senses uttering their force so far off, without stirring out of their place: thinke you not that he would be wonderfully ravished, and so much more wonder at the said life, moving and sense, than at the body, as he wondered afore at the body, to behold the excel∣lencie of the proportion thereof above the masse of some stone? For what comparison is there betweene a Lute and a Lute-player, or between a dumbe instrument, and him that maketh it to sound? What would hee say then if he could afterward see how the same man being now quickned attaineth in one moment from the one side of the earth to the other, without shifting of place; descending downe to the centre, of the world, and mounting up above the out∣termost
circle of it both at once; present in a thousand places at one instant, imbracing the whole without touching it; keeping upon the earth, and yet containing it; beholding the Heavens from be∣neath, and being above the Heaven of Heavens, both at once? Should he not bee compelled to say, that in this silly body there dwelleth a greater thing then the body, greater then the earth, yea greater then the whole world together? Then let us say with Plato, that man is double, outward, and inward. The outward man is that which we see with our eys, which forgoeth not his shape when it is dead, no more then a Lute forgoeth his shape when the Lute-player ceaseth from making it to sound howbeit that both life, mo∣ving, sense, and reason be out of it. The inward man is the Soule, and that is properly the very man, which useth the body as an in∣strument; whereunto though it be united by the power of God, yet doth it not remove when the body runneth. It seeth when the eyes be shut, and somtimes seeth not when the eyes be wide open: It travelleth while the body resteth, and resteth when the body travel∣leth, that is to say, it is able of it selfe to performe his own actions, without the help of the outward man, whereas on the contrary part the outward without the help of the inward, that is to wit, the body without the presence of the Soule, hath neither sense, moving, life, no, nor continuance of being. In the outward man we have a Counterfet of the whole world, and if you rip them both up by piecemeale, ye shall finde a wonderfull agreement betwixt them. But my purpose in this book is not to treat of the things that per∣tain peculiarly to the body. In the inward man wee have a summe of whatsoever life sence and moving is in all creatures, and moreover an Image or rather a shadow (for the Image is defaced by our sinne) of the Godhead it self. And that is the thing which wee have to examine in this Chapter. In Plants, we perceive that besides their bodies which wee see, there is also an inward vertue which we see not, whereby they live, grow, bud, and beare fruit: which vertue wee call the quickening Soule, and it maketh them to differ from Stones and Metalls, which have it not. In sensitive living things, we finde the selfesame vertue, which worketh while they sleep and are after a sort as the Plants; and there withall we finde another certaine ver∣tue▪ or power which seeth, heareth, smelleth, tasteth, and feeleth; which also in many of them doth hoord up the things brought in by
the sences; which manner of power the Plants are void of. This do we terme the sensitive Soule, because the effects thereof are discer∣ved and executed by the Sences.In Man are three abilities of Soule. In man we have both the quick∣ning and the Sensitiue, the former uttering it self in the nourish∣ing and increasing of him, and the latter in the subtility of sence and imagination, where through he is both Plant and Beast together. But yet moreover wee see also a Mind which considereth and be∣holdeth, which reapeth profit of the things that are brought in by the Sences, which by his seeing conceiveth that which it seeth not; which of that which is not, gathereth that which is; & finally which pulleth a man away both from earth and from all sensible things, yea and (after a sort) from himself too. This doe we call the reaso∣nable Soule, and it is the thing that maketh man to bee man, (and not a Plant or a brute Beast as the other two do,) and also to be the Image or rather a shadow of the Godhead, in that (as we shall say hereafter) it is a Spirit that may have continuance of being a∣lone by it selfe without the bodie. And by the way, whereas I say that the inward man hath a quickening power as a Plant hath, a sensitiue power as a Beast hath, and a power of understanding wherby he is a man: my meaning is not that he hath three Soules but onely one Soule; that is to wit, that like as in the brute Beast the sensitive Soule comprehendeth the quickening Soule; so in man the reasonable Soule comprehendeth both the sensitive and the quickening, and executeth the offices of them all three, so as it both liveth, feeleth, and reasoneth even as well and after the same manner, as the mind of a man may intend to his own household-matters, to the affaires of the Commonweale, and to heavenly things all at once. Or to speake more fitly, these three degrees of Soules are three degrees of life, whereof the second exceedeth and conteineth the first, and the third exceedeth and conteineth both the other two. The one, without the which the bodie cannot live, is the Soule or life of the Plant, and is so tied to the bodie, that it sheweth not it selfe in any wise out of it. The second, which cannot live without the bodie, is the Soule or life of the Beast, which doth well utter forth his power and force abroad, but yet not otherwise then by the members and instruments of the body whereunto it is tyed. The third, which can of it selfe live and continue vvithout the body, but not the body vvithout it, is the soule of man vvhich giveth life inwardly to all his parts, sheweth forth his life abroad
in the perceiving of all things subject to sence, and retaineth still his force (as shall be said hereafter) yea and increaseth it, even when the strength of the body and the very livelinesse of the sences fail. And in very deed, you shall see a man forgoe all his sences one after another as the instruments of them decay, and yet have still both life and reason unappaired. The cause whereof is, that some of the instruments of life and sense doe faile, but the life it selfe vvhich quickneth them fayleth not. And therefore the Beast forgoeth not life in losing sense, but hee utterly forgoeth sence in forgoing life. And that is because life is the ground of the abilities of sense, and the sensitive life is a more excellent life than the quickning life, as wherein those powers and abilities are as in their oot. To be short, he that bereaveth man or beast of the use of sences, or man of the right use of reason, doth not thereby bereave him of life▪ but he that bereaveth the beast▪ or the outward man of their life, doth therewithall bereave them of sence and reason. Therefore it is a most sure argument, that the soule which causeth a beast to live, and the soule that causeth it to have sence, are both one, that is to wit, one certain kind of life more lively and more excellent than the life that is in Plants. And likewise that the soule vvhich cau∣seth man to live, to have sence, and to reason, is but one, that is to vvit, one certain kinde of life more excellent, more lively, and of further reach, than the life of the Beast. But like as sence is as it vvere the forme or Selfebeing (if I may so terme it) of the life of a beast; so is reason or understanding the very forme and Selfebeing of the soule of man; and (to speak properly) it is the soule or life of the soule, life as the apple of our eye is the very eye of our eye. And in very deed, vvhen the minde is earnestly occupied, the sences are at a stay; and vvhen the sences are overbusied, the nourishment and digestion is hindered, and contrariwise: vvhich thing could not come to passe if the soule vvere any more than one substance, vvhich by reason that it is but one, cannot utter his force alike in all places at once, but yeeldeth the lesse care one vvhere so long as it is ear∣nestly occupyed anotherwhere. In this soule of man (vvhich yet notwithstanding is but one) the diversity of the powers and abili∣ties is very apparant. The quickning power doth nourish, increase and mayntaine us; and Reason and Sence meddle not therewith, neyther have they power to impeach the working thereof. The truth whereof appeareth in this, that those things are best done
when our mind is at rest, and our sences are asleep; insomuch that oftentimes we forg'd the sence and moving of some parts by some Rheume or some Palsey, and yet the same parts ceasse not to be nourished still. Also, the sensitive life seeth and perceiveth a far off, yea oftentimes without setting of the mind thereupon, or without considering what the Sence conceiveth. Some men which have but weak Sences, have very quicke understanding; and likewise on the contrary part. Againe, some fall into a Consumption, which want not the perfect use of their Sences. Sometime the reasonable part is so earnestly bent and occupied about the things that it liketh of, that by the increasing of it selfe, it hurteth and diminisheth the part that quickneth. Also it standeth in argument against the Sences, and reproveth them of falshood, and concludeth contrary to their information. And it may be that the man which hath his digestion perfect and his Sences sound, hath not his wit or reason sound in like case. Now, were the Soule but onely one ability, it could not be so. But now is the same divided manifestly into wit or understanding, and will; the one serving to devise, and the other to execute. For we understand divers things which wee will not, and wee will divers things which we understand not: which contrary operations cannot be attributed both to one power. Neverthelesse, the uniting of all these powers together is with such distinctnesse, and the distinguishing of them is with such union, that ordinarily they meet altogether in one self-same action, the one of them as readily (by all likelihood) as the other, howbeit that every of them doth his own work severally by himselfe, and one afore another as in respect of their objects. Thus have we three sorts of men, according to the three powers or abilities of the inward man. Namely, the earthly man, which like the Plant mindeth nothing but sleeping and feeding, making all his senses and all his reason to serve to that purpose, as in whom the care of this present life onely, hath devoured and swallowed up his sences and understanding. The Sensuall man (as S. Paul himselfe termeth him) who is given wholly to these sensible things imbacing and casting down his reason so far, as to make it a bond-slave to his sences and the pleasures and delights thereof: And the reasonable man, who liveth properly in spirit and minde, who intereth into himselfe to know himselfe, and goeth out of himselfe to behold God; making this life to serve to the attainment of a bet∣ter,
and using his Sences but as instruments and servants of his reason. After as any of these three powers doe reigne and beare sway in man, that is to wit, after as a man yeeldeth himselfe more to one than to another of them; so becommeth he like unto the Spi∣rits, the brute Beasts, or Plants, yea and the very Blocks and Stones. But it is our disposition even by kind, to be carried away by our corrupt nature, and by the obiects which hemme us in on all sides; but as for against our nature yea or beyond our nature, our nature is not able to do any thing at all. Now, it is not enough for us to know that wee have a soule whereby wee live, feele, and understand, and which being but one hath in it selfe alone so many sundry powers or abilities: for it will be demanded of us by and by what this soule properly is. And soothly if I should say, I cannot tell what it is, I should not belye my selfe a whit; for I should but confesse mine own ignorance, as many great learned men have done afore me. And I should doe no wrong at all to the Soule it self; for sith we cannot deny the effects thereof, the lesse that wee be able to declare the nature and being thereof, the more doth the excellency thereof shine forth. Againe, it is a plaine case, that no thing can comprehend the thing that is greater than it selfe. Now, our Soule is after a sort lesse than it selfe, in as much as it is wrapped up in this body, in likewise as the man that hath gyves and fetters on his feet, is after a sort weaker than himselfe. Neverthelesse, let us assay to satisfie such demands as well as wee can. And for as much as it is the Image of God, not only in respect of the government and mayntenance of the whole World, but also even in the very nature thereof: as we said here∣tofore when we spake of the nature of God, if we cannot expresse or conceive what it is, let us at leastwise be certified what it is not. First of all,The body and the soul be not one self-same thing. that the Soule and the Body bee not both one thing, but two very far differing things, and also that the soule is no part of the body, it appeareth of it selfe without further proof. For if the soule were the body, or a part of the body, it should grow with the body, as the other parts of the body doe, and the greater that the body were,, the greater also should the soule be. Nay, con∣trary wise, the body increaseth to a certain age and then stayeth; after which age is commonly the time that the Soule doth most grow, and those that are strongest of minde are commonly weakest of body, and the Soule is seen to be full of livelinesse in a languish∣ing
body, and to grow the more in force, by the decay of the bo∣die. The Soule then groweth not with the body, and therefore it is not the body, nor any part of the body. And whereas I speak of growing in the soule, by growing I mean the profiting there∣of in power and vertue, as the body groweth in greatnesse by fur∣ther inlarging. Again, if the Soule were the body it should lose her strength and soundnesse with the body so as the maimed in bo∣dy should therewith feele also a mayme in his understanding, as well as in his members: whosoever were sick of any disease, should also be sick in his reason; he that limpeth or halteth, should there∣with halt in soule also: the blinde mans soule should bee blinde, and the lame mans soule should be lame. But we see contrariwise, that the maymed and the sick, the cripples and the blinde, have their soules whole and sound, and their understanding perfect and cleer-sighted in itselfe. To be short, many a man dyeth whose body is sound, and differeth not a whit in any part from that it was when it was alive, and yet notwithstanding, both life, moving, sense, and understanding are out of it. Let us say then that in the body there was a thing which was not of the body, but was a far o∣ther thing than the body. Some wilfull person will object here, that the force and strength of the soule groweth with the body, as appeareth in this that a man grown will remove that which a child cannot, and that a child of two years old will goe, which thing a babe of two moneths old cannot doe. But he should consider also, that if the selfesame man or the selfesame child should have a mischance in his leg or in his arme, he should thereby forgoe the strength and moving thereof, whereas yet notwithstanding his soule should have her former force and power still to move the other as shee did afore. Therefore it is to be said, not that the childs soul is grown or strengthened by time; but rather that his sinews are dryed and hardened which the soule useth as strings and instruments to move withall and therefore when age hath loosened and weakned them, a man hath need of a staffe to help them with, although he have as good a will to run as he had when he was young. The soule then which moveth them all at one beck, hath the selfesame power in infancie which it hath in age, and the same in age which it hath in the prime of youth: and the fault is onely in the instrument, which is unable to execute the operations thereof: like as the cunning of a Lute-player
is not diminished by the moistnesse or slacknesse of the Lutestrings, nor increased by the over high straining and tight standing of them; but indeed in the one he cannot shew his cunning at all, and in the other he may shew it more or lesse. Likewise the speech of children commeth with their teeth, howbeit that the speech doe manifestly utter it selfe first, in that they prattle many things which they cannot pronounce: and in old men it goeth away again with their teeth, and yet their eloquence is not abated thereby. As for Demosthenes, although hee surmounted all the Orators of his time, yet were there some letters which he could not pronounce. Give unto old age or unto infancie the same sinews and teeth, and as able and lusty limbs and members as youth hath; and the actions which the soule doth with the body and by the body, I meane so farre forth as concerne the abilities of sence and live∣lynes, shall be performed as well in one age as in another. But had∣dest thou as great indifferencie in iudging of the force and power of thyne owne soule, as of the cunning of a Lute-player, (I say not by the nimblenes of his fingers which are perchance knotted with the gout, but by the playne and sweet Harmonie of his Ta∣bulatorie as they terme it, which maketh thee to deeme him to have cunning in his head, although hee can no more utter it with his hands,) so as thou wouldest consider how thou hast in thy selfe a desire to go, though thy feet be not able to beare thee; a discretion to iudge of things that are spoken; though thyne eyes cannot con∣vey it unto thee; a sound eloquence, though for vvant of thy teech thou cannot vvell expresse it; and vvhich is above all the rest, a sub∣stantiall quicke and heavenly reason, even vvhen thy body is most earthly and drooping. Thou vvouldest soone conclude that the force and power of quickning▪ moving, and perceiving, is vvhole and sound in thy soule, and that the default is altogether in thy body. Insomuch that if she had a nevv body and nevv instruments given unto her, she vvould be as lusty and cheerely as ever she vvas, and that the more she perceiveth the body to decay, the more she labou∣reth to retire into her self vvhich is a plaine proofe of that she is not the body nor any part of the body, but the very life and in worker of the body. And sith it is so,That the Soul is a substance. there needeth no long scanning vvhether the soul be a substance or a qualitie. For, seeing that qualities have no being but in another thing than themselves; the life vvhich cau∣seth
another thing to be, cannot be a qualitie. Forasmuch then as the Soul maketh a man to be a man; who otherwise should be but a carcasse or carion: doubtlesse (unlesse we will say that the onely dif∣ference which is betwixt a man and a dead carcasse, is but in acci∣dents) we must needs grant that the soule is a forming substance and a substantiall forme, yea and a most excellent substance infinitely pas∣sing the outward man, as which by the power and vertue thereof causeth another thing to have being, and perfecteth the bodily sub∣stance which seemeth outwardly to have so many perfections. But hereupon inseweth another controversie, whether this sub∣stance be a bodily or an unbodily substance: which cause requireth somewhat longer examination. Soothly, if we consider the nature of a body, it hath certain measurings, and comprehendeth not any thing which is not proportioned according to the greatnesse and capacity thereof. For, like as it selfe must be fain to have a place in another thing; so must other things occupie some certain place in it, by reason whereof it commeth to passe, that things can have no place therein if they be greater then it, without annoying the one the other. To be short, if the thing be lesse than the body that con∣taineth it, the whole body shall not contain it, but onely some part thereof: And if it be greater, then must some part thereof needs be out of it:Bodilesse. for there is no measuring of bodies but by quantity. Now we see how our soule comprehendeth heaven and earth, without annoying either other; and likewise, time past, present, and to come, without troubling one annother; and finally innumerable places, persons and towns, without cumbering of our understanding. The great things are there in their full greatnesse, and the small things in their uttermost smallnesse, both of them whole and sound, in the soule whole and sound, and not by piecemeale or onely but in part of it. Moreover, the fuller it is, the more it is able to receive, the more things that are couched in it, the more it still coveteth; and the greater the things be, the fitter is shee to receive them even when they be at the greatest. It followeth therefore that the soule (which after a sort is infinite) cannot be a body. And so much the lesse can it so be, for that whereas it harboreth so many and so great things in it, it selfe is lodged in so small a body. Again, as a thou∣sand divers places are in the soule or minde without occupying any place; so is the minde in a thousand places without changing of place; and that ere whiles not by succession of time, nor by turns,
but oftentimes altogether at one instant. Bid thy Soule or Mind goe to Constantinople, and forthwith to turne backe againe to Rome, and straight way to be at Paris or Lyons: Bid it passe tho∣row Amercia, or to goe about Affricke; and it dispatcheth all these iourneys at a trice: looke whether soever thou directest it, there it is; and or ever thou callest it backe, it is at home again. Now, is there a body that can be in divers places at once, or that can passe with∣out removing, or that can move otherwise than in time, yea and in such time as (within a little under or over) is proportioned both to his pace, and to the lenght of the way which it hath to goe: Then is it certain that our Soule is not a bodily substance; which thing appeareth so much the more plainly, in that being lodged in this body which is so movable, it removeth not with the body. Also it is a sure ground, that two bodies connot mutually enter either in∣to other, nor conteine either other: but the greater must alway needes conteine, and the lesser must needes be conteined. But by our Soules, we enter, not only either into others bodies, but also either into others minds, so as we comprehend either other by mutuall understanding, and imbrace either other by mutuall loving. It followeth then that this substance which is able to receive a bo∣dilesse thing, can be no body; and that so much the rather, for that the body which seemeth to hold it, conteineth it not. Nay verily, this Soule of ours is so farre of from being a bodily substance, and is so manifestly a Spirit; that to lodge all things in it selfe, it ma∣keth them all after a sort spirituall, and bereveth them of their bo∣dies; and if there were any bodylinesse in it, it were unable to enter into the knowledge of a bodie. So in a Glasse a thousand shapes are seene: but if the cleere of the Glasse had any peculiar shape of it owne, the Glasse could yeeld none of those shapes at all. Also all vi∣sible things are imprinted in the eye; but if the sight of the eye had any peculiar colour of it owne, it would be a blemish to the sight, so as it should either not see at all, or else all things should seeme like to that blemish. Likewise, whereas the Tongue is the discerner of all tasts; if it be not cleere but cumbered with humours, all things are of taste like to the humour, so as if it be bitter, they also be bit∣ter; & if it be waterish, they be waterish to; yea and if it be bitter, it can not judge of bitternes it self. That a thing may receive all shapes all colours, and all tasts; it behoveth the same to be cleere from all shapes, from all colour, and from all savour of it own. And that a
thing may in understanding know and conceive all bodies, as our soule doth, it behoveth the same to be altogether bodilesse it selfe▪ for had it any bodilinesse at all, it could not receive any body into it. If we look yet more neerly into the nature of a body, we shall finde that no body receiveth into it the substantiall forme of another bo∣dy, without losing or altering his own, ne passeth from one form in∣to another, without the marring of the first; as is to be seen in wood when it receiveth fire, in seeds when they spring forth into bud, and so in other things. What is to be said then of mans soul, which receiveth and conceiveth the forms and shapes of all things with∣out corrupting his own, and moreover becommeth the perfecter by the more receiving? For the more it receiveth, the more it under∣standeth; and the more it understandeth, the more perfect it is. If it be a bodily substance, from whence is it and of what mix∣ture? If it be of the foure Elements, how can they give life, having no life of themselves? Or how can they give understanding, having no sence? If it be of the mixture of them, how may it be said that of divers things which have no being of themselves, should be made a thing that hath being? Or that of divers outsides should be made one body? or of divers bodies, one Soul? or of divers deaths, one life? or of divers darknesses, one light? Nay rather, why say we not that he which beyond nature hath made the mixture of these bodies, hath for the perfecting of our body, breathed a Soul also into the body? To be short, the property of a body is to suffer, and the property of our Soule is to doe. And if the body be not put forth by some other thing than it self, it is a very block; whereas the mind that is in our Soul ceaseth not to stir up and down in it selfe, though it have no∣thing to move it from without. Therefore it is to be concluded by these reasons and by the like, that our Soul is a bodilesse substance, notwithstanding that it is united to our body. And hereupon it followeth also,Vnmateriall. that our Soule is not any mate∣riall thing, for as much as matter receiveth not any forme or shape but according to his owne quantity, and but onely one forme at once, whereas our Soule receiveth all formes without quantity, come there never so many at once or so great. Againe, no matter admitteth two contrary formes at once; but our Soule contrari∣wise comprehendeth and receiveth them together, as fire and wa∣ter, heat and cold, white and black; and not only together, but al∣so the better by the matching and laying of them together. To be
short, seeing that the more wee depart from matter, the more wee understand: surely nothing is more contrary to the substance of our Soule, than is the nature of matter. Furthermore, if this reasona∣ble soule of ours is neither a bodily nor a materiall thing, nor de∣pending upon matter in the best actions thereof: then must it needs be of it self, and not proceed either from body or from matter. For what doth a body bring forth but a body; and matter but matter; and materiall but materialls: And therefore it is an unmateriall substance, which hath being of it selfe. But let us see whether the same be corruptible and mortall on no.The Soul hath being of it self. Plutarch in his Treatise why God deferreth the punish∣ment of the wicked. Vncorruptible Soothly, if Plutarch be to be beleeved, it is in vain to dispute thereof. For he teacheth, that the doctrine of Gods providence, and the immortalitie of our Soules are so linked together, that the one is as an appendant to the other. And in very deed, to what purpose were the World created, if there were no body to behold it: Or to what end behold wee the Creator in the world, but to serve him▪ And why should we serve him upon no hope: And to what pur∣pose hath he indewed us with these rare gifts of his, which for the most part doe but put us to pain and trouble in this life: if we pe∣rish like the brute Beast or the Hearbes, which know him not▪ Howbeit, for the better satisfying of the silly Soules which go on still like witlesse Beastes, without taking so much leysure in all their life, as once to enter into themselves; let us indevour here by lively reasons to paint out unto them againe their true shape, which they labour to deface with so much filthinesse. The Soule of man (as I have sayd afore) is not a body, neyther doth it increase or de∣crease with the body: but contrary wise the more the body decayeth, the more doth the understanding increase; and the neerer that the body draweth unto death, the more freely doth the mind understand; and the more that the body abateth in flesh, the more workfull is the mind. And why then should we think, that the thing which be∣commeth the stronger by the weaknesse of the body, and which is advanced by the decay of the body, should returne to dust with the body: A mans Sences fayle because his eyes fayle, and his eyes fayle because the Spirits of them fayle: but the blind mans under∣standing increaseth, because his eyes are not buside: and the olde mans reason becommeth the more perfect by the losse of his sight. Therefore why say we not that the body fayleth the Soul, and not the Soule the body; and that the Glasses are out of the Spectacles
but the eysight is still good: Why should we deeme the Soule to be forgone with the Sences: If the eye be the thing that seeth, and the care the thing that heareth; why doe we not see things double, and heare sounds double, seeing we have two eyes and two ears? It is the soule then that seeth and heareth; and these which wee take to be our sences, are but the instruments of our sences. And if when our eyes be shut or picked out, we then behold a thousand things in our minde; yea, and that our understanding ir then most quick-sighted, when the quickest of our eysight is as good as quench∣ed or starke dead: how is it possible that the reasonable soule should be tyed and bound to the sences? What a reason is it to say that the soule dyeth with the sences, seeing that the true sences doe then grow and increase, when the instruments of sense doe die? And what a thing were it, to say that beast is dead, because he hath lost his eyes, when we our selves see, that it liveth after it hath forgone the eyes? Also I have proved that the soule is neither the body, nor an appertenance of the body. Sith it is so, why mea∣sure we that thing by the body, which measureth all bodies; or make that to die with the body, whereby the bodies that die, yea many hundred years agoe, doe after a certain manner live still? Or what can hurt that thing, whom nothing hurteth or hindereth in the bo∣dy? Though a man lose an arme, yet doth his soule abide whole still. Let him forgoe the one halfe of his body, yet is his soule as sound as afore: for it is whole in it selfe▪ and whole in every part of it selfe, united in it selfe and in the own substance, and by the force and power thereof it sheadeth it selfe into all parts of the body. Though the body rot away by piecemeal, yet abideth the Soule all one and undiminished. Let the bloud dreyn out, the moving wax weake, the sences faile, and the strength perish; and yet abideth the minde neverthelesse sound and lively even to the end. Her house must be pierced through on all sides, ere shee be discouraged; her walls must be battered down ere she fall to fleeting; and she never forsaketh her lodging, till no room be left her to lodge in. True it is, that the brute beasts forgoe both life & action with their bloud. But as for our soule (if we consider the matter well) it is then gathered home into it selfe, and when our sences are quenched, then doth it most of all labour to surmount it selfe: working as goodly actions at the time that the body is at a point to fail it, yea and often times far goodlier also, than ever it did during the whole
life time thereof. As for example, it taketh order for it selfe, for our household, for the Common-weale, and for a whole Kingdome; and that with more uprightnesse, godlinesse, wisdome; and modera∣tion, than ever it did afore, yea and perchance in a body so far spent, so bare, so consumed, so withered without, and so putrified within, that whosoever looks upon him sees nothing but earth, and yet to heare him speake would ravish a man up to heaven, yea, and above heaven. Now when a man sees so lively a soule in so weake and wretched a body, may he not say as is said of the hatching of chickens, that the shell is broken, but there commeth forth a chicken. Also let us see what is the ordinary cause that things perish. Fire doth either goe out for want of nourishment, or is quenched by his contrary which is water. Water is resolved into aire by fire, which is his contrary. The cause why the Plant dyeth, is extremitie of cold or drought, or unseasonable cutting, or violent plucking up. Also the living wight dyeth through contrarietie of humours, or for want of food, or by feeding upon some thing that is against the nature of it, or by outward violence. Of all these causes, which can we choose to have any power against our Soule: I say against the Soule of man which (notwithstanding that it be united to matter and to a bodie) is it selfe a substance unbodily, unmateriall, and on∣ly conceivable in understanding: The contrarietie of things: Nay, what can be contrarie to that which lodgeth the contraries alike e∣qually in himselfe: which understandeth the one of them by the o∣ther: which coucheth them all under one skill? and (to be short) in whom the contrarieties themselves abandon their contrarieties, so as they doe not any more pursue but insue one another: Fire is hote, and water cold. Our bodies mislike these contraries, and are grieved by them; but our mind linketh them together without ei∣thet burning or cooling it selfe; and it setteth the one of them against the other to know them the better. The things which destroy one another through the whole world, do mainteine one another in our minds. Againe, nothing is more contrary to peace then warre is; and yet mans mind can skill to make or mainteine peace in prepa∣ring for warre, and to lay earnestly for warre in seeking or inioying of peace. Even death it selfe (which dispatcheth our life) cannot bee contrary to the life of our Soule: for it seeketh life by death, and death by life. And what can that thing meet withall in the whole world, that may be able to overthrow it, which can inioyne obe∣dience
to things most contrary? What then Want of food: How can that want food in the world, which can skill to feed on the whole world: Or how should that forsake food, which the fuller it is, so much the hungryer it is; and the more it hath digested, the bet∣ter able it is to digest: The bodily wight feedeth upon some cer∣tain things, but our mind feedeth upon all things. Take from it the sensible things, and the things of undrstanding abide with it still: bereave it of earthly things, and the heavenly remayne abun∣dantly. To be short, abridge it of all worldly things, yea and of the world it selfe, and even then doth it feed at greatest ease, & maketh best cheere agreeable to his owue nature. Also the bodily wight fil∣leth it selfe to a certain measure, and delighteth in some certain things. But what can fill our mind? Fill it as full as ye can with the knowledge of things, and it is still eager and sharpe set to re∣ceive more. The more it taketh in, the more it still craveth: and yet for all that, it never feeleth any rawnesse or lack of digestion. What shall I say more: discharge our understanding from the minding of it selfe, and then doth it live in him and of him in whom all things doelive. Againe, fill it with the knowledge of it selfe, and then doth it feele it selfe most empty, and sharpest set upon desire of the other. Now then, can that die or decay for want of food, which cannot be glutted with any thing, which is nourished and maintained with all things, and which liveth in very deed upon him by whom all the things which we wonder at here beneath are upheld▪ And what else is violence, but a iustling of two bodies together: and how can there be any such betweene a bodie & a spirituall sub∣stance: yea or of two spirits one against another, seeing that often∣times when they would destroy one another, they uphold one an∣other: And if the Soule cannot be pushed at, neither inwardly nor outwardly: is there any thing in nature that can naturally hurt it▪ No: but it may perchance be weakened by the very force of his encounter, as we see it doth befall to our sences. For the more ex∣cellent and the more sensible the thing is in his kind which the sence receiveth, so much the more also is the sence it selfe offended or grie∣ved therewith. As for example, the feeling, by fire; the tast, by harsh∣nesse; the smelling, by savours; the hearing, by the hideousnesse of noyse, whether it be of Thunderclap or of the falling of a River; and the sight, by looking upon the Sunne, upon Fire, and upon all things that have a glistering brightnesse. I omit, that in the most
of these things, it is not properly the sense it selfe, but the outward instrument of sense onely that is offended or hurt. But let us see if there bee the like in our reasonable soule. Nay, contrariwise the more of understanding and excellencie that the thing is, the more doth it refresh and comfort our minde. If it be darke so as wee un∣derstand it but by halves, it hurteth us not, but yet doth it not de∣light us. Nay, as we increase in understanding it, so doth it like us the better, and the higher it is, the more doth it stir up the power of our understanding, and (as you would say) reach us the hand to draw us to the attainment thereof. As for them that are dim∣sighted, we forbid them to behold the things that are over-bright. But as for them that are of rawest capacity, wee offer them the things that are most understandable. When the sence beginneth to perceive most sharply, then it is fain to give over, as if it felt the very death of it selfe. Contrariwise, when the minde beginneth to understand, then is it most desirous to hold on still. And whereof commeth that, but that our senses work by bodily instruments, but our mind worketh by a bodilesse substance which needeth not the help of the body. And seeing that the nature, the nourishment and the actions of our soule, are so far differing, both from the na∣ture, nourishment, and actions of the body, and from all that ever is done or wrought by the body, can there be any thing more chil∣dish than to deem our soul to be mortall by the abating & decaying of our sences, or by the mortallity of our bodies? Nay contrariwise it may be most soundly and substantially concluded thereupon that mans soule is of its own nature immortall, seeing that all death as well violent as naturall commeth of the body and by the body. Let us see further what death or corruption is.What is death▪ It is (say they) a separating of the matter from his forme. And forasmuch as in man the soule is considered to be the forme, and the body to be as the matter, the separation of the soule from the body is commonly called death. Now then, what death can there be of the soule. sith it is unmateriall, as I have said afore, and a forme that abideth of it selfe? For (as one saith) a man may take away the roundnesse or squarenesse from a table of copper, because they have no abi∣ding but in the matter: but had they such a round or square form, as might have an abiding without matter or stuffe wherein to be, out of doubt, such forme or shape should continue for ever. Nay (which more is) how can that be the corrupter of a thing, which is the per∣fection
thereof: The lesse corsinesse a man hath, the more hath he of reason and understanding. The lesse our minds be tyed to these bodily things, the more lively and cheerefull be they. At a word, the full and perfect life thereof, is the full and utter withdrawing there∣of from the bodie and whatsoever the bodie is made of. All these things are so cleere as they neede no proofe. Now, wee know that every thing worketh according to the proper being therof and that the same which perfecteth the operations of a thing, perfecteth the being thereof also. It followeth therefore, that sith the separation of the body from the Soule, and of the forme from the matter, per∣fecteth the operation or working of the soule (as I have sayd a∣fore) it doth also make perfect and strengthen the very being there∣of, and therefore cannot in any wise corrupt it. And what else is dy∣ing but to be corrupted? And what els is corrupting but suffering: And what els is suffering, but receiving: And how can that which receiveth all things without suffering, receive corruption by any thing? Fire corrupteth or marreth our bodies, and we suffer in re∣ceiving it. So doth also extreme colde: but if we suffered nothing by it, it could not freese us. Our sences likewise are marred by the excessive force of the things which they light upon. And that is be∣cause they receive and perceive the thing that grieveth them, and for that the manner of their behaving of themselves towards their objects, is subiect to suffering. But as for the reasonable Soule; which receiveth all things after one manner, that is to wit, by way of understanding, where through it alway worketh & is never wrought into, how is it possible for it to corrupt or marre it selfe: For what is the thing whereat our Soule suffereth ought in the substance thereof, I meane whereby the substance of our Soule is any whit impaired or hurt by minding or conceiving the same in understanding: As little doth the fire hurt it as the aire, and the aire as the fire. As little hurt receiveth it by the frozen ice of Nor∣wey, as by the scorching sands of Affricke. As little also doth vice annoy it as vertue. For vice and vertue are so farre of from incom∣bering the substance of the soule, that our mind doth never con∣ceive or understand them better, than by setting them together one against another. That thing therefore which doth no whit appaire it selfe, but taketh the ground of perfecting it selfe by all things, can∣not be marred or hurt by any thing. Again, what is death: The uttermost point of moving, and the
uttermost bound of this life. For even in living we dye, and in dy∣ing we live, and there is not that step which we set downe in this life, which doth not continually step forward unto death, after the manner of a Diallor a Clock, which mounting up by certain degrees forgoeth his moving in moving from Minute to Minute. Take away moving from a body, and it doth no more live. Now let us see if the soul also be carryed with the same moving. If it be caryed with the same moving, then doth it undoubtedly move there∣withall. Nay contrariwise, whether the mind rest, or whether it be buzyed about the proper operations thereof, it is not perceived either by any panting of hart, or by any beating of pulses, or by any breathing of Lungs. It is then as a Ship that carieth us away with it, whether we walke or sit still; the sticking fast whereof or the tying thereof to a poste, hindereth not our going up and downe in it still. Againe, if the soule be subiect to the sfin corruption of the body, then is it subiect to the alterations thereof also; and if it be subject to the alterations, it is subject to time also. For altera∣tions or changes, are spices, or rather consequents of moving, and movings are not made but in time. Now man in respect of the body hath certain full poynts or stops, at the which he receiveth manifest changes, and thereafter groweth or decayeth. But com∣monly where the decay of the body beginneth, there beginneth the chief strength of the mind▪ Howbeit that in some men, not only their chinnes are covered with down, but also their beards become gray, whose minds for want of exercise, shew no signe at all either of ripenesse or growing. Moreover, time (as in respect of the body) cannot be called againe, but in respect of the mind it is alwayes present. Yea and time perfecteth, accomplisheth, and increaseth our mind, and after a sort reneweth and fresheth it from day to day, whereas contrariwise it forweareth, washeth away and quight consumeth, both it selfe, and the body with the life thereof. It follo∣weth then that the reasonable Soule is not subject to time, nor con∣sequently to any of the changes and corruption that accompa∣nie time. Nay we may say thus much more; That nothing in the whole world is nourished with things better than it selfe; neither doth any of them contain greater things than it selfe; But the things that are corruptible do live of corruptible things, and can∣not live without corrupting them: as for example, beasts live by herbs, men by beasts, and so forth. And therefore things which
live by uncorruptible things, and can so receive and digest them, as to turne them into the nourishment of their nature, and yet not cor∣rupt them; are uncorruptible themselves to. Now the Soule of man, I meane the reasonable soule or mind, conceiveth reason and truth, and is fed and strengthened with them. And reason and truth are things unchangeable, not subject to time, place or alteration, but steady, unchaungeable, and everlasting. For that twice two be fower, and that there is the same reason in the proportion of eight unto six that is of fower unto three, or that in a Triangle, the three inner angles are equall with the too right angles; and such like; are truths, which neither years, nor thousands of years can change; as true at this day, as they were when Euclide first spake them. And so forth of other things. It followeth then that the Soule comprehending reason and truth, which are things free from cor∣ruption, cannot in any wise be subject to corruption. Again, Who is he of all men that desireth not to be immort all? And how could any man desire it, if he understood not what it is? Or how could he be able to understand it, unlesse it were possible for him to attain unto it? Surely none of us coveteth to be begin∣ninglesse, for none of us is so; neither can any of us be so. And as we cannot so be, so also can we not comprehend what it is. For who is he that it not at his wits end, but onely to thinke upon eternitie without beginning? On the contrary part there is not so base a minde which coveteth not to live for ever, insomuch that whereas we looke not for it by nature, we seeke to obtain it by skill and pollicie, some by books, some by Images, and some by other de∣vices; and even the grossest sort can well imagine in themselves what immortality is, and are able both to conceive it, and to be∣lieve it. Whence comes this, but that our soules being created cannot conceive an everlastingnesse without beginning, and yet neverthelesse, that forasmuch as they be created immortall, they doe well conceive an immortality or everlastingnesse without end? And whereto serves this universall desire, if it be not naturall? or how is it naturall if it be in vain? and not onely in vain, but also to bring us to hell and to torment? Let us wade yet deeper. Who can dispute, or once so much as doubt whether the soule be im∣mortall or no, but he that is capable of Immortality, And who can understand what difference is betwixt mortall and Immortall, but he that is Immortall? Man is able to discerne the difference be∣tween
that which is reason, and that which is not, and thereupon we terme him reasonable. Whosoever would hold opinion that a man is not reasonable, should need none other disproof than his own disputing thereof; for he would go about to prove it by reason. Man can skill to discerne the mortall natures from the immortall, and therefore we may well say he is immortall. For he that should dis∣pute to the contrary, shall be driven to bring such reasons, as shall of themselves make him to prove himselfe immortall. Thou sayest the soule cannot be immortall: and why? Because (sayst thou) that to be so, it would behove it to worke severally by it selfe from the body. When thou thinkest that in thy minde, consider what thy body doth at the same time. Nay, yet further, who hath taught thee so much of the immortall nature, if thou thy selfe be not immortall? Or what worldly wight can say what the inworking of a reasonable wight is, but the wight which in it selfe hath the use of reason. Yet sayest thou still▪ if the soule be immortall, it is free from such and such passions. How enterest thou so far into the Nature that is so far above thee, if thou thy selfe beest mortall? All the reasons which thou alleadgest against the immortality of the soule doe fight directly to the proofe of it. For if thy reason mounted no higher than to the things that are mortall, thou shouldest know neither mortall nor immortall. Now it is not some one covetous man above all other, that desireth immortality, nor some one man excelling all others in wisdome, that comprehendeth it, but all man∣kind without exception. It is not then some one severall skill or some one naturall property, that maketh such difference between man and man as we see to be between many, but rather one selfe∣same nature common to all men, whereby they be all made to dif∣fer from other living wights, which by no deed doe shew any de∣sire to over live themselve, ne know how to live, and therefore their lives doe vanish away with their bloud, and is extinguished with their bodies. If ever thou hast looked to die, consider what discourse thou madest then in thy minde, thou never couldest perswade thy conscience, nor make thy reason to conceive, that the soule should dye with the body; but even in the selfesame time when it dispu∣teth against it selfe, it shifteth it selfe I wot not how from all thy conclusions, and faileth to consider in what state it shall be, and where it shall become when it is out of the body. The Epicure that hath disputed of it all his life long, when he commeth to death, be∣queatheth
a yearly pension for the keeping of a yearly feast on the day of his birth. I pray you to what purpose serve feastings for the birth of a Swine, seeing he esteemeth himselfe to be no better than so? Nay, what else is this, than a crying out of his nature against him, which with one word confuteth all his vain arguments? A∣nother laboureth by all means possible, to blot out in himselfe the opinion of immortallity; and because he hath lived wickedly in this world, he will needs beare himselfe on hand, that there is no Ju∣stice in the world to come. But then is the time that his own na∣ture waketh and starteth up, as it were out of the bottome of a wa∣ter, and at that instant painteth againe before his eyes, the selfesame thing which he tooke so much pains to deface. And in good sooth, what a number have we seen, which having been despisers of all Religion, have at the hower of death been glad to vow their soules to any Saint for reliefe; so cleere was then the presence of the life to come before their eyes.Clevi. lib. 1. I had lever (sayd Zeno) to see an Indian burne himselfe cheerfully, than to heare all the Philosophers of the World discoursing of the immortality of the soule; and in very deed it is a much stronger and better concluded argument. Nay then, let us rather say, I had lever see an Atheist or an Epicure witnesse the immortallity of the soule, and willingly taking an honourable farewell of nature upon a scaffold, then to heare all the Doctors of the world discoursing of it in their pulpits. For what∣soever the Epicures say there, they speake it advisedly and (as ye would say) fresh and fasting; whereas all that ever they have spoken all their life afore, is to be accounted but as the words of Drunk∣ards, that is to wit, of men besotted and falne asleepe in the de∣lights and pleasures of this world, where the wine and the excesse of meat, and the vapors that fumed up of them did speake, and not the men themselves.Three lives in man. What shall I say more? I have told you al∣ready, that in the inward man there are (as ye would say) three men, the living, the sensitive, and the reasonable. Let us say therefore that in the same person there are three lives continued from one to another: namely, the life of the Plant, the life of the Beast, and the life of the Man or of the Soule. So long as a man is in his mo∣thers womb, he doth not onely live and grow; his spirit seemeth to sleep, and his sences seem to be in a slumber, so as he seemeth to be nothing else then a plant. Neverthelesse, if ye consider his eyes, his ears, his tongue, his sences, and his movings, you will
easily judg that he is not made to be for ever in that prison, where he neither seeth nor heareth, nor hath any room to walk in, but rather that he is made to come forth into an opener place, where hee may have what to see and behold, and wherewith to occupy all the pow∣ers which we see to be in him. As soon as he is come out, he begin∣neth to see, to feel, and to move, and by little and little falleth to the perfect using of his limbs, and findeth in this world a peculiar object for every of them, as visible things for the eye, sounds for his hear∣ing bodily things for his feeling and so forth. But besides al this, we find there a mind; which by the eys as by windows beholdeth the world, and yet in all the world finding not any one thing worthy to rest wholly upon, mounteth up to him that made it; which minde like an Empresse lodgeth in the whole world, and not alonely in this body; which by the sences (and oftentimes also without the sences) mounteth above the sences, and streyneth it self to go out of it self, as a child doth to get out of his mothers wombe. And therefore we ought surely to say, that this Mind or Reason ought not to be ever in prison. That one day it shall see cleerly, and not by these dimme and cloudy spectacles: That it shall come in place where it shall have the true object of understanding: and that hee shall have his life free from these fetters and from all the affections of the body. To be short, that as man is prepared in his mothers wombe to be brought forth into the world; so is he also after a sort prepared in this body and in this world, to live in another world. We then understand it, when by na∣ture it behoveth us to depart out of the world. And what child is there which (if nature did not by her cunning drive him out,) would of himself come out of his Covert, or that cometh not out as good as forlorn and half dead; or that if he had at that time knowledge and speech, would not call that death, which we call birth; and that a de∣parture out of life, which we call the entrance into it? As long as we be there, we see nothing though our eys be open. Many also do not so much as stir, except it be at some sodain scaring or some other like chance; and as for those that stir, they know not that they have either sence or moving. Why then should wee thinke it strange, that in this life our understanding seeth so little, that many men doe never mind the immortall nature, untill they be at the last cast, yea, and some thinke not themselves to have any such thing, howbeit that even by so thinking they shew themselves to have part there∣of? And imagine wee that the unborn babe hath not as much adoe
by nature to leave the poore skin that hee is wrapt in, as wee have hinderance in our sences and in our imprisoned reason, when wee be at the point to leave the goods and pleasures of this world, and the very flesh it self which holdeth us as in a grave? Or had the babe some little knowledge; would he not say that no life were compa∣rable to the life where he then is, as we say there is no life to the life of this world wherein we be? Or would he not account the stage of our sences for a fable, as a great sort of us account the stage that is prepared for our Souls? Yes surely: and therefore let us conclude where wee began, namely that man is both inward and outward. In the outward man, which is the body, he resembleth the being and the proportion of all the parts of the world. And in the inner man he resembleth whatsoever kinde of life is in all things, or in a∣ny thing that beareth life in the world. In this mothers womb he liveth the life of a plant, howbeit with this further, that he hath a certain commencement of sense and moving which exceed the Plant, and doe put him in a readinesse to be indowed with Sences as a Beast is. In this life he hath Sense and moving in their perfecti∣on, which is the property of a sensitive wight; but yet besides these, he hath also a beginning to reason and understand, which are a be∣ginning of another life, such as the sensitive wight hath not, and this life is to be perfected in another place. In the life to come he hath his actions free and full perfected, a large ground to worke upon, able to suffice him to the full, and a light to his understanding in stead of a light to the eye. And like as in comming into the world, he came as it were out of another world; so in going yet into ano∣ther world, he must also goe out of this world. He commeth out of the first world into the second, as it were fayling in nourishment, but growing in strength unto moving and sense: and he goeth out of the second into the third, failing in sences and moving, but grow∣ing in reason and understanding. Now seeing we call the passage out of the first world into the second a birth, what reason is it that we should call the passage out of the second into the third a death? To be short, he that considereth how all the actions of mans mind tend to the time to come, without possibility of staying upon the present time, how pleasant and delightfull soever it be: we may wel discerne by them all, that his being (which in every thing (as sayth Aristotle) followeth the working thereof) is also wholy bent to∣wards the time to come; as who would say this present life were
unto it but as a narrow grindle, on the further side whereof (as i were on the bank of some streame or running water,) he were to finde his true dwelling place and very home in deed. But now is it time to see what is sayd to the contrarie:Objections. wherein we have to consider eftsoons that which we spake of afore; name∣ly that if all that ever is in us were transitoric and mortall, wee should not be so witty to examine the Immortallitie as we be: for of contraries the skill is all one. If a man were not mortall, that is to say, if he had no life, he could not dispute of the mortall life; neither could he speake of the immortall, if he himselfe also were not immortall. Therefore let us goe back retrive. Some man will say, that the soule dyeth with the body, because the soule and the body are but one thing, and he believeth that they be both but one, because he seeth no more but the body. This argument is all one with theirs, which denyed that there is any God, because they saw him not. But yet by his doings thou maist perceive that there is a God: discerne likewise by the dooings of thy soule, that thou hast a soule. For in a dead body thou seest the same parts remain, but thou seest not the same doings that were in it afore. When a man is dead, his eye seeth nothing at all, and yet is there nothing changed of his eye: but while he is alive he seeth infinite things that are divers. The power then which seeth is not of the body. Yet notwithstanding, how lively and quick-sighted soever the eye be; it seeth not it selfe. Wonder not therefore though thou have a soule, and that the same soule see not it selfe. For if thine ey∣sight saw it selfe, it were not a power or ability of seeing, but avi∣sible thing: likewise, if thy soule saw it selfe, it were no more a Soule, that is to say the worker and quickner of the body, but a very body, unable to doe any thing of it selfe, and a massie substance subject to suffering. For we see nothing but the body and bodily substances. But in this thou perceivest somwhat else than a body (as I have said afore) that if thine eye had any peculiar colour of it own, it could not discerne any other colour than that. Seeing then that thou conceivest so many divers bodies at once in imagi∣nation: needs must thou have a power in thee which is not a body. Be it (say they) that we have a power of sense; yet have we not a power of reason; for that which we call the power of reason or un∣derstanding, is nothing but an excellencie or rather a consequence offence, insomuch that when sense dyeth, the residue dyeth there∣with
with also. Soothly in this which thou hast said, thou hast sur∣mounted sence; which thing thou haddest not done, if thou haddest nothing in thee beyond sence. For whereas thou sayest, if the sence dye, the rest dyeth also; it is a reason that proceedeth from one terme to another, and it is a gathering of reasons which conclude one thing by another. Now the sences do indeed perceive their ob∣jects, but yet how lively so ever they be, they reason not. Wee see a Smoake; so farre extendeth the sence. But if we inferre, therefore there must needs be fire, and thereupon seeke who was the kindler thereof: that surmounteth the ability of sence. Wee heare a piece of Musicke; that may any beast do as well as we. But his hearing of it is but as of a bare sound; whereas our hearing thereof is as of an harmony, and we discern the cause of the concords and discords, which eyther delight or offend our sence. The thing that heareth the sound is the sence; but the thing that judgeth of that which the sence conceiveth, is another thing than the sence. The like is to be said of Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling. Our smelling of sents, our tasting of savours, and our feeling of substances, is in deed the work of our sen∣ces. But as for our judging of the inward vertue of the thing by the outward sent thereof, or of the wholsomnesse or unwholsomnesse of food by the taste thereof, or of the hotnesse or vehemency of a Fever by feeling the Pulse; yea and our proceeding even into the very bowels of a man, whether the eye being the quickest of all sences is not able to attain; surely it is the worke of a more mighty power than the Sence is. And in very deed there are Beasts which do heare, see, smell, taste, and feel much better and quicklier than man doth. Yet notwithstanding none of them conferreth the contraries of colours, sounds, sents and savours, none sorteth them out to the serving one of another, or to the serving of themselves. Whereby it appeareth, that man excelleth the beasts by another power than the sences, and that whereas a man is a Painter, a Musician, or a Phisician, he hath it from elsewhere then from his sences. Nay, I say farther, that oftentimes wee conclude clean contrary to the report of our sences. One eye perchance telleth us that a Tower which we see afar off is round, whereas our reason deemeth it to be square: or that a thing is small, which our reason telleth us is great: or that the ends of lines in a long walke doe meet in a point, whereas our reason certifieth us that they run right forth with equall distance one from another. For want of
this discretion, certaine Elephants (sayth Vitellio) which were pas∣sing over a long bridge, turned back being deceived; and yet they wanted not sight no more then we doe. But they that lead them were not deceived. Their leaders then besides their eysight, had in them annother vertue or power which corrected their sight, and therefore ought to be of higher estimation. In like case is it with the rest of the other sences. For our hearing telleth us, that the thun∣der-clap is after the lightning; but skill assureth us that they be both together, for there is a certain power in us, which can skill to discerne what proportion is between hearing and seeing. Also the tongue of him that hath an ague, beareth him on hand that even sugar is bitter, which thing he knoweth by his reason to be untrue. To be short, those which have their sences most quick and lively, be not of the greatest wisdome and understanding, A man therefore differeth from a beast, and excelleth man by some other power than sence. For whereas it is commonly sayd, that such as have seen most are commonly of greatest skill, we see that many have travailed far both by Sea and land, which have come home as wise as they went forth. A horse hath as good eyes as he that rides upon him, and yet for all his travailing, neither he, nor peradventure his rider whom he beareth become any whit the wiser by that which they have seene: whereby it appeareth that it is not enough to see things unlesse a man doe also minde them to his benefit. Now there is great difference between the livelynesse of the Sence, and the power that governeth the Sense; like as the re∣port of a Spie is one thing, and the Spie himselfe is another, and the wisdome of the Captain that receiveth the report of the Spie is a third. Nay, who can deny, that sense and reason are divers things; or rather: who will not grant, that in many things they be clean contrary? Sense biddeth us shun and eshew griefe; whereas reason willeth us to proffer our leg sometime to the Surgeon to be cut off. Sense plucketh our hand out of the fire, and yet we our selves put fire to our bare skin. Hee that should see a Scevola burn off his own hand, without so much as once gnashing his teeth at it, would think he were utterly senselesse: so mightily doth reason over-rule sense. To be short, Sense hath his peculiar inclination, which is appe∣tite, and reason likewise hath his, which is will. And like as rea∣son doth often times over rule sense, and is contrary to it, so will correcteth the sensuall appetite or lust that is in us, and warreth
against it. For in an Ague we covet to drinke, and in an Apoplexie we covet to sleepe, and in hunger we covet to eate, and yet from all those things doth our will restrain us. The more a man followeth his lust, the lesse is he led by will: and the more he standeth upon the pleasing of his sences, the lesse reason useth he ordinarily. Again, let us consider the brute beasts which have the sensitive part as well as we. If we have no more than that, how commeth it to passe that a little child driveth whole flocks and heards of them whether he listeth, and somtimes whether they would not? Whereof commeth it that every of them in their kind, doe all live, nestle, and sing after one sort, whereas men have their Laws, Commonweales, manners of building, and formes of reasoning, not onely divers, but also commonly contrary? Now what can harbour these contrarieties together, but onely that which hath not any thing contrary unto it, and wherein all contrary things, doe lay away their contrariety? Surely it is not the sense that can doe it, whose proper or peculiar object is most contrary to the sense. Besides this (as I have said afore) whereas we conceive wisdome, skill, vertue, and such other things which are all bodilesse, our sences have none other thing to work upon, than the qualities of bodily substances. And whereas we make universall rules of particular things, the sences attain no farther than to the particular things themselves. And whereas we conclude of the causes by their effects, our sences perceive no more but the bare effects: And whereas concerning the things that belong to un∣derstanding, the more understandable they be, the more they refresh us; contrariwise, the stronger that the sensible things are, the more doe they offend the sense: To be short, the selfesame thing which we speak in behalfe of the sences, proceedeth from elsewhere than from the Sences. And we will easily discerne, that he which denyeth that besides the common sence, there is in man a reason or under∣standing, distinct and severed from the sense, is voyd both of under∣standing and of sence. But see here a grosse reason of theirs. This reason or power of understanding (say they) which is in man, is corruptible as well as the power of perceiving by the Sences. I think I have proved the contrary already, neverthelesse, let us examine their reasons yet further. The forme or shape of every thing (say they) doth pe∣rish with the matter. Now the soule is as you would say the forme or shape of the body therefore it corrupteth with the body. This ar∣gument
were rightly concluded, if it were meant of the materiall forme. But I have proved that the soule is unmateriall, and hath a cōtinuance of ir self. And indeed the more it is discharged of matter, the more it retaineth his own peculiar forme. Therfore the corrupti∣on of the matter toucheth not the foule at all. Again, if mens souls live (say they) after their bodies, then are they infinite, for the world is without beginning & without ending, and (as we know) nature can away with no infinite thing: therefore they live not after their bodies. Yes, say I, for I have proved that the world hath a begin∣ning, and that with so substantial reasons▪ as thou art not able to dis∣prove. Therfore it followeth that the inconvenience which thou al∣ledgest can have no place. Another sayth, If dead mens souls live stil, why come they not to tell us so? And he thinketh he hath stumbled upon a wonderfull subtle device. But how doth this follow in rea∣son? There hath not come any man unto us from the Indies a long time: ergo there be no Indies. May not the same argument serve as well to prove that we our selves are not, because we never went thither? Again, what intercourse is there between things that have bodies, and things that have no bodies, or between heaven and earth, considering that there is so smal intercourse even between men which live under one selfesame Sun? He that is made a Magistrate in his own Countrey, doth not willingly return to the place of his banishment. Likewise the Soule that is lodged in the lap of his God, and come home into his native soyle, forgoeth the desire of these lower things, which to his sight beholding them from above, and lesse then the point of a needle. On the other side, he that is put in close prison▪ (how desirous soever he be) cannot goe out; so that soule which is in the Jarle of his soveraign Lord God, hath no respit or sporting time to come tell us what is done there. Unto the one, the beholding of the everlasting God is as a Paradice wherein he is willing to remain; and unto the other his own condemnation is an imprisonment of his will. But we would have God to send both the one & the other unto us to make us to believe. As who would say, it stood him greatly on hand to have us to believe, and not rather us that we should believe. And in effect what else is all this, but a desiring that some man might return into his mothers womb again, to incourage young babes a∣gainst the pinches and pains which they abide in their birth, wherof they would be as shie as we be of death, if they had the like know∣ledge of them? But let us let such vanities passe, and come to the ground.
Yee beare us on hand (say they) that the soul of man is but one, though it have divers powers. Whereof we see the sensitive, and the growing powers to be corrupted and to perish: therefore it should seeme that the understanding or reasonable power also should doe the like. At a word, this is all one as if a man should say, you tell mee that this man, is both a good man, a good Sword-player, and a good luteplayer altogether, and that because his sword falls out of his hand, or his hand it selfe becommeth lame, therefore he cannot be a good or honest man still as you reported him to be. Nay though he lose those instruments, yet ceaseth he not therefore to be an honest man, yea, and both a Sword-player, and a Lute-player too, as in respect of skill. Likewise when our soules have forgone these exercises, yet cease they not to be the same they were afore. To inlighten this point yet more; of the powers of our Soule, some are exercised by the instruments of the body, and o∣thersome vvithout any help or furtherance of the body at all. Those vvhich are exercised by the body, are the sences and the powers of the sences, and the powers of the grovving, vvhich may carrie the sime likenesse that is between a Luter and a Lute. Breake the Luters Lute, and his cunning remaineth still, but his putting of it in practice faileth. Give him another Lute and hee falls to play∣ing new again. Put out a mans eye, and yet the ability of see∣ing abideth still with him, though the very act of seeing be disap∣pointed. But give unto the oldest Hag that is, the same eyes that he had when he was young, and he shall see as well as ever he did. After the same manner is it with the growing or thriving power. Restore unto it a good stomack, a sound liver, and a perfect heart; and it shall execute his functions as well as ever it did afore▪ The power that worketh of it selfe and without the body, is the power of reason or understanding, which if we will we may call the mind. And if thou yet still doubt thereof, consider when thou mindest a thing earnestly what thy body furthereth thy minde therein, & thou shalt perceive that the more fixedly thou thinkest upon it, the lesse thou seest the things before thee, and the more thy minde wandereth the more thy body resteth: as who would say that the workings of the body, are the greatest hinderance and impediment that can bee to the peculiar doings of the minde. And this ability of understand∣ing may be likened to a man, which though he have lost both his hand and his lute; ceaseth not therefore to bee a man still, and to
doe the true deeds of a man, that is to wit, to discourse of things, to minde them, to use reason and such like; yea, and to be both a Luter and a man as he was afore, notwithstanding that he cannot put his Lute-playing in exercise for want of instruments. Nay, (which more is) this understanding part groweth so much the stronger and greater, as it is lesse occupied and busied about these base and corruptible things, and is altogether drawn home wholy to it selfe, as is to be seen in those which want their eyes, whose mindes are commonly most apt to understand, and most firme to remember. Doe we debate of a thing in our selves? Neither our body nor out sences are busied about it. Doe we will the same? As little doe they stir for that too. To understand and to will (which are the operati∣ons of the minde.) the soule hath no need of the body, and as for working and being, they accompany one another sayth Aristotle. Therefore to continue still in being, the soule hath not to doe with the body, nor any need of the body: but rather to worke well and to be well, the soule ought either to be without the body, or at least∣wise to be utterly unsubject to the body. Yea (say they) but yet we see men forgoe their reason, as fools and melancholie persons: & seeing it is forgon, it may also be corrupted▪ and if corrupted, it may also die; for what is death but an utter and full corruptnesse? Nay, thou shouldest say rather; I have seen divers, which having seemed to have lost their right wits, have recovered them again by good diet and medicinable drinks. But had they been utterly lost and forgone, no physick could have restored them again: and had they been utterly perished, the parties themselves should have had neither sense nor life remaining. Therefore of necessity the soule of them was as sound as afore. But our soules we see not other∣wise than by the body and by the instruments of the bodie as it were by Spectacles, and our minde which beholdeth and seeth through his imaginations as it were through a cloude, is after a sort troubled by the dimming of the spectacles, and by the smoakie∣nesse of the imaginations. After that manner the Sun seemeth to be dimmed & eclipsed; & that is but by the coming of the moon or of some clouds between him & us, for in his light there is no abatement at all. Likewise our eysight conceiveth things according to the spe∣ctacles wherethough it looketh or according to the colour that over thwarteth the things which it looketh upon. Take away the impe∣diments, and our eyes shall see cleere, purge away the humors,
and our imagination shall be pure: and so our understand shall see as bright as it did afore, even as the Sunne shineth after the putting away of the Clowdes. And it fareth not with our Soules as it doth with our bodies, which after a long sicknesse retain still either a hardnesse of the Splene▪ or a shortnesse of breath, or a fal∣ling of the Rhewme upon the Lungs, or a skarre of some great wound that cannot be worne out because of the breake that was made in the whole. For neither in their understanding, neither in their willes do our Soules feele any abatement, saving that there abideth some maime or blemish in the instruments; to wit (as I will declare hereafter) so farre forth as it pleaseth GOD for a iust punishment, to put the Soule in subjection to the bodie whose so∣vereign it was created to have been, because it hath neglected the will of the Creator, to follow the lusts and likings of the bodie. This appeareth in Lunaticke folkes and such others, which have their witts troubled at times and by fitts. For they be not vexed but at the stirring of their humours, being at other times sober and well enough stayed in their witts, The like is seene in them that have the falling sicknesse. For their understanding seemeth to be eclipsed, and as it were stricken with a Thunderclap, during the time of their fitts; but afterward they be as discreet as though they ailed nothing. To be short, the body is subject to a thousand diseases, wherewith we see the understanding to be no whit alte∣red, because they touch not the instruments of the Sence and of the Imaginations, which move the understanding. Troubled it is in deede by those few things only, which infect the Sence and the Imagination, which by that meanes report the things unfaithful∣ly whereon the mind debateth. Therefore ye shall never see any bo∣die out of his witts or out of his right mind, in whom the Phisi∣tions may not manifestly perceive, either some default of the in∣struments, as a mishapen and misportioned head; or els an o∣verabounding of some melancholike humour, that troubled and marred his bodie afore it troubled or impaired his mind. And like as the wisest men being deceived by false Spies, do make wrong deliberations, howbeit yet grounded upon good reason, which thing they could not doe unlesse they were wise in deede: So the reason that is in our mind maketh false discourses, and gathereth wrong conclusions, upon the false reports of the imagination; which it could not doe, if it were either diminished or impaired, or done a∣way
way. Whereunto accordeth this ancient saying, That there be certain follyes which none but wise men can commit, and certain Errours which none but learned men can fall into: because that in some cases, discretion and wisedom are requi∣site in the partie that is to be deceived, even to the intent he may be deceived; and learning is required in a man that he may conceive and hold a wrong opinion. As for example, to beguiled by a doubledealing Spy or by the surprising of a cose∣ning letter, belongeth to none but to a wise man. For a grosheaded foole never breaketh his brain about such matters as might bring him to the making of false conclusions by mistaking likelyhoods in stead of truth. Likewise to fall into Heresie by misconceiving some high and deepe point, befalleth not to an ignorant person; for he is not of capacitie, neither doth his understanding mount so high. To be short, Whosoever sayth that mans Soul perisheth with the body, because it is troubled by the distemperature or misproportionatenesse of the body; may as well uphold that the Child in the mothers wombe dy∣eth with his mother, because he moveth with her, and is partaker with her of her harms and throws, by reason of the streit conjunction that is between them; howbeit that many children have lived safe and sound, notwithstanding that their mothers have dyed; yea and some have come into the World even by the death of their mothers. And whereas some say, that because our mind conceiveth not any thing here, but by helpe of Imagination; therefore when the I∣magination is gone with the instruments whereunto it is tyed, the Soule cannot work alone by it selfe, nor consequently be alone by it selfe: surely it is alone as if they should say, that because the Child being in his mothers wombe taketh nourishment of her bloud by his navill; therefore he cannot live when he is come out her womb, if his navillstrings be cut off. Nay contrariwise, then is the time that the mouth, the tongue, and the other parts of the Childe doe their dutie, which served erst to no purpose, saving that they were prepared for the time to come. After the same manner also doe wee cherish our mind by Imagination in this second life; which in the third life being (as ye would say) scaped out of prison, shall begin to utter his operations by himselfe, and that so much the more certainly, for that it shall not be subject to false reports, nor to the sences eyther in∣ward or outward, but to the very things themselvs which it shall have seen and learned. To be short, it shall live, but not in prison; it shall
see but not through spectacles; it shall understand, but not by reports; it shall list, but not by way of lusting: the infirmity which the body casteth upon it as now shal then be away: the force which it bring∣eth now to the body, shall then be more fresh and lively than afore. Now then notwithstanding these vain reasons of theirs, let us con∣clude, That our soule is an understanding or reasonable power; over the which neither death nor corruption have naturally any power, although it be fitted to the body to govern it. And if any man doubt hereof, let him but examine himselfe, for even his own doubts will prove it unto him. Or if he will stand in contention still, let him fall to reasoning with himselfe: for by concluding his arguments to prove his soule mortall, he shall give judgement himselfe that it is immor∣tall. And if I have left any thing unalleadged which might make to this purpose, (for why may I not▪ seeing that even the selfesame things which I have been able to alleadge on the behalfe of mine adversaries, doe drive them thereunto?) let us think also that he which feeleth himselfe convicted in himselfe, and for whose behoof and benefit it were greatly, both to believe it and to confesse it, nee∣deth no more diligent proof than hath been made already. But if any man will yet of spight stand wilfully still against himselfe, let him try how he can make answer to my foresaid arguments: and in the mean while let us see what the said opinion of the wisest men, yea, and of the whole world hath been upon this matter. CHAP. II. That the immortality of the Soul hath been taught by the Phylosophers of old time, and believed by all people and Na∣tions. SOothly it had been a very hard case, if this minde of ours which searcheth so many things in nature, had not taken some leasure to search it selfe and the nature thereof, and by searching attained to some poynt in that behalfe. And therefore as there have at all times beene men, so shall wee see also that men have at all times believed and admitted the immortality of the soule, I say not some one man, or some one Nation, but the whole world with gene∣rall consent, because all men universally and particularly have learned it in one schoole, and at the mouth of one Teacher, namely even their own knowledge in themselves. The holy Scripture which
teacheth us our salvation, useth no school arguments to make us be∣lieve that there is a God: and that is because we cannot step out of our selves never so little, but we must needs finde him present to all our sences. And it seemeth to speake unto us the lesse expressely of the immortality of our soules, specially in the first books thereof, because we cannot enter into our selvs be it never so little, but we must needs perceive it. But in as much as from the one end thereof to the other▪ it declareth unto us the will of God: in so doing, it doth us to un∣derstand, that it is a thing, whereof it is not lawfull for us to doubt. And whereas it setteth forth so precisely from age to age;The opinion of the Men of old time. the great and manifold troubles and pains which good and godly men have suffered in indeavouring to follow that will, it sheweth infalibly that their so doing was in another respect than for this present wretched life. For who is he that would depart with any piece of his own li∣king in this life, but in hope of better things? and what were it for him to lose his life, if there were not another life after this? This serveth to answer in one word to such as demand expresse texts of Scripture, and are loth to finde that thing in the Bible, which is contai∣ned there, not onely in every leaf, but almost in every line. For where∣as God created man after the world was fully finished & perfected: it was as much as if he had brought him into a Theater prepared for him, howbeit after another sort than all the other living things which were to doe him service. As for beasts, birds, plants, and such other things, the elements brought them forth, but man received his soule by inspiration from God. Also the brute beasts are put in subjection to man, but man is in subjection onely unto God. And the conveying of that good man Henocke out of this life for his godli∣nesse, was to none other end, but to set him in another life void of all evill,The belief of the Patriarks, &c. and full of all good. But when we read the persecutions of Noe; the overthwartings of Abraham, the banishment and wayfarings of Jacob, and the distresses of Joseph, Moses, and all the residew of the Fathers; they be all of them demonstrations, that they did cer∣tainly trust and believe that the soule is immortall, that there is another life after this, and that there is a judgement to come. For had they been of opinion that there is none other life after this; the flesh would have perswaded them to have held themselves in quiet here, and they would have liked nothing better than to have fol∣lowed sweetly the cōmon trade of the world, Noe among his friends, Abeaham among the Chaldees, Moses in Pharoahs Court, and
so foorth. So then, although the Scripture seeme to conceale it; yet doth it speake very loude thereof in deede, considering that all the cryes of the good and godly, and all the despayres of the wicked which it describeth unto us, doe sound none other things unto us, if we have cares to heare it. And it may be, that in the same respect, this article of the Immortalitie of the Soule was not put into the ancient Creede of the Jews, nor also peculiarly into the Creede of us Christians, because we beleeve beyond reason, and this is within the bounds of reason; and whosoever treateth of Religion must needes presuppose God eternall and man immortall, without the which two, all Religion were in vayne. Also, when we see that Godlinesse, Iustice, and vertue were commended among the Hea∣then of all ages: it is all one as if we should heare them preach in expresse words the Immortalitie of the Soule. For their so doing is builded every whit upon that, as upon a foundation without the which those things could not stand. I will spend my goodes or my life for the maintenance of Iustice. What is this Iustice but a vaine name, or to what end have I so many respects, if I looke for nothing out of this present world here: I will (sayd a man of olde time) rather lose even the reputation of an honest man, thau behave myselfe otherwise than honestly. But why should I doe so, if I looke for no good in another world, seeing I have nothing but evill here: Surely if there be none other thing than this life,The wise Men of Egypt. then is vertue to be used no further, than profit and commeditie may growe upon it; and so should it become a Chaffer and Merchandise, and not vertue in deed. Yet notwithstanding, those are the ordinary speeches, even of such as speake doutfully of the Immortalitie of the Soule. Therefore they doe but denye the ground and yet grant the consequence; which is all one as if a man having first bin burned should fall to disputing whether fire be hot or no. But now (which is better for us) I will here gather together their owne speeches one after another. Hermes declareth in his Poemander,Hermes in his Poemander, . how at the voyce of the e∣verlasting, the Elements yeelded forth all reasonlesse living wights as it had bin out of their bosomes. But when he commeth to man, he sayth, He made him like unto himselfe, he linked himselfe to him as to his Sonne, (for he was beautifull and made after his owne Image) and gave him all his works to use at his pleasure. Againe, he exhorteth him to forsake his bodie, (notwithstanding that he wonder greatly at the cunning workmanship thereof) as
the very cause of his death, and to manure his soul which is capable of immortality, and to consider the originall root from whence it sprang, which is not earthly but heavenly, and to withdraw himselfe even from his sences, and from their trayterous allurements to gather himselfe wholy into that minde of his which hee hath from God, and by the which, he following Gods word, may become as God. Discharge thy selfe (sayth he) of this body which thou bearest about thee, for it is but a cloke of ignorance, a foundation of infection, a place of corruption, a living death, a sensible carryon, a portable grave, & a household thief. It flattereth thee because it hateth thee, and it ha∣teth thee because it envieth thee. As long as that liveth it bereaveth thee of life, & thou hast not a greater enemie than that. Now, to what purpose were it for him to forsake this light, this dwelling place, & this life, if he were not sure of a better in another world (as he him∣selfe sayth more largely afterward.) On the other side, what is the soule?)Hermes in his Poemander, cap. 10. The soule (sayth he) is the garment of the minde, and the garment of the soule is a certain spirit, whereby it is united to the body. And this minde is the thing which we call properly the man, that is to say, a heavenly wight which is not to be compared with beasts, but rather with the Gods of heaven, if he be not yet more than they. The heavenly cannot come down to the earth without leaving the heaven, but man measureth the heaven without remo∣ving from the earth.. The earthly man then is as a mortall God, and the heavenly God is as an immortal man. To be short, his conclusion is, That man is double, mortall as touching his body, and immortall as touching his soule,Hermes in his Esculapius. Aenaeas Gaz. concerning the immorta∣lity of the Soule. Chaldeans. which soule, is the substantiall man, and the very man created immediately of God (sayth he) as the light is bred immediately of the Sunne. And Chalcidius sayth, that at his death he spake these words. I goe home again into mine own countrey, where my better forefathers and kinsfolke be. Of Zoroastres who is yet of more antiquity than Hermes, we have nothing but fragments. Neverthelesse, many report this argu∣ment to be one of his, That mens souls are immortall, and that one day there shall be a generall rising again of their bodies; and the answers of the wise men of Chaldye (who are the heirs of his Do∣ctrine) doe answer sufficiently for him. There is one that exhorteth men to return with speed to their heavenly father, who hath sent them from above, a soule endowed with much understanding, and another that exhorteth them to seeke paradice, as the peculiar dwel∣ling
place of the soule. A third sayth that the soule of man hath God as it were shut up in it, and that it hath not any mortality there∣in. For (sayth he) the soule is as it were drunken with God, and sheweth forth his wonders in the harmonie of this mortall body. And again, another sayth, It is a cleere fire proceeding from the power of the heavenly father, an uncorruptible substance, and the main∣tainer of life, containing almost all the whole world with the full plenty thereof in his besom. But one of them proceedeth yet further, affirming that he which seteth his minde upon godlinesse, shall save his body, fraile though it be. And by those words he acknowledgeth the very glorifying of the body. Now,The Greeks. all these sayings are reported by the Platonists, and namely by Psellus; and they refuse not to be acknowne that Pythagoras and Plato learned them of the Chaldees; insomuch that some think, that the foresaid Hermes and Zoroastres, and the residue afore-mentio∣ned, are the same of whom Plato speaketh in his second Epistle, and in his eleventh Book of Laws, when he sayth that the ancient and holy Oracles are to be believed, which affirme mens Souls to be Immortall, and that in another life they must come before a Judge that will require an account of all their doings: The effect whereof commeth to this, That the Soule of man proceedeth immediatly from God, that is to say, that the father of the body is one, and the Father of the Soul is another: That the Soul is not a bodily sub∣stance, but a Spirit and a Light: That at the departure thereof from hence, it is to go into a Paradise, and therefore ought to make haste unto death: And that it is so far from mortality, that it maketh even the body Immortall. What can we say more at this day, even in the time of light wherein we be?Pherecydes. Pherecydes the Syrian, the first that was known among the Greeks to have written prose, taught the fame.Assyrium vulgo nascetur Amo∣nium. And that which Virgill sayth in his second Eglog concerning the Drug or Spice of Assyria, and the growing thereof every whereis interpreted of some men to be ment of the Immortalitie of the Soule, the doctrine whereof Pherecydes brought from thence into Greece; namely, that it should be understood everywhere throughout the whole world.Phocylides. Also Phocylides who was at the same time, speaketh thereof in these words, . That is to say: The Soul of man immortall is, and never weares away With any age or length of time, but liveth fresh for aye.
And again: , . The Remnants which remayn of men unburied in the grave, Become as Gods, and in the Heavens a life most blessed have. For though their bodies turn to dust, as daily we do see, Their Souls live still for evermore from all corruption free. And in another place he says again: . We hope that we shall come agayn Out of the earth to light more playn. And if ye aske him the cause of all this: he will answer you in ano∣ther verse thus. . Because the Soul, Gods Instrument and Image also is. Which saying he seemeth to have taken out of this verse of Sibil.Sybill. . In very reason Man should be The Image and the shape of me. Of the same opinion also are Orpheus,Pindar in the second song of his Olympiads. Homer in the Funerals of his Iliads. Theognis, Homer, He∣siodus, Pindar, and all the Poets of old time; which may answer both for themselves and their owne Countries, and for the residue of their ages. Likewise Pythagoras a disciple of Pherecides, held opinion that the Soule is a bodylesse and immortall substance, put into this body as into a Prison for sinning. And whereas the flee∣ting of soules out of one body into another, is fathered upon him; although the opinion be not directly against the immortality of the soul, yet doe many men thinke that he hath wrong done unto him. And his Disciple Timaeus of Locres reporteth otherwise of him. For what punishment were it to a voluptuous man, to have his Soule put into a beast, that he might become the more volup∣tuous without remorse of sinne? Soothly it is all one as if in pu∣nishment of murther or theft, yee would make the murtherer to cut the throats of his own father and mother, or the thiefe to com∣mit treachery against God. Howsoever the case stand, he teacheth in his verses, that man is, of heavenly race, and that (as Jamblichus reporteth) he is set in this world to behold God. And his Disciple Arckitas sayth,Pythagors. that God breatheth reason and understanding into him. Likewise Philolaus affirmeth that the Divines and Prophets
of old time bear record,Heraclitus as he is reported by Philo. Epicharmus as he is reported by Clement of Alexandria. that the soule was coupled with the body for her sins, and buried in the same as in a grave. Of Epicharmus we have this saying. If thou beest a good man in thy heart; death can doe thee no harme, for thy soule shall live happily in heaven, &c. Also of Heraclides we have this saying. We live the death of them (that is to say of the blessed) his meaning is that we be not buried with our bo∣dies, and we dye their life, that is to say, we be still after this bodie of ours is dead.Thales, Ana∣xagoras, Dioge∣nes and Zeno. Of the like opinion are Thales, Anaxagoras, and Dio∣genes concerning this point; yea and so is Zeno too, howbeit that he thought the soule to be begotten of man, wherein he was contra∣ry to himselfe. To be short, scarcely were there any to be found a∣mong the men of old time,Epicurus. save onely Democritus and Epicurus, that held the contrary way; whom the Poet Lucre imitated after∣ward in his Verses. Yet notwithstanding when Epicurus should dye, he commanded an Anniversary or Yeerminde to be kept in remembrance of him by his Disciples: so greatly delighted he in a vain shadow of immortality, having shaken off the very thing itselfe.Lucretius. And Lucrece (as it is written of him) made his book being mad, at such times; as the fits of his madnesse were off him, sure∣ly more mad when hee thought himselfe wisest, than when the fits of his phrensie were strongest upon him. Whosoever readeth the goodly discourses of Socrates upon his drinking of poyson,Socrates, Plato and Xenophon. as they be reported by Plato and Xenophon himselfe; cannot doubt of his opinion in this case. For he not onely believed it himself, but also perswaded many men to it with lively reasons, yea and by his own death much more then by all his life. And so yee see we be come un∣to Plato and Aristotle, with consent of all the wise men of old time, ungainsaid of any, saving of a two or three malapart wretch∣es, whom the ungraciousnesse of our dayes would esteem but as drunken sots and disards.Plato in his Timaeus. Certesse Plato (who might peradven∣ture have heard speake of the Books of Moses) doth in his Ti∣maeus bring in God giving commandement to the under-gods whom he created, that they should make man both of mortall and of immortall substances. Wherein it may be that he alluded to this saying in Genesis, Let us make man after our own image and likenesse. In which case the Jews say that GOD directed his speech to his Angels; but our Divines say he spake to himselfe. But anon after, both in the same book, and in many other places, Plato (as it were commming to himselfe again,) teacheth that
GOD created Man by himselfe,Plato in his Timaeus, and in his third Booke of a Commonweal. yea, and even his Liver and his Brain and all his Sences; that is to say, the Soule of him, not onely endued with reason and understanding, but also with sence and ability of growing and increasing; and also the instruments whereby the same doe worke. Moreover, he maketh such a mani∣fest difference betweene the Soule and the Body; as that he mat∣cheth them not together as matter and forme, as Aristotle doth: but as a Pilot and a Ship, a Common-weale and a Magistrate, an Image and him that beareth it upon him. What greater thing can there be than to be like God?Plato in his Phoedon, in his matter of State, in his Alcibiades, and in the tenth Book of his Commonweal. Now (sayth Plato in his Phoedon) The Soul of Man is very like the Godhead; Immortall, Reasonable, Uniforme, Undissoluble, and evermore of one sort, which are conditi∣ons (sayth he, in his matters of State) that cannot agree but to things most divine. And therefore at his departing out of the World, hee willed his Soul to return home too her kinred and to her first originall, that is to wit, (as he himself sayth there) to the wise and Immortall Godhead the Fountain of all goodnes, as called home from banishment into her own native Country. Hee termeth it ordinarily , that is to say, of Kyn unto God, and consequently , that is to say,Plato in his fifth Book of Laws. Everlasting, and of one self-same name with the immortall ones, a Heavenly Plant and not a Earthly, rooted in & Heaven not in Earth, begotten from above and not heer beneath, and finally such as cannot dye heer for as much as it liveth still in another place. To be short, seeing (sayth he) that it compre∣hendeth the things that are Divine and Immortall, that is to wit, the Godhead, and the things that are unchangeable and uncorrup∣tible, as truth is: it cannot be accounted to be of any other nature than they. The same opinion doth Plutarch also attribute unto him, which appeareth almost in every leafe of his Writings. As touch∣ing the ancienter sort of Platonists, they agree all with one accord in the Immortality of the Soul, saving that some of them derive it from God, and some from the Soule of the World, some make but the Reason or Mind onely to be Immortall, and some the whole Soule: which disagreement may well be salved, if we say that the Soul all whole together is Immortall in power or ability, though the exe∣cution and performance of the actions which are to be done by the body▪ be forgone with the instruments or members of the body. The disagreement concerning this point among such as a man may vouchsafe to call by the name of Phylosophers, seemeth to have
begun at Aristotle, howbeit that his Disciples count it a com∣mendation to him, that he hath given occasion to doubt of his opi∣nion in that behalfe. For it is certain that his new found Doctrine of the eternity or everlastingnesse of the world, hath distroubled his brain in many other things, as commonly it falleth out, that one error breedeth many other.Aristotl in his second book of living things. Because nature (sayth he) could not make every man particularly to continue for ever by himselfe, therefore shee continueth him in the kinde by matching male and female together. This is spoken either grosely or doubtfully. But whereas he sayth that if the minde have any in∣working of it own without any help of the Sences or of the bo∣dy, it may also continue of it selfe, concluding thereupon, that then it may also be separated from the body, as an immortall thing from a thing that is transitory and mortall: It followeth consequently also, that the soule may have continuance of it selfe, as whereof he uttereth these words,Aristotle in the third book of the Soule. namely, That the soule commeth from without, and not of the seed of man, as the body doth, and that the Soule is the onely part in us that is Divine. Now, to bee Divine and to be Humane, to be of seed and to be from without, that is to say, from GOD; are things flat contrary, whereof the one sort is subject to corruption,Aristotle in his 10. book of Moralls. and the other not. In the tenth book of his Moralls he acknowledgeth two sorts of life in man; the one as in respect that he is composed of body and soule, the other as in re∣spect of minde onely, the one occupied in the powers which are cal∣led humane and bodily, which is also accompanied with a felicity in this life, and the other occupied in the vertues of the minde, which is accompanied also with a felicity in another life, This which consisteth in contemplation, is better than the other; and the felicity thereto belonging, is peculiarly described by him in his books of Heaven above Time, as which consisteth in the franke and free working of the minde, and in beholding the soverain God. And in good sooth,Michael of E∣phesus upon Aristotles Mo∣ralls. fulwell doth Michael of Ephesus upon this saying of his conclude, that the soule is immortall; and so must all his moralls also needs doe, considering that to live well, whether it be to a mans selfe or towards other men, were else a vain thing and to no purpose, but to vex our mindes in this life. In his books of the soule, hee not onely separateth the body from the soule, but also putteth a difference betwixt the soule it selfe and the mind,
termining the soule the inworking of the body,. In his second book of the Soule. and of the bodily in∣struments, and the minde that reasonable substance which is in us, whereof the doings have no fellowship with the doings of the bo∣dy, and whereof the soule is (as Plato sayth) but the garment. This minde (sayth he) may be severed from the body, it is not in any wise mingled with it, it is of such substance as cannot be hurt or wrought upon, it hath being and continnance actually and of it selfe, and even when it is separated from the body, then is it immortall and everla∣sting. To be short, it hath not any thing like unto the body. For it is not any of all those things which have being afore it understand them. And therefore which of all bodily things can it be? And in another place he sayth thus: As concerning the minde, and the contempla∣tive power, it is not yet sufficiently apparant what it is, Ne∣verthelesse, it seemeth to be another kinde of soule, and it is that onely which can be separated from the corruptible, as the which is Ayeverlasting. To bee short, when as hee putteth this question, whether a Naturall Philosopher is to dispute of all manner of Soules, or but onely of that Soule which is immor∣tall: it followeth that hee granteth that there is such a one. And again, when as hee maketh this argument, Looke what God is everlastingly, that are we in possibility, according to our measure; but hee is everlastingly separated from bodily things, therefore the time will come that we shall be so too. Hee taketh it that there is an image of God in us, yea even of the Divine na∣ture which hath continuance of it selfe. Very well and rightly therefore doth Simplicius gather thereof, the immortality of the soule.In the last book of the parts of beasts. In the tenth of his Super∣naturalls. In his first book of mat∣ters of State. For it dependeth upon this separation, and upon continuance of being of it selfe. Besides this he sayth also, that hunting of beasts is granted to man by the law of nature, because that thereby man challengeth nothing but that which naturally is his own. But what right I pray you, if there be no more in himselfe than in them? And what is there more in him than in them; if they have a soule equall unto his? Hereunto make all his commendations of godlinesse, of Religion, of blessednesse, and of contemplation. For to what end serve all these, which doe but cumber us here below? Therefore surely it is to be concluded, that as he spake doubtfully in some one place, so he both termed and also taught to speake better in many other places, as appeareth by his Disciple Theophrastus, who spea∣keth yet more evidently thereof than he.
The Latines (as I have sayd before) fell to Philosophie some∣what later then the Greeks.The opinion of the Latine Writers. And as touching their common opi∣nion, the exercises of superstition that were among them, the man∣ner of speeches which we marke in their Histories, their contempt of death, and their hope of another life; can give ne sufficient war∣rant thereof, Cicero speaketh unto us in these words. The originall of our soules and mindes,Cicero in his first book of his Tusculane Questions, and in his book of Comfort. cannot be found in this low earth, for there is not any mixture in them, or any compounding that may seeme to be bred or made of the earth. Neither is there any moisture, any win∣dinesse, or any fiery matter in them. For no such thing could have in it the power of memory, understanding, and conceit, to beare in minde things past to foresee things to come, and to consider things pre∣sent, which are matters altogether divine. And his conclusion is, that therefore they bee derived from the minde of God, that is to say, not bred or begotten of man, but created of God: not bodi∣ly, but unbodily; whereupon it followeth that the soule cannot be corrupted by these transitory things.Cicero in his second book of the nature of the Gods▪ and in his first book of Laws. The same Cicero in another place sayth that between God and man there is a kinred of reason, as there is between man and man a kinred of bloud. That the fellowship between man and man commeth of the mortall body, but the fellowship between God and man, commeth of God himselfe, who created the soule in us. By reason whereof (sayth he) we may say we have alyance with the heavenly sort, as folke that are discen∣ded of the same race and root, whereof that wee may ever more bee mindfull, we must looke up to heaven as to the place of our birth, whe∣ther we must one day returne. And therefore yet once again he con∣cludeth thus of himselfe.In Scipio's dreame. Thinke not (sayth he) that thou thy selfe art mortall, it is but thy body that is so. For thou art not that which this outward shape pretendeth to be, the minde of man is the man in∣deede, and not this lump which may be pointed at with ones fin∣ger. Assure thy selfe therefore that thou art a God; For needs must that be a God, which liveth, perceiveth, remembreth, fore∣seeth, and finally raineth in thy body as the great God the maker of all things doth in the universall world. For as the eternall God ru∣leth and moveth this transitory world, so doth the immortall spirit of our soule move and rule our frail body. Hereunto consent all the writers of his time, as Ovid, Virgill and others, whose verses are in every mans remembrance.
There wanted yet the wight that should all other wights exceed In lofty reach of stately minde,Ovid in his first book of Metamorpho∣sis. who like a Lord indeed Should over all the res'due reign, Then shortly came forth man, Whom either he that made the World, and all things else began. Created out of seed divine, or else the earth yet young And lately parted from the Skie, the seede thereof uncloong Reteyned still in fruitfull wombe: which Japets sonne did take And tempering it with water pure, a wight thereof did make, Which should resemble even the Gods which soverein state doe hold. And where all other things the ground with groveling eye behold▪ He gave to man a stately look and full of Majesty. Commanding him with stedfast looke, to face the starry skie, Here a man might bring in almost all Senecaes writings,Seneca writing to Gallio and to Lucillus. but I will content my selfe with a few sayings of his. Our Soules (sayth he) are a part of Gods Spirit, and sparkes of holy things shine∣ing upon the earth. They come from another place then this low one. Whereas they seeme to be conversant in the bodie, yet is the better part of them in heaven, alway neere unto him which sent them hither. And how is it possible that they should be from beneath, or fom any where else than from above, seeing they overpasse all these lower things as nothing, and hold scorn of all that ever we can hope or feare? Thus ye see how he teacheth that our souls come into our bodies from above. But whether go they againe, when they depart hence:Seneca concer∣ning the Lady Martiaes Son, and the short∣nesse of this life. In his Questions and in his book of comfort Let us here him what he sayes of the Lady Martiaes Sonne that was dead. He is now everlasting (sayth he) and in the best state, bereft of this earthly baggage which was none of his, and set free to himselfe. For these bones, these sinewes, this coate of skin, this face, and these serviceable hands, are but fetters and prisons of the soule. By them the soule is overwhelmed, beaten downe, and chased away. It hath not a greater battell, than with that masse of flesh. For fear of being torn in peeces, it laboureth to return from whence it came, where it hath readie for it an happie and everlasting rest. And again: This soule cannot be made an Outlaw: for it is a kin to the Gods, equall to the whole world, and to all time; and the thought or conceit thereof goeth about the whole Heaven, extending it selfe from the beginning of all time to the uttermost point of that which is
to come. The wretched course being the Iayle and fetters of the soule, is tossed to and fro. Upon that are torments, murthers, and diseases executed. As for the soule, it is holy and everlasting, and cannot be layd hand on. When it is out of this body, it is at libertie and set free from all bondage, and is conversant in that beautifull place (where∣soever it be) which receiveth mens soules into the blessed rest thereof as soone as they be delivered from hence. To be short, he seemeth to pricke very nere to the rising againe of the dead. For in a certain Epistle to Lucillus, his words are these. Death, whereof we be so much afraid, doth not bereve us of life, but only discontinew it for a time; and a day will come that shall bring us to light againe. This may suffice to give us knowledge of the opinion of that great per∣sonage, in whom we see that the more he grew in age, the nerer he came still to the true birth. For in his latest bookes he treateth alwaies both more assuredly and more evidently thereof. Also the saying of Phavorinus is notable.Phavorinus. There is nothing great in earth, (sayth he) but Man; and nothing great in Man, but his soule if thou mount up thether, thou mountest above Heaven. And if thou stoope downe againe to the bodie, and compare it with the Heaven; it is lesse than a Fly, or rather a thing of nothing. At one word, this is as much to say, as that in this clod of clay, there dwel∣leth a divine and uncorruptible nature: for how could it els bee greater than the whole world? As touching the Nations of old time,The common opinion of all Nations. we reade of them all, that they had certain Religions and divine Services, so as they belee∣ved that there is a Hell▪ and certain fieldes which they call the E∣lysian fields, as we see in the Poets Pindarus, Diphilus, Sopho∣cles Euripides and others.Porphyrius, in his 4 book of Abstinence, The more superstitious that they were, the more sufficiently doe they witnesse unto us what was in their Conscience. For true Religion and Superstition have both one ground, namely the soule of man; and there could be no Religion at all,Which with their own hands made the fire to burn their bodies in: and saw a∣live the kind∣led flame that should consume their skin. if the soule lived not when it is gone hence. We read of the Indians, that they burned themselves afore they came to ex∣treme oldage, terming it the letting of men loose, and the freeing of the soule from the bodie: and the sooner that a man did it, the wi∣ser was he esteemed. Which custome is observed still at this day among the people that dwell by the River Niger otherwise called the people of Senega in Affricke, who offer themselves willingly to be buryed quicke with their Masters. All the demonstrations of
Logicke and Mathematicke (sayth Zeno) have not so much force to prove the immortalitie of the soule, as this only doing of theirs hath. Also great Alexander having taken prisoners ten of their Philosophers, (whom they call Gimnosophists) asked of one of them to try their wisedome, whether there were moe men alive or dead. The Philosopher answered, that there were more alive: Be∣cause (sayd he) there are none dead. Ye may well think they gave a dry mocke to all the arguments of Aristotle and Callisthenes, which with all their Philosophie had taught their scholer Alexan∣der so evill. Of the Thracians, we reade that they sorrowed at the brith of men and reioyced at the death of them, yea even of their owne childen. And that was because they thought that which we call death, not to be a death in deede, but rather a very happie birth. And these be the people whom Herodotus reporteth to have been called the Neverdying Getes, and whom the Greekes called the Neverdying Getes or Thracians.Gebeleizie, that is to say, Regi∣ster or giver of ease and rest. Who were of opinion that at their departing out of this world, they went to Zamolxis or Ge∣beleizie, that is to say (after the interpretation of the Getish or Go∣tish tongue) to him that gave them health, saluation or welfare, and gathered them together. The like is sayd of the Galles, chiefly of the inhabiters about Marsilles and of their Druydes; of the He∣truscians and their Bishops; and of the Scythians and their Sa∣ges; of whom all the learning and wisedome was grounded upon this poynt. For looke how men did spread abroad, so also did this doctrine, which is so deeply printed in man, that he cannot but carie it continually with him. Which thing is to be seene yet more in that which we read concerning the hearers of Hegesias the Cy∣renian, who dyed willingly after they had heard him discourse of the state of mens soules after this life; and likewise concerning Cleombrotus the Ambraciot, who slew himselfe when hee had read a certain treatise of the immortalitie of the soule. For had it not been a doctrine most evident to mans wit, they would never have bin caried so farre by it, as to the hurting of their bodies. And if among so many people, there be perchance some fewe wretched caytifes, that have borne themselves on hand the contrarie; which thing neverthelesse they could never yet fully perswade themselves to be out of all doubt or question: surely we may beleeve that they had very much adoe and were utterly besotted like Drunkards, a∣fore they could come to that poynt: so as we may well say of them
as Hierocle the Pythagorist sayd:Herocles in his 10. Chap. namely, That the wicked would not have their souls to be immortall, to the intent they might not bee punished for their faults. But yet that they prevent the sentence of their Judge, by condemning themselves unto death afore hand. But if they will neither heare God, nor the whole world, nor themselves: let them at leastwise hearken to the Devill as well as they doe in other things;Plutarke in his treatise of the slow punish∣ing of the wicked. who (as saith Plutark) made this answer to Corax of Naxus and others in these verses. It were a great wickednesse for thee to say The Soule to be mortall or for to decay. And unto Polytes he answered thus As long as the Soule to the body is tyde, Though loth yet all sorowes it needes must abyde. But when fro the body Death doth it remove, To heaven by and by then it flyes up above. And there ever youthfull in blisse it doth rest, As God by his wisedome hath set for the best. Not that any saying of the Devills owne is to be alledged in witnesse of the truth; further foorth than to shew that hee speakes it by compulsion of Gods mightie power, as wicked men divers times doe when they be upon the Racke. Now we be come to the time or nere to the time that the heavenly doctrine of Jesus Christ was spred over the whole world, unto which time I have proved the continuall succession of that doctrine, which could not but be unseparably ioyned with the succession of men.The opinion of the later Philosophers. But from this time forth it came so to light among all Nations & all persons; that Saint Austin after a short tryumphing over ungodlinesse, cryeth out in di∣vers places, saying: Who is now so very a foole or so wicked, as to doubt still of the immortalitie of the Soule? Epictetus a Stoikphilosopher, who was had in very great reputation among all the men of his time, is full of goodly sayings to the same pur∣pose. May we not be ashamed (sayth he) to leade an unhonest life,Epictetus. . and to suffer our selves to be vanquished by adversitie? we be alyed unto God, we came from thence, and we have leave to returne thether from whence we came. One while, as in re∣spect of the soule, he termeth man the ofspring of GOD, or as it were a branch of the Godhead; and another while he calleth him a divine Impe or a spark of God: by all which words (howbeit that they be somewhat unproper) (for what words can a man finde to
fit that matter:) he sheweth the uncorruptiblenesse of the substance of mans soule.Simplicius. And whereas the Philosopher Simplicius hath so diligently commented upon his bookes, it doth sufficiently an∣swer for his opinion in that case, without expressing his words here. Plotinus the excellentest of all the Platonists,Plotinus. Plotin. lib. 1. Aenead 4. con∣cerning the being of the Soule, & lib. 2. cap. 1. & lib. 3. cap. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22▪ 23. lib. 4. cap. 11. and the seventh book throughout. hath made nine trea∣tises expressely concerning the nature of the soule, besides the things which he hath written dispersedly heere and there in other places. His chiefe conclusions are these. That mens soule pro∣ceede not of their bodies, nor of the seede of the Parent, but come from above, and are as ye would say grafted into our bodies by the hand of God: That the soule is partly tyed to the body and to the instruments thereof, and partly franke, free, workfull, and continuing of it selfe; and yet notwithstanding that it is neither a body nor the harmonie of the body, but (if we consider the life and operation which it giveth to the body) it is after a sort the perfection [or ra∣ther the perfector] of the body; & if we have an eye to the understan∣ding whereby it guydeth the movings and doings of the body; it is as a Governour of the body: That the further it is withdrawne from the Sences, the better it discourseth of things; insomuch that when it is utterly separated from them, it understandeth things without discoursing, reasoning or debating, yea even in a moment; because this debating is but a certain lightening or brightnesse of the minde, which now taketh advisement in matter whereof it doubteth, & it doubteth wheresoever the body yeeldeth any impe∣dements unto it; but it shall neither doubt nor seek advisement any more when it is once out of the body, but shall conceive the truth without wavering: That the soule in the body is not properly there as in a place, or as in a ground, because it is not contained or comprehended therein, and may also be separated from it; but ra∣ther if a man had eyes to see it withall, he should see that the bodie is in the soule, as an accessary is in a principall, or as a thing con∣tained in a container, or a sheding or liquid thing in a thing that is not liquid, because the Soule imbraceth the body, and quickneth it, and moveth it equally and alike in all parts. That every abilitie thereof is in every part of the bodie, as much in one part as in ano∣ther, as a whole soule in every part; notwithstanding that every severall abilitie thereof seeme to be severally in some particular member or part, because the instruments thereof are there; as the sensitive abilitie seemeth to rest in the head, the irefull in the heart,
and the quickning in the liver, because the sinews, heart-strings, and veins come from those parts: Whereas the reasonable pow∣er is not in any part, saving so far forth as it worketh and hath his operation there, neither hath it any need of place or instrument for the executing of it selfe. And to be short, that the soule is a life by it selfe, a life all in one, unpaitable, which causeth to grow, and groweth not it selfe; which goeth through the bodie, and yet is not contained of the body; which uniteth the sences, and is not divided by the Sences, and therefore that it is a bodilesse substance, which cannot be touched, neither from within nor from without, having no need of the body either outwardly or inwardly, and con∣sequently is immortall, divine, yea and almost a very God: Which things he proveth by many reasons, which were too long to be rehearsed here.Plotinus in his Booke of the Sences, and of Memory. En. 4. lib. 3. and in his Booke of doubts con∣cerning the Soul, cap. 26, 27 Yea. he proceedeth so far as to say, that they which are passed into another world, have their memory still, notwith∣standing that to some mens seeming, it goe away with the sences as the treasury of the sences. Howbeit he affirmeth it to be the more excellent kinde of memory, not that which calleth things again to minde as already past, but that which holdeth and beholdeth them still as always present. Of which two sorts this latter he calleth Mindfulnesse. and the other he calleth Remembrance. I will add but onely one sentence more of his for a full president of his Do∣ctrine. The soule (sayth he) hath had company with the Gods, and is immortall, and so would we say of it (as Plato affirmeth) if we saw it faire and cleere. But for as much as we see it commonly troubled, we think it not to be either divine or immortall, howbeit that he which will discerne the nature of a thing perfectly, must consider it in the ve∣ry own substance or being, utterly unmingled with any other thing. For whatsoever else is added unto it, doth hinder the perfect discer∣ning of the same. Therefore let everyman behold himselfe naked, without any thing save himselfe, so as he look upon nothing else than his bare soule: and surely when he hath viewed himselfe in his own nature, meerly as in respect of his minde, he shall believe himselfe to be immortall. For he shall see that his minde aymeth not properly at the sensible and mortall things, but that by a certain everlasting power, it taketh hold of the things that are everlasting, and of what∣soever is possible to be conceived in understanding: insomuch that even it selfe becommeth after a sort a very world of understanding and light. This is against those which pretend a weaknesse of
the soule, by reason of the inconveniencies which it indureth very often in the body. Of the same opinion are Numenius, Jamblichus, Porphirius, and Proclus, notwithstanding that now and then they passe their bounds, suffering their wits to run ryot. For in their Philoso∣phie they had none other rule, than onely the drift of their own rea∣son. It was commonly thought that Alexander of Aphrodise be∣lieved not the immortality of the soule,Alexander of Aphrodise in his Books of the Soul. because hee defined it to be the forme of the body, proceeding of the mixture & temperature of the Elements. Surely these words of his doe us to understand, either that he meant to defiue but the sensitive life onely (as many others do) and not the reasonable soule, or else that he varieth from himselfe in other places. And in very deed he sayth immediately afterward, that he speaketh of the things which are subject to ge∣neration and corruption. But speaking of the soule he sayth it is separable, unmateriall, unmixed, and voyd of passions, unlesse, per∣chance we may thinke as some doe, that by this soule hee mean but onely God, and not also the soule that is in us; for the which thing hee is sharply rebuked by Themistius, who notwithstanding spake never a whit better thereof himselfe. Howsoever he deale elsewhere, these words of his following are without any doubtful∣nesse at all.In his second Book of Pro∣blemes. That the Soule (sayth he) which is in us, commeth from without, and is uncorruptible. I say uncorruptible because the nature thereof is such, and it is the very same that Aristotle affirmeth to come from without. And in his second Booke of Problems, searching the cause why the abilities of the soule are oftentimes impeached: If a mans brain be hurt (sayth he) the reasonable soule doth not well execute the actions that de∣pend thereon. But yet for all that, It abideth still in it selfe, un∣changeable of nature, ability, and power, through the im∣mortality thereof. And if it recover a sound instrument, it put∣teth her abilities in execution as well as it did afore. But I will reason more at large hereafter against the opinion that is fathered upon him. What shall we say of Galen,Galen in his Book of the Manners of the Soul. (who fathereth the causes of all things as much as he can, upon the Elements, and the mixture and agreeable concord of them) if after his disputing against his own soule, hee bee constrained to yield that it is immortall? Surely in his book concerning the manners of the soule, he doth the worst
that he can against Plato: and in another place he doubteth whe∣ther it be immortall, and whether it have continuance of it selfe or no. Yet notwithstanding in his book of the doctrine of Hippocra∣tes and Plato,In his Book of the doctrine of Hippocrates and Plato. It must needs be granted (sayth he) that the Soule is either a sheare body, and of the nature of the skie, (as the Stoicks and Aristotle himselfe, are inforced to confesse) or else a bodilesse substance, whereof the body is, as it were, the Cha∣riot, and whereby it hath fellowship with other bodies.In his Book of Conception. And it appeareth that he inclineth to this latter part. For he maketh the vitall spirit to be the excellentest of all bodily things, and yet he granteth the soule to be a far more excellent thing than that. What shall we then doe? Let us wey his words set down in his book of the conception of a childe in the mothers wombe. The Soule of man (sayth hee) is an influence of the universall Soule that discendeth from the heavenly Region, a substance that is capable of knowledge, which aspireth always to one substance like unto it selfe, which leaveth all these lower things to seeke the things that are above, which is partaker of the heavenly God∣head, and which by mounttng up to the beholding of things that are above the heavens, putting it selfe into the presence of him that ruleth all things. Were it reason then that such a substance comming from else where than of the body, and mounting so far a∣bove the body,The universall consent. should in the end die with the body, because it useth the service of the body? Now hereunto I could adde infinite other sayings of the an∣cient Authors both Greeke and Latine Philosophers, Poets, and Orators from age to age, wherein they treat of the judgement to come, of the reward of good men. of the punishment of evill men, of Paradise and of Hell, which are appendants to the immortality of the Soule: but as now I will but put the reader in minde of them by the way, reserving them to their peculiar places. To be short, let us run at this day from East to West,In the Alco∣ran, Azo. 25. and 42. and from North to South, I say not among the Turks, Arabians or Persians, (for their Alcoran teacheth them that mans soule was breathed into him of God,It appeareth by the stories of the East & West Indies. and consequently that it is uncorruptible) but even a mong the most barbarous, ignorant, & beastly people of the World, I meane the very Caribies and Canniballs, and we shall finde this beliefe received and imbraced of them all. Which giveth us to un∣derstand, that it is not a doctrine invented by speculations of some
Philosophers, conveyed from Countrey to Countrey by their Disci∣ples, perswaded by likelyhoods of reasons, or (to be short) entered into mans wit by his ears: but a native knowledge, which every man findeth and readeth in himselfe which he carryeth everywhere about with himselfe, and which is as easie to be perswaded unto all such as view themselves in themselves, as it is easie to perswade a man that never saw his own face, to believe that he hath a face, by causing him to behold himselfe in a glasse. There remain yet two opinions to bee confuted.Against Aver∣rhoes. The one is the opinion of Averrhoes, and the other is the opinion of Alexan∣der of Aphrodise, who affirme themselves to hold both of Aristo∣tle; namely in that they uphold that there is but one universall reasonable soule or mind, which worketh all our discourses in us, howbeit diversly in every severall person. And this thing (if wee believe Averrhoes) is done according to the diversity of the Phan∣tasies or imaginations wherewith the minde is served as with in∣struments. But if we believe Alexander,Let the Rea∣der bear these terms & their significations in Mind, for all the discourse here ensuing. it is done according to the diversities of the capable minde, as they terme it, that is to say, of the ability or capability that is in men to understand things, by receiving the impression of the universall minde that worketh into every of them which in respect thereof is called of them the work∣er. Soothly these opinions are such as may be disproved in one word. For this onely one minde, whether in possibility or in acti∣on, could not have received or imprinted in every man one selfe∣same common beliefe and conceit of the immortality of the Soule, in so great diversity of imaginations, and in so many Nations, as we see doe believe it, considering that the very same conceit is di∣rectly repugnant against it. Nay, it may well be sayd that Aver∣rhoes and Alexander had very divers conceits and imaginations one from another, and very contrary to all other mens, seeing they had so diverse and contrary opinions imprinted either in their mind or in their imagination. Howbeit for as much as there may be some, that will make a doubt of it; let us examine them severally yet more advisedly.Averrhoes up∣on Aristotles third Book of the Soul. First, Averrhoes will needs bear Aristotle on hand, that Aristotle is of that opinion. Let us see how this furnise of his can agree with the propositions which Aristotle hath left us. Aristotle telleth us that the soule is knit to the body as the forme or shape to the matter; that the soule hath three chiefe powers, namely, of life▪ of sense, and of understanding; and that the under∣standing
part containeth in his power both the other two powers, as a five square containeth both a foresquare and a Triangle. Whereupon it followeth,Aristotle in his second Book of the Soul. that if any one of the three powers of the soule be joyned to the body as a forme to the matter; all the three be joyned so to, as which are all in one soule as in their root. Now Averrhoes neither can nor will deny that the powers of growing and of perceiving by the sences are joyned after that manner to the body; and therefore it followeth that the understanding power is so joyned also, and consequently that according to Aristotle, as every body hath his forme,Aristotle in his first Book of the Soul. so every body hath his soule. The same A∣ristotle findeth fault with the former Philosophers for holding o∣pinion that a soule might passe out of one man into another: be∣cause (sayth he) that every certain soule must needs be appor∣tioned and appointed to some one certain body. Now looke by what soule a man liveth, by the same soule doth he understand: for it is but one soule indewed with three divers abilities, as hee himselfe teacheth openly. One understanding or minde therefore, must (according to Aristotle) worke but in one severall body, and not in many bodies. Also according to Aristotle, a man and a beast agree in this, that both of them have one sensitive power, and one selfesame imagination of things perceived by the sences, and that they differ in this, that man hath yet further a minde and reason a∣bove the beast, which thing the beast hath not. Now if this under∣standing or minde be without the man▪ as the sunne is without the chamber, that it shineth into and inlighteneth, then cannot he be called reasonable, or indowed with understanding, neither doth he consequently differ from a beast. For the difference must be in nature, and not in accident. And so should it insue that Aristotles foresaid definition of a man is false, as if he should define a chamber by the shining of the sunne into it: Or say that a dog differeth not from a man in kinde; yea, and that beasts are capable of under∣standing, for as much as they have imagination ready aforehand to receive the influence thereof as well as we. But Aristotle is always one in his defining both of beast and of man; and Averrhoes also holdeth himselfe to it, without doubting thereof at all. This conclu∣sion therefore cannot in any wise be upheld by such grounds. Again, if there be not in every severall man a severall minde, but onely one universall minde common to all men, which becom∣meth divers by the onely diversity of our imaginations: Then in
respect that we have sundry imaginations, we shall by sundry li∣ving wights; and in respect that we have all but one minde, we shall be all but one man. For man is not man in respect of the sensitive power, but in respect of the reasonable part which is the minde. But Aristotle granteth that we be not onely divers living wights, but also divers men. And therefore he must needs mean also, that wee have not onely divers imaginations, but also divers minds. Now besides many other reasons that might be aleadged, yee might add this also, That otherwise Aristotles Moralls and his discourses concerning Justice, Freewill, the Immortality of the soule, the happie blisse, the reward of the good, and the pains of the wicked, were utterly fruitlesse and to no purpose: For as our fancies or imaginations did come and goe, so would all those things come and goe likewise, and so should they have no continuance of themselves, but onely be as a shadow and vain phantasie. But let Aristotle a∣lone, (for he hath wrong) and let us come to the matter it selfe. The Philosophers doe ordinarily make a double minde; the one which they call possible or impossible, which is capable and of bility to understand things; and this they liken to a smooth table; the o∣ther they call working on workefull, which bringeth the ability into act, whereas notwithstanding they be not two mindes, but two se∣verall abilities of onely one minde. Now, as for this ability or pos∣sibility of understanding, we affirme it to be in the soule of every man. Contrariwise, Averrhoes affirmed onely one universall ca∣pable minde to be shed abroad every where throughout all men; & that the same is diversly perfected and brought into act in every se∣verall man, according to the diversity of the imaginations which the man conceiveth, even by the help or influence of the said uni∣versall workfull minde, which he sayth is also a substance severed, from man, and (in respect of the understanding in possibility) is as the sunne is to the sight of our eyes, and the understanding in pos∣sibility is to the imaginations as the sight is unto colours. Now, I demand first of all, whether these uniuersall minds of his, bee substances created or uncreated. If they be created, where becom∣meth then his conclusion, That the world is without beginning, and without ending, seeing that he will have them to be continued everlastingly in all men that have been, are, or shall be? If they bee uncreated, how can so excellent substances be made subject to our fond imaginations, to yield influence into them at their pleasures?
Or rather how happeneth it that they correct them not? How hap∣peneth it that they leave them in such errors, yea even in the know∣ledge of themselves, seeing that by the erring of the imaginations, the very understanding and reason themselves must also needs be so often beguiled? Again, as concerning these substances, which extend into so many places; are they Bodies or Spirits? How can they be bodies, seeing they be in infinite places at one instant, and doe infinite things, yea, and flat contraries? And if they be Spirits, doth it not follow therupon, that they be wholy in all men & who∣ly in every man; that is to say, that every man hath them wholy to himselfe? And therefore that if they be deceived by the fantasie of any one man, they be consequently deceived in all men? And where∣of comes it then, that one man overcommeth his imaginations, and another man not? Or that one man resisteth them, and another suffereth himselfe to be carried away by them? Moreover, who can deny that a man willeth things, whereof he hath understanding; and likewise that he willeth some things which he understandeth not: and that he understandeth some things which he willeth not? And also that he willeth things even contrary to his appetites, and concludeth oftentimes contrary to his imaginations, as commeth to passe in dreams and in looking-glasses; which thing the brute beasts doe not? When a man willeth contrary to his appetites, willeth he not contrary to his sences, yea, and contrary to his imagi∣nations too: for what els is fantasie or imagination, than the re∣bounding backe of the fences: And if this workfull understanding be the only worker in his possible understanding by meane of ima∣gination; how commeth it to passe that a man willeth contrary to his imagination: Againe, when either in dreaming or in debating, reason concludeth cleane contrary to that which fancie or imagina∣tion offereth; whereof commeth it that a man is contrary to himself, or that the deede is contrary both to that which imprinted it, and to that wherein it is imprinted? Also what els is imagaination (accor∣ding to the opinion of Averrhoes,) than a certain operation an∣nexed to the bodie, steaming up from the Hart to the Braine: And on the contrary part who can say nay, but that the Will and Vn∣derstanding are able to performe their operations without the in∣struments of the body,Aristotle in his tenth Book of Supernaturals seeing that a man doth both will and debate things that are most repugnant to the body: Yea and that (as A∣ristotle sayth) those be not actions which passe into the outward
man, but those which abide within & make perfect the inner man▪ And who can make Will and Vnderstanding to be things depen∣ding upon imagination, seeing that both waking and sleeping and all manner of ways els, they dayly utter infinite iudgements and determinations against it: Now, if we have nothing in us above Imagination: then considering that we doe both will and under∣stand, it must needes be that this power or abilitie to will and un∣derstand is shed into us from without. And if it but only one u∣niversally in all men; then seeing that the actions thereof are execu∣ted without the imagination, without the sences, and without the instruments of the bodie, yea and against them: it followeth that it willeth and understandeth in us whatsoever it liketh and listeth▪ even in despite of all impediments and lets of the bodie; and that as it is but one, so it shall will but one selfesame thing, and likewise al∣so understand but one selfesame thing in all men. For if (as Ari∣stotle confesseth) our imaginations make not our will and reason subject unto them; much lesse doe they make the foresayd universall mind subject to them as Averrhoes pretendeth. But now contra∣riwise we see therebe as many Willes as men, yea even in one matter; and that the understandings of men are not onely divers, but also contrarie. It followeth then that every particular person hath in that behalfe a particular substance, which willeth and un∣derstandeth, franke and free from all imaginations whensoever it listeth to retyre into it selfe; and not that there is but one universall mind which willeth and understandeth all things in all men. Be∣sides this; by the iudgement of Aristotle as I sayd afore, this uni∣versall mind could not worke will and understanding inus: for to will and understand (sayth he) are operations that passe not into the matter nor into the outward thing, but abide stil in the worker, that is to say in the mind, as actions and perfections thereof. Let us yet againe take of that which hath bin sayd afore. If the sayd universall only one working mind, have wrought from ever∣lasting in the sayd universall only one capable mind, by the Ima∣ginations of men: then hath the knowledge of all things bin ever∣more imprinted in the sayd capable mind; for it shall evermore have brought the abilitie into act: And therwithall, the working and per∣fection of the thing that is everlasting, shall have depended upon a thing that is temporall; which is unpossible. And although Aver∣rhoes supposed not the World to be everlasting: yet notwithstan∣ding
the said capable minde which hath been set awotke so many hundred years, by so many imaginations of men, and in so many sundry Nations, could not now meet with any new thing where∣of it had not the knowledge afore. For this capable mind (sayth A∣verrhoes) is a certain spirituall substance, which spreadeth it selfe forth into all men and into all ages, and the nature of such sort of substances is to be all in the whole, and all in every part thereof. For they be not tyed to any one place, but are wheresoever they worke, and their working is in respect of the whole, and not in re∣spect of any one part, forasmuch as they be undividable. Therefore it should follow by his opinion (as I have sayd afore) that the one universall capable minde is and worketh whole & unparted in every man. And if it be so, then is that being of it there, not in way of meer ability or possibility onely, but in way of operation and perfect in∣working, as a wicked spirit is in a witch, in a Pythonesse or in a possessed person: which spirit (were he possessed of the man as he himselfe possesseth the man, (after which manner Averrhoes affir∣meth us to possesse the understanding in possibility, by our imagi∣nations;) would make the man capable of all that ever the Spirit himselfe knoweth or is. Whereupon it will follow, that this un∣derstanding in possibility, shall everlastingly in all men from their very birth, actually understand and know all things that all men understand, as well in the old as the young, and in the ignorant as the skilfull; so as wee shall have no more need of sences; nor of imagination to understand withall. To be short, although Aver∣rhoes, admitteth not the World to be without beginning: yet at leastwise he will not deny, but that [by his reckoning] they which come into the world at this day, should come far more skilfull then all their predecessors, and the children of them more skilfull then their fathers, and the offspring of those children more skilfull then those children themselves, and so forth on, because they should succeed in the knowledge continued throughout all ages. Where∣upon it will also insue, that all Sciences shall be equall in all men that make profession of them. As for example, we will speak here, but of some one speciall Science, as Grammer and Arithmetick, Now if there be any diversity in the skill thereof, that diversity cannot come but of the diversity of the subject or ground wherein the skill is. Now the ground of the skill is the capacity of the minde or understanding, (which Averrhoes supposeth to be but on∣ly
one, common to all men) and not the Imagination, which is but a reflexion or rebounding backe of the Sence. And so forasmuch as there is (by his saying) but one ground in all men; it followeth that the knowledge or skill of this or that Science must needes be e∣quall and alike in all men: or els that if it be not equall, but doe vary, as we see it doth in divers degrees; then the same varying or diversitie happeneth through the diversitie of the ground where∣in the skill is, and consequently that there is one particular under∣standing or one peculiar mind in every man, and not one universall mind common to all men. Also it is a generall rule, that the recei∣ver of a thing hath not the thing afore he receive it.Aristotle in his third book of the Soule. For (as Ari∣stotle sayth) that which is to receive a thing, must needes be first ut∣terly voyde of the thing which it receiveth. Now afore that our Sence and Imagination had any being at all, this universall co∣mon mind had received and possessed all things aforehand; and not only received them, but also kept them together. For as Aristotle himselfe sayth, that manner of mind is the place of all under kinds and sortes of things, and thereto hath no lesse power than the Imagi∣nation, to reteine whatsoever the Sences receive. In vaine there∣fore should that universall mind understand by our Imaginations, considering that it understandeth by it selfe: in vaine likewise should the Imaginations imprint those things in it, which were imprinted in it so long afore: and in vaine is Aristotles setting∣downe of a workfull understanding, which should bring our under∣standing in abilitie, from possibilitie into action; if the sayd onely one vniversall mind or understanding be perfect of it selfe from e∣verlasting, as it followeth to be upon the opinion of Averrhoes. Neither is it to sayd, that although the conceivable underkinds of things have been imprinted everlastingly in the sayd universall mind; yet notwithstanding there needed and Imagination for the understanding of them, as there needeth now whensoever we will use the things that we have seene or learned afore. For by that rec∣koning, to learne all manner of Sciences, we needed no more but to bethinke us by imagination, of the things that were already a∣forehand in the sayd only universall one mind, as we doe the things that have bene printed sometime in our memories, and are some∣what slipped out of our remembrance; and so might we our selves learne all sciences without a teacher, because that in the sayd uni∣versall mind of ours, we should have all the skill that ever any
man had attained to, in like manner as the person that hath once had the skill of Arithmetick or Cosmographie throughly settled in his mind, needeth no teacher to teach it him againe, but onely to overturn his owne imagination, and to search his memorie for the finding againe of that which he had layd up there. Now we knowe that whosoever learneth nothing, knoweth nothig, and that ordi∣narily he which most studyeth, most learneth: and that all the tos∣sing and turmoyling of a mans owne imagination that can be all his life long, will never make him to attaine of himselfe to so much as the very principles of the least science that is. By reason where∣of it followeth, That we have not the skill of any science in us, un∣till we either be taught it or find it out by beating our wits about it: and that our imagination serveth not to revive the Sciences in us, but to bring them into us, and to plant them in us, And for∣asmuch as all the Sciences should be in all men from the begin∣ning, if there were but one universall mind in all men, [which is not so] it followeth that there is in every particular person a par∣ticular and peculiar mind, and not any one universall mind com∣mon to all men. Moreover, our mind attaineth after a sort to the understanding of it selfe: which thing it could not doe in very deede, if there were but one universall mind common to all men. For too understand it selfe, it must needes worke upon it selfe. But if we beleeve Averrhoes, our mind shall but onely be wrought upon and receive into it from the Imagination, as a Window recei∣veth light from the Sunne. Againe, the capacity of the universall understanding in possibilitie, could not doe that. For it behoved it to have some other thing besides itselfe, to bring it selfe into action. And surely Imagination could not helpe it, for it doth but offer up the sensible things unto it, and attaineth not so farre as to the things that are to be discerned by drift of reason. Yet notwithstanding we understand that we understand, and we reason and iudge both of our Imagination, and also of our reasoning and understanding it∣selfe. The thing then which doth so enter and pearce into itselfe, is another manner of power than an Imagination, or that an univer∣sall understanding in possibilitie. What is to be sayd to this, that of one selfesame Imagination, one selfesame person concludeth now after one sort, and by-and-by after in another sort; and thereout of draweth both contrarie arguments and contrarie determinations: or that divers person by divers imaginations doe close together in
one will and one minde? Is it possible that this should proceed of an everlasting substance in one selfe same person, seeing that ever∣lastingnesse is not subject to any change of time or place? Or that it should proceed of any one selfesame substance in many men, see∣ing that the imaginations of them be so divers one from another? at least wise if the said substance work not but by such instruments? As touching the opinion of Alexander of Aphrodise,Against Alex∣ander of Aphro¦dise. who up∣holdeth a certain universall working mind that imprinteth things in the understanding in possibility, that is to say, in every mans se∣verall capacity, and bringeth it forth into action: the most part of the reasons alleaged afore against Averrhoes, will also serve against him. Howbeit for as much as by this workfull minde, he seemeth to mean God himselfe, there is thus much more ro be ad∣ded unto it. That God who is altogether good, and altogether wise, would not imprint in our minde the fond and wicked conceits which we finde there, nor leave so great ignorance and darknesse as we feele there, but would in all men overcome the infection which the body bringeth: and although he inspired not all men a∣like with his gracious gifts, according to the diversity of their capacities after the manner of a planed Table, yet would he not at leastwise print the World with so many false Portratures and Trains, as every one of us may perceive to be in our selves. Again, were there any such inspiration or influence, it should be either continuall or but by times. If continuall or everlasting, wee should without labour and without cunning understand all that e∣ver our imagination offereth unto us. And if it be but at times, then should it not lie in us to list or to understand any thing at all, though we would never so fain. For contrariwise, wee have much adoe to understand some things, so as wee must be fain to win them from our ignorance by piecemeale, and there be some other things, which we understand by and by as soon as they be put un∣to us, and when we list our selves, There is then in us a power of Understanding, though very feeble; but yet never the later obedient to our will: which thing cannot be fathered upon God. Also if there be but onely one minde working in all men, there shall be but one selfesame understanding in all men, I meane naturally, notwith∣standing that it differ in degrees. For into what place soever the Sunne doth shead his beams, he doth both inlighten it and heat it, howbeit diversly according to the nature and condition of the pla∣ces
and things that receive him, some more, and some lesse, some brighter, and some dimlyer. But howsoever the case stand, his light yieldeth no darknesse, nor his heat any cold. So then if the diversities of mens imaginations do cause diversities of effects in the inspiration or influence that floweth into the capacitie of our understanding; surely it must needes be after this manner, namely that one man shall understand one selfesame thing more, and ano∣ther man lesse; but not in that any man shall take untruth for truth, unright for right, or one thing for another. Now we see unto how many errors wee be subject, I mean not in such things as this namely, that one man seeth better a far off, and another better at hand; but that one man seeth white and another seeth black (which are things contrary) in one selfesame ground and at one selfesame time. It followeth therefore that divers and sundrie mindes doe worke in divers persons, and not one selfesame minde in all persons. By force of which reasons and of such others, I say that every man shall finde in himselfe and of himselfe, that every man hath a par∣ticular soule by himselfe, that is to say, a spirituall substance united to his body, which in respect of giving life to the body is as the forme thereof, and in respect of giving reason, is as the guide of our actions: That in every man there is a certain Sunbeam of rea∣son, whereby they conceive things and debate upon them; where∣through it commeth to passe, that often times they agree both in the reason it selfe which is one, and in the manifest grounds there∣of▪ and in whatsoever dependeth evidently upon the same: That e∣very man hath also a peculiar body by himselfe, and likewise pecu∣liar complexion, humours, imaginations, education, custome and trade of life: whereof it commeth that every man takes a diverse way, yea, and that one selfesame person swarveth diversly from the unity of reason whereof the path is but one, and the ways to stray from it are infinite: That this Sunbeam of reason which shineth and sheadeth it selfe from our minde, is properly that understanding which is termed, The understanding in ability or possibility, which is increased and augmented by all the things which it seeth, heareth, or lighteth upon, like fire, which gathereth increase of strength by the abundance of the fewell that is put upon it, and be∣commeth after a sort infinite by spreading it selfe abroad: Also it is the same which otherwise we call the Memory of understanding, or mindefull Memory, and it is nothing else but an abundance of
Reason, and as it were a hoorder up of the continuall influence of the Mind: That the Mind from whence this floweth as from his spring, is properly that which they the sayd Averrhoes and Alex∣ander do terme the working or workfull Mind, which is a cer∣tain power or force that can skill to extend reason from one thing to another, and to proceede from things sensible to things unsen∣sible, from things movable to things unmovable, from bodily to spirituall, from effects to causes, and from beginnings to ends by the meane cause. This Mind is in respect of Reason, as cunning is in respect of an Instrument or toole; and Reason, as in respect of imagination and of the things that are sensible, is as an Instru∣ment or toole in respect of the matter or stuffe that it workes upon: Or to speake more fitly, this Mind is unto Reason, as the mover of a thing is to the thing that is movable, and Reason is to her ob∣jects, as the movable thing is to the thing whereunto it is moved. For to reason or debate, is nothing els but to proceed from a thing that is understoode, to a thing that is not understoode, of purpose to understand it: and the understanding thereof is a resting that inse∣weth upon it, as a staying or resting after moving: That both of them as well the one as the other, are but onely one selfesame sub∣stance, & like as a man, both when he moveth, and when he resteth is all one and the same man, or as the power that moveth the si∣news is one selfesame still, both when it stirreth them, and when it holdeth them still, so the reasonable or understanding soule that is in every man, is but onely one selfesame substance bodilesse and immortall, executing his powers partly of it selfe, and partly by our bodies. And seeing that Averrhoes and Alexander, make so great estimation and account of the effects which are wrought in us, that they be inforced to attribute them to some uncorruptible and everlasting minde; let us take of them, that in very truth the thing which worketh so great wonders in the body, can be neither sence, nor body, nor imagination, but a divine, uncorruptible and immortall minde, as they themselves say. But let us learn the thing of more then them, which all wise men teach us, and which every of us can learne of himselfe; namely that this understanding or minde is not one universall thing as the sunne is that shineth into all the windows of a Citie, but rather, a particular substance in every severall man, as a light to lead him in the darknesse of this life; for surely it was no more difficultie to
the everlasting GOD, to create many sundry soules, that every man might have one severally alone by himselfe, than to have crea∣ted but onely one soule for all men together. But it was far more for his glory, to be known, praised, and exalted of many soules▪ yea and more for our welfare to praise, exalt, and know him, yea, and to live of our selves both in this life, and in the life to come: then if any other universall spirit, soule or minde whatsoever, should have lived and understood either in us or after us. Now then for this matter let us conclude, both by reason and by antiquity, and by the knowledge that every of us hath of himselfe; That the soule and the body be things divers: that the soule is a spirit and not a body: That this spirit hath in man three abilities or powers, whereof two be exercised by the body, and the third worketh of it selfe without the body: That these three abilities are in the one onely soule as in their root: whereof two doe cease whensoever the body faileth them, and yet notwithstanding the soule abideth whole without a batement of any of her powers, as a craftsman continueth a craftsman though he want tools to work withall: And finally, that this soule is a substance that continueth of it selfe, and is unmateriall and spirituall, over the which neither death nor corruption can naturally have any power. And for a conclusion of all that ever I have treated of hitherto in this book, let us maintain, That there is but onely one God, who by his own goodnesse and wisdome is the Creator and Go∣vernour of the world & of all that is therein: That in the world he created Man after his own image as in respect of minde, and af∣ter the image of his other creatures as in respect of life, sense, and moving, mortall so far forth as he holdeth the likenesse of a crea∣turn, and immortall so far forth as hee beareth the image of the Creator: That is to wit, in his soule: That he which goeth out of himselfe to see the world, doth forthwith see that there is a God, for his works declare him every where: That hee which will yet still doubt thereof, needeth but to enter into himselfe, and he shall meet him there, for he shall finde there a power which he seeth not: That he which believeth there is one God, believeth himselfe to be im∣mortall; for such consideration could not light into a mortall nature: and that he which believeth himself to be immortal, believeth that there is a God, for without the unutterable power of the one God,
the mortall and immortall could never joyne together: That he which seeth the order of the world, the proportion of man, and the harmonie that is in either of them compounded of so many con∣traries, cannot doubt that there is a Providence for the nature which hath furnished them therewith▪ cannot be unfurnished therof it selfe; but as it once had a care of them, so can it not shake off the same care from them. Thus have we three Articles which follow in∣terchangeably one another. Insomuch that he which proveth any one of them, doth prove them all three, notwithstanding that I have treated of every of them severally by it selfe. Now let us pray the everlasting God, that we may glo∣risie him in his works in this world, and he voutsafe of his mercie to glo∣rifie us one day in the World to come. ({inverted ⁂}) AMEN.
