R1440 E398_8 R201685 99862185 114336
THE RIDDLES UNRIDLED OR, An Answer by way of Depositions of the Free-Commons of ENGLAND, to Nine Proposalls, by way of Interogation to the Generall Officers and Souldiers in the ARMIE. WRITTEN For Vindication of the Army, from the unjust A∣spersions of being mercinaries, and from the scanda∣lous imputation of Rebellion. Injuriously charged upon them by the Authour of those Seditious PROPOSALLS. 2 Tim. 2.23, 24. 23 Follow righteousnesse, faith, Charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. 24 But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they doe ingender strifes. Deut. 31.6. Bee strong and of a good courage, feare not, nor be afraid of them, for the Lord thy God, he it is that doth goe with thee, he will not faile nor forsake the. Printed in the Yeare 1647.
AN Answer to the following Proposalls OR Interrogations, by way of Depositi∣ons, or Satisfactory Reasons, alledged by the free Commons OF ENGLAND: 1. TO the first Interrogation these Deponents doe say, That they are perswaded in their Consciences, and doe verily beleeve, that a clearer, and better light then that which taught both Houses of Parliament in the beginning of this ParliamentSee Vote of 20 May 1642. & 6 Jun. 1642, Book Declar. p. 259. & 306. (viz. That the King seduced by evill Councell, intended to make Warre against the Parliament) to take up Armes, and to levy Warre against the King upon bare feares and jealousies, without any apparent act or evidence that he intended to introduce Arbitrary power, and to govern by his Will, and not by the Laws, hath guided and instructed those Noble Heroes, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lievte∣nant Generall Cromwell, and the other godly Officers, Souldi∣ers, and Saints of this Army (Ironically so called by this Scep∣ticall proposer) by Gods divine Providence to seize upon the King, to prevent the distruction of that sacred person, (which they have all this while pretended to fight for, to redeem him for his safety forth of the hands of his evill Counsellors, and to bring
him home to his Parliament, and to marry and reunite him a∣gaine to his imaginary Office in both Houses, though in the mean time they kept him prisoner at Holmeby) to prevent the destruction of that sacred person intended by some of both Houses of Parliament, for the maintenance and supportation of their own ambition, injustice, avarice, and cruelty, and Eng∣lands destruction, which they in their wicked imaginations have hatched and contrived for their owne particular advance∣ments, and the Kingdomes ruine. And the Army came so near to London, onely to awake the City, that they might not longer drinke of the cup of violence, and sleep the sleep of gid∣dnesse, or give eare to the Phantasies of their filthy dreamers, that despise the dominion of their King, and speak evill of dig∣nities, but to give them a faire warning, that they may in time provide for the things that belong to their peace, in joyning with the Army to restore his Majesty to his just rights and pre∣rogatives, the Kingdome to its desirable Liberties, and the peo∣ple to their native rights and properties, so much trampled upon by the accused, or rather accursed Members and others, contrary to all Law and Justice, and to the trust reposed in them by the free people of England, who choose them, and sent to Parliament to consult, and act for their weale, and not for their woe, as by their own Declaration is acknowledged, which since they have not done, the Army according to their ingage∣ments, and their Generalls Commission, have done nothing, but what in Honour, Justice, and Loyalty, blongs to them in preserving of his Majesties person to brin him up to sit in his Parliament in due time, both for the setling of the Peace of this Kingdome of England, and for an effectuall and vigorous reliefe of Ireland, without which neither of these can be esta∣blished, nor the warres ended. Neither is the Army obliged; nay, ought not to disband, It being the proper office of the Ar∣my, and the end for which the first Armes were raised by both Houses, according to their own Declarations,See the Propositions of Lords and Commons, Dat. 10. Junij 1642. Booke decl p. 342. See Sir Tho. Fairfax Ordi∣nance whereby his Army was rised. Booke of Ordin. p. 599. 15 Febr. 1644. to main∣tain the Protestant Religion, (not Presbyterian) the Kings Au∣thority and his person in his Royall dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdome, and
the just priviledges of Parliament against any which shall op∣pose them, even against the Members themselves. And whereas by this first proposll it is inquired whehr, and asserted that the Army hath inforced the houses to recall and anull their owne votes, against their judgements, con∣science, Honour, and common Justice, we say, we are hearti∣ly sorry that it is our ill hap to be governed for the present by such men, who hve renounced their judgements, conscien∣ces, Honours, and common ustice, and shall therefore take it for a great deliverance to the people of this Nation, that the Army would assist the free commons of England to remove those men who have departed so much from their judgements Honours, consciences, and common justice, as men unworthy to sit at the helme of a Kingdome, and to send othersMaxime virtu is et max∣ime intellectus as Parliament men ought to be. Cook Instit. 4. part. p. 3. fitly qualified for pablique busines to sit in their roomes, (who may aide the King in the Government of his pople with their best advice, as councellors, not by way of command as Masters or Regents) even such men as shall beare more re∣gard to honour, consciences, and justice, then those that now usurpe the place. And we conceive that the Charge against the elven Mem∣bers is neither so generall nor illegall, but that it ought not to be refrained, but is as warrantable by the Houses owne rules as that against the Earle of Strafford, the Arch Bishop of Can∣terbury, or Master Justice Barkley, and therefore in all reason ought to produce the same effects of suspention from the house and confinement to these accused Members as the Charges of those men did unto them, for ubi eadem Ratio, ubi debet cadem lex esse, is a maxime in Law,Vide Mr. Saint Johns Araign∣ment against Strafford, p. 4. 5 Vide Mr. Syms speech made in the Lords Houe against the Earle of Strafford 12 Ap. 1 41. and we well remember that the Earle of Strafford, the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Mr. Ju∣stice Barkley, and others, Members and Assistants of the Houses, notwithstanding they had been committed to the Black-Rod and afterward to the Tower, had not any particular Charge brought in against them for many monthes, nay some of them for many yeares after their Commitment, but only this Ge∣nerall Charge, That they intended the subversion of the Lawes of the Land, and to introduce an Arbitrary and tyrannicall
Government, which was the effect and mayne of all that w alleaged against them though long after their Commitments, some formall Articles were brought in against them, which was held more superfluous then necessary in the Earle of Straf∣fords case by Mr. Saint John Argu p. 4. as by his Printed Argument appeares where he delivers for Law, that it was altogether ir∣requisite in that manner of tryall of the Earle, (which may fall out to be the accused members cases) that there should have bin any Articles or Charge at al, neither doth the Bill of his At∣tainder expresse any causes of his Attainder but the Generall heads: nay Mr. Saint John goes further, that in that manner of tryall by Bill, privat satisfaction to each mans conscience is sufficient, although no evidence had bin given in at all, when we therefore consider, that the Charge against these eleven Members is presented unto the Houses under five heads are re∣duced into five Articles, the first of which containes that these Members have indeavoured or infringed to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this Nation in Arbitra∣ry violent or oppressive wayes, to delay and obstruct Justice; The second, their endeavour to endanger the Peace of this Kingdome, and retarding the Reliefe of Ireland; the third to prejudice the service of Ireland; the fourth designe, to raise new forces to advance and carry on desperate designes of their own in England, to the prejudice of the Parliament nd publike, and indeavouring to Lift and raise forces without Authority of Parliament. 5. That they have invited, incouraged, and pro∣voked divers Reformadoes to offer violence to the Houses and by such violence, outrages and threats, to inforce and awe the Parliament, we cannot in our most sober or serious Conside∣ration, either finde out any generality in this charge which wa not much more universally alledged in those of Straffords and Canterburies; neither can we finde any illegality in this Charge comparing it with theirs, either in the matter or manner, un∣lesse we should apparently and too palpably condemne both Houses of murder and injustice in their proceedings against those Peeres, and therfore in Charity to their former procee∣dings, (and to this Philologer who stiles this Charge against
the Members generall and illegall, and yet was a chiefe prose∣cuter of Canterbury upon a more Generall and illegall as wee suppose) we will for present admit their proceedings against those dead persons to be legall, And we are of opi∣nion,See 7. H. 4. f. 35. 2. H. 7. f. 15. 5. H. 7. f. 4. & 6. 30. H. 7. f. 20. 38. E. 3. 6. 24. E. 3. 9 11. E. 4. 4. 14. h. 8. 16. 27. h. 8. 23. that a Generall accusation is a sufficient ground in Law to secure the person of an offendor, (where an offence is committed) that he may be forth comming to answer Justice, though not to convict him of the offence, for if he should not be secured up∣on a generall, he may before the particulars prepared and the witnesses produced, withdraw himselfe from the hand of Justice, as the eleven accused Mem∣bers lately sought to do by their request for Passes to transport themselves beyond the Seas, which could be to no other end, then being conscious of their own guilt to avoyd their punishment. And whereas this proceeding of the Army is sup∣posed to be contrary to the Priviledge of Parliament and the Law of the Land, we say that there isRot. Parl. 17. F 4. nu. 6. Rot. Parl. 8. h. 6. nu. 57. 21. E 4. fol. 38. 39. Cok Inst. 4 part p 25. no priviledge of Parliament allowable by the Law of the Land to a Member of either House accused of Treason. The Parliament ought to punish not to protect Traytors, It is agreeable to the Honour and dignity of Parliaments to execute not to obstruct Justice, That is no priviledge of Parliament that is not just, to protect Members accused of Treason, will rather induce a suspition of an equall guiltinesse in those that protect them, then a reputation of Honour and Justice in the protectors. It is more just and a∣greeable to the end for which Parliaments were or∣dained, to secure Persons accused of Treason then to excuse them,Rot. Parl. 36. E 3. & 50. E. 3. Cook Instit. 4. part p. 9. for Parliaments are ordained to be held for the Honour of God and holy Church, for
the execution of Justice and quietnesse of the people, And it is most just that those members accused should be sequestred and suspended from the House, for if they should b admitted to sit in the House after their impeachment, they should be both Judges and par∣ties which is contrary to all reason and Justice;Doctor onhams Cooke 10. Re∣ports 8. b 6, 21. 5 Eliz. Dier 220. Sir Nich. Bacons case. for if an Act of Parliament were made that a man should be a Judge in that cause wherein he is a par∣ty, it were a voyd Act of Parliament as being repug∣nant to common right, no man ought to be a Judge in his owne case,21 E. 4. f 47. for no man can have or ought to have conusans in a plea wherein he himselfe is con∣ceived Neither do we conceive that the Army hath dealt either disloyally with the Parliament or prejuditially to the Kingdomes good in requiring the Houses and City to forbeare to list or raise Armes, or by making any of those demands specified in their Letters and Remonstrances to both Houses, especially that of the 23. of June 1647. for we say positively that wee were so far swallowed up in the Gulfe of devouring tyranny under this new Government, of a perpetuall Parliament, a great part of whose Members are as Jude saith Verse 12.13. Clouds without water, Raging waves of the Sea, fomeing out their owne shame, wan∣dring starres, to whom is reserved the blacknesse of dark∣nesse for ever. That most clearely we conceive the Army have no cause at all to repent their doings but to proceed to reforme these pretended Reformers who have only sought themselves and not the pub∣lick good of the Kingdome.
2. To the second we say, that the Vote of the House of Commons on Friday the 25. of June, which rather tends to obstruct, prevent, and forestall the just Charge, accusation and Proceedings of the Ar∣my against the 11 Members, then to the acquital of the parties accu∣sed, doth not any way oblige the Army either in honor or justice, to give the house or injured Members, as they are stiled, any reparation at all, nor that the Army should deliver up their accusers, before the accused Members have purged themselves of the Crimes objected against them; for if the Members be guilty of those offences laid to their Charge, the accusation is no injury unto them; and whether they are guilty or not, their tryall will shew, Actori incumbit onus probationis, the proofe of their guilt lies upon their accusers, whom to deliver up before they have given their evidence, were contra∣ry to the Law of the Land, and a manifest obstruction of Justice. And to suffer the Members accused to sit in the House after such a Charge, is contrary to the Law of the Land; for no man ought to sit as a Judge in that Court where he is accused of a crime punish∣able by the Law in that Court where he sits as Judge, untill hee hath made his purgation, therefore the Members ought to bee suspended the Houses till they have cleared themselves, lest in their owne causes when their accusations shall be there read against them, they sit there both as Judges and Parties. Quod legi contra∣rium est. 3. To the third we say, that the Armies Declarations, Papers, and Charge against the House and Members, nor their demands, concerning such as have deserted the Army, nor for their just pay, nor the suspension of the Members, nor the removing of the Re∣formado's from the City, nor their demand of the Houses and City to forbeare all listings, and raisings of new Forces, or drawing to∣gether of any, and all preparations towards a new War may be effe∣ctually declared against, and supprest, and their desires of Voting the Kings not comming nearer to London then the Quarters of the Ar∣my, are neither dishonourable, unjust, nor unreasonable; but in Ho∣nour, Justice, and Prudence to be insisted upon by the Army: Who are not mercenary, as the proposall-monger would have it; but free borne Subjects of England, and men as farre interested in the Pub∣lique liberties of the Kingdomes, and as inheritable to them as a∣ny Member of the Houses; Mercinary Souldiers are forraigners, or people of another Nation, hired into the Kingdome to make a party,
as the Scots were, not such as have equall rights to the liberties of the Kingdome with the Members their Trustees; neither are this Army in rebellion to the Houses, (as this petty Proposall-Jugler would seem to inferre by his Scripture insinuation of Rom. 13.1.) for there the Apostles Precept, Let every soule be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: The powers that be are ordained of God, proves not that the House of Commons are greater then their Trustees that sent them thither; but if it be law∣full for Peter to examine Paul, without a breach of priviledge of one or both Houses, he enjoynes thus, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as supreame, or unto Governours, as unto those that are sent by him; for so is the will of God: so that if the Army submit to the King, they have performed the Apostles Injunctions; and may, by the Apostles rules, be lesse supposed to bee in Rebellion then the two Houses, who will not submit nor acknowledge the King to be supreame; but untill they do, the Army by nor Law of God or man is bound to yeeld them obedience, especially in things against the publique good and prayer of the Kingdome; neither can the Hou∣ses without manifest dishonour and accusation to themselves call these Demands of the Armies fruits of Rebellion, or our Object Rebellion to them; For Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum; It is a shamefull thing to object that for a ruine to another which a man is himselfe guilty of: Now for these Demands of the Army, they are most reasonable and just, Salus populi suprema est lex, was the Houses Motto against the King; when they leavied Armes they said their chiefe ayme was the health and preservation of the peo∣ple; the Army is so now, there are a generation of men in the Hou∣ses, that would runne riot upon the Lawes, raise new Forces to in∣gage the Kingdome in a new warre, under pretence to relieve Ire∣land, as the Lord Wharton did in the beginning of these late troubles: to prevent these ends, the Army demands Justice against the accu∣sed Members, and such as desert the Army and their trust, refuse to disband till peace be setled in the Kingdome, and in the meane time demand their pay, and the dispersing of such Reformado's, as may prevent these Honourable, pious and just purposes. This is stiled Rebellion in the Army, by such as hate to bee reformed; and they Mercinaries, because they demand their pay. But their ends are lawfull and just, and their intentions glorious; Id semper justum est
quod omnino est necessarium; That is alwaies just, which is altoge∣ther necessary, it is altogether necessary for the preservation of the Kingdome to root out those that would begin a new warre, and to establish a firme peace: And therefore the undertaking of the Ar∣my, in pursuance of these ends is most just and honourable. 4. To the fourth Interrogatory, we say that we know not of any English or Irish Souldiers now listed in the Army, that hath hereto∣fore borne Armes against the Parliament, for such as were listed under the Lord Goring, or any others by the Kings Commissions were listed, ingaged, and taken on for the defence of his Majesties Royall person, the maintenance and preservation of the known and established Lawes, the just (not the unknowne unlimited Arbitra∣ry) Privileges of Parliament, and Properties of the Subject. And if any such are now listed under Sir Tho. Fairefax, who heretofore ser∣ved the K, we know not that they can be imployed for better ends then what they formerly were ingaged to maintain; and we doubt not but they will prove faithfull to this pious, religious, and victo∣rious Army, shall imploy them in, for restoring the almost lost Lawes, and Liberties of the Kingdome, and to punish those Ma∣lignant, and exorbitant Members of both Houses, who are such as Paul writes of, Rom. 1.29. Being filled with all unrighteousnesse, for∣nication, wickednesse, covetousnesse, maliciousnesse, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haeters of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inventers of evill things, and disobe∣dient to parents; without understanding, Covenant-breakers, with∣out naturall affection, implacable, unmercifull; who knowing the judgement of God, (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not onely doe the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. These are the true Malignants. And wee say, that those that did formerly serve the King,Books Decl. p. 10. The two Houses ac∣knowledge the King to be head of their body. Cook. 10. Reip s. 133, 124. Cook sue Lith. fol. 109. b. did not serve against the Parliament; for we hold that the King is a part of the Parliament; for the Parliament consists of the Kings, Lords, and Commons: And therefore it is a malignant imaginati∣on of the Pamphleter, to suppose that those that served the King in the late warre, fought against the Parliament. 5. To the fifth we say, that we know not whether any Ana∣baptists or discontented Sectaries have repaired from London and other parts to, and have been listed in the Army: Neier doe wee
know that all those that will not take the Scottish illegall Cove∣nant, and submit to Presbytery, bee to bee accounted Anabaptists or Sectaries; but if any such be, they are but such as they themselves heretofore imployed; But sure we are, that those that are now-a-days stiled Sectaries, are of a more lineall extraction from the true Reformed Protestant Religion, then those that either are descended from the Presbyterian Bull of Geneva, or the Scottish molten Calfe the Directory: And wee are very confident that they will shew themselves better friends to Kings, Parliaments, and all just Government, then the Law-destroying, King-selling, and impri∣soning English-Scotized Presbyters have done; for we believe they will neither beat, starve, nor imprison him for his good, nor take away all his power and revenue from him to make him a glorious King, and justifie all their Robberies and Rebellions a∣gainst him by their Covenant, because hee is not in the mainte∣nance and preservation of the true Reformed Religion, viz. the Scotch Presbyterie: and as touching their love to Parliaments, it cannot better be shewne then in purging out the ill and rotten Members, in calling to account the great receipts of the King∣dome, in compelling them to doe Justice, to judge the Widow and Fatherlesse, and to heare the cause of the oppressed (which we believe few can say these Houses have done since their first sittings) which is the onely way to keep and preserve Parliaments in the honour and esteeme of the People, and to maintaine Ju∣stice in the Land: And therefore no doubt but they deserve their free Quarter and pay better then those old cashier'd Reforma∣do's that care not what becomes of the Kingdome, and the Peoples Liberties, so they may be continued in pay, and get their Arreares, let the Parliament devoure the People, or the People worry the Parliament, what care these old Souldiers, so they can get money by the bargaine? so that wee conceive it better to continue those new leavied men who stand for the peace of the Kingdome, and good of the people in generall, then to disband the old Presbyterian Souldiers, that know as well how to plunder as to fight; and both well enough too for their owne ad∣vantage. 6. To the sixth, we say, That those that labour for the preserva∣tion of the publique Libertie of the Kingdome deserve to be payd;
The labourer is worthy of his hire before he be dismist, neither ought they to disband till their worke be done; No man having put his hand to the Plow, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdome of God: they are our Saviours owne words, Luk. 9.62. Every man fees, that the Votes to disband the Army were but so many fetters to inslave the Kingdom. And in answer to that part of the Interroga∣tion, Whether the Generall, and all other Officers Commissions, being conditionall to observe and obey the direction of both Hou∣ses of Parliament, &c. be not absolutely forfeited and made void in law by their late disobedience to, and attempts against the Hou∣ses priviledges? And so they are become Riotors and Mutineers, whom all men by law and justice are bound to resist and suppresse, and their quartering no better then trespasse or plunder, if not worse by the law of God and man, of which they can expect no Act of Oblivion from the Parliament, whose Authoritie they re∣sist, &c. We say, That if the Generall and Officers have forfeited their Commissions, we know where they may have better then the two Houses can give them; which Commissions, will take a∣way the scandalls and imputations of being Riotors and Mutineers, neither will they need any Act of Oblivion from the Houses when they have a more warrantable power by theSee stat. 11. H. 7. c. 1. Law to depend upon for their protection: But according to the two Houses owne as∣sertions we affirme, That the two Houses having departed from the equitie of the Law, in prosecuting and mainteining the good of the people and safetie of the Kingdome, relying meerly upon their owne particular unlimitted priviledges for their private ends, which is the Letter of the Law; The Generall and Officers may lawfuly disobey their illegal commands in order to the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom. For say they, Book Decl. p. 150.Booke Decla. p. 150. when there is appearance or grounded suspition, that the letter of the Law shall be improved against the equitie of it (that is, the pub∣lique good of the body, either reall or representative) then the Commander going against its equitie, gives libertie to the com∣manded to refuse obedience to the letter; It is the execution of Lawes, according to their equitie and reason, which is the spirit that gives life to Authoritie, the letter kills: This is their owne Theoreme, therefore the Houses failing in their dutie, the Generall, Officers and Souldiers, may by their owne principles and rules of
Reason disobey them, and neither forfeit their Commissions o incurre punishment: And as to that part of the same Interrogati∣on, which demands whether the Citie may not raise Armes to defend themselves from Violence and Plunder, and to suppresse Tumults, wee are confient there will be no cause, for it cannot b presumed by any indifferent judgement, that this glorious and Re∣ligious Army, that onely seekes the good and Peace of the King∣dome, and which without that, values not all the Treasure of it, will act or attempt, if they had power, any such unjust, oppressive course upon the Citie, and wee may the rather be induced to be∣lieve it, because wee have observed their detestation and hatred to the late Sale of the King, and their refusing to accept of even their own pay without a generall settlement of the Kingdome in Peace. And as touching Tumults, wee are confident, none will be raysed by that partie they call Independent in the Citie, but if any be, it will be by the Presbyters, who under pretence of suppressing Tu∣mults will practice to rayse men, to hinder the just and honourable designes of the Army for the establishing the Peace of the Realme. And whereas another doubt is made, whether the pretence of sen∣ding for forraign Forces be not a false chardge and scandalous to the accused Members; we say, that we are credibly informed that the Earl of Dumfermling went into France to Prince CHARLES, to intreat his Highnesse, and if possibly, to have inveigled him to have gone over into Scotland with him, and assured the Prince that if he would go all Scotland should rise as one man with him, to come into England with him, to make an invasion here, for the establishing of their Presbyterian designs; but the Prince with great affection to the English Nation, for which we owe him eter∣nall honour and memory, answered, that he loved the English Na∣tion too well to bring such calamities upon them, saying moreover as we heare, that the Scots had sold his Father already, and he would know what price they would set upon him in Scotland before hee would go thither, or what price a Prince of VVales was of i Scotland, or words to that effect; And we could tell of some o∣thers invited into this Kingdome to make Warre here, which we shall hereafter deliver in due time. But whereas this proposall-monger makes it a question, whether the two Houses ought not to inflict condigne punishment upon Sir Thomas Fairfax and Lieute∣nant
Generall Cromwell, and the rest of the Officers of the Army for their pretended disobedience, we advise this proposer, to wish them not to sell the Beares skins till they have caught the Beares. 7. To the seventh we say, that we believe that the Souldierie in the Army will obey their Generall and Officers in all things, tending to the preservation & good of the King & Kingdom, & wil acquiesce with their resolves, not marching neerer to the City, without gi∣ving notice to the Parliament and City and just reasons for their march, viz. the safety and preservation of the King and King∣dome, or eradication of Arbitrary and Tyrannicall power in a perpe∣tuall Parliament. And they further say, that the Generall and Offi∣cers are not bound to command the Souldiers to retreat and dis∣band, before their worke is done, no not so much as the new re∣cruits, unlesse they have a mind either to have their heads chopt off when they have parted with their Armes and power, or disband these new recruits, their faithfull friends, that come in to them to their help, to doe the worke of the Lord in the day of their trouble, and admit such as the Houses will raise for them, to divide and be∣tray them, that they may take that revenge upon them, which this Pamphleter in the foregoing proposall sayes they will and may doe: And we are of opinion that the Army notwithstanding, that they call themselves the Parliaments owne Army, which in∣truth they are, as the word Parliament ought to bee taken, for the King, Lords and Commons, ut supra, or as this Philologer will have it, the Generall, and four or five Members of the House of Com∣mons, and 8 or 9. Gentlemen and Tradesmen raised to places of command by the Warres, may and in conscience ought to pre∣scribe the two Houses of Parliament to do justice, suspend their owne Members, recall their Votes, banish Reformadoes, and doe what ever else is necessary for the good of the Kingdome, even by the Houses owne principles, as they did to the King,See the Peti∣tion to the K. at Teobalds, Mar. 1. 1641. B. Decl. p. 92. ecl.. 2. Mart. p. 7. witnesse all their Petitions to the King, and Declarations and Remonstrances to the people,Decl. May 2 1642. p. 207. Juveal. It being a law as old as the Kingdome; That the Kingdome must not be without a meanes to preserve it selfe, which meanes is now in this Army, and what though they are but few, and some of them but Gentlemen and Tradesmen, wee cannot thinke them the lesse worthy for that, but honour them the more for their vertues, * Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus, vertue on∣ly
is true Nobility. Titles honour not men, but men their Titles.Prov. 19.1. Nay Solomon tells us, that better is the poore that walketh in his integrity, then he that is perverse in his lips, and is a foole; Such as is to be feared this Pamphleter is, who would divert the wayes of this Godly and Religious Army from their just lawfull wayes, both by scandalizing their actions with imputations of being Mercina∣ries, Rebellious, Riotors, Mutineers, nay Hypocrites, blasting their just enterprizes with the name of pious frauds, a word onely fit to bee applyed to their Classicall, Synodicall Congregation, Con∣ventionall, Provinciall, and Nationall Presbyterian Cheat. 8. To the eighth wee depose and affirme, that wee are very well satisfied in our opinions, that all Acts, Ordinances, Votes, and proceedings in this present Parliament, obtained by Force, Violence, Insurrections, and Tumults bee invalid, repealable, and ought to be utterly nulled and repealed both in point of Justice and equity; and herein wee agree in judgement with the Pro∣poser;See 5. R. 2. c. 6. and that according to the Statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 6. (which is the most ancient Statute by him cited, that we can take notice of in his Proposalls, because of mis-quotations or mis-printing of his Quotations) all manner of Obligations, Re∣leases, and other Bonds made by compulsion Duresse and Ma∣nasse in the time of Riot and Rumor against the Lawes of the Land, and good faith, ought to bee wholly adnulled and holden for voyd. And that all Entries made in Lands or Tenements, and also Feoffments made in times of disturbance by compulsion, Manasse, or otherwise with force of people against the Law shall bee voyd and holden for none. These are the words of that Law; wee agree likewise that the Indictments, Ap∣peales, Fursuits, Accusements, Processe, Judgements, Exe∣cutions, and Forfeitures made, given, or ordained in the Par∣liament held 10. & 11. Rich. 2.10. &. 11. R. 2. against the Arch-Bishop of Yorke, the Duke of Ireland, the Earle of Suffolke, and others in that Statute mentioned, for adhering to, and taking part with the King, being made and presented by force of Armes, and procured by tumult in that Parliament, upon a pretence to re∣move them as evill Councellors, were void and ought to bee re∣pealed. (And the rather because SirSee Cooks In∣tit. par. 2. p. 12. Edward Cooke, a lear∣ned Father of the Law delivers his opinion, that to leavy war
against the King upon a pretence to remove his evill Coun∣sellours, or untill he hath yeelded to certaine demands, is High Treason) and therefore the same judgements were re∣pealed and justly made void by the statute of 21. R. 2. c. 12. And we are likewise of opinion, according to the words of the Statute of 31. H. 6. c. 1. (a Statute likewise cited by our Pamphleter) That all Inditements under power of Ty∣ranny, Rebellion, and Stirring, had,See 31. H. 6. cap. 1. ought to be of no re∣cord nor effect, but void in Law; And that therefore it was both wise and just in that Parliament, to declare, That all Petitions delivered to King Henry the sixt, in his last Parlia∣ment holden at Westminster the 6 day of November, in the 29 year of his Raign, against his mind, & by him not agreed, should be taken & put in Oblivion and out of remembrance, undone, voyded, adnulled, and destroyed for ever, as a thing purposed against God and Conscience, and against his Royall Estate and Preheminence, & also dis-honourable & unreason∣able. These are the very words of that Law. Another Statute is cited by the same proposer, which is the Statute of 17. E. 4. c. 6. which indeed is c. 7. and is nothing but a Repeale or a∣bolition of an Act made in a Parliament, summoned by Henry the sixth, in the 49 yeare of his Raigne, as being un∣lawfully assembled, and prejudiciall to King Edw. the fourth, his Noble Issue and Posteritie, and their inheritable successi∣on, and for the preservation and suretie of all the Lords, No∣ble-men, Subjects and servants, that had adhered unto him in his Warres. Wee cannot upon consideration had of these severall Acts of Parliament, see how the Author of these proposalls, (whose indeavour is to blast the reputation of Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army, with the stigmaes or brands of Rio∣tors, Mutineers, Rebells, and Jack Caedes) can makes use of these Statutes in order to those base ends; But on the contra∣ry, we discerne that the two Houses have little cause to give him thankes for mentioning those Lawes, because they seem manifestly to prove and declare to the world that their or∣ders and ordinances for Sequestrations, Plunders, Seisures,
and Duties, into the Lands, or of the Lands and Goods of the Kings Partie, and of the free-borne Subjects of England, are illegall and void; Nay, that all their proceedings by way of minatory Petitions and Declarations, to, and against the King, their raysing of Forces against him, the seizing of His Royall Person and Imprisoning of Him are altogether ille∣gall, derogatory to His Crown and Dignitie, and not warran∣table by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme. And there∣fore we conclude, that Sir Thomas Fairfax, receiving his Authoritie, and the Army being raysed modelled and form∣ed, by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament the 15 day of February,See the Book of Ordinan. p. 599. 1644. for the de∣fence of the King and Parliament, the true Protestant Reli∣gion, the Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome, he and the Army, may without any just imputation of Treason, Muti∣ny, Disobedience, or Rebellion, keepe their Armes in their hands, and prosecute those just and honourable ends for the good of the King, Church, and Kingdome, especially in a time wherein there is such and eminent and apparent dan∣ger of the destruction of all, as they have sufficiently and manifestly declared to the Kingdome by their severall De∣clarations and Remonstrances, and by their Charge ex∣hibited to the Houses against the eleven accused Mem∣bers. But because this proposer promised nine proposalls, and hath published but eight, wee shall adde one of our owne to make up the number nine, with our Resolution upon it, for the better satisfaction of that Right, Noble and Vali∣ant Generall, and Lieutenant Generall, and the rest of the honourable Officers, Agitators and Souldiers, in that Victo∣rious and Religious Army. 9. Whether this Kingdome can ever be happy without the conclusion of a firme and lasting Peace? Whether a firme and lasting Peace can be made without restoring the King to His Crowne and Dignitie, His legall Rights and Prerogatives, and the people to their just Liberties and Pro∣perties? And last of all, Whether either Sir Thomas Fair∣fax,
Lieutenant Generall Crowell, and the rest of the Offi∣cers and Souldiers of the Army, or their partie & Compli∣ces, can ever be safe in their lives and fortunes if they lay downe their Armes, during the continuance of this present State, as they call it, or rather the Government of the two Houses, (having provoked them so farre of late in their Letters, Declarations, Manifestoes and Charges) notwith∣standing any Peace that may be made betweene them and the Houses for the future, putting as their good desert past to∣wards them into the bargaine? Resol. And truly we must needs confesse that when we looke upon the ancient and happy estate of this flourishing Kingdome, under the hereditary succession of Monarchicall Government, the Kings hopefull nume∣rous and beloved issue, the great alliance of forraigne Princes, and the native Nobility of this Realme, to the Crowne of England; and that the Kings of England have in all ages been esteemed the fountaine and life of the Law, and that there was never any time in England since the first plantation of it, (for wee cannot presume our selves to bee Aborigines or borne out of the Earth of this Land) where∣in this Land was not governed by Kings, or that the Royall assent did not make the Law; wee can draw no other con∣clusions out of these considerations, then that this Kingdom can never be happy without a firme Peace, nor ever enjoy a firme and a lasting Peace without restoring the King to his Crowne, Dignity; Rights and Prerogatives, and the free-people of England to their just liberties and properties. Neither can Sir Thomas Fairfax and the rest of the noble Officers and Souldiers be safe if they should part with their Armes, before the King be restored, a firme Peace con∣cluded, and this Parliament dsolved; For let their deser formerly be never so great to the Houses, yet having as our proposer observes, enforced them to recall and annull their owne Votes, against their Judgements, Consciences, Ho∣nour and common-Justice, to their everlasting shame if they fall, They must needs if ever they recover their power
take a sad revenge for so foule an affront. It is a most cer∣taine Maxime, that free-states never forgive their Com∣manders the least offence that strikes at their Honour, or being, notwithstanding all their former good deserts, for or∣dinarily an injury hath more power in mens hearts then a pleasure already received, for more trust is to bee reposed in him who standeth in need of us,It is bet∣ter for the Army for this Reason to trust the King rather then the Houses. then in those who have already pleasure at our hands, for the desire of good to come hath much more force in mens hearts, then the remem∣brance of that which is already received. All States are naturally swolne with ambition and desire of revenge, but especially those that are newly crept up by surprize, and maintained by oppression, for they onely looking at their owne ends, esteem themselves no lesse injured when they are denied in the things they desire, but deserve not, then if the world were made for them and none others, which corrupt and exorbitant affection makes them take sharp and severe revenge upon their instruments, because they enjoy not what they would, though they have neither any title to the thing, nor just reason, and lesse hope to expect a frui∣tion of it. No integrity nor good desert towards that new grown insolent estate of Athens, blowne up into so great an height by the courage and conduct of that most renow∣ned famous Themistocles in the many victories he obtained for them as their Generall against the Persians, could pre∣serve him that had been their preserver from the punish∣ment ofi. e. Bani∣shment for 8 years, con∣fiscation of his goods, & incapacity to heare any more Office in their Common-wealth. Ostracisme, imposed upon him onely for seeking to moderate the excesses of that state; neither did Alci∣bides their wise and valiant Generall escape the fury of their banishment for the offence of his Lieutenant in losing of 15 of their ships contrary to his command, though his banishment proved afterwards their ruine, at the Battell of Agos Potamos for want of a good Generall, for not long before this Battell of Aegos Potamos, these Athenians put six of their owne valiant Commanders to death, for obtai∣ning a famous victory upon Callicratidas the Lacidemonian Admirall, and for losing one of their owne Gallies in the
fight, which they suffered to wreck in the Chase. Neither can we with griefe forget the barbarous entertainment that that never to be forgotten Hanniball, after his so many fa∣mous victories obtained for the state of Carthage in Spaine, Italy and Sicily against the most puissant Romans, recei∣ved from those inhumane Carthaginians, which was no lesse then a plaine treasonable contract to deliver him up for a sacrifice to the Romans, to pacifie the angry Manes of their Ancestors, whose ambitious insolencie he had so often chastized with glorious victories; nay, even among the Romans themselves, in their state famoused in those times for justice over the whole world, Coriolanus, Marcus Li∣vius, Lucius Aemilius, yea, and Scipio Africanus himselfe, Generalls, and Enlargers of the Roman dominions above their Ancestors, men whose vertues had raised them above the levell of their fellow Senators, could not escape the fury of that state, because they sought to reforme the pride, oppression and ambition of their fellow Senators, for which they all suffered death or Banishment: many instances more might be made, but remember the two Hthams and Sir A∣lexander Cary in this new state and 'twill give you satisfacti∣on enough, unlesse inevitable destiny hath deprived you of your judgements. Experience of things past are true instructers of things to come: Therefore the Army in wisedome ought not to trust them upon any pretence either of agreement or in∣gagement whatsoever; for the Maxime of all free States is, that to maintaine their estate, they are to promise, under∣take or doe any thing, and to attempt any hazardous enter∣prise, to deliver themselves from such as they hold their e∣nemies, or emulators, though they never intend to performe it; for as it is observed by a learned Author, There is no a∣greement, nor any forme of oath whereby Articles of peace can be held inviolable, save onely that which is written with the water ofSir Fr. Ba∣con de Sapi∣en. Veterū. Styx, that is necessity, which while it binds one party or both unto performance, making it apparent, that he shall be a loser who starts from the conditions, it
may so long (and so long onely) be presumed there shall be no breach. For in great grudges it is hard to establish a faithfull reconciliation, for that it hath its proper impedi∣ments either of suspition or revenge: And there is little ex∣pectation of sincerity and faithfull actions of those men, who have already entertained a suspition of you, and whom the world hath already taken an opinion of to be double and cautelous. It would be great folly in you to trust those whom you have injured, or at least those that conceive you have injured them, either in honour, estate, or life; and by how much the injury is more notable, or the persons honourable, by so much more the Revenge will bee assured and cruell: Therefore you noble Heroes of the Army, look to your selves, take heed you trust them not; it concernes your lives, ho∣nours, and fortunes; consider with your selves that it is a grosse error in Policy, to breed the storme, and to leave the defence to possibilities doubtfull; it is too dangerous to broach a Vessell of poyson, and leave the vertue of the Anti∣pote uncertaine: fire suffered to runne, burns without limit, even to the consuming of such as first kindled it. Take heed of Treaties, Treaties breed delayes, and delayes dangers Caesars Axiome is, In Rebus bellicis mora trahit pricul, In Military affaires delay is alwayes attended with danger; yet wee wish no more haste then good speed in your de∣signes; because we know that over-much haste is an enemy to good Counsell: Take heed of divisions amongst you; Unity it's the thing that preserves a City, and will doe the Army; divide & impera, is the old Maxime; if ye are divi∣ded, yee are overcome: all good things by division perish, and come to nought; A Kingdome divided in it selfe cannot stand, are our Saviours owne words: take heed of Ambition, Ambition is an unquiet Humour, which Reason can hardly moderate, or benefits allay, if there bee any Ambitious or Treacherous amongst you, cast them from you as as Plaguie or a Leprous garment that will infect and destroy you all; we hope that we your fellow-Commoners shall be excused for these avisoes, and the rather, because we wish you good
successe in your honourable enterprises, of which we doubt not: For when we look upon your unwearied paines, great diligence, and circumspection in the carriage of your busi∣nesse, We conclude, that those that feare a businesse, com∣monly provide well for it, and have oftner good successe then those that provide with a carelesse contempt. Wee have done, and desire you to take this for an assurance, Una salus victis nullam sperare salutem. The onely hope you can have, is not to be pardoned, if you be vanquished. JOSHUA. 1.6, 10, 11, 18. 6. Be strong and of a good courage, for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance, the land which I sware unto their Fathers to give them. 10. Then Joshua commanded the Officers of the Host, saying, 11. Passe through the Host, and command the People, say∣ing, Prepare you victualls: for within three dayes yee shall passe over this Jordan, to goe in to possesse the Land which the Lord your God giveth you, to possesse it. 18. VVhosoever he bee that doth rebell against thy Com∣mandement, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: onely bee strong, and of a good courage. FINIS.
