S2736 E131_3 R11756 99859125 111191
VII. ARTICLES DRAWEN VP AGAINST Lord Kimelton. M. Iohn Pimme. M. Densil Hollis. S. Artgur Haslerick. M. Hamden. M. Stroud. CHARGING THEM OF High TREASON VVith his Maiestie his Speech in the House of Commons Janu. 4. 1641, And a Petition to the Kings MAJESTY. LONDON: Printed for W. R. 1642.
ARTICLES, OF HIGH TREASON, AND other High misdemeanors, as they are aledged against the Lord Kimbelton, M. Pym▪ &c. I. FIRST, they have Traterously endevo∣red to subvert the fun∣damentall Lawes, and Government of the Kingdome of England, to deprive the KING of his Royall power, and to place Subjects in arbitrarie and Ty∣ranicall
power over the Lives, Liber∣ties, and estates of his Maiesties ledge people. II. That they have endevored to lay many false Aspertions upon his Ma∣iesties government, to allyenate the Affections of his People, and to make his Maiesty Odious unto them. III. That they have endevored to draw his Maiesties late Army to the diso∣bedience of his Maiesties Command, and to side with them in their Trate∣rous designes.
IV. That they have Traterously in∣vested and incouraged a Foraigne power, to invaid his Maiesties King∣dome of England. V. That they have Traterously en∣devored to subvert the Right, and very being of Parliaments. VI. For the comploting of their Tra∣terous Dsignes: They have endevo∣red as farre as in them lay, by Force and Terror to compel the Parliament to Ioyn with them in their Traterous
designes, and to that end have actu∣ally raysed, and Countinanced tu∣mults against the King and Parlia∣ment. VII. That they Traterously conspired to levey, and have actually leveyed power against the King.
His Maesties going to the Parliament house on Tuesday 4. Ianuar: 1641. ON Tuesday▪ the 4. of Ianuary, 1641. the Kings Maiestie went to Westmin∣ster, from his Pallace at White Hl, with many Attendants and when his Ma∣iestie came to Westminster Hall, the way was commanded to be cleared, which was done accordingly. And at the foote of the staires going up to the House of Commons the Marques Hambleton met his Maiestie and attended him to the Hous. When his Maiestie was come into the hous M. Speaker rose out of his Chaire▪ and his Maiestie sate thier himself, and before them spake to this effct, demaunding where M. Pim and some others were▪ and enquiring for them and not finding them there, expressed himself to be displeased that they were not there, desiring hat they may presently be Apprehended.
His Majestie having herein exp∣rest himself, departed again from there House and returned to Whitehall: And imediately the hovse Rejorned until the morrow being Wednesday, at Noone. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTIE HVmbly beseecheth that your most Excellent Majestie, would be, Gratiously pleased to meditate on that place of Scripture▪ writtn, 1. Kings. 12. 15, 16. Wherefore the King harkened not unto his people: for the cause was from the Lord, that he might performe his saying, which the Lord spake by Ahija thf Shulonite vnto Ierob∣om the sonne of Nebat. So when Israel sawe that the King harkned unto them, the people answered the Keng, saying, what Portion have we in David? neither have we Porti∣on in the sonne of Iesse: to yovr tents, O Isoael: now see to thine owne, &c. The Lord protect, guide, and direct Yovr Gratiovs MAJESTIE. And increase the number of your faithful Loyall Subiects AMEN FINIS.
