S2811 E451_24 R205270 99864687 161938
SEVERALL SPEECHES AT GUILD-HALL FOR The KINGS comming to London, and the Day appointed. A List of the Dukes, Earles, and Lords met at Kingston, and others come to them, and of their going from thence. Two Chests of Armes▪ and 60. Pistols taken. And a new Commission for Maj. Generall Skippon. Also a great Fight at Colchester, a hundred prisoners ta∣ken, and two pieces of Ordnance, and a List of the prisoners taken in the North. royal blazon or coat of arms C R LONDON▪ Printed by B. A. MDCXLVIII.
The whole RELATION OF The Cities proceedings about bringing the King to London, and the day appointed. THe Lord Mayor and Common-Councell sitting at Guild-Hall the 4. of this instant July, about the Military affairs, a Petition was presented unto them for their approbation, and to desire them to present it to the Honourable Houses of Parliament, in the name of the Field-Officers, Captains, and other Commissionate Offi∣cers of the City of London, which being openly read, they apprehended the same to be of great concernment, tending to the honour and safety of the King, the preservation of the Parliament, the settlement of the peace and welfare of the Kingdom; and thereupon they thought to present the same▪ to the Parliament, which Petition followeth in these words.
The humble Petition of the Field-Officers, Captains, and their Commission-Officers of the Trayned Bands of the City of London, and Liberties thereof. Sheeh, THat out of the deep sense of the sad Miseries that lie upon these Kingdomes, the only visible remedy whereof (under God) we conceive to be a personall Treaty with his Majesty; Which happy worke wee ear is like to be retarded, if not frustrated, by feares and jealousies suggested if it should be here in London (which is so much desired) That in stead of setling peace▪ it might involve us all in bloud, by tumults that might be raised by persons driving on their owne De∣signs and interests. We think our selves bound in Duty for promoting so desirable a Work, so much as in us lieth, to offer our service with our lives and fortunes to the utmost to defend his Majesties Royall person, and this Parlia∣ment from all violence whatsoever, that they may meet and treat with freedome, honour, and safety, ac∣cording to the antient fundamentall Constitutions of this Kingdome; and that whosoever shall by Tumults, Mutinies, Insurrections, or otherwise, interrupt or force the honour, freedom, and safety of the King or Parlia∣ment;
We, and all under our Commands shall bee ready as one man to live and dye in defence of the King and Parliament, according to our covenant. 1. Wherefore we humbly pray, that for our enablement theeunto▪ the Militia of the city of London, and adjacent parts, may be setled in one Committee: And if in your wisdomes you shall thinke fit, to joyne some persons of the prts adjacent to the Grand Committee, they may be such as have no places of profit which depend upon the continuance of the War, and our troubles, or have shewed them∣selves disaffected to the ends of the Cove∣nant. 2. That the King may be brought to Lon∣don, with freedome, honour, and safety, to treat with his Parliament, for the setling of a safe and well-grounded peace. 3. That the Militia may have power to raise Horse, if need be, fo the defence of the King, Parliament, and City. And we shall ever pray, &c.
Die Mercurij, 5. Iunij, 1648. THe Lords have commanded me to let you know, that they have considered of the Petitions this day rendred by you unto them. They had of themselves made some progresse in those thing mentioned there∣in; and they do now delare unto you, that they have thought fit to grant your desires in all the particulars contained in the Petitions, in confidence that the City City of London, will be carefull to make good their great engagement now made for the preserving and se∣curing of his Majesties person, and the Parliament from tumults, mutinies, or insurrections, or ot her dis∣orders that may interrupt, the honour, freedom or fafty of the King or Parliament, and they cannot, but, that they will still adhere to live and die in defence of the King and Parliament according to their covenant. Jo: Brown Cler. Parl. Die Mercurij, 5. Iunij, 1648. The Petitioners by command of the house were cal∣led in Mr, Speaker by cōmand of the house gave them this answer The house have read your Petition, & the Pe¦tition annexed; and they have agreed to the joyning the Militia's. The other matters contained in the Petitions are of great concernment, and have taken up much de∣bate and they have apointed another day to take up the debate, and have aponted a Committee to confer with the Common-councell of the City of London, and such as they shal appoint; and with the Commanders of the Souldiers in London about the sme; wherewith the House desires you to acquaint the Lor Maior, that a Common councell may be called to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, for a conference therup∣on accordingly H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
The 5. of July intelligence was brought to West∣minster, of a great meeting at Kingston, many went down the last night by water, and others on horseback those which had not horses, endeavoured to furnish themselves, and made bold with Gentlemens horses they met withall upon the Road. Two chests of Arms 60 case of Pistols, and other furniture for horse, were taken going downe to them. There was said to be the Duke of Buckingham, the E. of edford, and divers o∣thers of eminency. The Lord Gen. having notice of this meeting, hath sent a party of about 1000. horse, to know the cause of such a gathering together, &c. And the Parl. voted that M. G Skippon should have power to lead & co¦duct all Volunteers of horse and foot to any place b¦yond the late Line of Communication and as occasio is, to kill & slay all persons which shall be gathere together in any place to disturbe the peace of the Pa¦liament and City. Letters of certain intelligence were read in the house out of the North from M. G. Lambert, which gave an account of a very great Victory which he hath obtai∣ned against sir Marmaduke Langdale, the List of what taken being as followeth. 600 Horse. 300. Foot. 2 Knights. 2 Colonels. 4 Lieut. Colonels and Ma∣jors. 8. Captains. 30. Other Officers. 1000. Armes. And good store of booty which they had taken from the Country.
The sixth of this instant July a Committee of Lords and Commons as  mentioned in the answer to the City Petition came to Guil-hall where was a Com∣mon-councell in which were made severall speeches whereby the City endeavoured to explain themselves in perticulars expressed in their petition and proposed cer∣tain waies to make good the same in such a way as may be fo the safety of his Majesties person and pre∣servation of the Parliament according to the covenant and the Committe of Lords and Commons endeavou∣red to preserve a good understanding with the City up∣on the particulars expressed and for the time of the treaty to begin, the sence of the house is not to have it delayed and 3 weeks is to be the farthest time if things are agreed on when they are reported to the house which will be to morrow next and then it is probable it may be sooner. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
