T2089 E345_12 R200992 99861588 159799
A TREATISE Concerning TONGUES Appertaining to LEARNING: viz. The Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, Chaldean, Syrian, and Arabian. Shewing profit of skill in them, and in how short time a Student may receive such Instructions and Directions in any one of them, as whereby he may afterward pro∣ceed in the understanding of the Lan∣guage, without the help of a lively voice, using the Books requisite thereunto. Also that towards attaining the knowledge of the Latine, there are set forth certain books, in∣troducting into the Grammaticall skill thereof, in so easie a manner, as that they are as it were a Tutor for ones private help in the said Study. Imprinted, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Princes Armes, over against Pauls greater North doore.
A Treatise concerning Tongues pertain∣ing unto Learning. Of the Hebrew Tongue. SUch as have delight in reading of the holy Scriptures, if they understand the Hebrew Text, they may observe in many places something considera∣ble, which in a Translation is not al∣together so apparant. And whereas among Translations there is much difference, it is therefore profitable to have the skill of this Tongue, for to be able to know which interpre∣tation is according to the literall signification of the said Originall, and also how many waies the same may be taken Grammatically. And seeing that many are addicted to the study of sundry Languages, why should they not also unto this called the Mother of all ancient Speeches, and being in some respects the very glory of all Tongues?
Of the Greeke. IS it not in like manner profitable to know the Text of the Gospell in the Originall thereof? But the skill of Greeke is usefull in most Learnings. The com∣mon Grammer of Latine cannot in every point be un∣derstood, without some knowledge in the Greeke. Al∣so a very great part of words now used as Latine, are Greeke originally. Of the Latine. VVHoso hath not some knowledge in the La∣tine, cannot understand much English which is spoken and written. But he that understandeth the said Tongue, is able to read even universall Learn∣ing. And to the end that men may proceed in under∣standing thereof by their own private study, I have set forth such Books, as are as it were a Tutor; that when they perceive the use of them, they may without the voice of a Teacher increase easily in the skill of the Language, and in short time may make a good progresse in the same. He that indifferently understandeth but the Accidence, may make the use of the said Bookes without any teaching, onely observing the direction which is delivered in the first of them. Of the Chaldean. THere are sundry Chapters of Daniel and Ezra, whose Originall is not Hebrew but Chaldee. There
are also in this Tongue certain Paraphrases on Hebrew holy Scripture, said to be have bin set forth neer the Apo∣stles time, and observed to be usefull in many respects. Ancient learned Jewes have given this councell, (as Buxtorfius hath related it afore his Syro-Chaldean Lexi∣con, viz.  Ne sit lingua Syriaca (vel Chaldaica) vilis in oculis tuis, quia in Lege, in Prophetis, in Hagiographis invenimus, quòd De∣us sanctus & benedictus impertiatur ei honorem: in Lege, &c. Of the Syrian. BƲxtorfius in the Epistle afore his Chaldee Grammer saith, Hac lingua extat Translatio novi Testamenti, meritò pretiosi Thesauri loco aestimanda, qua Christiani in Syria, & usi sunt, & utuntur. Whereas the Syriack Edi∣tion of the New Testament, is accounted the most an∣cient Translation thereof, is it not profitable to have skill in it, as it is profitable to have skill in the most an∣cient Translation of the Old Testament? Necessaria est Doctoribus cognitio linguarum, inprimis Latinae, Graecae, Hebraicae, Chaldaicae, Syriacae Amandus, Polanus Syntag. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 11. Of the Arabian. THe Arabick is a Tongue of great use in many parts of the world; and the knowledge of it is necessa∣ry, for to be able to judge of the Translations of Au∣thors therein; and likewise to understand the Etymo∣logie of many words thereof used in Physick, Astro∣nomy,
&c. Erpenius in the Epistle afore his Arabick Grammer of the first Edition, saith, Res certa est, & quae probatione non indiget, linguae Arabicae, quae longè & antiquissima, & elegantissima est, cognitionem summèuti∣lem & necessarariam esse, tum ad illustrandam linguam Hebraeam & reliquas orientales; tum ad intelligenda infi∣nita, eaque eximia in omni generescientiarum volumina, ab Arabibus conscripta, &c. What the helpe is, which is signified to be had in the Tongues aforesaid? THe help is introduction into the knowledge of the generality of the Grammaticall Property of the said Languages, and how to make use of the Bookes requisite, also how to go on in studying Authors, and to need no more any lively voice for help in the said study. How much time is needfull to be spent unto the receiving of such a knowledge in any one of the said Tongues. IT is now almost forty yeers agoe, since in this City I began the study of Introducting into the Tongues; and much experience hath taught an easier way of Ini∣tiating, than at first was apprehended. So that such as are capable and industrious, may attaine to the afore∣said measure of understanding, in any one of the men∣tioned Languages, by being taught seven or eight times in severall daies, and spending at each time two houres, and between each time copying out certaine writings, and meditating on them. There have been some which have comprehended it, by being instructed but an houre at each time, and transcribing &c. as is aforesaid.
Once there was a Student (otherwise well learned) which desired that there might be spent with him se∣ven or eight houres in one day, for his introduction in∣to Hebrew. And at the end of the said time he acknow∣ledged, that he needed no more teaching by any lively voice, but having my notes for to Copy out, he could by them and such Books as were commended to him, well enough proceed in studying the Tongue. And this need not seeme unpossible, whereas there have been, which by help of Books only, have attained to much skill in the said Language, and never had therein the help of any lively voice at all. Also Clenard in his Grammer doth in a manner signifie the same to be pos∣sible concerning the very Greek, the difficultest of all, where he saith, Meditationes Graecanicae in artem Gram∣maticam in eorum gratiam, qui viva praeceptoris voce de∣stituuntur, & liter as Graecas suo ipsi ductu discere coguntur. How such are to be prepared, which desire to receive in one day so much knowledge as they can in any one of the said Tongues. THe consonants and vowels of the Hebrew, Syrian, or Arabian, are to be knowne, and their names to be learned by heart, in such order as they stand in the Alphabet. Of the Greek the whole declining of the Verb  is to be had in memory. And of the Latine there is in some measure to be understood, from the beginning of the Accidence unto the end of the decli∣ning of the foure examples of Verbs.
Of the best Order to be observed in studying the said Easterne Tongues AS Chaldee is learned after Hebrew, so is Syrian easiest apprehended after the Chaldean. Also he that understandeth the generality of the Hebrew words will soonest comprehend the Arabick: and meanes is now extant, whereby the greatest part of the Hebrew may in short time be understood. Of the Rabbinicall. BY the name Rabbinicall there is meant whatsoever Speech the Jewes in their Writings have used as their own, which is not Hebrew nor Chaldee. And the said Tongue in Words, Phrases, peculiar Properties Grammaticall, and in other matters is very great. Such as are unseen herein may with few instructions under∣stand how to study a Rabbinicall writing with help of the Translation. But afore one can well begin in a Text thereof, he is at least to be able for to construe and parse readily the Hebrew Psalter, and to have the knowledge of the Chaldean Grammer. Concerning their learning of Hebrew, which understand not Latine. WHereas an Hebrew Grammer is set forth, whose Rules are in English, they which are endued with capacity for such Learning, and will be duly laborious, may soone by help of the said Book, and other means which may be mini∣stred unto them, understand how in some Grammaticall man∣ner to examine any Hebrew Text of Holy Scripture; yea and in short time to make the Hebrew Bible in a good measure fa∣miliar unto them. Reward for instructing in any of the aforesaid Tongues is expected by the houre, that if after any time a Student con∣ceiveth himself unable for progresse, he need not be at any more expence. . FINIS.
