V354 e1189_2 99867231 119536
BISHOPS DEFENDED FROM Scripture, Laws, and other undeniable Authors, by D.D. Vidua, a Bishop of a Parish, and S. Th. Pr. The 2. Edition. Hebr. 12.15. Be yee Bishops, lest any one do faile from the grace of God. AN HUMBLE MOTION TO THE PARLIAMENT. IN the year 1639, this Treatise was imprinted to the Parliament, whose Authour through the alone favour and power of God, offereth in any free Vniversity, by Dispu∣tation written, for so none can eat his word, to prove these Articles. 1. There is no Provinciall Bishop in Scripture. 2. The power of the Keyes, of things indifferent, and of chusing a Minister is in the people. 3. No money or gift must be taken for any spirituall justice. 4. That a Provin∣ciall Bishop is a meere Lay-Elder, an Image of the Beast. Revelat. 14.9, 10, 11. one of the spirits of Devills, Rev. 16.14. The way to reforme these is, as is now in Refor∣med Churches. 1. That all who will may be of a Reformed Church. 2. That they may chuse their Church-officers. 3. That maintenance of such may be as is now in Reformed Churches, whereby most excessive riches come to be disposed by you. To conclude, I Petition for justice in most remarkable and farre more then Heathenish cases, and after very many years, a safe returne into my Countrey. God prosper you and yours, with the greatest blessings that possibly can be.
A Bishop Episcopus, is an overseer, and these are first, able Christians, Heb. 12.15. or a Church, Matth. 18.2. Elders, containing Ministers, Ruling Elders, and Dea∣cons, 1 Pet. 5.1. Acts 14.23.3. Onely Ministers and Ruling Elders, Phil. 1.1. whose Bishoprick, power, main∣tenance and practise, describe a true Bishop from a false Bishop. 1. A Church is generall over all the earth, yea and in heaven, or a particular Bishoprick in one assembly, 1 Cor. 14.23. The whole Church must come together in one. Ecclesia be people called together, for divine or prophane affaires, Acts 19.39. Cenchrea and Corinth, being within hearing of each others Sea, be Bishopricks. Plinij 4.4. Phaedra Ovidij: Et tenuis tellas audit utrumque mars. From Bersheba to the middle of Ierusalem, be a∣bout 40 English miles. From the Midland Sea of Iu∣dea to the Wildernesse, be about 50 miles, whence by the rule of Proportion, Ios. 15.126 Cities the seats of Bishops, were under 3 miles from their utmost limits. The Bishoprick of Bethlehem, is about 6 miles from Ie∣rusalem, 2 miles from the City Bethfur, 3 miles from Eder and Aman, Emaus is about 2 miles from Socch and Bethoron, and 60 furlongs from Ierusalem. An English mile is 8 furlongs, Luke 24.13. The 2 Bishopricks of Sydon and Sarepta be distant about 5 miles. Gibeah and Ramah be about 3 miles distant. Silo is nearer to Ramah, Iudg. 19. Those waies in regard of the mountains have many crooked turnings. From Dan to Beersheba be 140 miles, and 50 from the Midland Sea to Iordan, by the rule of Proportion, wherein the Cities of 9 Tribes and an halfe, being divided into Bishopricks, shew readi∣ly the greatnesse of them, Gal. 1.2.22. For a Provinciall
Church is never read of under the Gospell, and therefore the Provinces of Iudea, Galatia, Samaria, and the like, are said to have Churches, but never one Church alone, 980 Towns and 60 Castles of the Jews, maintained warre 6 years against the Romans, wherein 500000 are said to be slaine, before the year of the Lord, 139. All Cities be Bishopricks. Some Villages be Cities: as Bethlehem, these 60 of Iair, and the like. Cenchrea was no City. C. 23. Q. saith, Primates as the custome is, be in Villages. A Bishop of one onely Parish is usuall in Canons. C. 9.2. & 3. No Primate or Metropolitan ought to judge or excommuni∣cate, save in cases of his own Parish, unlesse called there∣unto by him whose right it is. At this day, within the proper Dominions of the Pope, Bishopricks and Arch-bishopricks be of the greatnesse of Parishes. The Bi∣shopricks of Florence and Fesulae be about 3 miles distant. The compasse of the Kingdom of Naples is 1460 miles, in which be 20 Arch-bishops, and 107 Bishops. Zacyn∣thus is 60 miles in compasse, and hath 2 Bishops. Cyprus, Rhodes, Sicily, and Achaia, where Paul was, have Bishop∣pricks like Parishes. Malta about 60 miles in compasse, hath 4 Cities. Egypt a small Region, had 20000, saith Pliny. Capreae 40 miles in compasse, hath a Bishop. Pope Gregory the Great disalloweth the greatnesse of Bishop∣pricks in England. D. 70. Crete is accounted in compasse about 860 miles, which being divided to an 100 Cities, hath Bishopicks like those in Iudea and of the Pope. 6 miles in a Quadrangle produce 1 mile and an halfe to each side, and 3 quaters of a mile from the Church in the middle. Tit. 1.5. yea a Bishoprick within the jour∣ney of a Sabbath, is the more allowable, Acts 1.12. Mount Olivet ariseth with 3 tops, from whose middle-most
the Lord is said to have ascended, which is estee∣med about one mile in height. The Syriak saith, it is 8 furlongs from Ierusalem. Bethania is 2 miles from Ieru∣salem, or 15 furlongs, on the further side of the Mount. Iosethus 11.18. Luke 24.50. in whose Territories the Ascension was. The Primitive Vigils or watchings about Churches might be, not to violate the journey of a Sab∣bath, Acts 14.23. Each Assembly should have Bishops, although in the first conversion or persecution, but 2 or 3 were in a Church, Mat. 18. Churches were in the Fa∣milies of Philemon, Nymphas, and Aquila, whose Bishop∣prick travelled thorow many Regions. The 12 Tables say: Ritus familiae patriaeque servanto. The Civill and Canon Law, permit not more Families to assemble without a lawfull Officer, and therefore a Church of more Families was forbidden in Rome. Rome was then above 70 miles in compasse. Paul writeth to the Saints, not to the Church of Rome, as his manner is to write, when more Churches were in a City, Col. 1.1. & 4.15. Rom. 1.1. The Church of Aquilla did leave many Chur∣ches at Rome, and every true Bishop in Scripture is over but one onely Congregation: but no Provinciall Bishop is over but one onely Congregation. The bounds of one mile from the middle produce 8 miles in compasse; 2 miles produce 16, &c. 2 The power of a Church before the Law, was in Families: under the Law in Synagogues, Mat. 5.21. and in the highest Court of Judges, Priests and Kings, Deut. 17.9.12. alwaies provided, that they judged according to Scripture, for otherwise Councels had made accur∣sed the Lord and his Disciples. After the Law, the Keys of Peter, Mat. 16. and of all the Apostles, Iohn 20. came onely to each particular Church, Mat. 18. Thus a Con∣gregation,
electeth two to stand for the Apostleship of Iudas, Acts 1. It chuseth Deacons, Acts 6. It accused, judged, and absolved Peter, Acts 11. It elected Church Governous, Acts 14.23. Here the interpretation allowed by Bishops, saith: They chose and placed them by the voice of the Congregation, Acts 17.10.11. It exami∣ned and judged the doctrine of Paul. It appointed Paul to go to a Councell. Bishops can be no Church, nor be ever so called in Scripture, without people: but people be a Church without Bishops. The whole Church and Brethren pronounce sentence with the A∣postles, in the first generall Counsell, Act. 15. Bishops be so far from this power, that no where in Scripture, an Epistle can be proved to be written to any Bishop, but alwaies to the people, as to the Hebrews, Corinthians, and the like, to whom the Apostles alwaies give this power. The Corinthians not the Bishop, are said to excom∣municate and absolve the incestuous, yea the people, not the Bishop, be blamed for not excommunicating, 2 Thes. 3.14. The Thessalonians must excommunicate. Archippus must be admonished by the people to ful∣fill his office, Col. 4.17. Archippus was a Bishop. Again: All that be of a Church, must be overseen by the peo∣ple being as Bishops, Heb. 12.15. , and must be subjest to the people, 1 Pet. 5.5. and must confesse sin to them, Iam. 5.16. To whom alone the power of things indifferent is given by God, they alone have it. But to the people alone, the power of things indifferent is given by God, 1 Cor. 14.40. who must see all things done with comlinesse and order. It is not to be proved by Scripture, that a Synod or
Counsell have authority over a particular Church to command, but to advise and perswade: For in the Coun∣sell of the Apostles, Act. 15. Scripture alone governed, by which the Lord Christ commandeth his doctrine to be tried. An Apostle might erre, as appeared by Peter more then once. No Provinciall Church or Bishop hath power of the Keys. For they be not in Scripture. Therefore can not excommunicate or absolve. The old Translation onely allowed by Papists, and M. Calvin, and other learned, with the Syriac and some Greek Co∣pies, leave out the subscriptions as being false, where Titus and Timothy be called Bishops: and the Canons al∣leadge those very Epistles, to shew doctrine quite con∣trary that Bishops be onely by custome, D. 93. yea Paul commandeth Timothy to do the work of an Evangelist, who differeth from a Bishop, as an Emperour from a Consta∣ble of a Parish, yea the Acts of the Apostles, and Epistles, shew these two alike to be Evangelists. And I know that no Divine can prove the subscriptions of the Epistles to be true. Apoc. 1.2, 3, 14, 16. Angell seemeth to containe more persons then one, as Israel for Israelites, and those also be sometimes temporall States and Souldiers. And therefore no Epistle being proved, to be written to any Bishop, the power Ecclesiasticall is appropriated, in the E∣pistles to the people. For he who hath power, must be lawfully called thereunto, as Aaron was: yea which is more, there can be but one forme or being to one crea∣ture, and therefore the election of the people, and ordi∣nation by their Elders, is the alone being a Bishop. Ther∣fore Elders and Deacons thus elected be spirituall men, and Provinciall Bishops be meerely Lay Elders. This is most cleare from the former texts, and from the each 100 years after the Law, yea heathens shew this, as Lam∣pridius
in the life of Alexander, Ammianus Marcellinus, in the election of Arch-bishop Damasius. The Emperour Charles the Great, and Lewes, with others. D. 63. Ma∣chiavel in his History sheweth, what election of the peo∣ple to make Popes, remained untill about 1061. of the Lord. Other Authours also say the same of others, yet after that time, Pope Paschal would have the consent of the people, and about 1125. of the Lord, the Canons of the election being diligently observed, by perswasion of Leo, a Citizen of Rome: Pope Celestine was deposed, be∣cause he was elected by Cardinals, and Pope Honorius the II. was by the people elected in his place, and approved the true Pope by succeeding Popes. After 1136. the peo∣ple chose Celestine the II. About 1143. of the Lord, C. 8. Q. 1. concludeth, that a Minister must be sought for by the election of the people, not so much as naming any one of the Clergie. About 20 years after, the true Chri∣stians were named Waldensians, who about 1220 of the L. were about a thousand in Towns, and in the Town of Biders, one hundred thousand were esteemed to be, these had no ministers from the Pope, witnesse Frier Caesarius, lib. 5. & 6. who then saith but a few were Canonically called, where he condemneth not all: yea the History of Machiavel sheweth, that before 1300 of the Lord, the Popes began to lose spirituall power, and that the peo∣ple imprisoned the Pope Bonefacio. About 1330. of the Lord. The Proclamation of the Emperour Ludovicus sheweth the election of the people to make Popes, who then chose Pope Nicolas: yea the learned of those times subscribed to this: 1431. of the Lord, in the Councel of Basil, it was decreed with the consent of Pope Eugenio 4. Act. 15. being alleadged, that the godly and learned might judge in Councels with Bishops, who about that
time deposed and elected Popes: About 1535. of the Lord, the Popish Bishop of Munster answereth, that he was made Bishop by the will of the people, Sleidan, l. 10. This is the doctrine of Reformed Churches, as appea∣reth in their confessions: yea Papists, and Bellarm. de Dei verb. 3.5. clearly confesse: that in the Primitive Church, the power of binding and loosing was in particular con∣gregations, which power is also over a Minister, witnesse Pope Gregory the Great, who writeth to the Citizens of Naples, to examine, to judge and to depose their Mini∣ster, if they finde him faulty, and to chuse another in his place. This was the cause of Peter and of Chrysostom, and of the Popes Damasus, Gregorius the Great, and of many others: yea, Pope Leo the 4, offereth his case to be tryed by the Deputies of Lodovic the Emperour, so that all things should be examined by them concerning the Pope, and nothing should be left undetermined, C. 2. Q. 7. M. Calvin saith, Inst. 4.5. So many decrees of Synods doe most severely forbid a Minister to be otherwise made, then by the election of the people, and if it be o∣therwise done, they command it to be of none effect: yea it is Symonia and Ambitus, the most horrible of all crimes, to corrupt the election of the people: Therfore more heinous it is, to take it away, C. 1.2, 3, 7. Q. 4. Here the keys of Peter help not, who by Scripture can never be proved, to have been at Rome, or to have given this power to the Pope: yea Scripture sheweth, that Peter was the Apostle of the Jewes, Gal. 2. who were banished from Rome, that he writeth to the Jews, amongst whom he li∣ved in Babylon, near to Mark, who is known to have been martyred about Alerandria in Egypt. Neare to which is the Egyptian Babylon, abounding now with many ruines of Christianity; The Babylon of Mesopotamia was then
ruinated by building Seleucia, which then was not under Rome. Yea Paul a little before his martyrdom mentio∣neth not Peter to have been at Rome, although he speak∣eth of far lesser persons. Paul telleth the Romans, that he was their Apostle. Rom. 15.15.16. in whose Empire his preaching was, who in his Epistle to the people of Rome, giveth the power of government to the people. The like is observed of Peter, a little before his martyr∣dom, not to mention any one at Rome, Hierom who lived long in Iudea, and is one of the best describers thereof, and Lyranus say, Peter suffered at Ierusalem, near to Egypt Southward, of which be 62 Kingdoms of Jewish Chri∣stians, and in and near which were principally the Cir∣cumcised. The more learned Papists seeing this, do flie to Ephes. 4, where they must of necessity argue thus: Whosoever claimeth to be an Apostle to the worlds end, is an Apostle. But the Divell and Pope, and such others, claime to be Apostles, For they be not immediately called by the Lord Christ, as the Apostles were. And for corrupting of Fathers and Councels to help Papists, is so notorious, that a Printer confesseth in pub∣lique print, how Papists abused his Presse herein. Their forgeries old and new cannot be denied. Ordination may be omitted saith C. 5. Q. 6. yea Dea∣cons who be Elders, but not Ministers, may ordain, Acts 6. 1 Tim. 4.13. Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Tim. 5.17. yea Popery sheweth, that an heretique may ordain, whose Priests and Bishops, altering Religion, do still a∣bide Priests, C. 9. Q. 3. sheweth, that no Primate or Me∣tropolitan is a Minister in another Parish, because he is not elected by the people. The reason is good, for in another Parish then his own, he is a meer Lay man, and
so is a Provinciall Bishop, for he is not called as Aaron was, yet later Popery holdeth, that these may ordaine. For laying on of hands was appropriated to Bishops alone, about 577 of the Lord, by Pope Iohn III. which continued to make Ministers, when about 1335 of the Lord, Pope Benedict XII. brought the giving of all spirituall livings to the Pope, who hath a common rate for selling of Benefices. C. 1.2. & 3. Master Calvin writeth of making of Ministers by Bishops, Instit. 4.5. What can you accuse in the Reverend Fathers, but that in so open Church robberies, by sporting without any shame, they laugh at God and men. Would they doe this, if they thought there was a God? 3 The Lord Christ and his Apostles lived on almes. Peter and Iohn had no silver. Paul laboured with his hands. C. 12. sheweth the mean diet and expences of Bishops. They must not suffer any one to want in their Bishopricks. C. 12. from Act. 2.45. & 4.32. and that they must not give the goods of the Church, to kindred or friends, otherwise then to other poor. Machiavel sheweth this to be first noted, about 1281 of the Lord, from Pope Nicolas. Also Bishops, Commissaries, and all of their spirituall Courts, must not take one far∣thing for justice, but give justice freely, which freely they received, Math. 10. C. 1. imitating herein Refor∣med Churches and Heathens, witnesse Pliny lib. 5. Epi∣stolarum. Tacitus An. 11. Ovid. Am. 1. Turpe reos empta miseros defendere lingua, &c. Good Lawyers had greater rewards then fees. For taking of money causeth bad justice, witnesse the Heathens, therefore the Courts of Bishops be the worst on earth, and the Courts of Re∣formed Churches be the best spirituall Courts, but Bi∣shops obtained 1, a 4.2. a 3.3 halfe and 4. all that
belonged to the poore. For which, Fathers and Coun∣cels, doe most fearefully curse them, and pronounce such to be reprobates, C. 12. Master Calvin Instit. 4.5, saith: I pray you, if they had any spark of the feare of God in their hearts, could they susteine this consci∣ence, that whatsoever they eat, and be clothed withall, should come from theft and robbing of Churches? D. 95. saith: That a Minister is the same which is a Bishop, and by custome alone (sola consuetudine) Bi∣shops be above Ministers, D. 93. Every one by the power of the name of a fellow Bishop, which unlaw∣fully (illicite) they have challenged to themselves, with∣out the Church, doe bring to their own uses, all that which appertaineth to the Levites: yea, they take all things from all. The wretched Minister beggeth in the streets. The Bishop alone enjoyeth goods, he alone useth the Ministery, the Bishop alone challengeth all: he alone entreth upon portions appeartaining to other men; he alone (solus) murthereth all men (or rather the Bishop is the most notorious of all theeves and murthe∣rers.) But let a Bishop make himselfe equall to other. From a Bishop, the sentence of revenge is not defer∣red, unlesse all be restored, D. 70. Pope Vrbanus saith; We say, the Deaconship and Ministery be no holy Or∣ders, for it is manifest, that the Primitive Church had onely these. D. 39. saith; It is most manifestly decla∣red and proved, that a Bishop and a Minister is the same, Tit. 1.5. 1 Tim. 4.14. Acts 20.17.18. Ministers be Bishops, Phil. 1.1. 1 Tim. 3.1. 1 Pet. 5.2. 2 Iohn 1. & 3 Iohn 1. let Bishops read the Acts of the Apostles, and remember their own condition. In the Epistles to Titus and Timothy, mention is made of the ordination of a Bishop and Deacon, but nothing at all is spoken of a
Minister, because that a Minister is contained in a Bi∣shop; They be of the same Ministery, 1 Tim. 4.14. D. 21. saith, Amongst our Ancestors, Bishops and Mi∣nisters were the same, and their difference was most all brought in from the Gentiles (maxime) and Flamins of the Devill. D. 70. The Canons of later Bishops be a∣gainst the Law of God and man. Secondly, they make Church-wardens perjured. 3. They be against the old Canons, and therefore are of no force. For alwaies in the Canon Law, the elder authority must be preferred. Thus far the Canon law, Apoc. 17.18. They come from the Bottomlesse pit, Apoc. 16. Bishops against the Canon law being in Courts of Kings, be called spirits of Di∣vels, D. 51. Annas and Caiphas had a calling from God, but these have none, Luke 22.25. For Ministers may not rule over Ministers, with lawfull authority of the Lord, Rom. 14.9. From the Pope to the Paratour is the Image of the Beast, as from the Emperour to the hang∣man. It is imprinted in the Book of Martyrs, witnesse Woodruffe, by the allowance of the King and Bishops, that the twelve disciples of Antichrist be these; The Pope, Cardinals, Patriachs, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Arch-deacons, Commissaries, Deanes, Monks, Canons, Friers, Pardoners. Also the Kings and Bishops allow∣ance is of the Notes, Rev. 9.1. The Starre fallen from Heaven be Bishops. 3 Locusts and Arch-bishops, Bi∣shops, &c. And I am sure, that no distinction is from the Form, betwixt a Provinciall and a Popish Bishop. These have ruinated a multitude of Imperiall, Kingly, Noble, and Common Families, Cities, Kingdoms, and continue to ruinate; The Civill Law, witnesse Iustinian, is so much against them; that Pope Honorio about the year 1216. did forbid it to be read in the University
of Paris; The Common law condemneth all Bishops to be in Praemunire, therefore Bishops be against Par∣liaments. Frier Caesarius lib. 2. imprinted amongst Pa∣pists, writeth; I can beleeve all things, but I can scarce beleeve, that at any time, any Bishop of all men can be saved; The state of the Church is now come to this passe, that it is not worthy to be governed, but by re∣probate Bishops. Master Calvin Instit. 4.5. agreeing herein with Papists. and Gildas, saith; At this day, there is no kinde of men, more infamous, and more arrand and Arch, D. 61. saith, when a Lay-man excelleth the life of a Bishop or a Clergieman, the election then of a Lay-man to be a Bishop, may be accounted good; Thus Severus was made an Arch-bishop of a Weaver, Fuller, or a worker in wooll; and Ambrose a Bishop, of an Heathenish Souldier. What honest or civill man, but abhorreth and smarteth for the horrible abomina∣tions of the Courts of the Bishops Commissaries? Pope Gregory the Great saith, I think Brethren, that the case of God suffereth no more hindering of right from any, then from Priests; None greater Villanes, Every one which doth that in divine worship which is not the precept or practise of Scripture deserveth damna∣tion, Levit. 10.1. Nadah and Abihu do that which was not commanded, and where is their fact forbidden in Scripture? Col. 2.23. it is will-worship, Gal. 1.8. it is besides Scripture, Acts 28.27. it is none of all the will of God, Math. 28.20. nor of all things whatsoever commanded by the Lord, Revel. 22. it is adding and taking away from Scripture; It is not forbidden in Scripture, but is besides it, to believe 4 or 10 Persons in the Deity: or a 1000 worlds: and other such bla∣sphemies; but Bishops do that which is not comman∣ded,
and therefore let them read, Revel. 14.9. If any in divine worship, shall follow any Temporall state or Bishop, rather then Scripture, and shall receive any worship, not commanded by Scripture, either in pro∣fession or action; He shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, mixed to make strong, and unmixed to make weake, in the pot of his wrath; and shall be tor∣mented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb; And the smoke of the torment of them ascendeth for evermore, and they have no rest day or night, that worship the Beast and his Image, and if any one receiveth a marke to be named one of theirs in divine worship; Former Bishops who have sinned of ignorance herein, I leave to God. Master Calvin Instit. 4.5. saith; We affirme their kingdom to be the tyranny of Antichrist, where Bishops are for the most part very rude Asses. What madnesse is it to seek the order of a Church among them? Scripture shew∣eth true Bishops to be, first, a Pastour to teach, second∣ly, a Doctour to Catechise, and visite the sick, Thirdly, Elders to governe. Fourthly, Deacons to relieve the poore. All which take not one farthing from the poore and good uses, or for any spirituall case and justice whatsoever, as now we see in Reformed Churches, but they maintaine the poore admirably well. These true Bishops and Deacons are to be defended, and false Bi∣shops to be deposed, whose notorious abominations will otherwise bring ruine. Gallobelgious noteth, that all the warres of Christendom, except peradventure that one against the Town of Brunswick, have been begun by Bishops and their Clergie. The Popish State of Venice permit no Temporall power to any Bishop. Machiavel in his History sheweth them and
theirs to be Divels in Playes and Tragedies. 2 Cor. 11.14. beware of Divels like Angels of light. No flat∣terer to the Pulpit flatterer, 1 Kings 22.15. they de∣stroy Kings, Prov. 29.4.5. A Provinciall Bishop was never planted by God, Mat. 15.13. C. 2. Q. 7. Subjects be Asses and Oxen, their owners be Balaam Bishops. Becanus calleth Kings Dogs to be made away if they be idle. Chonan in his Book dedicated to Wil. Can∣terbury, and publikely allowed, saith; that Prelates be the heads and hearts to Kings. But I defend true Bi∣shops of Parishes, not the false of Provinces. Printed in the year 1641.
