W1991 E1016_14 99867238 168791
My Lord Whitlocks REPORTS ON Machiavil; OR HIS RECOLLECTIONS For the use of the Students of Modern Policy. Lex esto Emolumentum. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bateman, 1659.
My Lord Whitlocks Reports, ON, MATCHIAVIL, I Will not meddle with the Law, for that I did over-rule at my pleasure, and therefore I propose no maximes, no un∣questionable principles of the Norman sove∣raignty; I was by a new Common-Wealth name, called a Commissioner of the Seal, to as much purpose, as my Lord Ge∣nerall Monck was made a Commissioner of the Army; the difference is, I would have turned my Masters out of door by the Com∣mittee of Safety for my own ends, and he has not left them to themselves but as a mock and derision, to the general content and benefit of the three Kingdoms. I should discourse of Equity and good Conscience, and tell you how far—and something further it might be stretched, for
a my Chaplain George Cockain saith, we ought not to be hide-bound in our Consci∣ences, where there is an opportunity of making our purses to strut and swell above the gaged measure of a Private Fortune: But I had learn'd so much without his Ex∣ample or Precept, and a fig for that igno∣rant Rabbie. I will now make the World my Confessor. I was born to a Competent Inheritance, if it had meet and been entertained with a Competent mind, I was Christned with an hard and ominous name Bulstode, to which my numerous issue have adapted and fitted the Onomatopeia; for never any Parish had such a sure stout strider, as my self: but be∣fore I had such a chargeable large Family, I was an Infidell in the publick Aconomy of the State, and I was so farre from caring for my Children, that I cared not for my Parent whom God and the Laws had given me; and I will briefly shew you the rea∣sons. When the Long Parliament was called (which hath dwindled and shrunk up to a
Rump as short as an old Hens? I was elected a Burgesse; I had had my education in the Nurseries of the Law, the Inns of Court, and so suitably qualified for the charge and employment, and the fitter and more con∣venient for the projects the great Bontefeus had yed, if I could be gained to their Fa∣ction: I had then no interest, but conten∣ted my self with seeing the Fashions of the Parliament House, but Pyms discerning eyes, spying that curiosity, presently a∣qued my unconcerned, undetermined mind, and with the proffers of greatnesse and Po∣pularity, brought me over to his dsign: I was then his second and my abilities were by him every way extolled, to this pur∣pos, that where he smelt too ckly (as in all the Overes and Treaties  I by his management and ble direction, should supply his absence from which  by strange yes obliged my self by no means to vary. This sudd brought me upon do Stage, I was appointed with the Eal of Nor∣thumberland
M. William Pierpoint, &c. To attend the King at Oxford with Propositi∣ons from both Houses, where the great re∣spect shewed to the other Commissioners during our stay; and the small notice (or ra∣ther disrespect) taken of me by the King, (which  aggravated to my self, by the con∣ciousnesse of my strict obediende to Mr. Pym) implanted in me such an inveterate, im∣placable malice to him and his posterity, that I can better remember my crime, then tell how to expiate it, if it were possible such a dutifull thought should ever deign o harbour within me. By this means I was partly lifted, and partly scrued up my self to the Honour and greatnesse of being entrusted with the kee∣ping of the great Seal, the Rumps Confi∣dent, the Darling of the new-born Free State. I was sent to make speeches against the young King at Guild-Hall when he was at Worcester, which I did with so much vi∣gour and confidence, that Titchburn the next day durst throw the Kings Declarati∣on
into the fire made at the Exchange, for which sure he will con me little thanks. My next grand employment, my Master∣piece, was my Embassy unto Sweden (to which VISCOUNT Lisle after a review was not thought sufficient) where as if I was born to baffle and despose Princes, I let the Queen Christina on progresse through the world, as not being capable to act those designes, which I was sure the mony and promises of this State, would engage her successor CHARLES to, viz. the diverting the forces of the Emperour from the succour of Flaunders, and consequently the interest of the King, by an invasive war in Poland the Imperiall Dominions. Here I was al∣most non-plust with the dissolution of the Rump by OLIVER, which I presently re∣covered by an impudent complement, call∣ing him, and stiling him, His most Serene Highness my Master, for which I thank him still, he made me of his Treasury, although his extravagancies permitted me not to be as nimble fingered as I would.
Was not I therefore, fit to be a Master of mis-rule, and to be of that irregular Committee of Safety, where∣in I was obliged to do the same service for Lambert, as for Cromwel? I never could imagine the Rump any thing as long as the Sword  Free-Parliament; What would your waye Polititian to do? I knew nothing but Arms could secure me, and that there was no Compos for my Estate, which consists in the spoils of the  purpose I  my self as for  do for my Salary, and  I pretended, for which I sate alone in the cold weather three days in the Court of Chancery. By these Arts I have changed my Mannor of Folly-Hall, into Knaves-Court at Chessey. I have drawn Wil∣liam Lilly with a Golden Chain, to the making me his Heir to 200 l. per annum, and the like, though with no bait but cunning insinuation, have I done to an Essex Gentleman that shall be nameless, for his names sake. But what doth  will all this avail me? My Patron and Friend the King of Sweden is dead, and my incens'd Soveraign survives my Plots and Devices. I will therefore timely bethink my self of the Kings Clemency, and do as I see others doing before me; and so Exit all my Poi nd Honour. FINIS.
