W3343 E1625_1 99863815 116030
The Examination of TILENƲS before the Triers; In order to his intended set∣tlement in the office of a pub∣lick Preacher in the Com∣mon-wealth of UTOPIA. Whereunto are annexed The Tenents of the Remonstrants touching those five Articles Vo∣ted, Stated and imposed, but not disputed, at the Synod of DORT. Together with a short Essay (by way of Annotations) upon the Fundamental Theses of Mr. Thomas Parker. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1658.
THE EXAMINATION OF TILENVS in ƲTOPIA.
The Praefatory Epistle. Viro pari, & familiari meò M. S. P. MY dear and good friend, these Papers come now to your hands, to give you assurance, that my many late discourses up∣on the subjects here trea∣ted of, were in good earnest. What ever it was that occasioned the forming of my conceptions into this shape, there is nothing in the world hath had a great∣er hand (if so it may be said of motives) to give them birth, than your Passionate opposition. For I am weary of those debates by word of mouth, wherein men of much zeal and prejudice grow so hot and so far transported, that instead of solid arguments advancing orderly under the command of sober Reason,
they can Levy no other forces but froath and choler to assist them. That I may no more break the peace (in this kinde) with you, nor indanger making the least flaw in that dear friendship, that hath by so long a conversation grown up to so great a height betwixt us; I have resolved to take this calmer course, to give an account of some grounds of my present perswasions, wherein I dif∣fer from your judgment. Perhaps they may sometime or other finde your af∣fections so quiet, your understanding so well awakened, and your Will so Willing to stand neuter, till these truths have a fair and full hearing, that they may make a better impression than hi∣therto they have had opportunity to do, upon you. And because I remember (in some heat of dispute) you have thrown some things upon me, (which were not so much faults in me, as pre∣judices and scandals taken up by your self) I shall briefly wipe them off, that such rubs being removed out of your way, you may have the less objection to fright you from a further inquiry into the Articles under question.
And now, I beseech you, in the first place, to upbraid me no more with the errours of my education (for so I must now account them;) because the greater the prejudices were which were instil'd into me against these doctrines, the greater you ought to conclude the light to be, which hath wrought this my pre∣sent conviction of their truth, and indu∣ced me to imbrace them, (against all the charmes of interest, and secular ad∣vantages, wherewith the world tempts us, to the contrary.) Unconstancy (one of your other char∣ges) I confess is sometimes Culpable: but may we not say so too of Constancy ma∣ny times; which is therefore resembled (somwhere) to a fullen Porter, who keeps out better company oftentimes than he lets in? Our happiness that will be un∣changable commenceth in a change; and 'tis our duty to turn from darkness to light, though we be called inconstant for it. We were not born with our eyes open; neither shall we ever see far, if we look no further than that prospect, which some few admired writers have
set before us; The new man, which we are to put on, is renewed in knowledge &. [Col. 3. 10.] If we receive our illumi∣nation regularly from heaven, that is given according to the capacity of the subject. We have a dawning first, but the progress of our light holds a propor∣tion with the sedulity of our studies. We are never too old to learn in Christ's School. But the great scandal, you say, is, to profess my self a disciple to such Masters. What Masters do you mean? I call no man Master on Earth (in this sense) nor ever will give any so great a dominion over my faith, as to swear allegiance to his doctrines. (I would others were as free from this yoak of bondage.) But yet I know 'tis not only a thing commendable, but a duty to march after the standard of truth what hand soever carries it before us. And who do you think were the bearers of it? If you enquire into their learning, (even their adversaries being Judges) they were as lights shining in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, [Phil. 2. 15.] and if you examine their lives, for
piety and justice, they were blameless and harmless as becomes the sons of God, not more polite in their intelle∣ctuals than unreproveable in their mo∣rals, but very eminent in both. And they have declared their virtues as well in a way of Passive obedience as Active. What professors were ever more con∣stant and cheerful in their sufferings for the word of God and for the testimony which they held (having been taught it (according to their full perswasion) as the truth is in Jesus. [Ephes. 4. 21.] They have been banished, imprisoned, &c. Insomuch that one of them bespeaks his fellow souldiers (in this Conflict) after this manner, Vos societatis Apolog. pro Confess. in Praefat. ad finem. nostroe decora ac lumina, quorum vincula iam non in Belgio tan∣tum, sed penè ubique per totum or∣bem Christianum celebria facta sunt, qui patientiâ vestrâ iam per tot annos invicta atque infracta, adversari is totique adeo mun∣do fidem fecistis, Conscientiam Remonstran∣tibus Pluris esse, quam quicquid uspiam carum est in mundo. It a Pergite &c. You the lights and glory of our society, whose
bonds are famous throughout the whole Christian world, whose invincible pa∣tience hath given proof to your very ad∣versaries and all the world besides, that the Remonstrants value their conscience, above all things whatsoever. March on with me, saith he, to the mark, By ho∣nour and dishonour, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true: as un∣known and yet well known: as dying and be∣hold we live: as chastened and not killed: as sorrowful, yet alwayes rejoycing: as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. Thus far he. But you will say, non poena sed causa, 'tis not the suffering but the cause that makes a man a Martyr; and those men run after the errour of Pelagius, who was condemned by the Antient Fathers as an enemie to the grace of God. To this I shall return Arminius his own so∣lemn protestation. Inspiciantur capita omnia Pelagianoe doctrinoe, Examen Thesium Gomari pa. 156. & 157. prout illa in Synodis Mile∣vitana, Arausicana, & Hi∣erosolymitana enarrantur & condemnantur,
etiam ut à Pontifice Romano Innocentio refe∣runtur; & adparebit posse quempiam Re∣lagianam doctrinam improbare, & tamen doctrinoeisti (Gomari sc.) de Praedestinati∣one, non accedere: and a little after, Pro∣fiteor intereà me Pelagiana dogmata, quae ipsis imponuntur à Synodis supra nominatis, ex animo detestari, & si quis commonstrare possit, ex iis quae dico, quidpiam sequi, quod illis affine est, sententiam mutaturum & correcturum. If the protestation of this person be not sufficient to clear the innocencie of these tenents, then take Vossius his Historia Pelagiana, and Groti∣us his Disquisitio on that very argument, for their Compurgators. Withal let us remember the Caveat, which Arminius gives (loco citato) Neque id solum studio habendum, ut à Pelagiano dogmate receda∣tur quam longissimè: Cavendum etiam ne in Manichaeismum, aut quod Manichae∣ismo est intolerabilius, ratione saltem con∣sequentiae suae incidatur. But you object further, that these tenents are not agree∣able to the doctrin of St. Augustine, the Maule of Hereticks, as he is stiled. St. Augustine must give us leave to depart
from him, where he takes leave to de∣part from all that went before him, and from himself also; (and which of you will follow him in all he held?) For it is observed, that he changed his Batte∣ries, as he changed his enemies, and imployed other principles against the Pelagians, than those he used in comba∣ting the Manichees, and from the varie∣tie of his opinions in these points it pro∣ceeds, that his followers express them∣selves in such different terms, that though taught in the same Sclool, and of the same master, yet they seem (as he saith) not to have learnt the same les∣son. And yet we must not denie what Arminius observed (ubi supra) that St. Augustine might have confuted the Pela∣gians sufficiently, and yet have omitted that way of Predestination which he taught. And yet the doctrin of Prede∣stination, as it is handled by Gomarus and the rest of his perswasion, differs much from that of St. Augustine, and layes down many things which Augustin would by no means grant, though the greatest Adversarie the Pelagians had.
And therefore your objection that these Tenents are against the doctrin of the Sy∣nod of Dort; is of value, for besides their dissent from all the Antients and from St. Augustin himself, the manner of their proceedings, in carrying on that business against the Remonstrants, were enough alone to beget an aversation to their doctrin. Take it in their words, who had most reason to be sensible of the injury. Scrip. Hist Rem. (mihi p. 211.) Where they refer us to their Historica Narratio, & Antidotum, in which they say, iniquitas (Dordrac. Synodi) impri∣mis autem fraudes, imposturae, & aequivo∣cationes in Canonibus Synodicis ad horren∣dam illam Absolutae Praedestinationis senten∣tiam colore aliquo fucandam & incrustan∣dam usurpatae, clarissime deteguntur. Ti∣lenus, who was present there, an eye and an ear witness of those transactions, could discover something: but he spares you. And yet he cannot but tell you, that the many pittiful shifts, and thin distinctions and horrid expressions, which he observed to be frequently made use of, by persons of that perswa∣sions
have contributed very much to the rectifying of his judgement. Would it not startle a man, that were well in his wits, sadly to consider that opinion so stifly maintained by Piscator, Maccovi∣us, and diverse others, viz. Pisc. ad amic. dupl. Vorsti. p. 175. in summâse tueti fatetur Deum absolutè decrevisse ab aetérno & effi∣caciter. ne quispiam hominum plus boni faciat, quam reipsa facit, aut plus mali omittat, quàm reipsâ omittit. See the doctrine, of these Divines recited, Act. Synodal. par. 2. pa. 36, 37. That God hath so predetermined the will of every man to every action, that he can∣not possibly do any more good than he doth, nor omit more evil than he omitteth? What sad inferences may be drawn, and pro∣perly enough from this doctrine? will it not (in the consequence of it) take off the wheels of duty, and furnish the care∣less with an excuse, and lay all sin at the door of the most Holy God? Some of you indeed, to decline the odium of this assertion, do tell us the quite contrary, and affirm roundly that men may doe more good, and commit less evil if they will? but (see the fallacy) they hold withall, that for them to will either, the
decree of God hath made impossible. You may as well say, that a dogg can fly, and a horse become an excellent Philo∣sopher, if they will. You cannot but take notice when you are treating of these points, how your doctrines and uses do interfere, and when it hath cost you much noise and sweat to confute, what you account an errour, in the do∣ctrine how you are sain to court the very same opinion to come in, to help you, at a dead lift, in your exhortation. You deliver it for sound DIVINITY, that Christ died only for a few, and yet you vehemently urge all men to believe in him, which they cannot rationally do unless they be perswaded of the con∣trary. Have you heard the Preacher inveigh against Apostacy, and yet almost in the same breath, tell his Audience the Elect can never fall away, and the rest ne∣ver stood? What is this but to take a∣way the very subject of that sin? What construction have I known some men put upon those particles, in those Texts, [Let him that thinketh he standeth 1 Cor. 10. 12.] and [What he seemeth to have
Luk. 8. 18.] as if they signified nothing but a bare appearance or misconceit, when 'tis most evident, they are either a redundance in the phrase, or imply re∣ality? Hebr. 4. 1. One while you cry O ! and declaim against prying into God's secrets; anon you are as de∣finitive, as if you had been of God's Counsel, and seem to be angry that others should pretend to have as good a key to open that Cabinet, as your selves. You ascribe much to God's Omniscience, and yet you will not allow him to see future events but by the perspectives and opticks of such decrees as yourselves fancy him to have made to that purpose. Vide infra ad lit. E. ideo praesciverit, quia decre∣to suo sic ordinaverat. You set up his Sovereignty to confront his o∣ther attributes, viz. his Justice and Mer∣cy, and think you do much honour him in assigning him a power Fateor & pse, quod ad communem sentiendi con∣suetudinem crudum nimis hoc videri; Deum posse bla∣sphemiam, perjurium, mendacium &c. imperare:- quodotamen verissimum est in se &c. vid. Szydlovium apud Steph. Curcellaeum, de jure Dei in Creaturas. p. 25, 26. This is bound up with Armin. Examen Thesium Gomari in octavo, of small price, and great profit. to Command Perjury, Lying, Blasphemy, and a preroga∣tive to cast poor innocent babes into Hell torments; a piece of doctrine which the
great Patriarch certainly never dreamt of, when he expostulated with his Ma∣ker, and said, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? [Gen. 18. 25.] What think you of that passage, which an ho∣nest ear-witness told me from the mouth of one of your brethren, that God deals by Reprobates, as the Rat-Catcher does by those Vermine, who stops up all their avenues and Passages, and then hunts them with his doggs that he may provoke them to fly in his face? Do such expressions become the pulpit, or that reverence which should govern our thoughts, when we speak of the Di∣vine Majesty? But this is one of your excellent artifices to salve the justice of Gods decree of Reprobation, and be∣cause you dishonour him in the first act of it, [the Praeterition of those forlorn wretches, without any respect to sin,] you think to make him amends in the later, by saying in effect,
Ant. Thesius ad Summ. Baronis ex Piscatore, Re∣probatio facta est nullâ habitâ peccati ratione: Idem ib. ex Wittak. Cygn. Cant. p. 57. Ibi demum infinitum  & abyssus est divinae discretionis, quando sine peccati ratione quidam reprobantur. that he does necessitate them to sin, that he may seem not, to condemn them without ju∣stice. Zanc. de nat. Dei. l. 5. c. 2. de praed. part. 4. Resp. ad postrem. arg. pa. 743, 744. Quia reprobatio immu∣tabilis est &c. damus reprobos necessitate peccandi eo{que} & pereundi ex hac Dei ordinatione constringi; atque it a constringi, ut neque aut non peccare & perire. Et Mox, Non dubitamus ergo confiteri &c. vide. For thus, some of your party say, his wisdome hath contrived it, and his will decreed it, and his power brings it to pass insuperably. I know you will shift this off, by saying that the Repro∣bates sin voluntarily. But will this plea more alleviate, or aggravate the cruelty? That holy man could say, It is better to be in Hell without sin, than in Heaven with it. If a man be cast into the Goale without fault, he carries the comforts of a good Conscience to help to bear the burden of his durance; But when his Judge con∣trives to draw him in to be a partner in some crime, that the guilt and remor∣dency of his own Conscience may make an accession to his misery, this leaves
him nothing to reflect upon to mitigate his torments. I pray, by whose decree comes it to pass that the soul of the Re∣probate is polluted at the first. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7. Unde factum est, ut tot gentes, unà cum liberis eorum infantibus aeternae morti involveres lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est?—Decretum quidem horribile, fate∣or: inficiare tamen nemo poterit quin praesciverit Deus quem exitum habiturus esset homo, antequam ipsum conderet, & ideo praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordina∣rat. Et in responsione ad Calumn. Nebul. ad artic. 1. Interea hanc meamesse doctrinam agnosco, Non solo Dei per∣n issu, sed arcano etiam Consilio lapsum fuisse Adam, omnes{que} Posteros suo lapsu in aeternum interitum traxisse. Et paulò post: Quod si Deum naturae legibus subjicere tibi proposi∣tum est, injustitiae eum damnabis, quod ob unius hominis cul∣pam omnes aeternae mortis reatu tenemur impliciti. Peccavit unus, omnes ad poenam trahuntur; neque id modo, sed ex unius vitio omnes Contagionem Contrahunt, ut Cor∣rupti & mortiferâ labe infecti nascantur. Quid tu ad hoc bone Censor? An Deum crudelitatis damnabis, quia suos omnes faetus praecipitaverit in exitium, unius homi∣nis lapsu? Et si enim se & sus perdidit Adam, corruptio∣nem tamen, & reatum arcano Dei judicio adscribere necesse est; quia nihil ad nos unius hominis Culpa, nisi nos coele∣stis judex aeterno exitio addiceret. He hath also these words: Liberi arbitrii fuisse dicunt [Adam] ut fortunam ipse sibi fingeret: Deum vero nihil destinasse nisi ut pro me∣rito eum tractaret. Tam frigidum Commentum (So he calls it) Si recipitur, ubi eri illa Dei omnipotentia, quà secundum arcanum consilium, quod aliunde non pendet, omnia Moderatur? Vide Iocum. Instit, ubi suprà. Their 1. sin comes to them only by imputation (as diverse of your party do contend) and
that drawes all the rest after it by an un∣avoidable and invincible necessity, as they acknowledge likewise. Upon which account, God should have been less se∣vere, if he had cast them into hell inno∣cent, and without any sin at all, as, you say, he Cast them off, or past them by, at first, without any respect at all to it. But you have one reserve behinde, by the strength whereof you are confident, after all these disputes and foils, to win the field at last. Upon the matter you say, Gods decrees could be no other than they are; For Decreta & liberae Dei actiones sunt ipse Deus: The Decrees of God are God himself, and therefore to make a conditional decree, were to make a conditional God, and if Election or Repro∣bation should have respect to any qualifi∣cations in their objects, this would a∣mount to a denial of Gods Independency. And having resolved justification to be an immanent act of God, and consequent∣ly God himself: it follows, you say, from the same Topick or principle, that it must be from all eternity, and that mens sins are remitted before they be commit∣ed,
and that it is as impossible for all the most horrid sins in the world, to cause any interruption of a mans justifi∣cation, as for Almighty God to become immutable in his nature and being; that faith serves not as a condition to qualifie us for our actual justification before God, but only for a meane to procure the sense and feeling thereof in our selves. These opinions with many others of like import, you say, do unavoidably follow from that one position, which you think as certain, as if you found it (toti∣dem verbis) in the Gospel. But that the very foundation, upon which you build so many gros errours, is it selfe unsound, you may learn from your own Gomarus, who was once of that opinion with you, but being afterwards awakned to a more clear sight and mature judgment in this point, he hath left arguments enough up∣on record in his own writings to confute you; to which purpose I shall subjoyn his own words presently. Gomar Tom. 3. Disput. 9. Thes. 28. & seqq. XXVIII. Ex qua, efficientis decreti. explicatione, gravis illa & ad veri Dei notitiam ac cultum pertinens, controversia; An decretum Dei, sit Deus, nec ne? como∣modissimè
dirimi potest. Siquidem spectata, cum rei, tum Dei, natura, negationis veritas, perspicuè demon∣stratur. XXIX. Nam à natura rei haec demonstratio est; Nulla actio, à consilio & voluntate Dei liberè agente dependens, est Deus: Deus enim, à se, naturâ est: non veró, à consi∣lio ac voluntate libere agente, dependet: Atqui decretum Dei, est actio, à consilio & voluntate Dei, liberè agente de∣pendens: Ergo decretum Dei, non est Deus. XXX. A natura verò Dei (ut causae efficientis decre∣ti) altera etiam invicta demonstratio promanat; Deus est ens, absolutè necessarium: Decretum Dei non est ens absolutè necessarium. Ergo decretum Dei, non est Deus. XXXI. Ex quibus etiam (ut alia omittamus) cla∣rissimum, aeternitatis Dei & decreti discrimen, elucet. Nam ut Dei existentia sit aeternitas ejusdem, absolutè necessaria est. Contra verò, et decreti existentia, à causa, liberrimè agente, dependet, sic ejusdem aeterni∣tas merè arbitraria est: ut quae sic est, ut non esse potuerit: quemadmodum ex superioribus constat. Ideoque decretum, non , seu eadem prorsus ratione, qua Deus; sed , aeternum appellatur. Ac propterea ex eo, decreti deitas, non firmatur; sed evertitur. XXXII. Neque tamen, essentiae divinae simplicitatem (qualem Sacrae literae ei attribuunt) ideo violari, si non omne quod in Deo est, sit Deus, ex actionibus personali∣bus (generatione Filii à solo Patre, & spiratione Spi∣ritus sancti, ab utroque) evincitur. XXXIII. Eas enim, sic in Deo esse, ut tamen, illaesa illius simplicitate, non sint Deus, sole clarius apparet. Essentia enim Dei, absolute ac simpliciter, communis est tribus personis: contra verò actio personalis, ut ge∣neratio silii, non est absolutè & simpliciter communis tribus personis; sed propria certae: Engo actio perso∣nalis, non est essentia Dei. Deinde, Deus  praedicatur, de singulis personis divinis: actio personalis Dei, non praedicatur  de singulis personis di∣vinis: Ergo ea non est Deus.
XXXIV. Ideoque mirandum non est, si liberrima voluntatis Dei, in rebus futuris, pro arbitrio, determi∣nandis, actio, in Deo sit, nec tamen sit Deus. Idque sanè non ignorasse, Clar. Ursinum, apparet ex Cate∣chesis explicatione, ad quaest. 58. de vita aeterna quaest. 1. etsi minus accuratè exponere videatur. In the mean time, if there be in any one word of this address, more asperity, than I ought to use, or your self can well digest, I desire you to pardon it, for Gods honours sake, which I am zealous to vin∣dicate from that foul impeachment, which something more than a mere je∣lousie prompts me to believe your opi∣nions guilty of. Nevertheless, to con∣clude with the words of the great Apo∣stle, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us minde the same thing. Endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. [Phil. 3. 16. Eph. 4. 3.] I have two things, which I must yet begg of you upon the score of our old friendship, viz. the continuance of your affection and your prayers; which Il'e assure you, how freely soever you lay them out, they shall not be cast away upon. Sir, Your true and faithful friend. N N.
The Printer to the Reader. THE absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, hath occasioned some escapes in this first Discourse and the two Tracts annexed. The Printer therefore thinks it the best instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not laid upon the Author; And he hopes they are no greater then an ordinary understanding may amend, and a little charity may forgive.
The Examination of Tilenus before the Triers in UTOPIA. DR. Absolute. The great pru∣dence an pietie of the Gover∣nours of this Common-wealth (considering how apt the peo∣ple are to be influenced by the principles and examples of their constant Teachers) have been pleased (out of an ardent zeal to God's glory, and a tender care of men's pretious souls) to think upon a course how their Dominions may be made happy in the settlement of an able and godly Ministery amongst them; for which purpose they have appointed Commissioners to examine the gifts of all such as shall be im∣ployed in the office of publick preaching. And seeing you have addressed your self to us for our approbation in order to your Establish∣ment in that office, we hope you understand the nature and weight thereof. You are to be a Pastor not of beasts, but of reasonable Creatures, fram'd after God's own image, and purchased with his blood. Having un∣dertaken this cbarge, 'tis incumbent upon
you to watch for those souls under your inspe∣ction, as one that must give an account; and what shall perish through your default will be required at your hands. And that we may not be sound betrayers of the great trust repo∣sed in us, we must receive some satisfaction, how you stand qualified for the carrying on so great a work as you pretend to be now caled unto. And because it is to be suspected that he who hath been so regardless of his own soul, that he is not sensible of the work of grace in himself, will not be very zealous in his in∣deavours to procure it to be wrought in o∣thers; therefore let us be informed in the first place, what assurance you have that you are in the state of grace? Tilenus. Sir, I trust, you shall find, that I am no Reprobate. Dr. Confidence. Methinks you speak very doubtfully? Tilenus. Sir, I humbly conceive it be∣comes not me to be too Confident, when the modestie of the great Apostle, was content (upon occasion) with the very same expressi∣on which I used. 2 Cor. 13. 6. Mr. Efficax. But can you remember the time and place: when and where that work of grace was wrought in you? By what means, and upon what occasion?
Tilenus. I suppose they are violent and suddain changes only, (from one extream to another,) that fall under such a punctual Ob∣servation. Had I with Mary Magdalen been so notoriously lewd, as to make the City ring of my crimes: or had I travell'd with a design of blood, as Paul did, and procured a Com∣mission to execute it upon the Church of Christ, my Conversion, if sincere, in that case, must needs have been very remarkable. Or had I committed Adultery, and then tempted the injur'd party with so much artifice to cloak it, and because I could not, with all the wick∣ed charms of intemperance, prevail to induce him to it, deliberately contrived and com∣manded his murder: or had I (though upon a surprize) so passionately denied and for∣sworn my Lord and Master, (as you very well remember who did,) the solemnitie re∣quisite to attend repentance, for such offences would have made as deep an impression in my memory, as the frequent inundation of tears did in those transgressors cheeks, and there would have been no need of red letters in my Kalendar to render such a time Observable with me. But blessed be God! by whose providence it was, that, being dedicated to the service of Christ in mine Infancy, the Pi∣ety of my Parents took an early care that I should not be alienated from him through the
allurements of the world, for want of a reli∣gious education; and from a childe having been acquainted (as Timothy was) with the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus; herein I have exercised my self, through the assistance of his grace, to have alwayes a conscience void of offence towards God and to∣wards men. Mr. Narrowgrace. You speak as if rege∣neration came by nature and education. Tilenus. No, Sir; to say regeneration comes by nature were a Contradiction. Mr. Takeo'-trust. Do you not remember what the Apostle saith, Rom. 3. 23. We have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God. And Ephes. 2. 1, 2. We are dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature children of wrath? Can there be so great a change wrought in a man, as is a change from death to life, and he have no apprehension or feeling when such a change is wrought in him? Tilenus. When I reflect upon the exube∣rance of the Divine grace under the Gospel, I perswade my selfe, there is some difference betwixt Christians, born of faithful and god∣ly parents, and from their childe-hood educa∣ted and instructed in the wayes of faith and pietie; I say we must make a difference be∣twixt these, and those Jews and Gentiles of
whom the Apostle speaks, before they were made Christians. I know you will not allow Heathens to stand in Competition with the servants of Jesus, devoted to him from their very infancy: neither is the law and discipline of Moses an equal standard to measure the dis∣pensations of the grace of Jesus Christ by; and yet, if you consider Zacharie and Eliza∣beth (who were trained up under the Pedago∣gie of Moses) and date their practice of Pietie from their youth See 1 King. 18. 12 (as you ought to do, for why should we make an ex∣ception where God makes none?) You will finde, that being righteous before God and walking in all the Commandements and ordi∣nances of the Lord blameless, S. Luke 1. 6. they were not capable of answering your que∣stion, When and where and how the work of grace was wrought in them. Now if the mini∣stration of Moses (which was, in comparison, a ministration of death) was thus glorious: how shall not the ministration of Christ, which is the ministration of the spirit, be rather glori∣ous, 2 Cor. 3. Under the Gospel that Covenant is fully accomplished, wherein God bound himself to Abraham by the sacred tie of an oath, to grant us a power to serve him in holi∣ness, and righteousness, all the dayes of our life. S. Luke 1. 74. And the conveyances of this powerful grace being all put so freely into our
hands (this word and Sacraments) it is requi∣red of us as a duty, to have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 12. 28. and doubtless 'tis only our own inexcusable fault if we have not, for indeed (be it spoken with holy reverence) the administration of our sacred baptisme, were not better than a piece of solemn Pagean∣try, if grace were not conferr'd upon us in re∣ceiving that Sacrament, for therein are begg'd, on our behalfe, the blessings of Christ, grace and pardon, with the renewing and assistance of the holy spirit. These the Church by pray∣er seeks for, on our behalf, by vertue of that Covenant, wherein God hath promised and engaged himself to bestow them; which pro∣mise, be for his part, will most assuredly keep and perform. Then upon this, we engage our vow, to forsake the Devil, and all his works, and to keep Gods holy will and Commandements. Can we think, either that God, in goodness, or justice would require such an ingagement at our hands (under peril of a greater condemna∣tion) or that the Church of God in prudence could oblige us to undertake it, without good assurance of sufficient assistance and power from his gracious spirit to inable us to perform it ac∣cording to the tenour of the Gospel? Mr. Fribabe. It seems you are for univer∣sal grace, and you hold, that all the children
of the faithful (dying in their infancie, and before they have the use of reason) are saved by vertue of that Covenant (made Isa. 49. 8. Heb. 13. 20. with us in the blood of Christ) into which they are consigned at their baptisme; as if all such were invested with some privi∣ledge to exempt them from the absolute decree of reprobation. Tilenus. This, Sir, is the faith into which I have been baptized and catechized; for I am taught to profess, that in my baptisme, I was made a member of Christ, a childe of God, and an inheritour of the Kingdome of Heaven. Mr. Knowlittle. But you know, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. Tilenus. That I very well remember: but withall I consider, that besides that fede∣ral holiness, which removes all obstacles in the children of the faithful, and renders them re∣cipients duly qualified for the Sacrament, I am instructed, in my Creed to believe in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifieth me, (that is, if I do not resist his work and quench his mo∣tions) and am further directed to beg by dili∣gent prayer his special grace to inable me to discharge my duty to God and my neighbour; which grace (if I be not wanting to my duy) I have reason to assure my self of, upon the strength of our Saviours promise. S. Luke 11. 13.
The short is, Baptisme being stiled, the la∣ver of regeneration. Tit. 3. 5, 6. And the children of the faithful, being in no capacitie of putting a bar against the efficacie of it, the learned Davenant (one of the Divines of the Synod of Dort) concludes, that, therein they are truly justified, regenerated and adopted, and, by this means, a state of salvation is con∣ferr'd upon them suitable to the condition of their infancy; and arriving to the use of rea∣son, if they walk in the strength of the Divine grace, under the command and conduct of the Holy Spirit, and fight under Christ's banner, as generous souldiers (ingaged by solemn cove∣nant, and armed with assistance from above to that purpose) should do, we are assured that sin shall not got the dominion over them. Rom. 6. 14. for he is greater that is [ingaged] in them [for their assistance] then he that is in the world [against them] 1 John 4. 4. Whereupon the same Apostle is confident to conclude [c. 5. v. 18.] We know that whosoever is born of God, sinneth not: but he that is begotten of God, keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. Mr. Knowlittle. You speak as if a man might live without sin, and so be saved without Christ. Tilenus. Sir, I believe it is the duty of the children of God, (and therefore possible)
to be blameless and harmless, without rebuke, shining as lights, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation. Phil. 2, 15. that at Christ's comming, they may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless; 2 Pet. 3. 14. but this is done (not without Christ, but) through the power of his grace, rescuing them from the pollutions, that are in the world through lust, and from all the carnal invitati∣ons, that do so earnestly sollicite them. Yet this is not to live without sin; for there are sins of ignorance and inadvertencie, which, many times, through the levitie of the matter, insensibly steal from us: sins of infirmitie, wherein we are surprized on a suddain, and sins wherein we are overtaken through the daily incursion and tiresome importunitie of temptations: but these, upon a general humi∣liation and petition being put upon the ac∣counts of Christ's Cross, and pardoned (as it were) of course to the regenerate, do not in∣terrupt his estate, nor impeach his interest in God's favour, and hereupon such men are rec∣koned by our Saviour in the accounts of just persons which need no repentance. Luke 15. 7. nor no more washing, saue of their feet. [Iohn 13. 10.] which is ordinarily performed in the day∣ly use of their prayers and other holy offices. Mr. Takeo'trust. But we see, by dayly experience, that the dearest of God's children,
do frequently complain of their corruptions, & bitterly bewail them, and groan under the apprehension and burden of them: Oh wretch∣ed man that I am! &c. Tilenus. No doubt, 'tis fit a Christian should entertain such a holy jealousie over himself, as may make him humble, and keep him upon his guard, vigilant and industrious. Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes. Prov. 28. 14. Mr. Narrowgrace. Yea but we finde al∣so that the most eminent of the saints of God have fallen fouly. Tilenus. We must walk by precept, not example; especially we should take heed we do not transcribe a foul copy, though written by the hand of the greatest saint in Heaven, who, we know, had never been admitted thither, had not that hand been wash'd in the streams of repentance and the blood of Christ. But the truth is, such is the frailtie of our humane nature, and the lubri∣city, the flexible and wax-like temper of youth, so apt to receive the impressions of vice, and such the precipitancie of our passi∣ons, that if we be not bridled by the bene∣fit of a more severe and holy institution, and taught to improve our talents of grace and na∣ture for our own preservation, the deceitful paintrie of pleasures, and the snare of occasi∣ons,
and the witchcraft of ill company and examples, with the sundry stratagems of that politick enemie, (who manageth all the rest to his best advantage) will surprize and foil, and most miserably wound us. But as to de∣nie the possibilitie of preventing this mischief, were a huge disparagement to the power of the Divine grace; so having that grace so a∣bundantly administred (as it is under the dis∣pensation of the Gospel) to prevent, and assist and follow us, not to cooperate therewith, but to let loose the reins unto our lusts, and give way for sin to abound, that grace may much more abound to the working of a re∣markable repentance, that having such a signal experience of sin and misery, we may be able to give a punctual account of the time and manner of our conversion; what were this but to grow desperate and tempt God; a ri∣diculous folly joyned with a most execrable impietie, (like a man that sets his house on fire, that he may make light for others to read his evidence, by which he holds it) he turns Gods grace into lasciviousness, and ventures upon a certain evil, for an uncertain good, whose damnation is just. Dr. Confidence. If a man should do so wil∣fully and of set purpose I grant it: but if you cannot satisfie our question concerning your certaintie of being in the state of grace, how
will you be able to obey that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready alwayes to give an answer to every man that asks you, a reason of the hope that is in you, with meakness and fear? Tilenus. That you may not think I have a desire to wave your question, by telling you, that I perceive, you do, many times, alledge Scriptures very impertinently; I shall shape my answer directly, to what I conceive to be your meaning: we must consider therefore what our Saviour Christ saith (very applicable to our purpose) S. Luke 17. 20. The King∣dome of God (in the work we speak of) cometh not (alwayes) with observation: but (many times) 'tis as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring, and grow up, he knoweth not how. Mar. 4. 26, 27. And therefore I observe, our Saviour and Apostle do direct us to make our judgement à Fosterio∣ri, from the effects. By their fruits ye shall know them. And let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoycing in him∣self alone and not in another, Gal. 6. 4. The children of God are called Saints of light. Col. 1. and the wiseman saith, The path of the just is like the shining light that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Prov. 4. 18. 'Tis only the conscience loaden with guilt, and
fear, and horrour, having fire put to it, that like a gun charged with powder and shot, makes a bounce when 'tis discharged. Expe∣rience teacheth, that the natural day breaks without a crack to report it to us, and so does the day of grace too in many souls. Though the sun riseth under a cloud, and so undiscer∣nibly, and the clock of conscience do not strike to give us notice of the hour, yet we may be assured he is up by the effects, viz. if his influences have dried up the dirt and made the plants and herbs to spring out and flourish. Grace is more discoverable in the progress then in the dawning of it. Mr. Impertinent. But the Apostle saith, He that hath not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. Tilenus. And I say as the same Apostle to another purpose. 1 Cor. 7. 40. I think also, that I have the spirit of God. Mr. Confidence. You said well even now from our Saviour, that the tree is known by the fruits; can you give us a good account of the fruits, that the spirit of Christ hath brought forth in you, so as we may be able to distin∣guish them from counterfeit, and discern that they proceed from the Holy spirit, not a lying one? Tilenus. That I may not deceive my self nor you herein, I think the surest way is, not
to go by the common Inventory of the world; whereby I finde men pretending to godliness, to be generally very partial in their reckoning: if they abhor Idols, they think it tolerable e∣nough to commit sacriledge and sedition: and if they be not drunk with wine, or strong drink, they think 'tis no matter though the spirit of pride and disobedience stagger them into any schisme or heresie. I choose therefore to fol∣low the Apostles Catalogue, (and if I can find that in my self, I hope I am safe) the fruit of the spirit (saith he) is love, joy, peace, long-Suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meek∣ness, temperance: against such there is no law. Gal. 5. 22, 23. That is (as I conceive) the love of Christ in sinceritie, as 'tis Ephes. 6. 24. which sinceritie discovers and approves itself, in a constant and uniform observation of all his Commandements. Iohn 14. 15. Mr. Efficax. How did the spirit of God bring forth these fruits in you (if you finde them?) Did you ever feel it offer a holy violence to your will and affections, so that you were not able to resist the power of it? You have read how Paul was surprized in the height of his rebellion, his spirit subdued and forced to yield, and he cast down to the earth in great astonishment. Tilenus. Though I have intimated mine opinion in this particular already, yet I shall
adde, that the conversion of St. Paul, was not according to the common way and rule, but extraordinary, in regard whereof he may very well stile himself an abortive. 1 Cor. 15. 8. for the ordinary course is not for the King∣dome of Heaven to offer violence to us, and take us by force; but for us to do so by it. St. Mat. 11. 12. Mr. Efficax. You speak as if the grace of conversion were resistible; and so you would make man stronger than God: but the Apo∣stle tells you, that God exerts and putteth forth a power for the conversion of a sinner equal to that, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. Ephes. 1. 20. And indeed there is a necessitie of such a power for the accomplishment of this work; because the sinner is as a dead person; dead in trespasses and sins. Ephes. 2. 1. Tilenus. Tis a rule we have learned in the schools, that Theologia Symbolica non est argu∣mentativa. Metaphors never make solid and cogent arguments. Sinners are like dead men: but no like is the same. If they were abso∣lutely dead, then it were impossible for them to make any opposition or resistance at all, to any the least dispensation of grace. Resi∣stance implies reaction, but the dead have no power at all to act; and yet tis acknowledged; that the sinner hath a power to resist, and doth
actually resist: but that which is maintained generally by that side is, that the power of grace is so prevalent and invincible, that at last it will subdue and take away the resistibilitie of mans will. And therefore man is not dead in every sense. We finde him sometimes resem∣bled to one halfe dead. Luke 10. 30. Some∣times to one asleep. Ephes. 5. 14. so that you cannot certainly infer the conclusion desired, from such figurative expressions. Besides, Ephes. 1. 20. speaketh of Gods power towards those that were already believers, not of his power that works belief in them. Mr. Impertinent. 'Tis said of those that disputed with Stephen, Acts 6. 10. That they were not able to resist the wisdome and the spirit by which he spake. Tilenus. He speaks of that conviction, which the force of his arguments (dictated to him by the Holy spirit) made upon their un∣derstandings, so that they were not able to an∣swer him in disputation: but he speaks not of any irresistible impression that the internal Divine grace made upon their wills; for there was no such effect wrought in them, as ap∣pears in the following verses: but rather the contrary, as you may conclude from St. Ste∣phens word, Acts 7. 51. Ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost. Mr. Efficax. By resisting the Holy Ghost
there, Stephens meaning is, that they oppo∣sed the outward Ministerie which was autho∣rized and sent out by the holy Ghost. Tilenus. The words are plain in them∣selves, and so they are literally clear against you: but that this Evasion may not serve your turn, we finde the word and spirit both together, Zach. 7. 12. Yet 'tis said, they har∣dened their hearts like an Adamant, and resisted both. Esa. 63. 10. But (2) men may, & do resist that power of Divine grace, which doth effectually and eventually convert others; yea, a greater power, than that which doth it. Luke 11: 32. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judge∣ment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Ionah: and be hold a greater than Ionah is here. And as much is implied in those other words of Christ. Mat. 11. 21. Wo unto thee Chorazin, wo unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have re∣pented long ago in sackcloath and ashes. Those Heathen cities would have been wrought up∣on by these gracious dispensations, but you to whom, they are so freely and earnestly ad∣ministred, do resist them. And why should our Saviour work so many miracles to their senses, to induce them to believe and be con∣verted? Ad quid perditio haec? Why so much
pains lost? For (if that had been the way) that one Superlative miracle, the irresistible operation of internal grace, had superseded the necessitie of all others, and made them ut∣terly superfluous. Mr. Impertinent, what say you to that text in Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in: doth not that imply an irresistible power upon them? Tilenus. This place in St. Luke speaks of a charge given to a Minister, whose office it is, to call, invite, and importune, (to say no∣thing, that it is part of a parable) and I re∣member even now, when you were urged with that in Acts 7. 51. [ye alwayes resist the Holy Ghost] then you could alledge, that, that was spoken concerning the outward ministery of the word, which you confest, might be re∣sisted: but now you produce a text your selves, which though it doth most evidently belong to the outward ministery, yet because it hath the word [compel] in it, and will serve your interest, it must needs signifie irre∣sistible. So that in the Acts, the Holy Ghost must (according to your interpretation) sig∣nifie the outward Ministery, and that must be the only thing resisted: but in St. Luke, the outward Ministery shall signifie the inward working of the Holy Ghost, and that shall be irresistible.
Mr. Efficax. The Apostle saith, It is God which worketh in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13. Tilenus. The Apostle doth not say, that God doth this immediately and irresistibly; for if he did, that would evacuate the force of his exhortation, (which is both a mean and swasion) to the duty of working out our salva∣tion, &c. for the inforcing whereof, that is rendred as the reason (which is the cord of a man.) He speaks not of the means, see 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 10. or manner of Gods working: and that he works the abilitie I grant: but not the very act it self of our duty, (which if he did, it would be his act, not ours, and so not o∣bedience, for he hath no superior) much less doth he work it immediately and irresistibly. Mr. Efficax. The Prophet acknowledgeth, that the Lord worketh all our works in us. Isa. 26. 12. Tilenus. If the text were to be read [in us] there were some small colour for your pre∣tension; but in the original, it is [for us;] and therefore (rejecting the sense, which you would put upon the words) some understand all the benefits, which God had bestowed upon them, answerable to the former part of the verse [Lord thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou hast wrought, &c.] others understand it of their afflictions and distresses, in opposition
to that former branch of the verse, and agree∣able to the verse following, [other Lords have had dominion over us.] But if you would have the meaning of that (or any other place of Scripture) to be this, that God doth imme∣diately and irresistibly produce all our spiritual works, (which are works, as well of duty, as of grace in us) and that he hath tied himself by Covenant and promise so to do (as is affir∣med by some) then it will undeniably follow, that God himself, (being so ingaged) ought to believe, and repent, and pray, and do all o∣ther necessary good in us; as Servetus said, the fire burns not, the sun shines not, bread nourishes not: but that God alone doth immediately all these things in his Creatures, without having given them such properties; and then, sure, it were fitter for the preacher to direct his admo∣nitions to God alone, that he would perform his undertaken work in mens hearts, by his omnipotency, unto which they may never finde ability, to make resistance. But the truth is, it standeth not with Gods wisdome, neither doth he ever use to work upon the will of man after this manner, and that for three reasons. Mr. Dubius. I pray let us hear them clear∣ly from you. Tilenus. First then, though (speaking of his absolute power) God can compel and ne∣cessitate
the will of man (and so we do not make him stronger then God, as is very weak∣ly concluded by some) yet he will not; be∣cause he will not violate that order which he hath set in our Creation. He made man after his own image, invested him with a reasonable soul, having the use of understanding, and the freedome of will: he indowd him with a power to consider and deliberate, to consult and choose, and so by conquence he gave him dominion over himself and his own actions; that having made him Lord of the whole world, he might not be a slave to himself, but imprimis animi sui possessione regnaret, might first exercise his soveraigntie in the free possession of his own minde saith Tertullian. To force his will, were to destroy the nature of his Creature (which grace is not designed to do, but only to heal and assist it) and there∣fore God deals with manas a free Agent; by instructions and commands, by promises and threatnings, by allurements and reproofes, by rewards and punishments. So true is the say∣ing of that fathet, Nemo invitus fit bonus. With this accords the Son of Syrach. Ecclus. 15. 14. to 17. God made man from the begin∣ning, and lefe him in the hand of his Counsel. If thou wilt keep the Commandements, and perform acceptable faithfulness, He hath set fire and water before thee: stretch forth thy
hand unto whether thou wilt. Before man is life and death, and whether him liketh shall be given him. Mr. Knowlittle. That text is Apocryphal, and therefore will not serve your turn, if you produce it to confirm a point of faith. Tilenus. My second reason shall confirm it out of the authentick Canon, and it shall be this, viz. because God will have our faith and our repentance, and his whole service (where∣in we ingage our selves) to be a work of our own choice, as tis said of Mary, she had chosen the good part: and hereupon our Saviour pro∣pounds the quaere. John 5. 6. Wilt thou be made whole? And so the Prophet Jeremiah before him, Jer. 13. and the last. O Jerusa∣lem, wilt thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? God doth not necessitate nor irre∣sistibly determin his people's will: but only directs, and conjures and assists them to make the best choice. Deut. 11. 26. Behold I set be∣fore you this day a blessing and a curse, and more fully, Chap. 30. verse 15. See, I have set before thee this day, life and good, death and evil, and vers. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cur∣sing: therefore choose life. And this is rende∣red as the reason of mans rejection. Prov. 1. 29. Because ye did not choose the fear of the Lord.
Mr. Narrowgrace. By this reason you make man to have freewil. Tilenus. Under favour Sir, 'tis not I, but it was God that made him to have it, and he that denies all freedome of will to man, de∣serves no other argument then a whip or a cudgel to consute him. Sure the smart would quickly make him finde libertie enough to run from it. Our wosul experience tells us we have too much freewil to do evil; and Scrip∣ture teacheth us plainly, that we have libertie in moral things, Numb. 30. 13. 1 Cor. 7. 36, 37. and for the service of God and things spiritual, our Saviour Christ saith, Iohn 8. 36. If the son shall make you free (and he doth so, by the ministry of his Gospel, Vers. 32.) yee shall be free indeed: and sin shall have no more dominion over you: (unless ye yield your selves up to the power of it.) Rom. 6. 14. with the 16. Ioshuah was so well assured hereof, that he puts it to the peoples choice, Ios. 24. 15. (which implies their libertie) to serve the Lord or other Gods. [Yet were not they under so great means as we are] your self ac∣knowledged even now (out of the Philippians) that God worketh in us to will and to do, (which signifies a libertie, else it could not sig∣nifie an abilitie) whereupon St. Paul saith, Phil. 4. 13. : I am able to do, or suffer all things.
Mr. Narrowgrace. The Apostle addeth in that place [through Christ strengthening mee; for without Christ we can do nothing. Iohn 15. Tilenus. Nothing spiritual; that puts us into possession of Heaven, or accompanies salvation: but observe, 'tis not through Christs forcing, but through Christ streng∣thening mee. The grace and the abilitie is from Christ, but 'tis our part and duty to actuate that abilitie, and cooperate with that grace; and therefore it will be worth your notice to observe, that what God promiseth to do him∣self in one place, He commands the very same things to be done by us in another; to intimate, that although the power of acting be derived from his assistance, yet the Act it self, as it is a duty, depends upon our cooperation. Thus, Circumcision of the heart, is promised (as from God) Deut. 30. 6. but commanded (as to be done by us) Deut. 10. 16. Ier. 4. 4. A new heart and spirit, promised. Ezek. 36 26. but commanded, Ezez, 18. 31. see Eph. 4. 23 I will be your God, promised, Ierem. 32. 38. but commanded, Exod. 20. 3. and if ye forsake him, he will cast you off for ever, 1 Chron. 28. 9. One heart and one way; promi∣sed, Ier. 32. 39. yet commanded, Ephes. 4. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 1. 10. So Ier. 32. 40. 'tis promised, I will put my fear in their hearts. Yet, Prov. 1. 29. because they did not chuse the fear of the
Lord, and 1 Pet. 2. 17. So 'tis promised, I will write my lawes in their inward parts, and they shall be all taught of God. Jer. 31. 33. Isa. 54. 13. Yet in other places it is comman∣ded, Be swift to hear; take heed how you hear; as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. See Prov. 7. 1, 3. and Rom. 10 8. with the 17. vers. So 'tis promi∣sed, Isa. 1. 25. I will purge; yet 2 Tim. 2. 21. He that purgeth himself. So 'tis promi∣sed, Ier. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity: yet Iam. 4. 8. Isa. 1. 16, 18. 'tis commanded, wash ye, make ye clean. And 'tis evident that God many times fulfilleth his promise, and performeth his part, when mn altogether neglecteth his part and duty. Ezek. 24. 13. I have purged thee and thou wast not purged. See Mat. 11. 21. Luke 7. 30. Dr. Dubius. Enough of this; you promi∣sed us a third reason, why God doth not (as you pretend) work mans Conversion and his faith, by a power of grace irresistible. I pray let us hear that also. Tilenus. Sir, you shall have it in a few words, and it is this; because he will not save as (I speak of the Adult, who have the use of their faculties) but in a way of duty. Gen. 4. 7. If thou do well, shalt thou not be ac∣cepted? Rom. 2. 6, 7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory and
honour and immortalitie, to them, and to them only, will he render eternal life; and there∣fore He is said to be the Author of Eternal sal∣vation, only, to them, that obey him. Heb. 5. 9. Now observe; that which is not wrought, but by the omnipotent impulse and irresistible motion and operation of God, that cannot be the duty of a poor frail Crea∣ture: or thus, what is a work of Almighti∣ness in God, cannot be a work of obedience in us (if it were, it would conclude us to be omnipotent; besides, the act could not be an act of duty, Christ could do nothing, that was duty for us, till he had submitted him∣self to the condition of our nature. Phil. 2. 7. because God, supposed to be the doer of it, is not under obedience) but repentance and amendment of life, &c. are required, as a du∣ty, of us, and as part of our obedience, Ier. 7. 3, 5. Amend your wayes, and make you a new heart and a new spirit. Ezek. 18. 31. Mr. Knowlittle. By this doctrin, you seem to make a man his own Saviour. Tilenus. If I should, not only seem to do so, but do so in good earnest, so it be in a way of subordination to Christ, I see no harm in it. St. Paul saith, work out your salvation. Yea, St. Peter, exhorting to repentance, saith ex∣presly, save your selves. Acts 2. 40. To our safety, our own sedulity is required, accor∣ding
to that trite saying. He that made thee without thy self, will never save thee, without thy self. Dr. Absolute. Me thinks, this doth hard∣ly sound like that doctrin, which the Apostle labours so earnestly to establish, to shut the creature, for ever, out of all ground, and oc∣casion of boasting. Rom. 3. 27. Tilenus. For a man to boast himself in his riches is vanitie; in his wickedness is impietie; in his works, performed in obedience to Moses law, or out of the strength of nature, as if they could justifie and save him, is arrogancie: But to glory in the Lord, and rejoyce in his salvati∣on, is not only allowed, Rom. 2. 7. but also injoyned, 1 Cor. 1. 31. Phil. 4. 4. and practised, 2 Cor. 1. 12. our rejoycing (or glorying) is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplici∣ty, and godly sinceritie, not by fleshlie wisdome, but by the grace of God we have had our Conver∣sation in the world. See Rom. 15. 17. and Gal. 6. 4. Let every man prove his own works, per∣formed in the faith of Christ, and through the power of his grace,) and then shall he have re∣joycing, (glorying, boasting,) in himself. 'Tis the same word in these two places, with that in the Text objected. Rom. 3. 27. Dr. Damman. Are these your tenents Consonant to the Articles of the Synod of Dort? What opinion have you of tat, and
the doctrin held forth by the Divines in that Assembly? Tilenus. I have had as great a reverence for that Synod, as any man living, the prin∣ciples therein delivered being instill'd into me from my youth: but I thank God, studying the best method for the cure of souls, and the opportunitie of reading better books, hath al∣tered my judgement quite. Dr. Damman. Do you think you have changed so much for the better, that you have reason to give God thanks for it? Tilenus: Yes truly, and I perswade my self, you would be of that minde too, if you would patiently attend to my objections a∣gainst their doctrin, and weigh them without prejudice or partialitie. But before I pro∣pound those objections, it will be requisite, that we take a brief view of that doctrin, which I shall therefore concisely, yet truly and clearly summe up in these five Articles fol∣lowing. They hold. 1. That God by an absolute decree hath elected to salvation a very little num∣ber of men, without any regard to their faith or obedience whatsoever, and secluded from saving grace all the rest of mankinde, and appointed them by the same decree to eternal damnation, without any regard to their infidelitie or impeni∣tencie.
2. That Christ Iesus hath not suffered death for any other, but for those elect oly; having neither had any intent, nor commandement of his father to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. 3. That by Adams fall his posteritie lost their freewil, being put to an unavoidable ne∣cessitie to do, or not to do, whatever they do or do not, whether it be good or evil; being there∣unto predestinate by the Eternal and effectual secret decree of God. 4. That God to save his Elect from the cor∣rut Mass doth beget faith in them by a power equal to that whereby he created the world, and raised up the dead; insomuch that such unto whom he gives that grace cannot reect it; and the rest, being reprobate, cannot accept of it, though it be offered unto both, by the same preaching and ministery. 5. That such as have once received that grace by faith can never fall from it finally nor totally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can commit. Dr. Damman. I confess you have done the Divines of that Synod no wrong in setting down their tenents: but what objections have you against the doctrin? Tilenus. I shall insist only upon this (and 'tis so comprehensive I need mention no more) it doth not only evacuate the force and
vertue, but quite frustrateth the use of the ministerie of the word, and all other holy or∣dinances instituted by our Saviour Christ, and commanded to be continued for the edificati∣on, and benefit of his Church to the worlds end. Dr. Dubius. How can you make that ap∣pear? Tilenus. For the ministery of the word it is imployed, either about the wicked or the godly; the wicked are of two sorts, either Infidels despising, or Carnal persons profes∣sing the holy Gospel: the Godly, they are of two sorts, or two tempers likewise; or we may consider them under a two-fold estate, either as remiss and tepid, or else as disconsolate and tempted: so that the ministery of the word is designed to a four-fold end, (in re∣spect of man.) 1. The Conviction and Conversion of an Infidel. 2. The Correction and amendment of the Carnal. 3. The quickning and provocation of the te∣pid and slothful. 4. The comfort and consolation of the affli∣cted and tempted. But the former doctrin of the Synod of Dort, is so far from being serviceable to any of these four ends, that it is directly repugnant to them
all, and therefore not consonant to that holy Scripture, given by inspiration of God, which is profitable (for all those ends as the Apostle saith, 2 Tim. 3. 15, 16.) for doctrin, for re∣proofe, for correction, for instruction in righte∣ousness, that the man of God, (who is a helper of the peoples joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24.) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. That this may the more evidently ap∣pear, I desire, you (with whom that doctrin is in so high esteem) to make a practical at∣tempt of it, herein I desire you to be true to your own principles, (and not to shuffle, as usually in your popular sermons, wherein the Synodical and Calvinian principle in your Do∣ctrin is alwayes confuted by an Arminian ex∣hortation in your Application,) in the mean while I am content to personate successively those four sorts of men; and for method sake, I pray address your discourse; first, for the Conversion of Tilenus Infidelis. Dr. Absolute. Most gladly will we under∣take this task, that we may convince you of the errours, in which we see you are immersed; provided you do not studie to be obstinate, nor alledge any other reasons to justifie your recusancie and averseness to the Christian faith, then what you clearly deduce from the do∣ctrin of the Synod, and the Divines thereof. To begin the work then, we will take it for
granted that you acknowledge a Deitie, and demand of you, what Attributes this Deitie i, according to your apprehension, invested and cloathed with. Tilenus Infidelis. The School of nature hath determined that question by so many ir∣refragable arguments, that I am convinced long since, that there is a soveraign Power called God, and when I consider such beams and characters of wisdome and knowledge in the soul of man, such impressions of truth and justice upon his conscience, with so great a varietie of goodness in all Creatures, I must conclude, that God, the maker of all these, is an Eternal being, infinitly wise, good, and just. I believe further, that this most wise God in communicating so much goodness un∣to man, intended hereby to oblige him to pay (according to his abilitie) such homage and service as is due to his soveraign excellencie and bounty, and in performance hereof we may be confident to finde protection and re∣ward. Mr. Simulans. The God whom we profess and worship, and he alone is such a God, as you have described; but more merciful and gracious, infinitly, then you have been ac∣quainted with, to whose service, therefore e do most earnestly invite you. Tilenus Infidelis. I thank you for your
pretended kindness; but if you can produce no fairer glass to represent the nature of your God; then the doctrin of that Synod, I must tell you, I shall have no temptation or in∣ducement at all to believe in him; for that doctrin is so far from exalting the attributes of wisdome, goodness and justice in him, that it doth in a high measure impeach them all. Mr. Fatqlitie. You will never be able to make that good. Tilenus Infidelis. I beseech you hear me patiently. For his wisdome first; I conceive that is extreamly eclipsed, in that he hath made choice of no better means to advance his own honour, but hath stoopt to such mean & unworthy designs (to compass that end) as all but tyrants & bankrupts would be ashamed of. Dr. Dubius. How so? Tilenus Infidelis. Your doctrin (if it does not belie the majesty you profess to worship) supposeth him to have made a peremptory de∣cree, whereby his subjects are necessitated to trade with Hell and Satan for sin and damna∣tion, to the end he may take advantage out of that commerce to raise an inconsiderable impost to augment the revenues of his own glory. Mr. Preterition. We have his own word for it, Mt. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Tilenus Infidelis. (1.) Your Scripture
must not conclude me, while I personate the Infidel: but (2.) We are not now arguing what God may do by his absolute power and right of dominion, but what is agreeable to his infinite wisdome. And (3.) your text speaks of a free disbursement of his favours: but our discourse proceeds upon the account of ap∣pointing men to sin and punishment. Now I hope you will not call sin Gods own (though your doctrin concludes him fairly to be the Author of it) and for punishment, he is plea∣sed to call that, opus alienum, not his own, but a strange work. But if your God, for his mere pleasure only, and to make demonstration of his absolute power, hath appointed to eter∣nal torments, the greatest part of his noblest Creatures without any respect to sin, as some of your Synod do maintain (not regard∣ing his own image) in them, what is this but to play the tyrant, and where then is that infinite goodness, which you profess to be in your, and I expect to be in that God whom I fear and honour. A righteous man regard∣eth the life of his beast, Prov. 12. 10. yet his mercy is to be but a copy transcribed from that original in God, Luke 6. 36 but if your God be of that temper, the righteous man may ve∣ry well be a precedent of mercy unto him. Mr. Preterition. Indeed some of the Synod do maintain that rigid way: but the Synod
it self determined otherwise, viz. that Al∣mighty God looking upon mankinde as fall'n in the loyns of Adam, pass'd over the greatest part of them, leaving them in that lapsed estate, not affording them sufficient grace for their re∣covery, ordaining finally to condemn them. Tilenus Infidelis. If for the sin of another man (and that pardoned to him, that did wil∣fully commit it, but) imputed to his posteri∣tie, (who never were in a capacitie to tast the pleasure of it, or consent unto it, or protest against it,) your pretended God deals thus cruelly with them, depriving them for ever of his grace, which should inable them to repent, and sealing them up by an irrevocable decree, under an irresistible necessitie, continually to sin, and then to perish everlastingly for so sin∣ning; where is that infinite justice, accompa∣nied with that superabundant mercy and graci∣ousness, you affirmed to be in him? I have heard that the God whom Christians do a∣dore, is so infinitely merciful, that he will have all men to be saved, and none to perish; and not able to swear by a greater, swears by himself, that he will not the death of the sinner, but that he may repent and live. That he protesteth the sufficiencie of his own applications, and be waileth their wilful obstinacie, and expo∣stulateth most earnestly: What could have been done more that I have not done? O that there
were such a heart in you! Why will ye die? In∣deed there is so much grace and sweetness in these expressions, they would bring a poor wretch presently upon his knees to such a God. Dr. Dubins. These are all the very expres∣sions of that God whom we serve, into whose gracious arms and bosome we so earnestly de∣sire to bring you. Tilenus Infidelis. If you could teach me how to reconcile these expressions to the do∣ctrin of your Synod, I should say something: but I conclude that impossible. Mr. Simulans. I shall willingly undertake that work, as hard as you make it, and a great deal more too, to gain your soul out of the state of infidelitie. There is a threefold distin∣ction used amongst our Divines, that will un∣tie the knot presently. 1. Mr. Calvin (in Ezck. 18. 23.) hath very learnedly observed, that God hath two wills, one outward and re∣vealed, whereby he doth most sweetly invite sinners to his grace, and most gratiously calls them to repentance, seeming as though he were earnestly desirous of their salvation; the other will is inward and secret, which is irresistible and takes effect infallibly, and by this he brings, through wayes unavoidable, to an estate and course of sin here, and then to eternal damnation and punishment hereafter. Now to applie
this; you must understand those places of scripture forementioned, of Gods outward and revealed will, which is uneffectual, not of his inward and secret will, which is unresistible. Tilenus Infidelis. A very useful distincti∣on, and tending much to the honour of your God, as you have applied it. I see you have not your name for nought Mr. Simulans: but for my part, I think Homer was much more honest then you and your God, when he sayes, that , &c. Who speaks contrarie to what he means ought to be held as a common enemie, and hated as the very gates of Hell. But perhaps your second distinction may be more satisfactory. I pray let us have that. Mr. Simulans. We must make use of di∣stinctions to clear our doctrins from contradi∣ction; and if that doth not like you, we have another which cannot be denied. When 'tis said, that God would have all men to be saved; the word [All] is to be understood, non de singulis generum, but de generibus singulorum: not for all of every kinde, but for some few, only of every sort and nation. Tilenus Infidelis. Methinks Sir (if this be the meaning of the words) the Scripture might have said with far more reason, that God will have all men to be damned, since of every Nation and condition the number of the damned do far exceed the number of the saved
(according to your doctrin,) and reason re∣quires that the denomination should be made according to the major part. But perhaps your third distinction will help this out? Mr. Simulans. The will of God, is either approbans tantum, or else approbans et efficiens simul. God (we say) will have all men to be converted and saved Approbativè, non effecti∣vè: he approves of it and likes it well in him∣self, that all men be converted and saved, but he wills it not effectively, that is, he hath de∣creed the contrary, not to give them means necessarie to the attainment of it. Tilenus Infidelis. This distinction I con∣ceive no less unreasonable and absurd than the former. That your God should appoint by a secret, absolute and irrevocable decree, that those things, which he doth naturally hate and abhor, should be most practised, and those which he naturally loves and likes, should be omitted; this is so inconsistent with that infinite wisdome and goodness, which you proclaim to be in him, that I cannot finde my self, in any measure inclin'd to acknowledge him the Governour of the world. I suspect rather that you have a design to make me be∣come a proselyte to the Manichoeans, who profess two principles, a wicked one as well as a good one; and having acknowledged my perswasion of a good God, who loveth righte∣ousness
and hateth iniquitie, you tempt me to believe a wicked God also, which is the Au∣thor of all evil, and in perpetual hostilitie a∣gainst the former. It were so great an im∣peachment of his sinceritie, that no civil per∣son would indure to have his words so inter∣preted as you interpret those of your Gospel; the unavoidable consequence whereof is, that your God is the true Author of all the sins and wickedness of this world, both past, present and to come. Mr. Fatalitie. We say, Deus est causacur peccatum existat, sed non cur sit. God is the cause of the existence, but not of the essence (if I may so speak) of sin; as he that drives a lame horse is the cause of his halting, but not of his lameness. Tilenus Infidelis. This distinction will hardly help the lame dog over the stile. For he that drives a horse unavoidable into that motion, which necessarily causeth his first hal∣ting, is certainly the cause of his lamenes: and so did your God drive Adam (according to your own doctrin) into the first sin; which made him and his posteritie halt ever since. Mr. Fatalitie. You must distinguish the materialitie of sin from the formalitie of it; or the Act from the deformitie: God, we say, is cause of the act, or the materialitie: but not of the formalitie, the defect or obliquitie of it.
Tilenus Infidelis. I replie. 1. That there are sins of omissien, which happen (according to your doctrin) by reason the offender is de∣prived of necessary and sufficient grace to per∣form the duty, and these sins are not capable of that distinction; and if the desicient cause in things necessary be the efficient, you know to whom such sins are to be imputed 2. There are sins of commission not capable of that di∣stinction neither; as in blasphemie, murder, adulterie, wherein the act is not to be distin∣guished from the exorbitancie; were such a distinction allowable before God, (and if it be not, sure 'tis not to be alledged on his be∣half,) every transgressor might shew a fair acquittance, and justly plead [not guilty.] The Adulterer might say, he went in to his Adulteress as a woman, not as she was married to another man; and that he humbled her for procreation, or for a remedie of his Concupi∣scence, not for injurie to her husband; the blas∣phemer might say, what he spake was, to make use of the facultie of speech, which God had given him, and to keep his tongue in ure, not to dishonour the Almighty: and so (might every offender have leave by vertue of this di∣stinction to separate his sinful act from the enor∣mitie of it) every sin would become a miracle, that is, it would be an accident without a sub∣ject. If your God stands in need of this lo∣gick
himself, there is all the reason in the world, that (when he sits in judgement) he should allow the benefit thereof to others. But 3. the greatest Doctors of your Syned have written, that God doth predestinate men as well to the means as to the end: but the na∣tural Act (granting your distinction) is not the cause of mans damnation, as it is an Act, but only as it is sin; and therefore those un∣fortunate forlorn wretches, whom the abso∣lute pleasure of your God hath invincibly chained to the fatal decree of Reprobation, can no more abstain from following sin [the means,] than avoid damnation, [the woful end] to which they are so peremptorily de∣signed. Mr. Fatalitie. We do not desire, that you should lanch out any further into that un∣fordable abysse of horrour and astonishment [the decree of eternal Reprobation.] It is more for your comfort, to make your calling and election sure; to get an interest in Jesus Christ through faith; by whose means the eternal decree of mercy may be accomplished to you. Tilenus Infidelis. If the decree of God be really such as you propound it, my indeavours would be to as little purpose, as your instructi∣on is like to be; for if every man be inrolled from all eternitie (after such a sort as your Sy∣nod hath determined) in one of those two fa∣tal
books, of life or death, tis as impossible to be blotted out of either, as for God to denie himself; to what end then serves all your im∣portunitie? Mr. Impertinent. It were too great an ar∣rogance in us to pric into Gods secrets. 'Till he gives us a Key (of his own making) to un∣lock that Cabinet, we must not undertake to read the mysteries, he hath lock'd up in it. There are visible marks by which we may dis∣cern the Elect from the Reprobate, and those we must reflect upon to the making out of our assurance; and because our vocation is the next saving benefit, that result's from our Election, and 'tis altogether uncertain when God will vouchsafe it to us, whether at the third, or at the sixth, or at the ninth, or at the last hour of our lives, therefore every one ought to keep himself in readiness, to answer when God knocks, and to obey when he calls. What you utter in your ignorance and unbe∣lief, is capable of so much alleviation; that it proceeded from you in such a state, other∣wise I should tell you it savours much of a spirit of Reprobation, to say, that men work in vain, since such as God hath elected, are ele∣cted to the means, as well as to the end, to be∣lieve, and do the exercises of pietie, as well as to be saved; and to perform these in order to their salvation.
Tilenus Infidelis. If it be so great an arro∣gance to prie into these secrets; why do you so positively define in them, and so perempto∣rily obtrude your definitions upon others? But 2. If all men be infallibly inlisted under one of those two Regiments, of Election or Re∣probation, and we be not able to distinguish to which we do belong till God be pleased to call us over and give us our special marks and cog∣nizance; and that vocation be not in our own power to procure (all our works and indea∣vours, that are brought forth before it, being born in sin and children of wrath, (as your do∣ctrin teacheth) and so not conducible to that purpose) sure it were a piece of improvidence at least, if not a huge presumption, to attempt thus to prevent the will of God, and anticipate the decrees of heaven; notwithstanding, 'tis a part of our faith (as you define it,) that we must needs stay till that saving call of God doth ring so loud in our ears, that 'tis impossi∣ble we should be deaf or disobedient to it. Dr. Confidence. None but a Reprobate would argue after this manner. Tilenus Infidelis. If you be of that opinion, I'le hear no more of your instructions; for I understand, tis one of your tenents, that the Gospel is preached to the greatest part of the world, to no other end, but to aggravate their condemnation; as 'tis recorded by a
chief professor of that doctrin, called Mr. Cal∣vin, that God doth direct his word unto such, that they may become the more deaf, and that he doth set his light before them, of purpose, to make them the more blinde; [Inst. 3. c. 24. §. 13.] And if this be the infinite wisdome, good∣ness, and justice of your God, those, at whose ears there never arrived any intelligence of him, are the more happie, or at least the less unfortunate and miserable, than those who are brought into some acquaintance with him, and yet cannot believe, because the notice they have of him, through his own unprovok'd re∣straint, is not attended with grace necessary to work belief in them. Mr. Impertinent. We advise you to betake your self to your prayers, that these thoughts of your heart may be forgiven you, and that God would put you into a better minde. Tilenus Infidelis. I am weary of these ab∣surd contradictions: for if the best works of the unregenerate be not only unfruitful, but noxious and hurtful, (as they are accounted by the test and scale of your doctrin) and it be impossible to please God without faith in Christ, and that faith not to be usher'd into the soul, but by the dead-awakening call of the Almigh∣ty; my papers in this state of Infidelitie, will rather provoke and exasperate that God, you advise me to pray unto, then propitiate and
appease him. That Philosopher therefore, gave those wicked passengers, whom the vio∣lence of a tempest had storm'd into a fit of de∣votion, a great deal better counsel, when he said, Silete, ne dii vos nebulones hic naving are sentiant, he bid them hold their peace lest their cries should give the Gods warning to take their advantage to shipwrack and destroy them. By this gentlemen, you see with what suc∣cess you are able to mannage your plea (ac∣cording to your Synod's principles) in behalf of your God, against an Infidel; perhaps you may come off better in your attempt to correct a wicked Christian; I desire therefore, in the next place, that you would make proofe of your discipline upon Tilenus Carnalis. Mr. Fatalitie. Herein methinks, I should make no great difficultie to prevail, if the po∣wer of reason can but fasten upon your under∣standing, or the tie of religion upon your con∣science, or the sense of gratitude upon your heart and affections. Do but reflect upon those obligations, which Almighty God hath laid upon you, in your Creation and Redemp∣tion. He hath a fair title to your best obe∣dience by right of dominion, in regard of that excellent nature and being, he freely conserr'd upon you; but a stronger title (if stronger may be) by the right of a deer purchase, made by no lower price than his own blood. These
obligations, as common equitie hath drawn them up, so (with respect to the benefit that would accrew to you hereby) your own inge∣nuitie hath drawn you on to subscribe and seal them. You have been solemnly devoted unto God and listed a sworn souldier under the Banner of your Redeemer. Are you un∣der his pay, and fight against his interest? Do you wear his livery, and eat his provisions, and expect his reward, and yet spend your time and strength and talents in the service of his mortal enemie? How execrable is the sa∣criledge of this ingratitude and rebellion? Re∣member, it will not be long ere the justice of God send's the trumpet of the Law (which will be so much the shriller, if it be sounded by the hollow lungs of death) to give your now-secure Conscience a hot alarum; and when you are once awakened with the terrour of those dreadful threatnings, you will be ama∣zed at the horrour of that apprehension, when you shall behold all those shoals and swarms of sin (you are guiltie of) muster'd up in their several ranks and files, to charge and fight a∣gainst you; for the momentarie and trifling pleasures whereof, you have so improvidently forfeited all the comforts of a good Consci∣ence, and refreshments of the Holy Ghost, with your portion in Heaven and your interest in Gods favour; in exchange whereof, like a
foolish Merchant, you have procured nothing but the coals of eternal vengeance, and the flames of Hell, which the crowds of your con∣densed sins have thrust wide open, ready to swallow up and devour you, unless you pre∣sently prevent it, by an unfeigned repentance, and universal reformation. Tilenus Carnalis. Sir, I beseech you suffer not your zeal of a holy life to transport you beyond the rule of sacred truth, lest while you pretend to honour God on earth, you cast re∣proach upon his Eternal designs in Heaven. I am jealous, Tilenus Infidelis hath so disturbed your passions, that you know not where you are; for you have quite forgotten your Synod and your principles, and (I think) your own name too, and seem to have lost your Creed in your Commandements. Recollect your senses, and recal your wandring phantasie, and awaken your judgement to consult the O∣racle of your belief (your Synod) and speak accordingly (for whatsoever is not of faith will be sin in you:) And is it not one of the Ar∣ticles of that Creed (which you profess) that all the good or evil whatsoever, that happens in the world, doth come to pass by the only immutable and ineluctable decree of God, and his most effectual ordinance? That the first cause doth so powerfully guide and impel all second causes, and the will of man amongst
the rest, that they cannot possibly either act or suffer sooner then they do, nor in any other manner? I am sorry I am no more master of my self and mine own actions, that I am so di∣vested of my libertie, and carry a nature about me so debauched, that I cannot chuse but suf∣fer my self to be carried captive under the po∣wer of those sins, that reign in-me: but (my comfort is) I am assured by the judgment of such sound Divines as your self, that the secret will of God (which procur'd Judas's treason no less then Pauls Conversion) hath so de∣creed it. And you know it is not in my po∣wer to procure a writ of Electment, to cast out that sin, which came in and keeps possession by the uncontroulable order of the divine pre∣destination. I cannot get grace when God will not give it me, nor keep it, when he is pleased to take it away from me. I have no Lure to throw out, that the Dove of Heaven will vouchsafe to stoop unto. the Spirit blows where he pleases, inspires whom he pleases, and retires when he pleases; returns where he plea∣ses; And so if it comes with an intent to a∣mend me, it will be as impossible then to put him back, as it is now to draw him on. It were an intollerable presumption in me, to make my self so much a taskmaster over the Holy Spirit, as to prescribe him the time and hour, when he shall effect that work for me,
whereunto I am able to contribute no more than to mine own birth or resurrection. Atque hec est illa tantopere in Scripturis predicata regenera∣tio, nov a Creatio, suscitatio & mortuis, & vivificatio, quam Deus SINENOBIS in no∣bis operatur. Can. 12. art. 3. & 40. Synodi Dordracene. I can affirm with confi∣dence, I never was so much an Atheist as to en∣tertain the least distrustful thought of the divine po∣wer. When he hath been four dayes dead, and lies stinking in his grave Lazarus may be raised; and the more putri'd I am in my cor∣ruptions, the triumphs of the divine grace will be so much the more glorious in my restituti∣on; but it may be the last hour of the Day with mee, before the Day-spring doth thus visit me. In the mean while, to shew my detestation of that arrogant doctrin of the Ar∣minians, I will not strive to do the least en∣deavour towards pietie, lest by attributing some libertie to my self, I should eclipse the glory of Gods grace, which I acknowledge, as well most free in her approaches, as unre∣sistible in her working. I confess for the pre∣sent, my sins have brought such a damp upon my grieved spirit, that he doth not afford m: so much grace as to crie Abba Father. Never∣theless I can call to minde, I have sometimes heretofore, had such heavenly motions, and gratious inspirations in my heart, as could be breathed from no other than the spirit of the Almighty, & hereby there hath been begotten
in me a faith in Christ's merits not only true (which can never be lost) but so firm also, that I am even now perswaded, nothing shall be able to separate me from the love of God towards me in Christ Jesus. This faith is rooted in a rock, which all the powers of darkness are not able to root up, though to your present apprehension (for want of the fruits and blos∣somes of pietie and devotion) it be as trees and herbs in winter, which seem drie, dead and withered, but are not so. Besides, being one of God's Elect (as every one is bound to believe, according to the doctrin of the Sy∣nod of Dort, or declared foresworn by that of Alez.) it follows by the same doctrin, that my sin though never so abominable doth Coope∣rate to my salvation; yea, and that my par∣don is sealed already; and this Mr. Fatalitie, you intimate your self, in your exhorting me to repentance; for repentance (you know) is of no worth without saith, and faith it self is defective, except it believes the forgiveness of all sins, past, and to come. However, if I be a Reprobate (which no temptation shall in∣duce me to believe, contrary to my duty, as I am instructed by the doctin of the Synod) yet, unless you have a commission to disanul the decrees of Heaven, your threatnings and exhortations cannot avail me: but may do me this disadvantage, that they may anticipate
my hell terrours, and beget a worm in my bosome, to torment me before the time. Mr. Takeo'trust. I like it well, you are so fully perswaded of the All-sufficiencie of the Divine grace, and that you profess so much a∣versness to the proud conceits of the Armini∣ans, (not daring to ascribe any thing to your own indeavours,) and that you are so careful to avoid the comfortless suspition of your be∣ing under the state of Reprobation: but I much bewail your dangerous errrour in one thing, and must indeavour your correction in that, as the most likely foundation of all your practical miscarriages. Tilenus Carnalis. I beseech you what may that be? I should be glad to have it discove∣red to me. Mr. Takeo'trust. Because (as you argued very well according to the minde of the Sy∣nod) the Holy spirit doth immediately produce repentance in the sinners heart, therefore you seem to set light by the Ordinance of the word, and this is a very dangerous errour in you; for the word (preached especially) with threatnings and exhortations are the means and instruments by which the Holy Ghost work∣eth, to the conversion and correction of a sin∣ner. Tilenus Carnalis. When we take our prin∣ciples, without any examination, upon the
credit of our admired Authors, we are apt to embrace their contradictions as points of faith, and their absurdities, as parts of our belief. And so it hath happened to your self in this par∣ticular; for you must observe, that, that man∣ner of working only is called immediate, wherein no means do concur: now if the re∣pentance and conversion of a sinner be attribu∣ted to the immediate working of the Holy Ghost, it implies a manifest contradiction to say, that exhortations and threatnings are the instruments and means thereof. Besides, the very essence and being of an instrument is pla∣ced in the aptitude and fitness, which it hath, for the use and office to which it is designed: so a knife is a knife in that respect only, that the qualitie and form of it's matter gives it an aptitude to cut: an eye is therefore an eye, because 'tis apt to see. So every instrument hath a suitable fitness to that office, for the performance whereof 'tis designed to be an in∣strument, and therein lies its subserviencie to the principal efficient. Mr. Takeo'trust. By this very reason I con∣clude, the Ministerie of the word to be the means and instrument of the sinners conversion and repentance; for it is most apt, to inform his understanding of his duty, and to quicken his will and affections to pursue and follow the same.
Tilenus Carnalis. Sir, you are much mi∣staken; indeed if a moral efficiencie would serve the turn, there are most excellent argu∣ments of perswasion to work upon a reasonable Creature: but this is the very thing, that the Arminians do plead for. Our Synod and the Divines thereof teach us otherwise, namely, that the conversion of a sinner cannot be wrought but by a physical or, or hyperphysi∣cal action, an impression of grace that is irre∣sistible, to which effect the ministery of the word (as exhortations and commands, pro∣mises and threatnings) can no more avail (ha∣ving no more aptitude thereunto) then to the raising of the dead, or the creation of the world. Mr. Impertinent. We do read, at the rai∣sing up of Lazarus, and the Creation of the world, that God spake the word and it was done. Gen. 1. 3, 6. Iohn 11. 43. Tilenus Carnalis. The word that produced those effects, was not the word of exhortation, such as we speak of; no, nor yet that outward word consisting of sound and syllables, (which did but signifie what God was about to work by his irresistible omnipotencie:) but it was the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. which is said to be his son, verse 2. compared with Col. 1. 16, 17. And as there could be no resi∣stance made against that power, exerted and put forth for that creation and resurrection; so
your Synod teach us to believe, that that po∣wer, which is imploy'd to effect the conversi∣on of a sinner from the errour of his wayes, is equally irresistible; but that the ministerie of the word hath no such power or energie ap∣pears too manifestly in the frequent, and al∣most general contempt and frustration of it. This therefore having no aptitude to such an use or office, (which nothing but an irresistible force can accomplish) it can with no proprie∣tie of speech, be said to be the means and in∣strument thereof. Mr. Knowlittle. Then you will allow the ministerie of the word to be of no use at all in the Church of God? Tilenus Carnalis. One function it hath and no more, according to the consequence of the Synods doctrin; it serves for a sign or ob∣ject to represent outwardly, what the spirit works inwardly, as well in the will, as in the understanding: but because 'tis like the rai∣sing of the dead, and the creation of the world, it requires an omnipotent and irresistible operation; therefore the Scripture, though it represents and urgeth so many sundry wayes (as by way of command, exhortation, pro∣mise and threatning) yet (to speak congruously to our principles) it can implie and signifie it, but as a work of God's, not as a duty of ours; and then why should we trouble our selves a∣bout
it, any more than Adam troubled himself about the creation of Evah, or Lazarus about his own Resurrection; especially seeing, we must believe 'tis nothing in our power to help it forward, and that God in pursuance of his own Deorees, will infallibly perform it, though we be cast into as deep a sleep (of security) as Adam was, or lie stinking in the grave of our corruptions (though insensible of it) as did Lazarus. Dr. Dubius. Do you then think the use of the Ministery a thing indifferent, and purpose to decline it? Tilen. Carnalis. Seeing the most the word can do is, to make us Morall men, if yet it can do that, (which are of no great esteem in Gods Kingdom, as our Divines generally have resolved) and the spirit is no more bound to wait upon the preaching thereof, than to be at our command; and seeing when he does come, he needs none of those auxiliary forces to at∣chieve his irresistible conquest over our rebel∣lions, and yet God hath been pleased (out of his unsearchable wisdome, and to shew his own dominion and liberty) so to order the mat∣ter, that although the word cannot really pro∣mote our spirituall good (which is a work far above the spheare of it's power and activity) yet, receiving it in vain (though it be not in our power (confessedly) to receive it other∣wise)
it will aggravate our condemnation; for this cause I think it prudent, to avoid the cer∣tain danger, with the no-probable-good that (according to those principles of the Synod) will accrew by it. Mr. Narrowgrace. If you be of that minde, we must leave you to the mercy of God, and the use of your own praiers, which are the only reserve, we can commend to your assi∣stance and benefit. Tilenus Carnalis. Alas Sir, you are as much out of the story now as ever, for the grace of praier (without which the duty will be a vain oblation, if not abominable) must be derived from the same supernal fountain; and we cannot pump it up our selves, it comes freely; and when it comes, it is so impetuous, and over∣flows the soul with such inundations of the spirit, that 'tis impossible to resist it. And since you see me altogether silent to this office, you may conclude that this silence begins in heaven, and that God will not have me pray, in that he denies me his grace to that effect. But Sir, you do well to take your leave of me; for it is evident, that God hath not imploy'd you, as intending my amendment by your ministery; since I find the confusion of your doctrine, more apt to furnish a cushion for the secure and areless, or a halter for the doubtfull and de∣pairing, then any sacred Amulet against the
charmes and poison of impicty. And yet be∣cause, when the wheel is once in motion, a little strength will be sufficient to continue it, and the fire is easily blown up after 'tis once kindled; therefore you may please to make your third experiment upon Tilenus Tepidus. And I am affraid you can produce no argument to quicken his remisness, into a more thorow pace of devotion, which the dexterous use of that buckler (of the Synods doctrine) will not be able to put by. Let us heare there∣fore how you will urge him to a further pro∣gresse in Pietie. Mr. Efficax. Do but reflect upon Peter's redoubled exhortation. 2 Pet. 1. 4. He suppo∣seth that they had escaped the (foul) corruption that is in the world through lust. And besides this (saith he) giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, &c. and vers. 10. give diligence to make your calling and election sure. Tilenus Tepidus. If S. Peter had understood our calling and election in the same sense the Sy∣nod understands them in, his exhortation had been to little purpose; For (in that sense) 'tis as sure already, as the wisedome, trueth, and power of God, or the blood of Christ, or the seales of the divine decrees can make it. The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. 2 Tim. 2. 19. It were arrogance to go about to lay any
other foundation; and a folly to imagine we are able to fortify it by our indeavours. Mr. Simulans. But Sir, we should make a Conscience of the duty, though there were no other necessity of it, but necessitas praecepti] because 'tis the will of Almighty God. Tilenus Tepidus. I perceive Sir, you have forgotten your own distinction, though 'tis so little while since you used it. You told us God hath a two-fold will; an outward revealed will, and an inward secret will. His outward will is signified by his commands, but saith Piscator, they are not properly God's will, for some∣times he nills the fulfilling of them: As for ex∣ample, Gen. 22. 2. with 12. He commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac, yet he nill'd the execution of it: but his secret will is the will of his good pleasure, which he hath therefore de∣creed shall ever come to passe. Whereupon, one of your Divines, concludes there is a kind of holy Simulation in God. [Ʋnde percipitur esse simulationem quandam sanctam, &c.] Now whereas you urge me to give all diligence, that I may grow in grace, if this were the will of Gods Beneplaci ure, he would move and im∣pell me indeclinably to effect it: but if it be onely his outward will, and improperly so cal∣led, Hee having by an irrevocable Decree prede∣termin'd my not doing of it, though it be out∣wardly commanded; then my not doing his
outward will is the performance of his secret will; and this being his proper will, wherein consists his good pleasure, my compliance there∣with must needs be the more acceptable; especi∣ally since to this he affords me his providential concurrence, which he denies me towards the accomplishment of the other. Mr. Knowlittle. We are taught, that there are degrees of glory; One glory of the Sun, ano∣ther of the Moon, and another of the starrs; and so there shall be in heaven. 1 Cor. 15. Now grant that you are secure (as you presume) as to the estate of glory; yet you should be earnest in your endeavours to capacitate your self for the highest degrees of it. Tilenus Tepidus. There are some have made a question of those different degrees of glory. In the parable, every one (at the end of the day) received his penny (as much they that wrought but one houre, as they that had born the heat and burden of the day.) And the righteous shall all shine as the Sun in the king∣dom of the Father; and every one shall enter in∣to the joy of the Lord, which is fulnesse of joy; But besides this, if a sparrow falleth not to the ground without God's Providence, and if the hairs of our heads be all numbred (as our Saviour saith they are;) shall we not think as well, that every degree of happinesse, and every beam of glo∣ry, and spark of joy are likewise appor∣tioned
and predetermined for all the E∣lect. Dr. Absolute. 'Tis true, the state of eternal bliss, as to all the degrees of joy and glory in it, is firmly and irreversibly decreed to all the E∣lect; but yet through your remisness, and e∣specially if that betrayes you to any wasting sin, you may damp your hopes, and lose the sense and comfortable apprehension of the influences and effects thereof, which you know was Da∣vid's case. Psal▪ 6. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed: My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long? Return O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake, and restore to me the joy of thy salvation. Psal. 51.] For in death there is no remembrance of thee. From hence you see there is ground enough for the Apostles ex∣hortation. Hebr. 6. 11. We desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence, to the full assu∣rance of hope firme unto the end. Tilenus Tepidus. I know Mr. Diodati, in his Annotations upon the 5. verse of that 6. Psalm, saith: Hereby is shewen the fear of Gods children, anguished and pressed by the feel∣ing of his wrath, lest they should die out of his grace, unreconciled; and by that means be ex∣cluded and debarred from their desired aim, to be
everlastingly instruments of his glory. But 'tis probable David had no intelligence of that comfortable Doctrine (defined by the Synod in this last age) as appears by his fearfull com∣plaint and expostulation (if that Psalme were his) Psal. 77. I remembred God and was trou∣bled: I complained, and my spirit was over whel∣med: My soul refused to be comforted: will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore? Hath God forgot∣ten to be gracious? Hath be in anger sbut up his tender mercies? There could not have been this conslict of diffidence and anxietie in him, if he had been established in the principles of the Synod; for, annexing the Lords Publick de∣clarations (by the mouth of Samuel touching him. I Sam. 13, 14. &c c. 16. 6. 7.) to the con∣science of his own integrity, he might have collected a certainty of his present regenerati∣on (when he was anointed King) and from thence have concluded undeniably his election from all eternitie, and consequently the impossibility of his rejection from God's fa∣vour. But there is some likelyhood, He thought that, in the designation of his ever∣lasting mercy towards them, God considered men, as faithfull (according to the way of the Arminians) and as persevering in their faithful∣nesse. For he saith, Psal. 4. 3. Know that the
Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself. If that text will not serve the turn, yet there is one unavoidable. Psal, 103. 17, 18. The mer∣cy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting; Ʋpon them that fear him: To such as keep his Covenant: and to those that remember his com∣mandements to do them. And to him that order∣eth his conversation aright, will I shew the salva∣tion of God. Psal. 50. the last. And governing his persuasions by these principles, there is no wonder he was so exceedingly transported with a fear of God's displeasure. And that such were his principles, may be collected also from hence, in that when the Paroxisme of the temptation was somewhat over, he doth not make his recourse to the immutable decree of God's Election, to cure the remanent palpita∣tion of his spirits; but onely to former expe∣rience of God's mercifull despensations to∣wards his people. Psal. 77. 11. 15. I will re∣member the works of the Lord: thou hast redeem∣ed thy people, &c. But since the cleering up of this soul-setling doctrine, by the great judge∣ment and pietie of the Synod, He that hath once tasted, the graciousness of the Lord in his ef∣fectuall vocation, and firmly believes, that the things concerning his everlasting happiness, are so established and carryed on by the irresi∣stible power of an irrespective Decree (as is there taught) he may cast away all anxiety and
care, and repose himself with confidence under the wings of that security. Dr. Absolute. But the Synod declares fideli∣bus perpetuò esse vigilandum & orandum, ne in tentationes inducantur. That the faithfull must watch and pray lest they fall into temptations; and that when they grow remiss and torpid, quit their guard and neglect their duty (as you do) they are many times surprized of the flesh and the world, and carried captive into hainous and enormous sinnes; whereby they offend God, and grieve the Holy Spirit, and incurre the guilt of death and the like. Tilenus Tepidus. 'Twas well you stopt there Mr. Doctor. But I had thought your worship had been better versed in this point. For my part, such Mormo'es and bugg-beares never trouble me. I am taught by the Synod to be∣lieve, that all the sins in the world, shall never be able to separate an Elect person from the love of God: but rather make for his greater advan∣tage. Mr. Indefectible. But suppose by your sins, you should provoke God to anger so far forth, that he should cut you off, as our Saviour threa∣tens the Jewes; Ye shall die in your sins. And Ezek. 18. 24. When the righteous turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth iniquity, and doth according to all the abominations, that the wicked man doth, shall he live? All his righ∣teousnesse
that he hath done shall not be men∣tioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, & in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shal he die. Tilenus Tepidus. I did not expect such a supposition, or objection from you of all men living; for to speak properly, God is never angry but with the Reprobates, and I know 'tis your avowed opinion, that the Elect can neither fall finally, nor totally, and all the Sy∣nodists are of the same judgement. They di∣stinguish therefore of righteousness, into that which is inherent, or the righteousness of works, and that which is imputed, or the righteousness of faith. And they confess the Elect may forsake his inherent righteousness, and fall into most foul and horrid sins, but yet he doth not fall from his imputed righte∣ousness, the righteousness of Christ, which he hath by faith. They do also distinguish be∣tween death temporal, and death Eternal; affirming that the sins of the Elect, though never so many or heinous, do not incur the guilt of eternal death, but only temporal, which is never inflicted upon them neither, as a curse, nor before their restitution; for if you ask them what doom David had layn un∣der, if death had surprized him in his murther and adultery, they will tell you roundly, it was impossible he should die without repen∣tance.
Dr. Dubius. I suppose David's case was extraordinarie; and a special reason is given by them of the Synod, why he could not die before repentance, viz. because after his sin he was to beget a son of whom the Messias should descend. Tilenus Tepidus. I conceive, that ground is too loose to bear the superstructure, the men of that opinion, would raise upon it; for they are not all saints in our Saviour's Ge∣nealogie, neither did David's sin bereave him of the facultie of generation. The son of Jesse might have propagated a stem for the Messias to branch out of, and yet have died in his sin afterwards; the impossibilitie therefore of his dying without repentance is grounded upon a more solid and impregnable foundation, viz. the eternal decree and love of God, which e∣qually concerns all the Elect. That immutable love wherein God elected them, doth exert it self and prompt him infallibly to confer the grace of repentance upon them first or last, how great and how many sins soever they run into. And if men had the will to improve this most excellent comfortable doctrin, the advantage of it would be unspeakable. Men do beat their brains and exhaust their treasure in experiments to finde out and extract Para∣celsus his Elixer to preserve them in life and health to perpetuitie. But here is the only
insallible medicine, ten thousand times more soveraign than the Poets fabulous ambrosia, or Medea's charms, that are said to have restored Jason's father to his youth. Here is a moral Antidote against death, easie to be made and pleasant to be taken; a receipt to make us shot∣free, sword and pistol-proofe; the ingredi∣ents are not many, nor chargeable, nor hard to be attained. Let a man get a firm perswa∣sion, that he is elected (which the Synodists say, every one is bound to believe) then let him be sure to espouse some beloved lust, and keep it very warm in his bosome, being care∣ful (as he hath free-will to evil) Mat. 17. 12. Iohn. 19. 11. Dan. 5. 19. not to cast it off by repentance; and he may venture himself se∣curely in the mid'st of the greatest perils. Let such Elect persons take up Arms against their lawful Governours, in the pretended defence of their Religion, rights and liberties, and they shall hew down thousands of their ene∣mies before them, and none of them shall fall in the attempt, (for they cannot die in sin) unless some few, whose pusillanimitie and co∣wardice, doth melt their hearts into an unsea∣sonable relenting and repentance of their Re∣bellion, while they are in pursuit of their de∣sign. Mr. Impertinent. But Mr. Tepidus, to grant you that the Elect can never fall from
grace (which is our avowed tenent,) yet cer∣tainly, we are bound to be rich in good works, out of gratitude, that God may have the more glory. Tilenus Tepidus. I need not tell you, it will be all our business to glorifie God, in Heaven; and so we may adjourn that work till we come thither; for our Divines hold, that sin is as much a means for the setting forth of God's glorie as vertue is, and that God decreed to bring it into the world to that purpose; and if it be the riches of his grace that we should glorifie, how can we glorifie that better, than by an absolute resignation of our selves up to it, (in despite of raging sin) and a confident dependance upon the free pardon thereof. And doubtless, if God would real∣ly have me shew my gratitude in any other way of service, he would irresistibly press me to it; for whatsoever the Lord pleases that he thus effecteth, Psal. 135. 6. (for to that pur∣pose this text is alledged by our Divines.) And therefore 'tis the resolution of Maccovius, (he instanceth in David committing murder and adultery) that if we consider the power of the regenerate, in respect of the Divine de∣cree, and in respect of the actual Divine provi∣dence, and in respect of the permission of sin, then (and in these respects which are not in our po∣wer) a man can never do more good then he
doth, nor commit less evil than he committeth. His reason is, that otherwise the will of man might be said to act independently to the will of God. Now if it be thus impossible to adde one cubit to the stature of the new man, it will (by our Saviours argument, Mat. 6. 27.) be impertinent and ridiculous to take thought about it. See Luke 12. 26. Mr. Knowlittle. Mr. Tepidus, Mr. Tepi∣dus. What ever you say, the doctrin of the Synod doth not overthrow the practice of Pie∣tie, and the power of godliness, as you go about to infer from it; for we know, the Doctors of that Assembly were very worthy Godly men, and so are many (as you cannot denie) that embrace their tenents. Tilenus Tepidus. Though the persecuti∣on and banishment of their brethren (only for dissenting from them in these opinions) be no great sign of godliness, yet I speak not con∣cerning the qualitie of the persons that hold such opinions, but of the nature and tendencie of the doctrin, the conclusions which imme∣diately and necessarily flow from it; They may be good men; but then they are ill Logi∣cians at least; order not their works by their faith or principles, and their godliness is not the result of these principles, but flows from some other, with which these are inconsistent, if they were rationally improved and practi∣sed,
as is now evident to you from this three∣fold experiment already made. Mr. Impertinent. The power of grace will subdue such Carnal reasonings. Tilenus Tepiaus. That is, in those men, who suffer their reason to be debauched, and then arrested by such principles: But you have yet another part for me to act, I shall not be satisfied till that is over. Another main end of the office ministerial, is to comfort the afflicted, and doubtful; and I am perswaded, this is rendred ineffectual by the doctrin of the Synod, and its Adherents, as well as the other fore-mentioned; for proofe whereof, I de∣sire I may now have leave to exhibit my com∣plaints and grievances under the person and title of Tilenus Tentatus. Dr. Confidence. Let us hear what they are. Tilenus Tentatus. Time was when I did walk comfortably before God in my Christian profession, feeling such inundations of spiritu∣al Consolation flowing into my soul from his gracious presence, as put me in minde of the hidden Manna, mentioned Rev. 2. 17. whose ravishing sweetness nothing but experience can make credible; and hath made me cry out in a holy extasie of admiration; It is good for me to be here! But now I feel the tide is turn∣ed, my wine is mixed with water, or rather my joyes turned into extream bitterness; for
I being continually alarum'd by the cries of an accusing Conscience, I apprehend the terrours of the Divine vengeance set in battail array a∣gainst me, and the curses of the Law thun∣dring out my sentence of condemnation, and the mouth of Hell gaping wide open to swal∣low me up and devour me. These frightful apprehensions are my constant attendants, they lie down and rise up with me, and pursue me so uncessantly that I am become a burden to my self. Dr. Confidence. This is some suddain storm raised in your bosome through the power and subtiltie of Satan: but there is refuge at hand, an immovable rock to anchor on, that will not suffer you to be overwhelmed. Remember that Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and hath purchased Eternal Redemption for us. By the sacrifice of himself he hath purged our sins, and delivered us from the curse of the Law, and from the wrath to come, and satisfied the di∣vine justice, and obtained reconciliation with the Father for us. Every one that is sensible of his misery by reason of sin, and understands what need he hath of a Redeemer, and runs into the arms of Jesus Christ, and embraceth him for his Saviour, & depends upon his merits and mediation, and payes a dutiful subjection to his scepter and authoritie, by a true and a lively faith, he hath an interest in al those bene∣fits
(as actually applied to him,) He receiv's the priviledge of justification and adoption, and being justified by faith, he hath peace with God. Rom. 5. 1. Tilenus Tentatus. Sir, I know these are ex∣cellent Cordialls to the soul that is perswaded she hath a reall interest in them: but they are designed onely for a very small number, as the doctrine of the Synod hath determined. For those Divines tell us, that Almighty God did by an absolute decree elect certain particular per∣sons to salvation, (neither considering the death of his Son, nor the faith of those elect, in that decree, but) then decreed to give his Son to die for them, and irresistibly to work in them a saving faith to lay hold upon that his Son, and actually to apply all the said benefits to themselves; (for whose salvation only they were all prepared and designed.) Now all the promises of salvation in Christ, how universal∣ly soever propounded, being (by your Do∣ctrine) restrained onely to these Elect, (amongst whom that I should reckon my self, neither any particular mention of me in Scripture, nor any revelation by Angel or Prophet out of it, doth assure me) and the number of them (ac∣cording to your computation) being so small in proportion to the Reprobates, there is so much odds against me, that I have reason to be afraid, that I am inlisted under the greater
multitude. When Christ said to his Apostles, One of you shall betray me, though the odds were eleven to one on the Innocent parties side, yet it raised so much scruple and suspition in all their bosomes, as made them very anxious and inquisitive. Matth. 26. 22. Master is it I? Were the number of the Reprobates, for whom you say Christ died not, far more disproportio∣nable to the elect; yet the sad apprehension of those eternal torments fatally link'd to the end of that horrible decree, would prompt me to entertain fears & jealousies more than enough, lest I should be filed upon that chain, having no assurance to the Contrary, How much more should fearfullness and trembing surprize me, when I consider how few the Elect are even a∣mongst the vast multitudes of such as are called! Mr. Simulans. Seeing it hath pleased the wisdom of Almighty God to keep his immu∣table Decrees, as well that of Reprobation, as that of Election, locked up in the secret Cabinet of his own unsearchable Counsell; we are to govern our judgment by the rule of Charity, which beleeveth all things, and hopeth all things. 1 Cor. 13, Tilenus Tentatus. I confesse the judgement of Charitie is a try'd and equall beame in many Cases, but if you extend it generally, and apply it unto all particulars, it must needs be very
false; and I am confident, you dare not avouch the trueth of it in such a latitude, or if you dare, you are no more able to maintaine it, than I can beleeve these two contrary proposi∣tions at once, that Jesus Christ died for all, and yet, that he died for a very small number. 2. It is not the judgement of my Charity, but the certaintie of my faith that must give me as∣surance and comfort in this particular. 3. Charitable judgement is a fair standard to measure the doubtfull actions of our neighbour by, and commands us to cover his infirmities, and stifle the too light conception of suspitions, and sinister opinions touching him, but bindes us not to preach falshood to him, to induce him (against his own reason) to foster too good an opinion of himself. When I see a man pre∣sent himself to the Holy Sacrament, the judge∣ment of Charity perswades mee, (knowing no∣thing to the contrary) that he addresses himself to it, with that preparation of heart, that be∣comes a good Christian. But that such as are rightly prepared and qualified, do partake thereof to their salvation; this I beleeve by the judgement of faith, which admtteth no∣thing that is or can be false. So when I see a sick man render his soul up with much devoti∣on and resignation, into the hands of Christ, I beleeve charitably, that he dies as becomes a faithfull Christian: But that God communica∣teth
his salvation to such as die in the profes∣sion and obedience of the right faith; this I beleeve by the certainty of faith; wherein it is impossible I should be deceived, though the judgment of Charity deceives us very often. In a word, the judgment of charity is a good stand∣ing measure betwixt man and man: but it is not current betwixt man and his own Conscience, much lesse betwixt him and God. I know, I am not to be relieved, but by such succours as are levied upon the divine promises, and those pro∣mises having their foundation, and infallibilitie in the undeceivable truth of God, they require such a certaintie of faith, as will admit no mix∣ture of any thing false or doubtfull. Besides, when I do inquire which act of faith hath the prioritie, viz. to beleeve in Christ, or to beleeve Christ to be my Saviour, (in particular) I am taught by some of your Divines (Maccovius by name,) that I must in the first place, beleeve that Christ is my Saviour, and that is the cause of the other act, or the reason why I place my faith in him. Now if Christ died only for a few particular persons, and all the promises made in him, belong to those few onely, unlesse I could find some mention of my name amongst them, or receive some revelation from heaven to that effect, how can I with any certainty or assurance build my faith upon it, that I am one of them? Mr. Tako'trust. We are bound to think every
one is of the number of the Elect, till it appears to the contary. Tilen. Tentatus. This is but singing the old note ever again. This is still your judgement of Charity; which though it suppresseth all suspi∣cion in you towards me, yet can it not cure those feares and jealousies, which I have (but with too great reason) conceived of my self. As for your appearances to the contrary, I cannot understand them, much lesse set any value up∣on them; for by such outward things, the Synod is ready to tell us, we can never perceive any thing of what belongs to the state of Election or Reprobation. I am beholding to you, that waving the severity of your reason, you will make use of a charitable supposition to flatter me into an opinion, that I am one of that little Flock for which Christ dyed: But there is no∣thing can secure and comfort me, but a full and certain perswasion that I am one of them; which you will never be able to work in me (denying that Christ died for all) unlesse you can find some particular and undeniable evidence of my interest in him. Mr. Indefectible. You should reflect upon your former experience of God's gratious work in you. That spirit of adoption sent out into the hearts of Gods Elect, to bear witness to their spirits; though he may become silent, and not speak peace to them in such an audible
language of comfort, as is alwayes apprehen∣ded by them, yet he abides with them for ever. Spiritual injoyments are different from these outward and carnal ones; we may lose their taste and relish, as to sensible refreshment: but not their real presence, as influencing to Salvation. Tilenus Tentatus. Some comfortable ap∣prehensions might be awakened and kindled in those bosomes, that have been warmed with such sweet and heavenly experiences, if they were not all overcast and darkned again, by other black and dismal clouds, which the observation of some of your greatest Divines have spread over them. For Mr. Calvin him∣self (Instit. 1. 3. c. 2. §. 10, 11.) saith, The heart of man hath so many starting holes, and secret corners, of vanitie and lying, and is cloa∣thed with so many colours of guileful bypocrisie, that it oftentimes deceiveth it self: and besides experience sheweth, that the Reprobates are sometimes moved with the same feelings, that the Elect are, so that in their own judgement they nothing differ from the Elect. See Heb. 6. 4, 5. But the truth is, though I have lived a good moral life hitherto, and in a way of du∣ty have had a comfortable dependence upon the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, yet I am now affraid, I have had none of those extraordi∣nary snavities and refreshments of Gods spirit,
and consequently have no assurance of the pre∣sence of that comforter, who is promised shall abide with us for ever. Mr. Knowlittle. You are to consider that all the Elect are not called at the same hour. Tilenus Tentatus. I should not stand upon the hour; I could be content that God may take his own time to call me, if you could, in order to my present comfort, insure me, that I shall be called, though it be but at the hour of death: but this is that, I am afraid you have no grounds for. Mr. Take o'trust. You may be confident, that Christ is dead for you, and that you have an interest in him, so you can believe it. Tilenus Tentatus. I would desire to ask but these two questions. 1. Whether this com∣fort be applicable to all and every sick and af∣flicted persons, and 2. whether it be ground∣ed upon the truth? For if it be not to be ap∣plied unto all, I may be amongst the excepted persons, and so am not concerned in it; or, if it be not grounded upon the truth, you offer me a delusion instead of comfort. Mr. Take o'trust. It is applicable unto all; and every one, and grounded upon the unque∣stionable truth of the Holy Gospel. Tilenus Tentatus. If it be applicable to all and every one, as you affirm, and grounded
upon the truth; that is, as I conceive a rruth anecedent, to their believing; then it fol∣lows undeniably that Christ died for all in ge∣neral, and for every one in speciall, (else how can the comfort of this doctrin be so ap∣plied to them, as you would have it.) But if your meaning be, that, it will become true to me, or any other person [that Christ died for us,] by that Act of faith, which you would have me, or any such other person give unto your speeches; then you run into a ma∣nifest absurditie, maintaining, that the object of faith, or the thing proposed to be believed, doth receive its truth, from the act of the be∣liever, and depend upon his consent; whose faith and approbation can no more make true, that which in it self is false, then make false by his unbelief, that which in it self is true. Well may the Infidel deprive himself of the fruit of Christ's death, but he cannot bring to pass, by his unbelief, that he hath not suffered it, as a proofe of his love to mankinde. On the o∣ther side, the believer may receive benefit from the death of Christ, but his act of faith doth not effect, but necessarily suppose that death as suffered for him, before it can be ex∣ercised about it or lay hold upon it. Nay, my believing is so far from procuring Christs death for me, that on the contrary, our great Divines do maintain, quod nemo unquam fidem
habeat, nisi morte & meritis Christi procuratam, that I cannot have faith unless it be procured for me by the merits and death of Christ. And because I cannot finde this faith in me, I may conclude he hath not procured it for me, and consequently that he hath not died for me nei∣ther; and this you know is the ground of all my trouble. Dr. Dubius. Sir, I wish you to take heed of that evil heart of unbelief, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 3. and to that end remember the words of our Saviour, John 3. ult. He that be∣lieveth on the son hath everlasting life: & he that believeth not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abideth on him. Tilenus Tentatus. Sir, instead of lending me a clew to guide me out of that Maze of dif∣ficulties, into which the prodigious Divinity of the Synod hath led me, you intangle me much more in it. For whereas the Apostle saith, that God sends strong delusions to such as will not receive the love of the truth, that they may be saved. (2 Thes. 2.) You (governing your discourse by those principles) would first perswade men to believe a false proposition (when you exhort every man to believe that Christ died for him, which is false according to that Doctrin) and then having believed this falshood, they are punished by the spirit of errour to believe a lie. I beseech you, which
way would you have me turn my self, to get out of these perplexities? Having instructed me to believe a doctrin, that turns my obedi∣ence into punishment, and makes my follow∣ing the truth (according to that Calculation) the sure way to aggravate my damnation. For if the Synod saith true, and Christ be not dead, for them that believe not in him, how do they deserve to be punished, for not believing that which is false? And those that do obey the Commandement and believe in his death (though but for a time,) why suffer they the punishment due only to the refractory and in∣credulous, which is to believe a lie? Mr. Knowlittle. Sir, you must not think to beguile us with your vain Philosophie: we are too well established in these saving truths, to be perverted by such Sophistrie. Tilenus. If you have no better Cordials for afflicted Consciences; nor firmer props to support the necessitie of your ministerie, than what the doctrins of the Synod will afford you, I am afraid, the most vulgar capacities will finde Logick enough to conclude, from the premises, that your office is altogether useless and impertinent. Laying aside therefore the person of the Infidel, Carnal, Tepid, and Af∣flicted, whose parts I have hitherto acted, to make a practical trial of the efficacie of your ministery upon them, according to the tenour
and consequences of those doctrins, I beseech you sadly to reflect upon what hath already pass'd betwixt; and consider further what a vertiginous spirit presided in that Synod, that led those Divines (Maugre all the reason to the contrary) to denie some things which the Scripture expresly doth affirm; and to affirm other things, which the Scripture doth as ex∣presly denie. They denie the universalitie of the merits of Christ's death, (which the Scrip∣ture abundantly proclaimeth) and yet they do exhort and injoyn all men upon peril of damnation to believe in him; as if the Author of all truth did not only allow, but also com∣mand some men to believe falshood. They exhort and command every one to believe that he is elected to salvation, (though indeed he be a very Reprobate,) and that he cannot lose faith and grace once received, which the Scrip∣ture in express terms denieth. And as the de∣nial of Christ's universal redemption, takes a∣way all the solid ground of comfort: so the asserting the Saint's indefectibilitie overthrows the necessitie of exhortation, with the useful∣ness of promises and threatnings to inforce it; for who will valew such admonitions, [Har∣den not your hearts, take heed lest ye fall, receive not the grace of God in vain.] When he is in∣structed to believe, that he can never be so far wanting to the grace of God, nor harden
his heart, nor fall from his standing so far as to indanger his salvation, and who will denie himself (upon the assault of a gallant tempta∣tion especially) the present satisfaction of his lusts and passions, for the reversion of a King∣dome, who is perswaded, there are several decrees past in Heaven as well to necessitate, as secure him in the Succedaneous injoyment of them both? And who will be frighted from the pleasures of sin with the threatned danger of damnation, (unless a fit of Melancholy transports him into that folly) which believes it is no more possible to happen to him, then for God to lie, or his immutable decrees to be rescinded? In brief, when we consider the consequences of that doctrin, that the abso∣lute decrees of Heaven, do not only over-rule, but also predetermine every individual action of mankinde (so that 'tis impossible for the indeavours and wit of man, to make any one of them happen at any other time, or after a∣ny other manner then they do) may we not (as far as that doctrin can warrant us) con∣clude, that it is God's only fault, that so many men prove Infidels, and Profane, Lukewarm, and desperate; because it is he that doth with∣hold that grace, which is absolutely necessary to work an effectual alteration and change in them? And resolve, that it were therefore fit, that all preachers (forbearing to impor∣tune
the weak creature to attempt any of those mere impossibilities to which he hath, at most, but a passive power) should direct their admo∣nitions to God alone, that he would (perform what is his own work onely, in the hearts of men, that is, to) Convert, Correct, provoke and comfort them, by such an invincible arme of ef∣ficiency as cannot be resisted? The benefit of the word preached being thus totally evacuated by these doctrines, we shall find no more use or comfort in the Sacraments, but so far forth as we can observe, the very same Ministers, in the very administration of them, to overthrow their own unhappy doctrin; for to every one they baptize, they apply the promises of the Covenant of grace, contrary to their own Tenet, which, that they belong no∣thing at all to the Reprobates. Likewise the Lord's Supper is given to all, with the assurance Christ died for all them that receive it, though their own Tenet is, that he no way died for them who receive it unworthily, and to their condemnation; whose number is not small a∣mong our Reformed Congregations, even by their own Confession. What more? The ve∣ry exercises of praier, wherein the Pastour and the flock are joynt petitioners, shall be found of no use or comfort unto either, since they all either Elect or Reprobate; for the Elect ob∣taine no new thing by this means, if God hath
written them (as the ynod saies) from all E∣ternitie in the Book of life, without any rela∣tion to, or consideration of, their faith and pray∣ers; and that it is impossible they should be blotted out of it. And the Reprobates can ne∣ver cause themselves to be inroled therein by any exercises of faith or prayers, no more than they are able to disanull the immutable Decree of God. Gentlemen, I begg your pardon, and shall trouble you no further, but onely to desire you to ponder those many prejudices that lie a∣gainst such a Religion, as is rather repugnant than operative to the Conversion of an Infidel, and the correction of the carnall, and the quickning of the careless, and the consolation of the afflict∣ed; And if the doctrine maintained and delive∣red by the Divines of that Synod, and their Ad∣herents, doth frustrate and nullifie the preach∣ing of the word, and the use of the Sacraments, and the exercise of prayer; it overthrowes the sacred function of the Ministery (which con∣sist's in the faithfull administration of wholsome Doctrine and good Discipline,) and gives such a totall defeat, to the whole designe, of the Di∣vine Ordinances; I hope you will, out of your great Pietie and Prudence, not think it reason∣able, to make the profession of such faith or Do∣ctrine, your , or Shiboleth [Judg. 12. 6.] to discerne your Examinats, and
passe them in the account of the Godly Mi∣nisters. Dr. Absolute. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw. Mr. Fatality. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw. Mr. Frie-babe. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw. Dr. Absolute. Brethren, what think you of this man, now you have heard him discover himself so fully? Mr. Fatality. The man hath a competent measure of your ordinary unsanctified learning: But you may say he hath studied the Ancient Fa∣thers, more than our Modern Divines, such as Mr. Calvin, and Mr. Perkins; and alas! they threw away their enjoyments, and their lives too, some of them, for, they knew not what; they understood little or nothing of the Divine Decrees, or the power of Grace and Godli∣nesse. This great light was reserved for the honor of after-ages, to be held forth and dis∣played in. Mr. Efficax. He may be an honest Morall man; but I cannot perceive that he hath been much acquainted with sinne, nor very sensible of the nature of Repentance. I confesse for my own part, I was never much taken with these Obadiah's, that cry, I thy servant feare the Lord from my youth. [1 King. 18. 12.] give me your experimentall Divines. The burnt childe will
dread the fire; and as Jude adviseth, will have compassion upon their brethren (having been tempted themselves) and will save them with fear, using a holy violence to pluck them out of the burning. I remember Mr. Calvin confes∣feth in an Epistle to Bucer, that he had a great conflict with that wilde beast of impatience that raged in him, and that it was not yet tamed. He would frequently, reproach his brethren (espe∣cially if they dissented from him in the matter of predestination, &c.) by the name of Knave and Dogg, and Satan. And he so vexed the Spirit of Bucer, that he provoked the good mild man to write thus to him: Judicas prout amas, vel odisti: amas autem vel odisti, prout libet. That his judgement was governed by his passions of love and hatred, & these by his lust. And for his bitter Speeches, Bucer gave him. the title of a Fratricide. Reverend Mr. Beza confesseth also of himself, that per quindecim annorum Spacium, quo alios docuit justitiae vi∣am, nec sobrium se factum, nec liberalem, nec ve∣racem, sed haerere in luto. That for the space of fifteen years together, wherein he taught others the way of righteousnesse, himself trod neither in the way of truth, nor bounty, nor sobriety: but stuck fast in the mire [of sin.] Men that have had triall of the powerful work∣ings of sin and grace, and been brought upon their knees (like the great Apostle) with a bit∣ter
complaint, O me miserum! O wretched man that I am. These are your None-such Divines, which, methinks, our Saviour gave an intima∣tion of, in that passage to Peter, Luke 22. 32. & tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres tuos. Mr. Narrowgrace He attributeth so much to the Ministery of the Gospel, that he seems to be superstitiously addicted to it, and turnes it in∣to an Idol. Whereas, we know of it self it is but a dead letter; and therefore Maccovius hand∣ling that question; Whether the word God may be savingly heard before regeneration; concludes negatively, and to avoide his Adversaries ar∣gument, he affirmes, that that hearing of the word, which produceth faith, doth presuppoose re∣generation. To this agrees the opinion of some Divines, who think that Regeneration is effected after another manner then faith is. To which purpose Johannes Rysius in his Confession, saith thus, Fides Dei gratiâ per verbum concipitur. Regeneratio [vero] a Deo per Christum sine ullius rei Creatae interventu proficiscitur. Faith is conceived by the grace of God through the word, but Regeneration pro-ceeds from God through Christ, with∣out the intervention of any created thing whatso∣ever. Mr. Take o' trust. I conceive Sir, when we see the ministery so much ecclipsed and under∣valued
as it is, if there were nothing else in it, Christian Policy should teach us, not to vent such doctrines, as are apt to bring more con∣tempt upon it. But the Holy Ghost hath set it at a higher rate, by cloathing it with titles of a greater reputation. He calls it the word of grace, the word of faith, the word of life, the Joh. 6. 63. Heb. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. word of reconciliation, the ministra∣tion of the Spirit, the word that is a∣ble to save the soul, the power of God unto Salva∣tion, the word of God that effectually worketh in them that beleeve. Mr. Know-little. I conceive, the Ministery of the word hath these excellent titles bestowed upon it, in regard it is the instrument, by and through which God doth infuse into the un∣derstanding and heart, his special grace, or ra∣ther that regenerating virtue, which alone doth powerfully effect the work of regeneration; so that the outward word, as an instrument, con∣ferreth nothing at all, to that effect, but is onely as the tunnell, whereby water is poured into a vessel; and yet that water receives no tincture at all from the nature or quality of the said tunnell. Mr. Takeo'trust. I have seen this alledged: But they say, we should consider, that the na∣ture and propertie of the word, is, to be intel∣ligible (in expression) and to carry such a sense as is apt to move the party, to whom it is ad∣dressed,
by working upon his understanding, and inciting his heart to love or hatred, hope or fear; and this is the true efficacy the word is indowed with. But if the word contributes no more to our conversion or regeneration, than the tunnell (that only conveighs the liquor) to the filling of the vessel: then it matters not whether the word be intelligible yea or no; for that regenerating virtue being a distinct power infused besides it, the word doth not work as a verbal, id est, a rational instrument, but onely concurr's as an instrument destitute of sense and reason. And therefore as it matters not what mettall the tunnell be made of, whether wood, or brasse, or tinn; So (had the word no other kinde of instrumentalitie than that hath) it were all one, whether the language were barbarous non-sense, (as is usuall amongst some Sectaries) or significant. And to what end then did God confer the gift of tongues upon his Apostles, and they take such care to condescend and ap∣ply themselves to the capacitie and apprehensi∣on of their hearers? Besides, if the word hath no more to do in this work, than is pretended, why should it consist of precepts, and those establish't with promises and threatnings? For a precept, (so establish'd especially) doth pre∣scribe the thing (under command) as a duty, and concurr's unto that duty, as the reason mo∣ving and obliging a man to performe it; But
if that special grace, or regenerating vertue, so infused, doth alone effect a mans regenerati∣on (taking nothing at all from the word) how can that effect be said to be the performance of his duty, and an act of obedience to the com∣mand of the word? Mr. Knowlittle. 'Tis a question, whether there be any precepts properly so called, un∣der the new Covenant, yea nor no? Some abso∣lutely denie it. But we confess it; and they may be said to concur to our conversion and be∣lieving, per modum signi, as a sign, or object representing, what God by his free grace, is said to effect and work in us. Indeed they de∣clare what man ought to do: but they serve rather to discover and convince his weakness, than promote his duty. Mr. Takeo'trust. This doctrin doth cancel the very formal reason & force of all the Com∣mands of Christ, and makes the word of God, intended for an instrument of mans conversion, to serve only for an object and meer doctrin for his faith and repentance to converse with; (for they are not to be wrought (it seems) by this means, but immediately effected and wrought of Almighty God, in the heart, by a special action and operation) and consequent∣ly, all the exhortations and precepts, as such, all the promises and threatnings, complaints and obtestations, wherewith the word of God
aboundeth, to be nothing else, but empty signs, and busie trifles (if not a ludicrous stage-play) conducing nothing to that effect, which they pretend to be designed for. But, that faith and regeneration (which flowes from it,) are both wrought (in a rational way) by the outward ministery of the word, moving and inciting the understanding and heart of man, will evidently appear to be the doctrin of Christ and his Apostles. 1. For faith, take that expression in our Saviours prayer, John 17. 17, 20. Sanctifie them through thy truth: thy word is truth. Neither pray I for these (Apostles) alone: but for them also, which shall believe on me through their word. See Joh. 20. 31. 1 John 5. 13. And Rom. 10. 17. There∣fore faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 1. That he understands faith working by love, which the Gospel de∣termines to be the only means, by which we may, and ought to be saved, appears in the 9. and 10. verses; If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the tongue confession is made unto salvation. 2. That by the word which works this faith, he under∣stands the outward word, appears by the whol contexture of the Chapter; for he saith,
(1.) This is that word of faith, which we Preach, verse 8. (2.) That word, which cannot be heard, unless it be preached, not internally by God, but externally by men, sent out to that purpose, verse 14, 15. (3.) That word, which is heard with the ears of the body, and (4.) may be disobeyed, verse 16, 18. As the working of faith is attributed to the ministery of the word, so is the working of Regeneration too; Jam. 1. 18, 19. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth; where∣fore, let every man be swift to hear. To this adde 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. Being born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preach∣ed unto you. Hereupon St. Paul tell's the Co∣rinthians, not only that he was a Minster of God, by whom they did believe: but tells them also, that He was their Father; for in Christ Jesus He had begotten them, through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 14, 15. Mr. Knowlittle. The Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 3. 6. I have planted and Apollo watered: but God gave the increase. Mr. Take o'trust. So the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 15. 38. God giveth to every seed his own bo∣dy, as it hath pleased him: but still it is in the ordinary way of husbandry; and therefore the Sower goes out to sow his seed, and so the
King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5. 9. But the sluggard, who will not plow by reason of the cold, He shall beg in harvest and have no∣thing, Prov. 20. 4. In these natural things, we see, God doth not bring forth fruit, by any peculiar divine action distinct from that of plan∣ting and watering; but by preserving that force and vigour, once put into the earth and water, (wherein and whereby such plantation and watering is made) he concurs to make the la∣bour of the husband man succesful, and so gives the increase, Psal. 65. 9, 10, 11, 12. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly inrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn when thou hast so provided for it: Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou setlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers, thou blessest the springing thereof. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fat∣ness. So 'tis here in a spiritual sense: ye are Gods husbandry, of Gods tillage, 1 Cor. 3. 9. and he hath instituted a ministery to bring you un∣to fruitfulness. I have planted, laying the foundation, or first principles of Christian faith among you: (of Heathens making you be∣lievers;) Apollo watered, he baptized you, and promoted that faith to some further growth in you. But yet there is no great matter imputable to him or me, that you
should make a schisme, upon this account, as if either of us were the author of your faith; but it is God alone, who gave us our abilitie. [See 2 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 4, 5, 6.] and put all the force and efficacie, into those sacred Ordinances which we administer, and so gave the increase. Thus, I say, God gives the increase, not by any peculiar, special acti∣on distinct from that Plantation & watering of Paul and Apollo: but by continuing to prosper that vigour and efficacie, which he was plea∣sed to put into that Ministery. Hence the A∣postle saith. Verse 9. We are labourers together with God, and Verse 5. Ministers by whom ye be∣leeved. To this purpose, the Apostle is a Chosen Vessel to bear the Gospel to the Gentiles. Act. 9. 15. and his Commission is, To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Act. 26. 18. and he doth so well mannage and execute this Commission, that he is confident to say, I have whereof I may glory, through Iesus Christ, in those things, which pertain to God. Rom. 15. 17. Mr. Know-little. There is a promise. Isai. 30. 21. Thine eares shall heare a word behinde thee, saying, This is the way, &c.
Mr. Takeo'trust. 1. That promise is made to such as are already converted, * and signi∣fies no more, than what is more clearly exprest, 'Tis observed, that the holy spirit (not in his miraculous gifts only) is most frequent∣ly said to be given to men after their conversion. Luke 11. 13. Acts 5. 32. c. 19. 2. &c. Isa. 59. 21. (2.) If the word, there promised, be a thing distinct from the word of the ministery, then I ask, whether it be an intelligible word or not? If not, then 'tis no fit mean to work upon a reasonable soul, and bring it to perform to God, a reasonable service, as ours ought to be, Rom. 12. 2. If it be an intelligible word, then either it hath the same sense, with the word written and preached, or a different sense from it. If it be of the same sense with the word written & preached, then 'tis to no purpose [frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora, & entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate] 'tis frivolous to multiplie means without cause. If this word be of a different sense from the word written or preached, then this, to the dishonour of the word, will argue the insuffi∣ciencie of it, to make us wise unto salvation, and the man of God perfect thoroughly furnished un∣to every good work; and this will lay an impu∣tation, not only upon the veracity and truth of God, but also upon his wisdome and good∣ness, for commending and injoyning the use of his written word to us, for an end and pur∣pose
to which it is unsufficient. But that we may understand the Prophets meaning; con∣sider that we are commanded to walk before God, Gen. 17. 1. according to which expres∣sion, we are to think God alwayes, at our heels (as we say,) observing our steps, and consonantly to that metaphorical expression, if we step aside, what means soever his provi∣dence useth to set us right, and direct our go∣ings in his paths, 'tis as if we heard a voice be∣hinde us. Not that God would exempt us from following the direction of the ministery: no, for the promise is thus expressed in the former verse. Thine eyes shall see thy Teach∣ers; [see Deut. 17. 9, 11.] and that we may not think it lawful to run on in errour, till the Enthusiastical charm recals us; remember, tis our duty to seek the law, at the priests mouth, Mal. 2. 7. Hence, we have these Caveats, not only, take heed how you hear, and what you hear, but also, whom you hear; for many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. and therefore try the spi∣rits whether they are of God, ibid. What need all these caveats, and so much ado, if the ministery of the word hath no influence or e∣nergie into our faith, and regeneration, and the work of grace in us? Mr. Knowlittle. But we see, the Scripture, every where ascribes the work of faith, con∣version
and regeneration in us, to the power and gift of God, to Christ, and to the Holy Ghost. Mr. Takeo'trust. The Scriptures do at∣tribute to Almighty God, that which he doth mediately by any of his creatures or Mini∣sters: Joh. 4. 1. Jesus is said to have baptized moe disciples than John, yet in the next verse, 'tis said that Iesus baptized not but his Disci∣ples. See Iohn 6. 45, 46. with Luke 10. 16. [2 Cor. 5. 19.] 1 Thess. 4. 8. Heb. 12. 25. Act. 5. 39. ch. 7. 51. Though the ministery of the word be instrumental in the work of grace in us, yet must we acknowledge the bles∣sed Trinity the chief cause and author thereof, and are bound alwayes to render them the ho∣nour of that efficacy, that is wrought by this instrument; because all the light force and effi∣cacy, which appears therein, flowes from God alone, and had not been in it at all, if He had not (as it were) implanted it therein. We have this treasure in earthen vessels (as the Apo∣stle in a like case 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.) [2 Cor. 3. 3, 4, 5.] Certainly there we have it, and God associ∣ates what other divine internal aids he plea∣seth with it; [Mar. 16. 15, 20. Rom. 15. 16, 19.] To Him therefore we must ascribe the glory, who hath annexed such an excellency of power, to such (otherwise) weak and fee∣ble instruments. 2 Cor. 10. 4.
Dr. Absolute. Leave your wrangling (Gentlemen) that we may dispatch Mr. Tilenus one may or other; Have any of you any more objections against him? Mr. Indefectible. He holds the possibility of the Saints Apostacy notwithstanding the decrees and promises of God to the contrary, and concludes David's Adultery and Murder, to be wilfull wasting, deadly sins, and incon∣sistent with the state of Regeneration: so that should a godly man through the frailty of the flesh suffer the like infirmity, he would be ready to discourage and grieve his spirit, tel∣ling him he had forfeited his interest in Gods favour, and lay under a damnable guilt, lia∣ble to the wrath of God and the torments of hell; and so in danger to bring him to despe∣ration, if he does not forsak his sin, and mor∣tifie his lust, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance upon his admonition. Mr. Narrowgrace. Which was worse then that to my minde; he flouted the Divines of the Synod, saying, if their doctrine were well improved, it would prove an Antidote against the power of Death, and teach a man how to become immortall, even in this life. Mr. Impertinent. That slipt my Observati∣on. I pray' what was it, he said? Mr. Narrowgrace. It was to this purpose; If the Elect cannot be cutt off in the state of
impnitency, notwithstanding they fall into most grievous sins; then (saith he) let them abandon themselves to some horrid lust, or course of impiety and they shall be sure to be immortal. Mr. Indefectible. But we know the Elect cannot do so. They have a principle within them, and a guard without them to defend and secure them from such courses. They are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 5. There is their guard, and their inward principle, that inclines and moves them, you have 1 Joh. 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit sin: for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God. Dr. Dubius. Under Correction, Sir, I con∣ceive man is never immutably good till he ar∣rives in heaven. As long as he converseth here below he is like other sublu∣nary things, subject to change Quod Angelis Casus hominibus mors. The reason is (besides temptati∣ons from without to allure and draw him) He hath a twofold principle, a new or an old man within him: the flesh and the spirit in Con estation Gal. 5. 7. The flesh lusteth against the sp it, and the spirit against the flesh; This Conflict is in the regenerate; And that he hath liberty to side with either of these parties, and so to change, I think cannot be denied. He
hath a liberty through Gods grace to side with the spirit against the flesh; and hereupon he is exhorted to abstain from fleshly lusts, to mortifie his earthly members, and to walk in the spirit; his liberty to side with the flesh is but too evident. And therefore the words [CANNOT SIN] must be taken, not Physicè but Ethicè, Not for a natural impo∣tency but a moral one, he cannot do it Legal∣ly, or at averseness of minde, which notwith∣standing is capable of being altered. 'Tis said of Christ sometimes, that Id possumus, quod jure possumus. He could doe no mighty work. Mark 6. 5. and so 'tis said that the brethren of Joseph could not answer him Gen. 45. 3. And the Angel could doe nothing against Sodom till Lot were escaped into Zoar. Gen. 19. 22. [See Ios. 24. 19, 21.] And 'tis usual in our common speech to say, we cannot do a thing; when the thing is not impossible to be done, but only it is unlawful or inconvenient for us to do it. If we set aside the inconvenience and step over the hedge of the law (as many times we do) we can finde power enough to do it. And so it is here. Therefore to that of our Saviour Mat. 7. 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. S. Hierome addeth, Quam∣diù in bonitatis studio perseverat, as long as it perseveres in the study and love of goodnesse. Thus he that is born of God, whiles he acteth
according to the nature of the principles of his new birth, and studies to follow and resem∣ble his heavenly Father, He cannot deliberate∣ly yield to any kinde of sin. Haec non admit∣tet omnino qui natus è Deo fuerit, non fu∣turus Dei filius si admiserit, saith Tertullian. He that is born of God will not at all admit such sins as these; he shall not be a childe of God if he doth admit them. As for that guard you men∣tion out of St. Peter [They are kept by the pow∣er of God.] We must consider that we are to add a guard of our own to it, as is required Jud. ep. ver. 20, 21. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, Keep your selves in the love of God. And S. Peter addes [through faith] 1 Pet. 1. 5. The Psalmist saith, Except the Lord keepeth the City, the watchman waketh but in vain: but he doth not say, the Lord will Keep the City, whether the Watchman waketh, yea or no: He that setteth the watch, and is Captain of the guard over us he saith, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; and we can promise our selves safety no longer then we are upon our duty. 1 Joh. 5. 18. He that is be∣gotten of God, keepeth himself and that wicked one toucheth him not. That is the effect or e∣vent of his duty, if he be careful to observe it. But (though Christ hath freed us from the do∣minion of the enemy, yet if we do voluntarily
render our selves up again to his power, his servants we are, to whom we obey. Rom. 6. 14, 16. r if we quit our guard, and suffer our selves to be surprised through our wilfull carelesnesse, we are involved in a like thraldome; for of whom a man is overcom, of the same is he brought in bondage. 2 Pet. 2. 19. Mr. Indefectible. Sir, The Apostle hath taught us to distinguish betwixt, a sin unto death, and a sinne not unto death. 1 Ioh. 5. We confesse the Regenerate may fall into sin, but not into sinne unto death. Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord up∣holdeth him with his hand. Psal. 37. 24. Dr. Dubius. For that place of the Psalmist, the context doth cleer the meaning to be of fal∣ling, not into sin, but into affliction and misery. Yet I do not deny, but God out of his abun∣dant mercy, is ready (in a way agreeable to his wisdom and justice) to assist such as fall into sin, in order to their rising again. But I am in some doubt whether the regenerate may not sin a sin unto death; and that as well if you con∣sider the event, as the demerit of his sin; For the Moderate (and those not infe∣riour Vid. Synops. pur. theo. disp. 31. thes. 38. Sy∣nod. Dordra. c. 5. Art. 4. & 5. in learning to the more rigid) of the Synod of Dort do acknow∣ledge, that the regenerate may not onely fall from certain degrees of grace, and in∣termit the Acts of grace: but likewise that they
may fall into such sins as leave them under a damnable guilt, so that they have need of an actual renuall of repentance, and a new absoluti∣on: that they lose their present aptnesse to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, into which no un∣clean thing shall enter. And that David and Solomon fell thus farr, will be evident, if you consider the nature of their sinnes, and apply these following Scriptures to them. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 21. Apoc. 21. 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 15. Now let us consider whether it be not pos∣sible for a man that is fall'n into this estate and condition, to be cut off in his sins, before his repentance be renewed, and his new absolution received, to remove his guilt, and restore him to an aptitude, and a present actuall capacity to enter into the kingdom of heaven. If it be possible for him to be cut off in this conditi∣on, then it will follow, that either he shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven at all; or else there must be some purgatory after this life (for him to passe thorow) to clense and fit him for heaven; which Protestants will not admit of. But if we say, it is not possible for such a man to be cut off in his sin; then it must follow, (1.) That he hath a lease of his life granted, till his restauration; which will be a hard matter to make appear; and (2) that God is bound by some Covenant or promise to afford him, as well grace as time to repent, and this will be as
hard to evidence, as the former; for, I presume, 'tis not to be denied, that there is required, a greater measure of grace to raise up such a sin∣ner being fall'n, then to keep him while he stood, from falling; Now if God's Covenant and promise, did not binde him to give that less measure of grace to keep him actually from falling, how can we perswade our selves that he is bound by it, to conferr that greater mea∣sure of grace, whereby he shall actually arise: Mr. Indefectible. The Apostle tell's the Philippi∣ans, he is confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in them, will perform (or finish) it untill the day of Iesus Christ. Phil. 1. 6. Dr. Dubius. I need not say, the Apostle's perswasion is not alwayes an infallible argu∣ment of Gods purpose. [Act. 16. 6, 7.] for he had a perswasion of charitie, as well as of faith, [Heb. 6 9.] and that his perswasion touching the Philippians was of this nature, appeares by the verse following, that which is alleaged. But I say, God doth as well carry on, as begin the work of grace in mans heart, in such a way as doth not evacuate but establish the necessity of mans duty; and therefore, he backs that his confidence, with a vehement exhortati∣on. Chap. 2. 12, 13. As ye have alwayes obeyed, work out your own salvation with fear and with trembling, for it is God, that worketh in you to will and to do, of his good pleasure. And
we may observe in the Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia. Where God makes a promise, to preserve him in a time of triall then at hand (though that promise was something of the nature of a reward, being made to him upon a consideration of his for∣mer fidelity, yet) he subjoynes an obligation of duty. Apoc. 3. 8. Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my Word, and hast not denied my Name: Verse 10. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell upon the earth. But to shew that his own care and constancy was re∣quisite in order to the accomplishment of that promise; he add's, Vers. 11. Behold, I come quickly, hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy Crown. Notwithstanding God's Promise, if we grow carelesse, we may forseit our reward, and incurr damnation, as is clear∣ly threatned. [Ezek. 18. 24.] But when the righ∣teous turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth iniquity, and doth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doth; shall he live? all his righteousnesse that he hath done, shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. Mr. Indefectible. How can this consist with God's Covenant and promise. Ier. 32. 40. I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my feare in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Dr. Dubius. That God doth not engage himself in that place, to conferre upon his peo∣ple an irresistible power of grace, infallibly to effect the gift of perseverance in them, will be manifest, if we consider that the Covenant there mentioned, concern'd the people of the Iewes, and conteined the favour that God would vouch safe to doe them presently upon their return from the Babylonish Captivitie, as ap∣pears cleerly in the fore-going and follow∣ing verses, and yet through their fault, and want of complyance, this did not take ef∣fect, their renewed defection crost God's pro∣mise, and the event happened far otherwise; for if you consider that people soon after their return from that Captivitie, they grew worse and worse, as appears Nehemiah the last; and if you will refer the fulfilling of the promise till after the exhibition of the Messias (though that is against the scope of the words, yet) then they grew worst of all. They resisted the Holy Ghost. Act. 7. 5. and rejected the Counsell of God against themselves. Luk. 7. 30. and judged them∣selves unworthy of eternal life, blaspheming and persecuting the Author, means and ministery of it, Act. 13. 45, 46, 50, and so were cut off for
their wilfull unbelief. Rom. 9. 32. In the Cove∣nant therefore we are to consider two things. 1. A Promise on Gods part; and 2. A stipula∣tion of duty on their part, who are concerned in the promise. The Promise on Gods part is. [I will be their God, and I will not (that is of my self, or without provocation) turn away from them to doe them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts: But to what end is all this? why, that they may be my people, and fear me, as my people, and not depart from me, (as is exprest in the 39. and 40. verses of that Chapter.) This then being a voluntary duty which God requires, we must not imagine it to be intima∣ted, as the infallible effect or event of his pro∣mise, but as the end why he makes that pro∣mise to them, and the Ingagement which it puts upon them. But if they will not choose to have the fear of God before their eyes, and to ex∣cite that grace, which he puts into their hearts, but out of an evill heart of unbelief, depart from the living God; they, by this their prevaricati∣on and apostacy (becomming Non populus) ceasing to be his people, he ceaseth likewise to be their God. Thus the Spirit of God by Azariah, hath resolved it to Asa and all Iudah and Benjamin, 2 Chron. 15. 2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if yee seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Yea, and cast you off for ever;
as David addeth to his Son Solomon. 1 Chron. 28. 9.] So that there is a kind of reciprocal ingagement betwixt God and man, and some∣thing is to be performed by either party in or∣der to salvation. Now it so happens many times, that all, which is promised to be done on God's part, is effectually done in regard of the sufficiency of it, and yet nothing done, that is required to be done on mans part, in respect of the event. [See 2 Tim. 2. 13.] Hence it is that sometimes God is said to have done all (viz. all his part) Ezek 24, 13. I have purged thee, but thou wast not purged; and for my part, what could have been done more? Isai. 5. 4. Sometimes again, he is said to have done no∣thing. Isa 53. 1. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? that is, in respect of the effect, or the event, for God was not wanting in sending his Prophets to make the Revelation. So Deut. 29 4. The Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and eares to hear unto this day. Not that God was wanting in af∣fording necessary means and assistance hereun∣to (for then Moses should rather have upbrai∣ded God's illiberalitie, than the Prophets Ob∣stinacie,) which he had no reason to do, God having wrought so many signes and miracles of mercy for them, and of justice upon their ene∣mies, as many times gained credit and ac∣knowledgement amongst the Egyptians, and
other nations as they past along, and captiva∣ted the understanding, and subdued the will and affections of Ioshuah and Caleb.) but God is said, not to have given them hearts, &c. in regard of the event; because though he had administred abundant means to that purpose, yet through their wilful obduration, he could not prevail so far with them, they had frustra∣ted the effect (as 'tis said of our Saviours Country-men in respect of his ministery, Mat. 13. 58.) and therefore Moses, must not be thought, to excuse them by laying their blind∣ness and stubbornness at Gods door, but to upbraid them, that they had made their hearts so impenetrable (hitherto) to all those gratious and powerful dispensations, that by them, though sufficient, God had not effect∣ed such an advertencie, as might have begot∣ten a willingness throughly to confide in him and obey in him, [verse 6. this was the end, which God seriously intended, and aimed at. Mr. Indefectible. This is inconsistent with that of the Apostle, Rom. 11. 29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Dr. Dubius. Sir, It will be a very hard matter to draw an argument from that Scrip∣ture to infer your conclusion. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Ergo, what? The regenerate cannot fall from grace, and their interest in Gods favour? Which is a
plain non sequitur. It does not follow. For of whom speaketh the Apostle that? Doth he not speak it of the Israelites? And yet he tells you but ten verses before, that they were bro∣ken off for their unbelief. All that can be con∣cluded from those words will amount but to this, that God is so faithful and tenacious of his promise, (wherewith he had gratified their fathers) that (as 'tis verse 23.) If they abide not still in unbelief, he is no less willing and ready, than able to graft them into the Co∣venant again. And upon this occasion, (my brethren,) give me leave to acquaint you with a few more of my doubts and scruples, in order to my better satisfaction and settlement in these points; for I hope you will not mi∣stake me, as if I were peremptory in my asser∣tions; for I speak only tentative, to trie, whether I can draw out of you, any better arguments or answers to objections, then I have hitherto met with, in those that have handled these controversies. I tell you then, that the Text last quoted with some other pas∣sages in the 9, 10, 11. Chapters of that Epistle to the Romans, have begotten a great doubt in me; whether, the Apostle in his discourse (Chapt. 9.) treateth at all, of that absolute and peremptory decree of Reprobation, whereby men are irrevocably excluded from salvation, and all the necessary means that lead to it.
Let me give you the reasons of my doubt∣ing. Mr. Preterition. I am afraid we shall not have time now to examine them, yet seeing you are so desirous, let us have them briefly, that we may be the better prepared to deliver our opinion about them at our next meeting. Dr. Dubius. Then take them thus. I sup∣pose it will be granted, that the Apostle, in those Chapters applies his discourse more e∣specially to the case of the Jews, yet haply so, as to conclude all others in their example. If so, then, that he speaks not of their absolute and peremptory reprobation, is very probable, not only from his way of arguing, but also from his passionate sorrow, hearty prayer, and earnest exhortations to them. 1. Let us reflect upon the Apostle's sorrow, and his option upon it, Chap. 9. verse 2, 3. I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could wish that my self were accur∣sed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh. What is the ground of this heaviness and his vote upon it? If it were that God, by an absolute decree of reprobation, and out of his sole beneplaciture had excluded them from the grace and power of believing unto righteousness and salvation; (as some interpret it,) then, where was the pietie of the great Apostle exprest in this sorrow? Where was
his prudence in this option? For if such were the decree God, and the Apostle knew it, and was about to demonstrate it to be such, he must grant it to be most wise, and most just, and much conducing to the illustration of Gods glorie; and then 'twere impietie in any man (much more in him, who was therefore cal∣led a vessel of Election, because he was design∣ed and called so eminently to be instrumental to the glory of the divine dispensations) to re∣pine and grieve at it. And if he knew such a divine decree, to be immutably fixt to all e∣ternitie; it was against prudence to interpose such a wish for the avoidance of it. If the common opinion be true, that in respect of the manifestation of the divine glory, it is better and more Eligible to be miserable than not to be at all, (and it be out of an erroneous and inor∣dinate judgement, that the very damned in hell-torments judge otherwise, as some great School-men maintain (then certainly we must set an ill Character upon the Apostles sorrow and option, if we make that the cause and ground of it alledged in this supposition. And it will not excuse, to say this vote past the A∣postle in the hurry of his passions, or that it was but a sudden sally of his affections, in their eager pursuit after the salvation of his nation; for all the circumstances of the discourse, and that solemn preface wherewith it is ushered in,
do manifestly argue, that 'twas uttered con∣siderately, and with great deliberation. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, Chap. 9. 1. and 'tis a sufficient indication of his calm and composed minde, that he did commit this option to writing and transmit it in an Epistle to the Churches. 2. To this let us adde his prayer, Chap. 10. 1. Brethren my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. What Israel he means is expressed in the 3. verse, they [who] being ignorant of God's righteous∣ness; went about to establish their own righte∣ousness, and did not submit themselves to the righteousness of God. How can this prayer or option of the Apostle consist with his know∣ledge or belief of their absolute and peremptory reprobation? For his prayer (according to that opinion) must be after this manner: Lord I know by Divine revelation, (and am now decla∣ring it, in an Epistle to the Romans, and so to all the world) that it is thine absolute will and good pleasure, utterly and irrevocably to aban∣don this people under an immutable decree of re∣pentance; yet I do most heartily desire, and be∣seech thee, to grant that they may be saved. Such a prayer had been directly against his faith, and therefore sin, (Rom. 14. 23.) and against the very Rule of prayer, and obedience
in that kinde, [Thy will be done] and so sin too. Sure the Apostle (after his conversion) was not wont, thus to break his faith and cross the counsel of his maker. 3. To this we may adde all other his en∣deavours and stratagems to gain them to the faith of Christ, and consequently to salvation: of which we read, Rom. 11. 14. and else where. All which had been as ridiculous as the incounters of the Knight Errant. in Don Quixot, if the Apostle had believed these men to be absolutely excluded, from all possibility of salvation, by such a decree as some fancy to be treated of in that ninth Chapter. 4. I conceive my doubt more reasonable, when I consider the Apostles way of arguing, [Rom. 11. 1.] For (to intimate (at least ac∣cording to my apprehension) that the ground of his sorrow was, (not their absolute irrespe∣ctive and irrevocable reprobation, but) the dan∣ger of their rejection from the Covenant and divine grace, wherein they had hitherto stood, as God's peculiar adopted people) 1. He makes their own wilful unbelief, the cause and ground of this their rejection and miserie, Rom. 11. 20. Because of unbelief, they were broken off; which cannot be said of the decree of Reprobation; for the maintainers of that decree, do not make unbelief the cause of re∣probation, but rather reprobation the cause of
unbelief. 2. He saith there is a possibilitie, and hope of their restitution. This is intimated, Rom. 11. 11, & 29. and exprest verse 23. If they abide not still in unbelief, they shall be graf∣ted in; for God is able to graft them in again. And this cannot be said with respect to the decree of Reprobation; for the decree of God is God himself (as Maccovius, and others do affirm, and so did Gomarus, Vide Gomar. Tom. 3. Disp. 9. Thes. 28. &c. till being impugned by Arminius he changed his opinion in this par∣ticular) and God cannot denie himself, 2 Tim. 2. 13. Besides, the men of that opinion, lay the foundation of all mercy and judgement to come, in those their absolute decrees of Electi∣on and reprobation; and make Christ but a part of the superstruction, or the Executor of those decrees; whereas this Apostle saith, other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And we may observe, that consonantly hereunto, he shutteth up that his discourse, Rom. 9. 30. What shall we say then? Or, what is the summe of all that hath been spoken? Name∣ly this; That the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteous∣ness, even the righteousness which is of faith: But Israel which followed after the Law of righ∣teousness, hath not attained to the Law of righ∣teousness. Wherefore? (not, because they
were excluded by an absolute and irresistible decree, as the Apostle should have said (if he had argued regularly) according to that opinion, but) because they sought it not by faith, (as they were taught, and inabled and obliged to do) but as it were by the works of the law: for they (quitting the only foundation) stumbled at the stumbling stone; as it is writ∣ten, Behold I set up in Sion (the deliverer of Jacob, whom they shall take occasion to make) a stumbling stone, and (through their wilful infidelitie and perverseness he shall be∣come to them) a rock of offence: but whosoe∣ver buildeth upon him by a lively faith and a ho∣ly obedience, shall not be confounded, verses 31, 32, 33. For as he hath tasted death for eve∣ry man; [Heb. 2. 9. 1 Gor. 8. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1.] according to the Scriptures, even for them that perish; and bought with the price of his heart blood, them that denie him, as St. Peter saith: so the father would not that any should perish, but [2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Tim. 2. 4.] That all should come to repentance and be saved; and to that end He now commandeth all men every where to repent, [Acts 17. 30.] and to kiss the Son, [Psal. 2.] and submit to his scep∣ter; who is the propitiation for their sins, and the sins of the whole world, [1 John 2. 2.] ha∣ving made our otnement and our peace, [Col. 1. 20.] and purchased grace and eternal re∣demption
for us: [Rom. 5. 11. John 1. 16. Heb. 9. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Heb. 12. 28.] suffi∣cient abilities and glorious priviledges, where∣by we might be inabled and incouraged to serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear, and is the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. These are all express parts of the divine Revelation, and therefore part of the object of our faith, and therefore infallible assertions of sacred truth. What slender distinctions are invented, and what Texts of Scripture wrested to elude some of them, I shall take my opportunitie to re∣present, when you will vouchsafe to give me a friendly meeting, to debate these and other emergent doubts, touching these great points of controversie. In the mean time, I could wish, you would not exclude from the exer∣cise of their ministery, men legally ordained thereunto, if they be otherwise well qualified, though they differ somewhat from you in these matters. But I am single, and must sub∣mit my vote to the suffrages of my bre∣thren. Chair-man. Brother Doctor, we may think upon your advise and doubts hereafter; but for the present we must agree as one man to carry on the great work of reformation, we have in hand; and therefore, Gentlemen, what say you to Mr. Tilenus? Do you approve of
him as a man well gifted and fitly qualified for the Ministery. Mr. Faality Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles. Mr. Preerition Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles. Mr. Indefectible and the rest Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles. Call him in. Chairman. Sr, The Commissioners are not satisfied in your Certificate. You may be a godly man, we do not deny, but we have not such assurance of it, as we can build upon, and therefore we cannot approve of you for the Ministery; and that you may be at no more expense of purse or time in your atten∣dance, we wish you to return home, and think upon some other imployment. Tilenus. Sr, I could wish I might be ac∣quainted with the reason of this my reprobati∣on, unless the Decree that governs your Votes, or proceeds from them, be irrespective. I think I am not so ill beloved amongst the most learned of the Godly Clergy (though differing a little in judgment from me) but I can procure a full Certificate from the chiefest and most moderate of them. Chairman. That is not all the matter we have against you; what have we to do with moderate men? we see your temper and want
of modesty in that expression, and therefore you may be gone. Tilenus. Then Gentlemen, I shall take my leave, and commend you to more sober Coun∣sels and resolutions. Isaiah 9. 16. The leaders of this people [Heb. they that call them blessed] Cause them to erre. Jer. 23. 30. Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my word every one from his neighbour. Luk. 11. 52. Ye take away the key of knowledge. Ier. 23. 32. Behold I am against them that Prophesie false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to erre by their lyes, and their lightness. Mat. 15. 6. & Mark 7. 13. Thus have ye made the word of God of none effect by your tradition.
Ezek. 34. 4, 5. The diseased have ye not strengthened, nei∣ther have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with force and with cruelty have ye ru∣led them. And they were scattered, because there is no shepheard. 1 Tim. 6. 3-5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholsome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is accord∣ing to godliness,—From such withdraw thy thy self; For if the blinde lead the blinde, they shall both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15. 14. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men. 2 Tim. 3. 9.
THE FIVE ARTICLES Controverted betwixt the REMONSTRANTS, and CONTRA-REMONSTRANTS, Commonly called ARMINIANS and CALVINISTS.
To the Reader. WHEN those points of do∣ctrine maintained by Me∣lancthon and other Moderate Lutherans, to be managed by the acute wit, Solid judgment, and great Learn∣ing of James Hermine, Publick Reader in the University of Leiden, they appear∣ed to the unprejudiced Examiners, so much more consonant, as well to the sa∣cred Scriptures and right Reason, as to primitive Antiquity, and so much more agreeable to the Mercy and Justice and Wisdome of Almighty God, and so much more conducing unto Piety, then the tenents of the rigid Calvinists, that they quickly found a cheerful reception and great multi∣tudes of followers in the Belgick Churches. Hereupon their Adversaries (having so passionately espoused the contrary opinions, and being so vehemently carried on with a prejudice against these) that they might the more effectually decry and suppress the Pro∣pugnators of them, caused some of their
Confidents to repesent them and their do∣ctrine under such odious Characters as were indeed proper to their own opinions. It was given out, that among their Heresies, they held; First, that God was the Author sin and Secondly, that he created the farre greatest part of mankinde onely of pur∣pose to glorifie himself in their damnati∣on, with several others of like nature; which indeed are, not only the Consequence and Results of Calvins Doctrine, but posi∣tively maintained and propagated by some of his followers. That thy credulity, [Good Reader,] may not be abused and betrayed by such practi∣ces, the following papers are hereunto annex∣ed, to give thee, in a short view, a true ac∣count of the difference that is betwixt the disagreeing Parties, with the grounds thereof. Farewell.
The first Article touching Predestination. What the Remonstrants hold. THAT God to the glory and praise of his abundant goodness, having decreed to make man after his own image, and to give him an easie and most equal law, and adde thereunto a threatning of death to the transgressors thereof, and foreseeing that Adam would wilfully transgress the same, and thereby make himself and his posterity lyable to condemnation; though God was notwith∣standing mercifully affected towards man, yet out of respect to his justice and truth, would not give way to his mercy to save man, till his justice should be satisfied, and his serious ha∣tred of sin and love of righteousness be made known. Proofes out of Scripture. After his own Image. Gen. 1. 26, 27. So God created man after his own image. See Col. 3. 10. Eph. 4. 24.
An easie law &c. Gen 2. 16, 17. Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat. See Rom. 2. 14, 15. Levit. 18. 5. Ezek. 20. 11. Rom. 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Added thereto a threatning of death. Gen. 2. 17, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Foreseeing that Adam, &c. Isa. 44. 7. And who, as I shall call and shall declare it,—and the things that are coming and shall come. See Isa. 41. 22, 23. Act. 15. 18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. And all mans works too, Psal. 139. 2. Thou under∣standest my thoughts afarre off. See Gen. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Tim. 2, 13, 14. Eccles. 7. 29. See Isa. 45. 21. Liable to condemnation, &c. Rom. 3. 23. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God. Rom. 5. 12-18, 19. By one man sin entred into the world and death by sin. Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. See Act. 17. 26. Heb. 7. 10. Job 14. 1. &c. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 3. with Rev. 2. 7. Gen. 3. 24. Deut. 27. 26. with Gal. 3. 10. Jam. 2. 10. Mercifully affected &c. Exod. 34. 6. The Lord God merciful and gracious. 1 Joh. 4. 19. He loved us first. See ver. 11. Jona. 4. 2. Thou art a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger. So 2 Chron. 30. 9. Psal. 86. 5, 15. For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive—a God full of
compassion and gracious. Psal. 103. 8. 13. The Lord is slow to anger. As a father pittieth his children. Psal. 111. 4. and 145. 8, 9. His tender mercies are over all his works. Rom. 2. 4. the riches of his goodnesse, and forbearance and long∣suffering. Luk 6. 36. Be ye mercifull, as your fa∣ther is mercifull. See Isa. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 20. Io∣el 2. 13. Num. 14. 18, 19. Neh. 9. 17. Deut. 5. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 18. Respect to his justice. Ex. 34. 7. He will by no means clear the guilty. Psal. 5. 4. For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickednesse, neither shall evill dwell with the. Isa. 59. 2. your iniquities have separated, &c. And to his truth. Gen. 2. 17. thou shalt die the death, and he is a God that cannot lie, nor repent, nor deny himself. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Num. 23. 19. 2 Tim. 2. 13. Till justice be satisfied. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 10. The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all; and made his soul an offering for sin. He was woun∣ded for our transgressions. Luk. 24. 26, 46. Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. 1 Pet. 3. 18. the just for the unjust. Mat. 20, 28. To give his life a ran∣som for many, and 1 Tim. 2. 6. Psal. 69. 4. I restored that which I took not away. See Phil. 2, 7, 8. Matth. 3. 15. c. 5. 17. Gen. 3. 15. Mar. 10 45. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. Luk. 2. 14. His hatred of sin, &c. Psal. 5. 4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickednesse,
thou hatest, and abhorrest, &c. Psal. 45. 7. thou hatest iniquity. Prov. 11. 20. The froward are abomination to the Lord. Isa. 59. 2. your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you. See Psal. 7. 11, 12. Isa. 65. 12. And love of righteousnesse. Psal. 45. 7. Thou lovest righteousnesse, Rom. 3. 24, 25, 26. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, to declare his righteousnesse: that he might be just, &c. He is the avenger of unrighteousnesse. And therefore I. For the satisfying of his justice, he did or∣dain the Mediatour Jesus Christ, who should be made a sacrifice for sinfull men, suffer Death for them, and by his blood, shed for their re∣conciliation, obtaine right of saving them upon termes befittting mercy and justice. Proofs out of Holy Scripture. Ordained the Mediator, Isa. 9. 6. To us a son is given. Ioh. 3. 16. So God loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten son. 1 Ioh. 4. 9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his onely be∣gotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to bee the propitiation for our sinnes. Rom. 5. 8. &c. But God commendeth his love towards us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 1 Tim. 2. 5, 6. For there is one God and one Me∣diatour between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. See Hebr. 12. 2. with 24, 25 verses. Made a sacrifice, and suffered death. Phil. 2. 8. He became obedient unto death. Ioh. 10, 11, 15. 17, 18. I lay down my life for my sheep. Se Ioh. 15. 13. Heb. 2. 9. He tasted death for eve∣ry man. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Christ died for our sinnes, Rom. 4. 25. c. 6. 10. He died unto sinne once. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self hare our sins in his own body, on the tree. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us. Isai. 53. 10. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin. Ephes. 2. 2. Who loved us, and gave himself for us, an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. He is the propitiation for our sins. Rom. 3. 25. Whom God hath set forth to be a pro∣pitiation through faith in his blood. See Hebr. 5. 1. &c. c. 8. 3. &c. c, 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 32, 26, 77, 28. c. 10. 5. 10. 12, 14. He is the lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world. Ioh. 1. 29. He gave his life a ransom. Mark 10. 45. and purged our sinnes. Hebr. 1. 3. He was made sin for us. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Made a curse. Gal. 3. 13. To redeem us that were under the Law, and delive∣red
us from the curse of the Law. Gal. 3. 13. and the power of darknesse. Col. 1. 13. and the fear of death. Heb. 2. 14. Hos. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55. and from the wrath to come. 1 Thes. 1. 10. Rom. 5. 9. and obtained eternal redemption for us. Hebr. 9. 12. Luk. 1. 60. 8. 2 Tim. 1. 10. By his blood shed for their reconciliation. Matt. 26. 28. This is my blood of the new Testa∣ment, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Rev. 1. 5. and washed us from our sins in his own blood. See Revel. 5. 6. 12. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 18, &c. God was in Christ reconciling the vvorld to himself. Rom. 5. 10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Having made peace through the blood of his Crosse. See Col. 1. 20, 21, 22. & ch. 2. 12, 13, 14. and Ephes. 2. 13. & 18. through him we have accesse unto the father. Obtain right of saving, &c. Isa. 53. 10, 11. He shall see his seed, and justifie many. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price. Act. 20. 28. Which he (God) hath purchased with his own blood. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 11. 27. [Mat. 28. 18.] All are delivered unto me of my father. Ioh. 3. 35. and Ioh. 5. 22. [See Ioh. 17. 2.] The Father hath committed all judgement unto the Sonne. Mat. 18. 11. Luk. 19. 10. The Son of man is come to seek & save that which was lost. See Heb. 2. 14. 15, 16, 17. In whom we have redemption. Col. 1. 14. Eph. 1. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3. Rev. 3. 14.
Upon terms befitting, &c. 1 John 3. 8. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, Mat. 1. 21. [see Rom. 6. 1, 2. Ephes. 1. 4, 6.] For he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 9. 13. I am come to call sinners to repen∣tance, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 14. That he might re∣deem us from all iniquitie, and from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. And purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Rev. 5. 9. He hath redeemed us unto God, that we might become servants to God, [1 Pet. 4. 1, 2.] And have our fruit unto holiness, Rom. 6. 22. And live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Rom. 8. 3. c. 10. 4. That the Lord God might dwell amongst us, Psal. 68. 18. And We live to him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Rom. 14. 9. [Heb. 5. 9.] and set forth his praise and glorie, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 30. Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. II. Upon the Consideration of his blood, as shed, he decreed that all those, who should believe in that Redeemer, and persevere in that faith; should through mercy and grace, by him be made partakers of salvation: but such,
as would not believe in him, but die in infi∣delitie, should therefore be punished with e∣ternal death; Reprobation being decreed upon precedent infidelitie and dying therein. Proofes out of Scripture. His blood, as shed, &c. Rev. 13. 8. The lamb, slain from the foundation of the world, Isa. 42. 1. [see 1 Pet. 1. 20.] Behold my ser∣vant whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my soul delighteth, Isa 49. 3. Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified, See a Tim. 1. 9. Before the world began. Who should believe, &c. Iohn 3. 14, 15, 16, 36. That whosoever believeth in him should not pe∣rish, but have everlasting life: He that belie∣veth on the Son hath everlasting life, John 6. 40. And this is the will of him, that sent me, that every one which seeth the son and believeth on him, may have everlasting life, see verse 47, 54, 58. Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the son of God, 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7. Whosoever belie∣veth on him shall not be confounded, see Rom. 9. 30, 33. Mark 16. 16. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 5. who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, Heb. 10. 38. Now the just shall live by faith, Rom. 11. 20. Thou standest by faith, Rom. 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it
might be by grace, &c. 1 Tim. 4. 10. The Saviour of them that believe, John 5. 24. Ve∣rily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condem∣nation: but is passed from death to life, 1 John 4. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, Acts 15. 11. We believe that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved. And persevere, &c. Rom. 2. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, Mat. 24. 13, 46. [1 Tim. 2. 15.] But he that shall indure unto the end, the same shall be saved. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall finde so doing, 2 John v. 9. He that abideth in the doctrin of Christ, hath the father and the Son, 1 Iohn 2. 24. If that, which ye have heard from the beginning shall re∣main in you, Rom. 11. 22. if ye continue in his goodnes, Col. 1. 23. Chap. 2. 5,6,7,8. If ye con∣tinue in the faith, rooted and built up, Heb. 3. 6, 12, 14. If ye hold fast-stedfastly unto the end, Rom. 8. 13. If ye mortisie the deeds of the body, Heb. 10. 35. ad finem. Cast not away your confidence, Rev. 2. 25. c. 3. 11. Hold fast till I come, that no man take thy crown, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Beware lest being led away with the errour of the wicked, ye fall from
your own stedfastness. But grow in grace, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, 2 Tim. 2. 5, 12. If a man strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully: if we denie him, he also will denie us, Rev. 2. 11, 17, 26. Chap. 3. 12, 21. To him that overcometh will I give of the hidden Manna; and grant to sit with me on my throne, and make him a pillar, and he shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faith∣ful unto the death, and I will give the a crown of life, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, see Iob 27. 3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 8. 15. Such as would not believe, but die in infi∣delitie, &c. Mar. 16. 16. He that believeth not shall be damned, Iohn 3. 18, 36. He that be∣lieveth not is condemned already, the wrath of God abideth on him, 2 Iohn v. 9. Whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrin of Christ, hath not God, [see Isa. 27. 11.] Rom. 11. 20. because of unbelief they were broken off, Rom 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death, Psal. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell: Psal. 11. 6. Ʋpon the ungodly he shall rain snares, &c. See Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, &c. shall have their portion in the lake that burneth with
fire and brimstone: Rev 22. 15. See the place Ephes. 5. 5, 6. Because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedi∣ence: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not deceived, the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdome of God: See Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Iohn 3. 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love dark∣ness rather then light. 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8. The Lord shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire taking vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ. See Mat. 13. 41, 42, 49, 50. Chap. 25. 41, 43. Wherefore if thine eye offend thee, &c. Mark 9. 43. to 49. See Heb. 11. 6. Ch. 12. 14. Rev. 21. the last. Ezek. 18. 26. Mat. 3. 10, 12. Chap. 5. 20. III. And because sinful man could not possibly of himself by his natural abilitie, believe in this Redeemer, and persevere in such faith, he decreed to afford man means sufficient and ne∣cessary (as he saw befitting his own wisdome and justice) for the working of faith and re∣pentance, whereby man might be inabled to believe, or more and more prepared and in cer∣tain steps or degrees brought on at length to true faith.
Proofes out of Scripture. Not of himself &c. Mat 6. 27. Which of you by taking thought can adde one Cubit unto his sta∣ture? Iob 9. 19, 20. If I speak of strength, loe he is strong. Hos. 13. 9. Thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Isa. 43. 1. c. 45. 21. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Saviour. Prov. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart: and lean not to thine own understand∣ing. Isa. 5. 21. ch. 31. 1. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes: but look not unto the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. Not be∣lieve by his natural ability &c. Rom. 5. 6. ch. 8. 3. Without strength. [See a Cor. 4. 6.] 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves. See Rom. 11. 32. Gal. 3. 22. Ioh. 3. 3, 5. Mat. 12. 33, 35. Make the tree good, and (then) the fruit good: 1 Cor. 3. 4. God giveth the increase. Phil. 1. 29. Ʋnto you it is given. Act. 16. 14. Whose heart the Lord opened Phil. 2. 13. It is God which worketh in you both to will and to doe. See Ezek. 36. 22. Mat. 16. 17. Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee: Lam. 1. 17. Every good gift is from above &c. Joh. 6. 44, 65. Except the father draw him. Mat. 11. 27. Nei∣ther knoweth any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. John 15. 5. Without me ye can doe nothing.
1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost. Eph. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God. See Rom. 4. 16. ch. 5. 15. &c. ch. 6. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God I am what I am. Gal. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 3. Who have obtained like precious faith with us, according as his divine power hath given us all things that pertain unto life and god∣liness. Eph. 3. 14. &c. ch. 6. 23. Rev. 1. 4. Grace and peace from God the Father &c. 1 Cor. 1. 3. He that glorieth let him glory in the Lord. See Rom. 1. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 3. Nor persevere in such &c. Ioh. 15. 5. He that abideth in me and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. Heb. 12. 2. Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith. 2 Thess. 2. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God even our Father, which hath loved us and given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and worke. 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all grace make you per∣fect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. See Ephesians 3. 14. &c. Phil. 1. 6. Hebr. 13. 20. Means sufficient and necessary. &c. Rom. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son- [See Rom. 10. 14. &c. 2 Tim. 1. 9, 10. Isa. 59. last.] How shall he not with him also freely give us all
things. Eph. 1. 3. He hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. Isa. 49, 6, 8, 9. ch. 42. 7. That thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. To open the blinde eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. I will give thee for a Covenant to the people. To per∣form the promise—that he would grant unto us [a Power] that we might serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse—all the dayes of our life. S. Luke 1, 72, to 76. 2 Pet. 1. 3. His Divine power hath given unto us all things, that pertain to life and godlinesse. Mat. 25. 14, 15, 27, 29. He gave unto them his talents. Mat. 13. 11, 12. To you it is given to know. Act. 2. 4, 5, 39, 41. The promise is to you and your children—Luke 10. 9. The kingdome of God is come nigh unto you. Isa. 65. 1. Rom. 10. 20. I was made manifest to them that enquired not after me. Tit. 2. 11, 12. ch. 3. 5, 6. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation unto all men hath appear∣ed:—the renewing of the holy Ghost, which is shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour. [See Hebr. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Iam. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 15.] Rom. 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law but under grace. Mar. 4. 23, 24, 25. Luke 8. 18. To him that hath shall be given. Iohn 7. 17. If any man will do his will he shall know of the doctrine. Luke 11. 13. Act. 5. 32.
He will give the holy Spirit to them that aske and obey him. Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? Heb. 12. 28. wherefore let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reve∣rence and godly fear. IIII. Whence ariseth the last decree, concerning the salvation of this or that man in particular, who by these means should be brought unto faith, and persevere therein; this being the condition required in every one, that is to be elected unto eternal life: and the considerati∣on of this or that man in particular, who should die in unbelief. Proofes out of Scripture. The condition required in every one that is to be elected &c. Iam. 2. 5. Hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith? 2 Thess. 2. 13, 14. God hath from the begin∣ning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth, &c. 1 Pet. 1. 2. [Mark. 13. 20] Elect according to the fore∣knowledge of God the Father, through sanctifica∣tion of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Rom. 8. 29. Whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate. Rom. 9. 23. with 2 Tim. 2. 21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel of mercy, unto honour, &c. See Psal 4. 3 & 103. 17, 18. Rom. 10. 10, 11. and all those texts cited above under these heads [Who should be∣lieve—and persevere.] See Rom. 11. 4, 5. not bowed. And the consideration of this or that man, who should die in unbelief, &c. Exod. 32. 33. Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book. Numb. 14. 21, to 35. As truly as I live, saith the Lord, The very form of actual Repro∣bation. because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkned to my voice, surely they shall not see the land, which I sware unto their fa∣thers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it. And ye shall know my breach of pro∣mise. Heb. 3. 18, 19. And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them, that believed not: So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief. Now these things happened unto them for [types, (see the application, Heb. 4. 11.) or] ensamples unto us. 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Rom. 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. Because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high minded but fear; for if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he alse spare not thee. Behold there∣fore the goodnesse and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but towards thee, goodnesse; if thou continue in his goodnesse, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. 1 Chron. 28. 9. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 2 Tim. 2. 12. If we deny him, he will deny us. Ioh. 12. 46, 47, 48. He that rejecteth me—hath one that judgeth him. Iude, v. 6, 7. [2 Pet. 2. 4. 2 Thess. 2. 12.] The Angels which kept not their first estate and Sodom—giving themselves over to fornication: are set forth for an ensample. Ʋngodly men turning the grace ef our God into lasciviousnesse, Were before of old ordained to this condemnation, to whom is reserved the blacknesse of darknesse for ever. verse 4, 13. See 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. & 2 Pet. 2. 7. &c. See also the texts cited above, under this head [Such as would not believe, &c.] V. Christ is not only the executor of election, but the foundation of the decree it self. Proofs out of Scripture. The executor, &c. Iohn 3. 16. So God lo∣ved the world, that he gave his only begotten son.
Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other. Iohn 17. 3. This is life eternal to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Iohn 14. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Iohn 15. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in mee, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of glory. See 1 Cor. 2. 2. But the foundation, &c. Ephes. 3. 11, 12. According to the eternal purpose, which he pur∣posed in Christ Jesus our Lord: 2 Tim. 1. 9, 10. According to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Iesus before the world began. Iohn 1. 16, 17. Grace and truth came by Iesus Christ, and of his fulness. See Col. 1. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Rom. 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand. See Ephes. 3. 11. 12. and Ephes. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11. Blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ chosen in him, pre∣destinated us by him, made us accepted in him, In whom we have redemption, forgiveness, and an inheritance. Ephes. 2. 20, 21, 22. Jesus Christ being the Corner stone. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay. See the Text cited above under this head [made a sa∣crifice and suffered death.]
What the Remonstrants do utterly denie Concerning Predestination. I. They do utterly denie, that God decreed to elect some to eternal life, and to reprobate others from the same, before he decreed to create them. The Reason of this. Not to elect some, &c. For he hath chosen us in Christ. Ephes. 1. 4. But in Christ we can∣not be, unless we be considered, 1. As sin∣ners, 2. As believers; and therefore Crea∣tures, 1. As sinners. For 1 Tim. 1. 15. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, [See Mat. 1. 21. Iohn 1. 29. Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. John 6. 51. Heb. 2. 14. &c. 2 Cor. 5. 19. &c. See all the places cited for salvation by faith.] 2. As believers. For, John 1. 12. They that receive him are they that believe in his name. See Ephes. 3. 17. Not to reprobate others, &c. For reproba∣tion is an act of Gods hatred, who hateth nothing but sin and for sin, which the creature could not be guilty of before it had a being. Exod. 32.
33. [See Ezek. 18. 23. Chap. 33. 11.] Whoso∣ever hath sinned him will I blot out. Ezek. 18. 4, 20. The soul that sinneth, it shall die. See all those places where damnation is said to be for sin, especially for infidelitie. See also those places cited to shew Gods hatred of sin, and his inclination to mercy, as Exod. 33. 18, 19. Chap. 34. 6, 7. Lam. 3. 33. Psal. 145. 8, 9. Ezek. 33. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ezek. 18. 23, 32. Mat. 25. 41. Hell made for Devils. II. They do not hold, that any such decree in order before the decree of Creation, was made for the demonstration of the glory of Gods mercy and justice, or power and abso∣lute dominion. The Reason of this. 1. Ier. 18. 4. The vessel that he made of clay, was marred in the hand of the potter; so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it. See to the 10, 1. vers. [See Isa. 27. 11. last part. Hos. 9. 15.] (2.) Isa. 49. 8, & 6. verses. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people to restore Israel, and inlighten the Gentiles. And verse  Thou art my servant, O Israel, [Christ] in whom
I will be glorified: [See Iohn 15. v. 8 & Pro∣verbs 14. 28.] Consider what is noted before, and what followeth, for further evidence of this. III. They do utterly denie, that God did, with this intent, create all men in Adam, ordain the fall and permission thereof, withdraw from Adam grace necessary and sufficient, or procureth the Gospel to be preached, and men to be externally called, and bestoweth certain gifts of the Holy Ghost upon them, (and all this with this intent) that these should be means whereby he would bring some unto life, and disappoint others of the benefit thereof according to such decree. The reason hereof (in the several branches) is to be collected from the proof of the foregoing and following articles; yet that it may further appear. 1. That God did not create, &c. Consi∣der that He made man after his own image: Gen. 1. 27. 2. Gave him the tree of life. Gen. 2. 9. 3. That he hates sin: Psalm 5. 4, 5. Hab. 1. 13. 4. And cannot be tempted with evil James 1. 13, 14, 15, 17.
5. And desireth not the death of a sinner: Ezek. 18. 31. c. 33. 11. 6. That sin was from the suggestion of the Devil: Gen. 3. 1. 7. And mans voluntary compliance with him: Eccles. 7. 29. 2. That he procureth not the Gospel, &c. Consider, 1. He is merciful to all: Psalm 145. 8, 9. Acts 14. 16, 17. Chapter 17. 26, 27. Would not that any should perish: Ezek. 18. 23, 31. & Cha. 33. 11. [See John 3. 17. 2 Chron. 24. 19. But that all should come to faith and repentance: 1 Tim. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. And, 2. Christ having died for all: 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Heb. 2. 9. He invites all: Mat. 11. 28. And upbraids such as wilfully refuse to embrace his offered grace and salvation: Iohn 5. 34, 40. IV. They do utterly denie, that Christ the Me∣diator is only the executor of the decree of E∣lection, and not the foundation thereof. The places cited (above) in proof of the affir∣mative is sufficient reason hereof. And note here once for all, that whensoever the Affirma∣tive is sufficiently proved, the Negative is there∣by utterly overthrown; because both parts of a contradiction can never be true.
V. They do utterly deny, that the cause why some are effectually called, justified, perse∣vere in faith, and are glorified is, because they are absolutely elected to eternal life. The Reason. Acts 10. 34, 35. [See Gen. 4. 6, 7.] God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted with him. Rom. 10. 11, 12. For the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him, shall not be ashamed: for the same Lord over all, is rich un∣to all, that call upon him. See Jam. 2. 5. 2 Thes. 2. 13. and all the rest of those places cited above for the affirmative conditional Election. VI. They do utterly deny, that the cause why others are left in the lapse, and Christ not gi∣ven to them, and that they are not at all, or uneffectually called, and so hardened and damned, is, because they are reprobated from eternal life by an antecedent decree. The Reason.
Prov. 5. 22. [See Mic. 7. 18.] His own ini∣quities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin. Isa. 59. 2. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you. See the places cited above for the affirmative, viz. for respective reprobation. Al∣so the Texts cited for Christs satisfaction, and the administration of necessary and sufficient means unto salvation. VII. They do utterly deny, that God did de∣cree, without respect unto actual sins com∣ing between, to leave in the fall of Adam, the far greater part of mankinde shut out of all hope of salvation. The Reason. Gen. 3. 15. ch. 9. 8, 9. Isa. 49. 8. Christ is promised and given for a Covenant and means of restauration. Gen. 22. 16, 18. [See Rom. 1. 18. chap. 2. 8. Deut. 24. 16. 2 King. 14. 6. Eph. 5. 7, 11.] See the Texts cited for his satisfaction. Ezek. 18. 2, 3, 4. What mean ye that ye use this proverb, The Fathers have eaten sowr grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge? As I live saith the Lord God, ye shall not hae occasion any more to use this Proverb. Be∣hold
all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die. Ier. 31. 29, 30. They shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sowr grape and the childrens teeth are set on edge. But eve∣ry one shall die for his own iniquity, every man that eateth the sowr grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. [See Isa. 27. 11. It is a people with∣out understanding, therefore he that made them will have no pity on them. Gen. 4. 6, 7.] Eph. 5. 5, 6. The wrath of God cometh upon the children of disobedience. Prov. 1. 24. &c. Because I have called and ye refused &c. 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my selfe should be a cast∣away. See Prov. 5. 22. Isa. 59. 2. VIII. They do utterly deny, that God did de∣stin by an absolute decree, to give Christ a Mediator only to the Elect, and to give faith to them alone by an effectual calling, to justifie and continue them in the faith, and glorifie them alone. The reason of this appears in the Texts cited above for Christs satisfaction, and those which follow for the universality of his merit, in the Second Article or Question. To which nothing is needful to be added.
IX. They do utterly deny, that many, even all the reprobates, are rejected from eternal life, and means lufficient thereunto by an ab∣solute and antecedent decree, so as neither the merit of Christ, nor vocation, nor any gift of the spirit, can, or do avail unto their Salvation. The Reason. Because God created man after his own image and approved him to be very good. Gen. 1. 27, 31. and to the judge of all the earth, the righte∣ous are not (dealt with) as the wicked. Gen. 18. 25. For he is good to all and his tender mer∣cy is over all his works. Psal. 145. 8, 9. He will not the death of a sinner. Ezek. 18. & ch. 33. almost throughout. [See Iob 34. 23.] 1 Tim. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Mans destruction is of himself. Hos. 13. 9. Rom 6. 23. ch. 1. 32. for he despiseth mercy. Rom. 2. 4, 5. Luk. 7. 30. Acts 13. 46. See Mat. 22. 2. to the 15. Luke 14. 24. Hebr, 10. 26. &c. Iohn 3. 19. [See 2 Chron. 24. 19. and 36. 15, 16.] This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evill. Ezek. 24. 13. In filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged
thee and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. [See Prov. 1. 29, 30, 31. Rom. 2. 8. c. 1. 18.] Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. For this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lye: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. See likewise all the places cited for the affirmative, viz. respective reprobation. X. They do utterly deny, that God hath de∣stined Reprobates (as they are called) to infi∣delity, impiety, and sins, as means and causes of their damnation. The Reason. 1. God himself hath stigmatized Jeroboam with this Character, (as a brand of infamy) 2 King. 23. 15. Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. And Hab. 2. 15. Wo unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that put∣test thy bottle to him, and makest him drunken also; that thou mayest look on their nakedness. 2. If a Prince should make a decree to take away the life of his subject, and then necessi∣tate
him by force, or winde him in by subtle∣ty, to be instrumental (and subservient to his own ends) in the perpetration of an act, which, the said Prince himself, hath made to be cri∣minal, that the execution of his said subject might appear to be just; this argues cleerly, that his first decree against him, even by the verdict of his own conscience, was unjust, and so is his execution also. 3. It is accounted an act of horrid tyranny in Tiberius, who because it was unlawful to strangle Virgins, He caused the hangman first to defloure a virgin, and afterward to strangle her. See also the Reason of the next. XI. They do utterly deny, that God is the Au∣thor of sin. The Reason. 1. Because He is Holy and a pattern of holi∣ness. Lev. 11. 44. ch. 19. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. 2. His wayes are right and equal and he can do no iniquity. Ezek. 18. 25, 29. Hos. 14. 19. Psal. 45. 7. & 92. 16. Zeph. 3. 5. Deut. 32. 4. 3. He hates sin. Psal 5. 4, 5. & 45. 7. Prov. 11. 20. Isa. 59. 2. Deut. 12. 31. Isa. 61. 8. Zee. 8. 17. Am. 6. 8. Ier. 44. 4. Hab. 1. 13. 4. 'Tis a burden to him. Isa 7. 13. ch. 43. 24.
5. He forbids sin. Exod. 20. 1. &c. Iob 36. 21. Ezek. 45. 9. Rom. 6. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 34. 6. He cannot be tempted with evil. Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15. 7. He is provoked to anger by it. Isa. 3. 8. Hos. 12. 14. Exod. 23. 21. Mark 3. 5. 8. 'Tis enmity to him. Rom. 8. 7. 9. 'Tis the work of the Devil. Ioh. 8. 44. Gen. 3. 1. 10. He sent his Son to destroy it. 1 Iohn 3. 8. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 11. He doth revenge it and punish the sinner for it. Jer. 5. 25, 29. Deut. 18. 12, 13. Rom. 1. 18. Eph. 5. 6. Psal. 11. 5, 6. 12. Mans destruction is from himself. Hos. 13. 9. Prov. 5. 22. XII. They do utterly deny, that election of particular persons is made without considera∣tion of faith and perseverance therein, as the condition prerequired in him that is to be cho∣sen [unto glory.] The Reason. Ps. 103. 17, 18. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him [considered as such] Ps. 3. 3. The Lord hath set apart the man that is godly for himself. Ps. 50. ult. To him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God, Rev. 3. 4. Thou
hast a few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. Isa. 48. 10. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. Jam. 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. Heb. 6. 12. Who through faith and patience inher it the promise. See Heb. 10. 36. Rev. 7. 14, 15. See also the proofes of the 2 and 4 affirmatives. XIII. They do utterly deny, that particular men are reprobated from eternal life without consi∣deration had of sin and infidelity, and perse∣verance therein, as going before. The Reason. Exod. 32. 33. Whosoever sinneth—Him will I blot out. [See the 2 & 4 Affirmative] Rev. 22. 15. Without are doggs. 1 Cor. 6. 9. The un∣righteous shall not inherit the kingdome of God See 2 Thess. 2. 12. Luke 14. 17, 21, with 24. verse. A general reason of both the former Negatives.
The execution of Gods decree sheweth what the decree it selfe was; for God worketh (in time) all things according to the counsel of his own will [from eternity,] Eph. 1. 11. So that man must be considered in the decree, as he is considered in the execution of it; otherwise the act decreeing, and the act executing should have respect to different Objects, and Conse∣quently, this act could not properly be called the execution of that Decree. Ex. Gr. If a decree be past against T B as a Malefactor, and R S doth arrest T B being clear and innocent; this action cannot be said to be the execution of the former decree, which was made against T B the Malefactor, though R S pretends to do it in persuance of the same. So in other Cases, But in the executi∣on of the divine decree [of Election and Re∣probation] We see men are looked upon ac∣cording to their several qualifications Mat. 25. 31. & 41. Then shall the King say—Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome pre∣pared for you: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat. Goe ye Cursed: For I was &c. Rom. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. He shall render to every man according to his works. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honour and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation
and wrath: Rom. 8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit, do mortifie the deeds of the body ye shall live: See Psal. 11. 5. To the end; an Emphatical place. Concerning Children, They hold. That all the children of the faithful are san∣ctified in Christ; so as none of them depart∣ing this life, before they come to the use of reason, can perish. Proofs out of Scripture. Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the woman, shall bruise the Serpents head. This seed (which is Christ) was promised, before ever any seed of mankinde was conceived: Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. [See Mat. 18. 11, 12.] Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost: 1 John 3. 8. He came to destroy the works of the Devil: Rom. 5. 12, 18. As by the offence of one judge∣ment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life: Hebrews 2. 14, 15, 17. For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might de∣stroy
him who had the power of death, that is the Devil and deliver—and make reconciliation, &c. [Consider 1 John 2. 12. with Mat. 19. 14.] Suffer little children to come unto me, and for∣bid them not; for of such is the Kingdome of God. See Psal. 127. 3. Concerning Children, What they do utterly deny. I. They do utterly deny, that some Infants, (children) of the faithful are to be accounted in the number of Reprobates. The Reason. Rom. 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy so are the branches: Gen. 17. 7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee: Acts 2. 39. The promise is unto you and to your children: Acts 11. 14. Words where∣by thou and all thy house shall be saved: Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved and thy house: 1 Cor. 7. 14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the hus∣band; else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. II. They utterly denie, that some Infants of the faithful departing this life in their Infancy, before they have committed any actual sin, in their own persons, are reprobated. The Reason. Gen. 18. 25. That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wick∣ed, and that the righteous should be as the wick∣ed, that be far from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Ionah 4. 11. Thou hast had pitty on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it to grow, which came up in a night and perished in a night: and should not I spare Nineveh, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, that cannot dis∣cern between their right hand and their left: E∣zek. 18. 2. 3, 4. What mean ye that ye use this proverb, saying the fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the cldrens teeth are set on edge? [See Deut. 24. 16. 2 Kings 14. 6.] As I live saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb. Behold all souls
are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth it shall die; Ier. 31. 29, 30. In those dayes, they shall say no more, the fathers have eaten a sowre grape, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. But every one shall die for his own iniquitie, eve∣ry man that eateth the sowre grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. III. They do utterly denie, that the sacred la∣ver of baptisme, and the prayers of the Church, can no wayes avail such Infants unto salvation. The Reason. Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and disciple all Nations, baptizing them, &c. 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even baptisme, doth also now save us: Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration: Ephes. 5. 25, 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it: that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word: Acts 2. 38, 39. with Acts 22. 16. Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins; for the promise is to you and to your children: Gal. 3. 27. with Rom. 8. 1. As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
And the prayers of the Church, &c.] 1 John 5. 14; 15, 16. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing accord∣ing to his will; he heareth us. And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions, that we desired of him. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for them that sin not unto death. And shall not God hear the prayers of the Church in behalf of Infants? IV. They do utterly denie, that some of the faithfuls children, baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, while they live in the state of their Infancy, are reprobate, by an absolute decree. The Reason of this appears sufficiently in the Reasons of those Negatives fore-mentioned. The state of the Controversie touching Pre∣destination, or Election to Eternal life, or Reprobation therefrom. I. Whether of divine and peremptory Electi∣on to (Glory or) eternal life, the first and
adequate object be [All and only those, which persevere in true faith unto their lives end, as such: or certain particular persons not at all considered as believing and persevering in faith, as such.] See all the Texts alledged for conditioned and against absolute irrespective Election. II. Whether of Peremptory Reprobation unto everlasting torments, the first and adequated object be [All and only unbelievers dying in their unbelief, as such: or certain particular persons (the greatest part of mankinde) not at all consi∣dered, as impenitent, unbelievers and disobedi∣ent, as such.] See the Texts fore-cited for respective and a∣gainst irrespective and absolute reprobation; to which you may adde: Isa. 27. 11. Because this people have no understanding, therefore, &c. Ezek. 18. 1, 23.
The second Article Contro∣verted, concerning the Universalitie of Christs death. What the Remonstrants hold. I. THey hold, that the price of Redemption which Christ tendred unto his Father, was not only in it self sufficient for the Re∣demption of all mankinde, but was also accor∣ding to the decree, the will and grace of God the Father, paid for all and every man. Proofs out of Scripture. For all and every man: 1 Tim. 2. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransome for all: Chap. 4. 10. We trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, Iohn 3. 16. John 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God
that taketh away the sin of the world: 1 John 2. 2. [John 6. 33, 51.] We have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. He tasted death for every man: Hebrews 2. 9. For the unjust: 1 Peter 3. 18. &c. For the ungodly, for sinners, for his enemies: Rom. 5. 6, 8, 10. See the places cited before for Christs satis∣faction. According to the decree, the will and grace of God, &c. John 3. 16. So God loved the world: &c. 1 John 4. 14. We have seen and do testifie, that the father sent the son, to be the Saviour of the world: Romans 8. 32. He spa∣red not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: 1 John 4. 9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us; and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, for God sent not his Son into the world to con∣demn the world; but that the world through him might be saved: John 3. 17. That he by the grace of God should tast death for every man: Heb. 2. 9. Col. 1. 19, 20, 21. It pleased the father—by him to reconcile all things to himself: Tit. 3. 4. After that the kindness and pity of God our
Saviour towards man appeared. Iohn 12. 47. For I came not to judge the world: but to save the world. Iohn 15. 13. Greater love hath no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friend. Rev. 1. 5. He loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. The love of Christ Constraineth us &c. II. They hold, that Christ by the merit of his death, hath so far forth reconciled God the Father to all mankinde, that the Father, by reason of his Sons merit, both could, and would, and did enter and establish a new and gracious Covenant with sinful man liable to Condemnation. Proofes out of Holy Scripture. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing their tres∣passes unto them. Col. 1. 21, 22. And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minde by wicked works, yet now hath he recon∣ciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Isa. 49. 8. I will give thee for a Covenant of the peo∣ple. [i. e. A mediator and foundation of the Covenant of grace. Deodat: Annot:] Isa. 53. per tot. verse 10, 11, 12. When thou shalt
make his soul an offering for sin, He shall see his seed—and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands:—by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justifie many. Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins. See Ier. 31. 31, 33, 34. & ch. 33. 8. Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20. with Hebr. 8. 6. &c. He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better pro∣mises, viz. I will put my lawes into their minde and I will be mercifull to their unrighteousness &c. Hebr. 9. 14, 15. &c. How much more shall the blood of Christ—and for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the trans∣gressions, that were under the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. See chap. 10. per totum chap. 7. 22. chap. 12. 24, 25. III. They hold, that though Christ hath me∣rited reconciliation with God and pardon of sins, for all and every man, yet according to the tenour of the new and gracious Covenant, none is indeed made partaker of the benefits purchased by the death of Christ, otherwise then by faith; nor are a mans sins pardoned,
before he actually believes in Christ. Proofes out of holy Scripture. None made partakers otherwise then by faith. Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ: whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his bloud. Heb. 11. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please God. Romans 9. 33. Whosoever believeth on him shall not be confounded: 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the Saviour, specially of those that believe: Col. 1. 19. to the 23. For it pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things unto himself—And you hath he now reconciled—to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, If ye continue in the faith &c. Heb. 3. 6, 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold fast &c. Heb. 9. 15. He is the Mediator that by means of death, they which are called [Cum Eventu] might receive the promise of eternal in∣heritance. Iohn 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. See Gal. 3. 22. Nor are a mans sins pardoned before he believes: Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whoso∣ever believeth in him shall receive remission of
sins: See Acts 26. 18. Chapter 13. 39. [See John 3. 36.] Rom. 3. 21, 22. The righteous∣ness of God, without the law is manifested—even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them, that believe: Romans 4 3, 24. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, and it shall be imputed to us also, if we believe. See the whole Chapter. Gal. 2 26. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ: Gal. 3. 11. [See Gal. 3. 22.] The just shall live by faith: Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God: See Acts 2. 38. Isa. 53. 11. IV. They hold, that only they for whom Christ died, are bound to believe, that Christ died for them; and if there were any for whom Christ died not, they should not be bound to believe he died for them, or condemned for not believing; yea, if there were any such Reprobates, they should rather be bound to believe, that he died not for them. Proofs out of Scripture. Only they bound to believe, &c. 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19. with 21. ye were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, who was manifest for you, who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God. Iohn 14. 1, 2, 3. Believe also in me. Why? I goe to prepare a place for you, and I will receive you to my selfe. See 1 Cor. 15. 2, 3. with the 14 verse. Whence it followes, that they for whose sins Christ died not, and for whose justifi∣cation he rose not again; to them, preaching is vain, and their faith is vain, for they do but believe an untruth, and lean upon the staffe of a broken reed. Accordingly (as was alleaged above) Maccovius saith, A man must first be∣lieve Christ to be his Saviour (which he cannot be, unless he hath died for him) and that must be the reason why he placeth his faith in him. Rather believe that he died not for them. For Deut. 29. 29. Those things which are re∣vealed, belong to us. And Luke 24. 25. O fooles and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. If it be a revealed truth, that Christ died not for the Reprobates; then are they bound to believe, he died not for them. But if it be not a truth revealed, why is it then preached, and urged, as an Arti∣cle of faith?
What they doe not hold, touching Christs death. I. They do utterly deny, that the price of Re∣demption, which Christ tendered unto God his Father, was not, according to the decree, will, and grace of God the Father, paid for all and every man, that so the greatest part of mankinde, should by an absolute and antece∣dent decree of God, be precisely shut out from the participation of the benefits of Christs death. The Reason. 1. Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world un∣to himselfe. Isa. 53. 6. He laid upon him the iniquity of us all. And Christ died for all, for every man, for the world, for the whole world, for the unjust and disobedient (finally such,) 1 Pet. 3. 18 with the 20. for the ungod∣ly, for sinners, for his enemies, (as was said above.) 2. Also for as many as died in Adam. Rom. 5. 12, 18. 1 Cor. 15. 22. As by the offence of one man, &c. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
3. For as many as are bound to believe in him, (as was declared above.) 4. For as many as are bound to adore and serve him. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorifie God in your &c. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. with Rom. 14. 9. We thus judge; that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that he might be Lord of all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves; but unto him which died for them. See Eph. 1. 12. 5. For as many as we are bound to pray for in Christs name: 1 Tim. 2. 1, 5, 6. I exhort, that supplications be made for all men—For there is one Mediator, who gave himselfe a ransome for all. 6. For such as crucifie him a fresh to themselves, Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. c. 10. 29. For such as deny him, and finally do perish. 2 Pet. 2. 1. See Rom. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11. II. They do utterly deny, that the immediate fruit of the death of Christ is the actual pardon of sins; or (which is the same in effect) that sins are pardoned unto sinners, before they do actually believe in Christ.
The Reason. Rom. 10. 10. For with the heart man belie∣veth unto righteousness. [See Gal. 3. 22.] Heb. 11. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please God. Marke 16. 16. He that believeth not shall be damned. Iohn 3. 18, 36. He is condem∣nd already: the wrath of God abideth on him. See proofes for the affirm. III. They do utterly deny, that Reprobates (as some call them) for whom Christ died not (if there were any such) are bound not∣withstanding, to believe in him, and to be∣lieve that they are elected unto glory, and that therefore those that believe not shall be con∣demned justly, yea, shall therefore be punish∣ed with more grievous torments by Almighty God. The Reason. 1. Iob 13. 7. Will ye speak wickedly for God? And talk deceitfully for him? Ier. 10. 1. He is the God of truth. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. that cannot lye. All his Commandements are truth, righteousness and faithfulnesse. Psal. 119. 86, 151, 172. And Rom. 15. 8. Christ was a
Minister for the truth of God, and no lie is of the truth. 1 Iohn 2. 21. 2. If we meet with false Prophets and dis∣semblers, (for all their fair speeches) he bid us Believe them not. Ier. 12. 6. Mat. 24. 23. Prov. 26. 25. 3. He denounceth grievous judgments a∣gainst such Prophets as go about to induce the people to trust in a lye. Ier. 28. 25. chap. 29. 31. 4. It is a sore judgement, inflicted only upon the obstinate and refractory, (and therefore certainly no duty of them that are not such) to be given up to such Errours. 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lye: that they all might be dam∣ned, who believed not the truth; but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So that the God of truth and righteousness doth not binde men (as a part of their duty) to believe falshood, much less punish them with more grievous torments for not believing it. 5. Iob 8. 3. Doeth God pervert judgement? or doth the Almighty pervert justice? Io 34. 10, 12. Yea surely, God will not doe wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgement; and ver. 23. He will not lay upon man more then is right, that he should enter into judgment with God.
The state of the Controversie, touching the Universality of Christs death. Whether Christ Jesus, out of a serious and gratious purpose and decree of God the Fa∣ther, suffered that most bitter and shameful death, that he might bring into favour with God onely some few, and those formerly and in particular chosen to eternal life by an abso∣lute decree: or that he might merit and ob∣tain reconciliation with God, for all, and every sinner, without difference, by doing and suf∣fering those things, which divine justice, by sin offended, did require to be done and suffe∣red, before he would enter a new gracious Covenant with sinners, and open the door of salvation to them? The decision is conteined in the former Assertions and Negations.
The Third and Fourth Arti∣cles Controverted, which are touching the grace of God in the Conversion of Man. What the Remonstrants hold. I. THey hold that a man hath not saving faith of himselfe, nor from the power of his own free will, seeing while he is in the state of sin, he cannot of himselfe, nor by himselfe, think or will, or do any saving good (in which kinde faith in Christ is eminent) but must needs, by God in Christ, through the power of the Holy Ghost, be regenerated and renew∣ed, in his minde, affections, will, and all his powers, that he may aright understand, will and meditate, and do that which is savingly good.
Proofs out of Holy Scripture. Not faith or any saving good of himself, &c. Ephes. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness: Rom. 7. 5. When we were in the flesh, the mo∣tions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. Rom. 11. 32. God hath concluded all in unbe∣lief. Ephes. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Phil. 1. 8, 9. To you it is given—to believe. 1 Cor. 12. 3. None can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; (who is therefore called) the spirit of faith. 2 Cor. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves: but our sufficiencie is of God. Rom. 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly. Iohn 15. 5. Without me, ye can do nothing. Iohn 6. 44, 45, 65. No man can come to me, except the Father draw him. Every man there∣fore, that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father cometh unto me. Must needs be regenerated, &c. John 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and this I say brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inhe∣rit the Kingdome of God: 1 Cor. 15. Iohn 3. 3, 5. Except a man be born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. Not by works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savi∣our: 1 Pet. 1. 3, 23. The father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us again, not of cor∣ruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, &c. See Ezek. 36. 26, 27. Renewed in understanding, will, affections, &c. Ephes. 4. 23. Renewed in the spirit of your mindes: Col. 3. 10. In knowledge: See 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Tit. 2. 11. Acts 26. 18. To whom I send thee, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: Acts 15 9. God, through the Holy Ghost, purify∣ing their hearts by faith: Heb. 9. 14. The blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God: 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth, through the spirit, and the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly: 1 Thes. 5. 23. To do that which is savingly good, &c. Mat. 7. 17, 18. and chap. 12. 33, 34, 35. Make the tree good, and his fruit good: Rom. 6. 22. But now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life: See verse 18. II. They hold, that the grace of God is the be∣ginning, proceeding, and fulfilling of all good, so as even the regenerate man himself, with∣out grace preventing, exciting, following, and co-working, cannot think, will, or do good, or resist any temptation to ill: so that the good deeds and actions which any man can conceive, are to be ascribed, to the grace of God in Christ. Proofes out of holy Scripture. That the grace of God is the beginning, &c. James 1. 17, 18. Every good gift, and e∣very perfect gift is from above: John 8. 36. [2 Cor. 4. 6.] If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed: 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie: Phil. 1. 6. & chap, 2. 13. It is God, which hath begun a good work in you, which worketh in you, to will, and to do, of his good pleasure: Heb. 12. 2. The author and finisher of our faith: 2 Thes. 2. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel: See verse 15, 16, 17. & 1 Pet 5. 10. &c. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 3,—His divine power hath given us all
things that pertain to life and godliness. Or resist any temptation to ill, &c. Where∣fore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day: Ephes. 6. 13. Watch and pray, &c. Mat. 26. 41. Lead us not into temptation: Mat. 6. 13. The good, we do, to be ascribed to the grace of God, &c. 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God, I am what I am: Gal. 2. 20. The life, that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God: 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, hath be∣gotten us again unto a lively hope, &c. 1 Pet. 5. 10, 11. But the God of all grace, who hath called us into his eternal glory, by Christ Jesus; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen: See Rom. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Ephes. 1. 3. &c. Rom. 16. 25, 26, 27. Rev. 1. 5, 6. III. They hold, that to hear Gods word, to be sorry for sin committed, to desire saving grace, and the spirit of renovation (nothing of which, notwithstanding, can a man do without grace) is profitable and needful for the obtaining of faith, and the spirit of reno∣vation.
Proofes out of holy Scripture. St. Luke 19. 13 Negotiamini dum venio: Trade, till I come; for whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance, Luke 19. 26. See Mat. 13. from v. 10, ro 17. Iohn 6. 45. [See Luke 16. 11, 12. chap. 19. 17.] Every man that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me: Rom. 10. 17. Faith cometh by hearing: Acts 17. 11, 12. They (of Berea) received the word with all readiness of minde, and searched the Scriptures, Therefore many of them believed: Iohn 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrin, whether it be of God: See Psal. 25. 12, 14. Psal. 111. 10. Prov. 1. 7. 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation: See Acts 2. 37, 38. chap. 16. 29, 30 Prov. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If thou wilt incline thine ar un∣to wisdome, and apply thine heart to understand∣ing—If thou seekest her as silver—Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord: Prov. 8. 17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall finde me: Luke 11. 13. Your heavenly Father will give the spirit to them that ask him: See the example of Sergius Pau∣lus: Acts 13. 7, 12. Especially that of Corne∣lius: Acts 10. 1, 2, 4, 5, 34, 35. See also Gal. 3. 24. Prov. 3. 32. Iob 28. 28. 2 Tim. 2.
21. James 1. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. See the reason of the Negative, following. IV. They hold, that effectual grace whereby a man is converted is resistible: and though God doth so work upon the will by his word, and the inward operation of his holy spirit, as that he gives both power to believe, and supernatural abilities, and makes a man actual∣ly to believe; yet can man of himself, despise that grace, not believe, and so through his own default perish. Proofs out of Holy Scripture. Ezek. 11. 20. compared with the 21. verse. I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine Ordinances and do them—But whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things, and their a∣bominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads: Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. Then began he to upbraid the cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe un∣to thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre
and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven shalt be brought down to Hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day: Ezek. 24. 13. I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged: Acts 2. 41. They that gladly received his word were baptized: 1 Thes. 2. 13, & 19. [See v. 19. & Acts 11. 21.] Ye received it, not as the word of man, but, (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe: See Rom. 1. 16. Acts 13. 46. & 48. Luke 14. 16. &c. Mat. 22. 4, 5. He sent out his servants, saying—All things are ready: coms unto the marriage. But they made light of it: Luke 10. 16. 1 Thes. 4. 8. He that despiseth you, despiseth me: he despiseth not man but God, who hath given us of his spirit: Mat. 23. 37. Luke 13. 34. How often would I have gathered thy children—and ye would not: John 5. 34, 40. These things have I spoken that ye might be saved. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. Prov. 1. 24. &c. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and ye regarded not, &c. Rom. 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the ri∣ches of his geodness and forbearance and long suf∣fering, not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? Isa. 63. 10. They
rebelled and vexed his holy spirit: See Zach. 7. 11, 12, 13. Acts 5. 7, 51. Ye have alwayes re∣sisted the Holy Ghost, and done despight to the spirit of grace. Heb. 10. 29. And rejected the Counsel of God against themselves. Luke 7. 30. & turn the grace of our God into lascivious∣ness. Jude ep. v. 4. We then as workers toge∣ther with him▪ beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: 2 Cor. 6. 1. & Heb. 12. 15. Looking diligently, ne quis desit gratiae Dei, lest any man be wanting to the grace of God: See Psal. 78. 40. &c. 2 Cor. 3. 15. chap. 4. 4. Also see the Reason of the second Negative following: See Exod. 21. 5, 6. com∣pared with Isa. 61. 1, 2. & Rom. 6. 14, 16. V. They hold, that though grace be dispensed in differing measure, according to Gods most free will, yet on all those, to whom, the word of faith is preached, the Holy spirit bestows, or is ready to bestow, so much grace, as is sufficient, in fitting degrees, to bring on their conversion. Proofs out of Scripture. In differing measure, &c. Heb. 1. 1, 2. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse man∣ners—hath in these last dayes spoken to us by
his son: Mat. 12. 4. A greater than Jonas is here. Iohn 10. 10. I came that they might have life, and that they might have it more a∣bundantly: Heb. 2. 2, 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation: Mat. 25. 15. To one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one. 1 Cor. 12. 4. There are diversi∣ties of gifts. 1 Pet. 4. 10. The grace of God is manifold. Ephes. 4. 16. According to the effectual working in the measure of every part. Rom. 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith re∣ceive you. 1 Cor. 8. 7. There is not in every man that knowledge. So much grace as is sufficient, &c. Acts 3. 26. God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your iniquities. Acts 5. 31. Him hath God exalted, to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made unto us wisdome and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. Tit. 2. 11, 12 [See 2 Chron. 24. 19.] The grace of God which bringeth sal∣vation hath appeared unto all men, &c. Acts 26. 18. To whom I send thee, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance, &c. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. Our sufficiency is of God; who al∣so hath made us able Ministers,—not of the let∣ter,
but of the spirit. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go ye and teach—and loe I am with you. [Mat. 18. 20.] 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are ambassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconci∣led unto God. 2 Cor. 6. 1. receive not the grace of God in vain. In fitting degrees, &c. St. Mark 4 33. With many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear it. Mat. 25. 15. And delivered to his servants his talents, to every one according to his several abilitie, [Agreeable to his capacitie, and competent to his office and imployment, and the exi∣gence of business intrusted to him of his Lord] see Heb. 5. 13, 14. Prov. 4. 18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Mat. 13. 12. For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance. Luke 16. 10, 11, 12. He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mam∣mon, who will commit to your trust the true ri∣ches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is anothers, who shall give you that which is your own? [If you be not faithful in the use of things temporal, how shall God intrust you with things heavenly and spiritual? Wherefore let us have grace [hold it fast by
imploying it] whereby we may serve God accep∣tably. Heb. 12. 2. 8. and grow in it. 2 Pet. 3. 18. VI. They hold, that a man by the grace of the holy spirit, may do more good then indeed he doth, and omit more evil, than indeed he omitteth. Proofs out of Scripture. Iohn 15. 22, 24. If I had not come and spo∣ken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak [excuse] for their sin. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen, and hated, both me, and my father. Acts 17. 30. [1 King 21. 25. Zach. 1. 15.] The times of this ignorance God winked at. Deut. 30. 14. with Rom. 10. 6, 8. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaketh on this wise; the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it. [Iohn 8. 32. with 36.] 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie. Rom. 6. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness. Rev. 3. 8. Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name. Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things, through Christ, which strength∣neth
me. Matthew 11. 21, 23. If the mighty works, which have been done in you, had been done in Tyre, Sidon, or Sodom, they would have repented. See the 4. negative propositions. VII. They hold, that whomsoever God calls un∣to salvation, he calleth him seriously, that is, with a sincere, and unfeigned intention and will to save him. Proofes out of Holy Scripture. 1. His command. Acts 17. 30. But now, he commandeth All men every where to repent. 2. His invitations. 2 Chron. 36. 14, 15, 16. [See 2 Chron. 24. 19.] And the Lord sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes and sending: Mat. 22. 2, 4. &c. Luke 14. 21. And he sent out his servants—and he sent other ser∣vants, saying, go out quickly—and compel them to come in. Rev. 22. 17. The spirit and the Bride say, come. And let him that heareth, say, come. And let him that is athirst come. And whoso∣ever will, let him take the water of life freely. Isa. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock. Prov. 1. 20. &c. Wisdome cri∣eth without: she uttereth her voice in the streets.
How long ye simple ones—Turn you at my re∣proof: Behold I will pour out my spirit unto you. &c. 3. His reception. Iohn 6. 37. Him that com∣eth to me, I will in no wise cast out. Mat. 11. 28. Come and I will refresh you. Rev. 3. 20. He shall sup with me. 4. His options. 1. For the time past. Psal. 81. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But my people would not hear. O that my people had hearkned unto me. Isa. 48. 17, 18, 19. Thus saith the Lord thy Redeemer—I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest goe. O that thou hadst hearkened to my Commandements: then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. 2. For the future. Deut. 5. 29. O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my Com∣mandements alwayes, that it might be well with them. Deut. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consi∣der their later end. 5. His precations and beseechings. Isa. 65. 2. Rom. 10. 21. I have spread out my hands [a posture of prayer Exod. 9. 29. Psal. 63. 5.] all the day unto a rebellious people. 2 Cor. 5. 20. God doth beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, Be ye reconciled unto God. 6. His obtestations. Deut. 30. 19. I call
heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore chuse life that both thou and thy seed mayest live. Isa. 1. 2. Hear O hea∣vens, and give eare O earth &c. 7. His complaints Micha. 6. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testifie against me. Ier. 2. 5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity and are become vain. Ier. 2. 31. Have I been a wilderness &c. 8. His Lamentations. Ier. 4. 14. O Ierusa∣lem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee; Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings and ye would not? Luke 19. 41, 42. He beheld the city and wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! 9. His expostulations. Ezek. 18. 31, 32. Cast away from you all your transgressions, and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ier. 13. last. 10. His increpations and exprobrations. Iohn 5. 40, with 34. These things I say, that
ye may be saved. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. Rom. 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodnes—not knowing, that the goodness of the Lord leadeth thee unto repen∣tance? Ier. 13. last. Woe unto thee, O Jerusa∣lem: wilt thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? 11. His Comminations and threatnings. Ezek. 18. 30. Therefore will I judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his wayes, saith the Lord God; repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity shall not be your ruine. Ier. 18. 10, 11. Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah—saying, thus saith the Lord, behold I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your wayes and your doings good. 12. His oath and Protestation. Ezek. 33. 11. As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil wayes; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Are not these arguments of seriousness? Judg. 13. 23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us,—he would not have shewed us all these things, nor have told us such things as these. See the Reason of the fifth Negative.
What the Remonstrants do not hold, touching the said Ar∣ticles, viz. Gods grace and Mans Conversion. I. THey do not hold, that all Zeal, Care, and Study for the obtaining of Salvation, which a man shall use before he hath faith, and the spirit of renovation, is vain and to no purpose; much lesse, that 'tis rather hurtful, than profitable and fruitful to him. The Reason. 1. The neglect hereof is complained of. Isa. 64. 7. There is none that stirreth up him∣self to take hold of thee. [Isa. 44. 19.] Iob 35. 10, 11. But none saith, where is God my maker?—Who teacheth us more then the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser then the fouls of hea∣ven? See Ier. 5. 24. & ch. 8. 6. No man re∣pented him of his wickednesse, saying, what have I done?
2. This neglect is threatned Luke 16. 10, 12. He that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore you have not been faithful in that which is anothers &c. Rom. 1. 21. Be∣cause when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. 3. This is a duty expected even of the Heathens. Act. 17. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and finde him. 4. And 'tis commanded. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear. Isa. 46. 8. Remem∣ber this, and shew your selves men. Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdome, let him aske of God. Strive to enter in at the streight gate [Ier. 4. 3.] Luke 3. 4, 6. Prepare the way of the Lord. Hos. 10. 12. 5. This is commended as a disposition and preparative to faith in Christ, and the spirit of renovation. Mat. 13. 10, 11, 12. To him that hath shall be given; To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdome of heaven. Mat. 11. 5, 25, 26. Thou hast revealed them to babes. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. [Iohn 10. 27.] Iohn 3. 21. But he that doth truth, cometh to the light. Luke 8. 15. That on the good ground, are they, which in an honest, and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Mark 19. 14. Of such is the kingdome of God.
6. This care and study is incouraged. Mat. 12. 20. He will not quench the smoaking flax, nor break the bruised reed. Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28. Ho every one that thirsteth, that labours: Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will dnaw nigh to you. Neh. 1. 11. They that desire to fear thy Name. Psal. 38. 9. 7. He adjourns the judgment, upon Ahabs humiliation. 1 King. 21. 27, 29. [See 2 Chr. 12. 12. Exod. 1. 17, 20, 21.] 8. He sends direction to such as are prick∣ed to the heart, and inquire after him, Acts 2. 37, 38. To the Publicans and Souldiers, Luke 3. 8, 10. To the Jailor. Act. 16. 29, 30. To Cornelius after a most eminent and extraor∣dinary manner. Act. 10. 1. to 35. 9. He gives persons of such study and incli∣nations, satisfaction and a blessing. Mat. 5. 6. Blessed are they, that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled. See Luk. 1. 53. Mat. 11. 28. God is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11. 6. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. 1 Chr. 22. 16. II. They do utterly deny, that effectual grace, whereby a man is converted, is an unresistible power.
The Reason. 1. Conversion is injoyned us as our duty and we are exhorted to it with promises and threatnings. Prov. 1. 22. Ezek. 18. 30, 32. Ier. 7. 3. Turn ye, turn ye. 2. 'Tis a matter of Choice. Deut. 30. 19. Jos. 24. 15. Chuse whom ye will serve, chuse life. [2 Cor. 5. 20. Isa. 1. 19, 20.] 3. The duty and the grace enabling to it may be neglected. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Hebr. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salva∣tion. Jer. 36. 6, 7. Therefore we are admo∣nished. Hebr. 3. 7, 8. Psal. 95. 7, 8. Harden not your hearts. [Some temper of minde bet∣ter qualified: See the 1. Negat. 4. God requires our endeavours (1,) by way of preparation: laying aside the vail. 2 Cor. 3. 15. prejudice [John 7. 3. 4, 5, 52.] ambition. [Iohn 5. 44. ch, 12. 42, 43.] all ma∣lice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all superfluity of naughtiness. [See Act. 13. 45. Luke 16. 14.] that we may with meekness, [Psal. 25. 9, 12, 14. See Acts 2. 41.] as new born babes receive the ministeries of grace. Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And as many as [being in pur∣suit of the world to come] were [thus] ordained, [addicted, disposed] to eternal life, believed. Acts 13. 48.
5. When being wrought into this temper and frame of spirit, by Gods preventing grace, we are fit for the kingdome of Christ. [Luke 9. 62.] God requires our endeavours, by way of cooperation, to make his saving grace effectual (which argues 'tis not an unresistible power) Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the doore and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door. [Which doore turns upon two hinges, faith and obedience, Rom. 1. 16. 1 Thess. 2. 13. Ephesians 3. 17. Romans 6. 17.] I will come in to him &c. 6. That this grace is not unresistible, ap∣pears further: By Gods option: O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me &c. (as above.) 7. He complains also of mens perverseness and contumacy, obstructing the work of grace in themselves. [See Mark 6. 6.] Isa 5. 4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? [Mat. 3. 15.] Ezek. 12. 2. They have eyes to see, and see not: they have ears to hear, and hear not, for they are a rebellious house. Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit; & Zech. 7. 10, 11, 12. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant-stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts hath
sent in his spirit, by the former Prophets. 8. Some are captivated to the obedience of this grace, whiles others stand out in rebellion against the power of it Act. 2. 41. ch. 13. 48 with 45. Some gladly receive it, others do thrust it from them, contradicting and blaspheming. See 1 Thess. 2. 13. with 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11. Ezek. 3. 5, 6, 7. Thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech—surely had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee: but the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee, Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22. Tyre and Sidon, and Sodome would have repented: but you will not. Matth. 12. 41. The men of Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonas; but [you resist a greater light and force of grace] behold, a greater then Jonas is here. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. To the one we are the savour of life unto life; and to the other the savour of death unto death. 9. The Lord punisheth the refractary, for resisting the work of his grace and spirit. Heb. 6. 7, 8. For the earth which drinketh in the rain—and bringeth forth fruit—receiveth bles∣sing from God. But that which beareth thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Prov. 1. 24. &c. Be∣cause I have called and ye refused &c. Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13. Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord. Iohn 3. 19. This is the condemnati∣on, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness, rather than light. Ezek. 24. 13. [See Mat. 13. 15. &c. Acts 28. 24. &c. 2 Chron. 24. 19, 20.] In thy filthiness is lend∣ness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy fil∣thiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee: James 4. 6. God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. See the 4. and 7. Affirmatives. III. They do utterly denie, that God doth be∣stow grace sufficient for faith and couversion, only upon those, whom according to the de∣cree of his Election, he willeth to convert un∣resistibly, and that he neither doth, nor wil∣leth to bestow on the Reprobates grace neces∣sary to faith and salvation. The Reason. 1. Psal. 145. 8, 9. The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. 1 Tim. 2. 3, 4. He will have all men to be saved. 2 Pet. 3. 9. He will not that any perish. Mark 16. 15. with 20. Go preach the Gospel to every Creature—and they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signes fol∣lowing.
Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done more. [See Mark 6. 6. & Jer. 36. 6, 7.] Ezek. 18. 31. Why will ye die. Ezek. 33. 11. As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, &c. See the proofs for conditionate Election, Administration of ne∣cessary and sufficient means, and the serious∣ness of Gods call: being the 7. affirm. pro∣pos. above. 2. He threatens to withdraw his grace from men, only for their stubbornness and rebellion against him and it. Mat. 21. 41, 43. There∣fore—the Kingdome of God shall be taken from you. Rev. 2. 5. Or else I will remove thy Candlestick out of his place. Luke 14. 24. None of those men which were bidden shall tast of my supper. Luke 13. 34. with chap. 19 42. How often would I, and ye would not?—But now are they hidden from thine eyes. Matth. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15. But whosoever hath not (made good use of preventing grace) from him shall be taken away, even that he hath. Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing, see not: And in them is fulfilled the prophesie of Isaias, by hearing ye shall hear, and shall not under∣stand—for their eyes have they closed, lest at any times they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted and I should heal them. See Acts 28: 26. &c. Rom. 1. 18. 21,
24, 25, 28. Who hold the truth in unrighteous∣ness—and turn it into a lie, for this cause God gave them up to vile affections. 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, for this cause God gave them up. Prov. 1. 24. &c. Because I have called, and ye refused—Ye also shall call and I will not answer you; I will laugh at your calamities. James 4. 6. God resisteth the proud but giveth grace to the humble. See the Texts cited against Absolute Reprobation. 1 Chron: 28. 9. 2 Chron. 15. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Zach. 9: 15. with 17. I will love them no more; because they did not hearken. IV. They do utterly denie, that God is simply unwilling that a man should do (1.) more good than he doth, or (2.) omit more evil than he omitteth; or that he hath precisely decreed from Eternitie, that both [Good and Evil] should be so done, as they are. The Reason. 1. His command. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy minde and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. 1 Thes. 5. 22.
Abstain from all appearance (kinde) of evil. Ephes. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness. Mich. 6. 3. [See Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.] Wherein have I wearied thee? Mat. 11. 29. Myyoak is easie. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Re∣ceive not the grace of God in vain. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace. Luke 19. 12, 13. &c. Negotiami∣ni dum venio. Trade till I come. Verse 20. &c. Wherefore (hast thou kept my talent in a napkin, and) gavest it not into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury? &c. Cast that unprofitable servant, &c. Gal 5. 7. Ye did run well, who drive you back? 2. Jude Epist. verse 10. But what they know naturally, as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Eccles. 8. 11. Their heart is fully set in them to do evil. Mich. 2. 1. They devise iniquity upon their beds. Job 24. 13. They rebel against the light. Consider verse 15, 16, 17. [See Rom. 1. 32. and Isa. 30. 8, 9, 10, 11.] See the proofs of the Affirmative in the sixt Assertion. V. They do utterly denie, that God doth out∣wardly call some, whom he is unwilling in∣wardly to call, and truly to convert, and that before they have rejected the grace of conver∣sion.
The Reason. 1. 1 Tim. 1. 15. Luke 19. 10. This is a faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Mat. 9. 13. To call sinners to repentance: Rom. 16. 25, 26. To call them to the obedience of faith. 1 Thes. 4. 7. Ʋnto ho∣liness. 1 Pet. 2. 9. [Ephes. 1. 12.] Out of dark∣ness, into his marvelous light, that we might set forth his praise. Why should he not be seri∣ous in all this, seeing 'tis according to his pur∣pose and grace? 2 Tim. 1. 9. 2. And the motive of it is, his Compassion. 2 Chron. 36. 15. The Lord sent to them by his messengers: because he had compassion on his peo∣ple. But they mocked the messengers, &c. [See 2 Chron. 24. 19. Mark 12. 6, 7. Rom. 1. 7. Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. Beloved, and called:] I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord—He was their Saviour in all their afflictions, he was afflicted—in his love and in his pity he re∣deemed them. But they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit. With this affection the Lord calls such as are finally disobedient. See 1 Pet. 3. 19. with chapter 4. 6. Till they provoke him to wrath, that there be no remedy left: 2 Chron. 36. 16. This affection is testified, by options, and intreaties, by expostulations and increpati∣ons, by his lamentations and oath. See the
proofes of the seventh Affirmative. 3. His charge: Acts 20. 28. Ezek. 33. 7. Son of man, I have set thee, a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from mee. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou doest not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquitie: but his blood will I require at thine hand. 4. His expectation: [1 Pet. 3. 20.] Isa. 5. 2. He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wilde grapes. 5. His appeal to our own judgement in the cases: Isa. 5. 3, 4. Judge I pray you betwixt me, and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my vineyard, (dare any man al∣ledge the want of a serious inward call?) That I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wilde grapes? [Luke 14. 21. He was angry at their refusal.] Ezek. 18. 29. &c. O house of Is∣rael, are not my waye equal? Are not your wayes unequal? 6. He charges their non-conversion (as was proved above) upon their own refractariness: and punisheth them for it: Jer. 25. 4. & cha. 35. 15. 1 Sam. 2. 30. (1.) with desertion: [Rom. 1. 28.] 2 Chron. 36. 16. & 2 Thes. 2. 10, 11, 12, & (2.) with destruction: 2 Thes. 1. 8. See
the proofes of the seventh Affirmative. VI. They do utterly denie, that there is a se∣cret will in God, so contrary to his will re∣vealed in his word, that according to his secret will he nilleth the conversion and salvation of the greatest part of those, whom by the word of his Gospel and revealed will, he seriously calleth and inviteth to faith and salvation; so as there should be acknowledged in God, a holy simulation and a double person. The Reason. 1. He calls us out of compassion and accord∣ing to his purpose and grace: [See 2 Chron. 24. 19. Mark 12. 6.] 2 Chron. 36. 15. & 2 Tim. 1. 9. 2. He is a God of truth, and adds his oath for confirmation of our faith in this particular. He cannot lic, nor denie himself: Numb. 23. 19. Titus 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. 2 Tim. 2. 13. 3. He condemneth a double heart and pu∣nisheth dissemblers and Hypocrites, no less then unbelievers: Mat. 24. 51. Luke 12. 46. 4. And besides, our conversion, sanctifica∣tion, and salvation, is according to his secret, acceptable and perfect will: Ephes. 1. 9. 1 Thes.
4. 3. Rom. 12. 2. See the proofs of the seventh affirmative: see 1 Tim. 2. 3, 4. VII. They do utterly denie, that God calleth Reprobates for these ends, viz. that he may harden them the more, make them unexcu∣sable, punish them the more grievously, ma∣nifest their weakness; and not, for this end, that they may be converted, believe and be sa∣ved. The Reason. See it in the Reasons of the 5. and 6. Nega∣tives, immediately foregoing; to which adde Ephes. 4. 1. I therefore the pri∣soner See. 2. Chron. 24. 19. His design is to re∣duce them. Mark 12. 6. Rom. 1. 7. Belo∣ved, and called. of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocati∣on, wherewith ye are called. And what answer doth such a call deserve, as is given to no other end then those now menti∣oned? But God calleth us with an holy calling. 2 Tim. 1. 9. And he saith unto me, write. Blessed are they, which are called unto the mar∣riage supper of the lamb. And he saith unto me, these are the true sayings of God: Rev. 19. 9. [Luke 10. 24. Mat. 16. 17.] 2. He upbraids such as make no better use of his calls, then to aggravate their own dam∣nation.
Deut. 29. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ezek. 2. 5. John 15. 22, 24. & John 5. 34, 40. These things I say that ye might be saved. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. Rom. 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness—not knowing that the goodness of God, leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hard∣ness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath? Se proofes of the 7. Affirm. VIII. They do utterly deny, that by the force and efficacy of the secret will and decree of God, not onely good things, but evill do ne∣cessarily come to pass. The Reason. 1. 'Tis mans duty to eschew evil and doe good [Psal. 34. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 11.] (See 2 Sam. 24. 12, 13. 1 Sam. 23. 11, 12.) good being commanded upon promise of life, and evill forbidden under peril of damnation. Matth. 19. 17. If thou wilt enter into life keep the Com∣mandments. Rom. 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth of God in unrighte∣ousness. See verse 32.
2. The good and evil, which men do, are matters of choice, [See John 19. 11. Ios. 24. 15, 22.] Isa. 1. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient &c. But if ye refuse and rebel &c. Ezek. 2. 5. Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, &c. See Ier. 36. 6, 7. Mic. 2. 1. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand. [Mat. 17. 12.] 1 Cor. 7. 36. Let him do what he will. See Deut 30. 19. 3. Gods exprobration. Ier. 5. 22, 23. under different lawes. 4. Good and evil are attended with praise and dispraise which such actions deserve not as come to pass Necessarily. The wise shall inhe∣rit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of fools. Prov. [Phil. 4. 8. Rom. 2. last.] Rom. 13. 3. Doe that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. [1 Cor. 4. 5.] 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. This is thank-worthy with God. Well done good and faithful servant. Luke 19. See Gal. 6. 4. Who seek for glory and honour and immortality. Rom. 2. 7. 5. God propounds examples to our imitation. 6. That is omitted which God loves, and that comes to pass which He hateth. [See Ier. 44. 4, 5.] Isa. 65. 12. & 66. 4. They did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that, wherein I delighted not. Zech. 8. 17. All
these are things that I hate. See Ier. 44. 4, 5. [1 King. 20. 42.] 7. Lastly, God is sometimes said to expect that which doth not come to pass. [See Mark 12. 6. Ezek. 22. 30.] 1 Pet. 3. 20. When once the long suffering of God waited, in the dayes of Noah. Isa. 5. 2, 4. He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wilde grapes. See the places cited for Gods hatred of sin, and against Absolute, antece∣dent decrees. The state of the Controversie, touching the work of grace, in the Conversion of man. Whether a man, when God seriously wills that he believe, and be converted, can nill to believe and convert.
The Fifth Article Contro∣verted is touching Perse∣verance. What the Remonstrants hold. I. THey hold, that God doth furnish the true believer with supernatural power of grace, as, according to his infinite wisdome, he judgeth sufficient for their perseverance, and conquest over the temptations of the Devill, the flesh and the world, and that he is never the cause why they persevere not. Proofes out of holy Scripture. Sufficient for their perseverance. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit sin: for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin: because he is born of God. See Ioh. 4. 14. & ch. 6. 53. shall never thirst. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee. Phil. 4. 13. I am a∣ble
to doe all things through Christ, which strengtheneth me. Matth. 11. 30. 1 Iohn 5. 3. My yoke is easie, and my burden light. And conquest over temptations. Ioh. 10. 28, 29. They shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Fa∣ther, which gave them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fa∣thers hand. Rom. 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faith∣ful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. (Luke 22. 32.) John 17. 11. Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou hast given me. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; Rom. 8. 35. &c. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 1 John 5. 4, 5. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world. 1 John 2. 13. 14. I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. 1 Joh. 4. 4. Because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. He is never the cause why they persevere not &c. 1 Cor. 1. 8. Phil. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you, will perform it, untill the day of Jesus Christ. [See 1 Thes. 5. 23, 24.] 2 Thes.
3. 3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evill. Jude ver. 24. Now to him that is able to keep you from falling. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. II. They hold, that true believers may fall from true faith, and into those sins, which cannot stand with true and justifying faith; neither is this onely possible, but oft cometh to pass. Proofes out of holy Scripture. True Believers may fall from true faith. Mat. 13. 20, 21, 22. & Luke 8. 13. 14. They on the rock, are they, which when they hear, re∣ceive the word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of tempta∣tion fall away. And that which fell among thorns, are they, which when they have heard, goe forth, and are choaked with cares and rich∣es, and pleasures of this life, and bring forth no fruit unto perfection. Rom. 11. 20, 21, 22. Be∣cause of unbelief they were broken off. Gal. 5. 4, 7. Ye did run well: Ye are fallen from grace. 1 Tim. 1. 18, 19. Holding faith and a good con∣science, which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwrack. ch. 4. 1. Some shall
depart from the faith, ch. 5. 12, 15. Some are already turned aside after Satan. Having dam∣nation, because they have cast off their first love. See ch. 6. 10. & 2 Tim. 1. 15. ch. 2. 17, 18. Gen. 3. 6, 24. Into sins which cannot stand with justifying faith &c. 2 Pet. 2. 18. [See ver. 1. &c.] They allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them, who live in errour,—It hath hap∣pened unto them according to the true proverb; The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Mat. 26. 70, 72, 74. Then began Peter to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. David, a man of great faith and integrity: 1 King. 15. 5. yet 2 Sam. 11. 4, 15. & ch. 12. 9. He committed adultery and murder. And Solomon beloved of the Lord. 2 Sam. 12. 25. 1 Kings 3. 10. yet 1 Kings 11. from 1 to 10 verses, through the love of strange women his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel,—which had appeared unto him twice, and went after other gods. And that these sins (of Adultery, Mur∣der, and Idolatry, are inconsistent with true justifying faith, See Gal. 5. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8. ch. 22. 15. Demas one of Saint Pauls fellow-labourers: Philemon 24. Col. 4. 14. Whose names were written in the book of life. Philip. 4. 3. yet 2 Tim. 4. 10. He embraced
this present world. How great a sin that is, [in a person so engaged. 2 Tim. 2. 3, 4.] See Iames 4. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 1 Iohn 2. 15. Ier. 2. 13. My people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fountain of living wa∣ter &c. Rev. 2. 20, 22. Jezebel—seduced my servants to commit fornication, and eat things sacrificed to Idols—and they commit adultery with her. Luke 11. 24. &c. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest: and finding none, he saith, I will return unto mine house whence I came out. And when he cometh he findeth it swept, and garnished. Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits, more wicked then himselfe, and they enter in and dwell there. III. They hold, that true believers, may through their own default fall into crimes and heinous offences, continue and die in them, and so finally fall away and perish. Proofes out of Holy Scripture. 1 Chron. 28. 9 If thou forsake him, He will cast thee off for ever. John 15. 2, 6. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, He taketh away—and it is withered, and men gather them, and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Ezek. 18. 24. When the righteous turneth a∣way from his righteousnesse, and committeth ini∣quity, and doth according to all the abominati∣ons, that the wicked man doth, shall he live? all his righteousness that he hath done, shall not be mentioned: in his trespass, that he hath trespassed, and in his sin, that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. See ver. 26. and ch. 33. 12, 13, 18. Matth. 18. 26. ad finem. Then his Lord, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desi∣redst me: shouldest not thou also have had com∣passion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors. See the Rea∣sons of the 2, 3, 4, &c. Negatives, and the proofes of the 2 Affirmative. III. They hold, that true Believers, though they fall sometimes into grievous sins, and such as wast the Conscience, yet fall not from all hope of repentance, but that God, accor∣ding to the multitude of his mercies, can and often doth bring them again, by his grace, unto repentance: although they cannot cer∣tainly be assured, that this shall certainly and undoubtedly be done.
Proofes out of Holy Scripture. Fall not from all hope, &c. Ezek. 18. 30. Re∣pent and turn your selves from all your transgres∣sions: so iniquitie shall not be your ruin. See Rev. 2. 4. c. 3. 3. Psal. 51. 17. Ier. 3. 1, 12, 14. Thou hast plaid the harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, saith the Lord. Turn O backsliding children: I will not cause mine an∣ger to fall upon you: for I am merciful: I will not keep anger for ever: For I am married unto you: Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: Ier. 31. 19, 20. Is E∣phraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant childe? For since Ispake against him, I do earnestly re∣member him still: therefore my bowels are trou∣bled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord: Mich. 7. 7, 8, 9. Therefore I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Re∣joyce not against me, O mine enemie: when I fall, I shall arise: Mat. 18. 21, 22. How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Jesus saith, untill seventie times seaven. Luke 6. 36. As your father, which is in hea∣ven is merciful. Exod. 32. 2. &c. to the 10. Aaron makes a calf and provokes the Lord, yet, chap. 40. 13. He is consecrated to the Priests office. Hezekiah humbled himself, the wrath
of God was removed from him, 2 Chron. 36. 26. Peter weeps bitterly. Mat. 26. 75. Da∣vids sin is put away. 2 Sam. 12. 13. The incestu∣ous Corinthian findes indulgence: 2 Cor. 2. 7, & 10. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. Psal. 51. 17. They cannot certainly be assured, &c. 2 Tim. 2. 25. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Divel. Joel 2. 14. Who knoweth, if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behinde him? [Ionah 3. 9.] Isa. 27. 11. For it is a people of no understanding: there∣fore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, will shew them no favour. Prov. 1. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not finde me. Numb. 14. 40. &c. They rose up early in the morning, saying, we will go up unto the place, which the Lord hath promised: for we have sinned [viz. in refusing to go up at his command:] see 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Heb. 3. 18. with chap. 4. 11.] And Moses said, it shall not prosper. But they presumed to go up, and were discomfited. Heb. 12. 17. Afterward when he would have inhe∣rited the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance [in his Father, who had
past away the blessing from him though he sought it carefully with tears. If these places do not make a saving repentance (especially after grievous sins [see Acts 8. vers. 22.] and an obstinate continuance in them) somewhat doubtful, yet doubtless they implie a difficulty, (and the more difficult, the more doubtful.) So do the places following. Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45. He taketh seven other spirits, more wick∣ed then himself, and they enter in and dwell there. And the last state of that man is worse than the first. 2 Pet. 2. 20. [Compare this with verse 1. &c.] For if after they have esca∣ped the pollutions of the world, through the know∣ledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again intangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them, than the beginning. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible: [i. e. ve∣ry difficult, as Luke 17. 1. or Luke 18. 27.) If they fall away, to renew them again unto re∣pentance. See the last Negative precedent. Ecclus. 5. 5. Concerning propitiation, be not without fear to adde sin unto sin. Rom. 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches, &c? Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many, I say unto you, will strive to enter in, and shall not be able. V. They hold, that the true believer may for
the present be assured of the integritie of his faith and conscience, and for that time, may and ought to be assured of his salvation, and the saving love of God towards him. Proofs out of holy Scripture. 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all our sin. 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we do know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandements. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. 1 John 5. 2, 3. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his Commandements—and his commandements are not grievous. Gal. 6. 4. But let every man prove his own works and then shall he have rejoycing in himself. 1 Iohn 3. 21. If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our reoycing is this, the testimonie of our conscience, that in simplicitie and godly sinceritie, not with fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world. Rom. 5. 1, 2, 5. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God, and rejoyce in hope of the glory of God—and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by
the holy Ghost which is given unto us. 1 Ioh. 4. 13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because He hath given us of his spirit, Rom. 8. 16. The spirit it self beareth witness with our spi∣rit, that we are the Children of God: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit, do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. ver. 13, 14. Isa. 32. 17. And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousnesse, quietness and assurance for ever. VI. They hold, that the true believer may and ought to be assured for the time to come, that in the use of watching and prayer, and other holy exercises, he may persevere in faith, and that Gods grace shall never be wanting there∣to. But how he may be assured for the time to come, that he himselfe shall not be want∣ing to do his duty, but that he shall, in the actions of faith, piety, and charity, as be∣seems the faithful, persevere in this school of Christian ware, they see not, nor think it necessary, that a believer should be assured thereof.
Proofs out of Holy Scripture. In the use of watching and prayer &c. Eph. 6. 11, 13, to 19. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil & having done all to stand. 2 Thess. 5. 17. pray without ceasing. Watch and pray; Matth. 26. 41. & ch. 24. 13. with the 42. Luke 12. 35, 36, 37. Let your loins be girded about and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord. Luke 21. 34, 36. Take heed lest at any time your hearts be over-charged with surfeting and drun∣kenness and the cares of this life. Watch ye there∣fore and pray alwayes. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be so∣ber, be vigilant: because your adversary the de∣vil, as a roaring Lion walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist stedfast in the faith. James 4. 7. Resist the devil and he will flee from you. 1 Iohn 5. 18. He that is be∣gotten of God, keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. Heb. 6. 11. And we de∣sire that every one of you, do shew the same di∣ligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end. That Gods grace shall never be wanting. Psal. 23. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall fol∣low me all the dayes of my life: Rom. 8. 38. For I am perswaded, that neither death, nor
life &c. shall separate us from the love of God. Phil. 1. 6. He which hath begun a good work in you. Iohn 15. 2, 7, 10. Every branch that beareth fruit he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall aske what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. [See Luke 11. 13. Acts 5. 32.] ver. 10. If ye keep my Commande∣ments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my fathers Commandements, and a∣bide in his love. Rom 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee. 1 Iohn 4. 4. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them; [the false teachers] because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. But how assured for the time to come, that he himself shall not be wanting &c. For 1. Man is many times deceived in his present condition. Rev. 3. 17. Thou sayest, I am rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing: and knowest not that thou art wretch∣ed, and miserable, and poor and blinde and na∣ked. Gal. 6. 3. 2. Mans heart is deceitful above all things. Ier. 17. 9. [See Iohn 16. 2. 3. 'Tis Gods prerogative to know future contingencies. Isa. 41. 22, 23. and Eccles. 9. 1. The righteous, and the wise, and their works,
are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love, or hatred by all that is before him. 4. A man may resolve well for the present, and be confident he shall stick to such princi∣ples and resolutions as he hath once made and espoused; and yet fall quite off from them. 2 King. 18. 13. Hazael practised afterward, what he then abhorred. [Mar. 14. 31.] Matth. 26. 33, 35. Peter said unto him, though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples. But he de∣nied before them all, saying, I doe not know the man. ver. 70. & 72. and again he denied with an oath. and ver. 74. Then began he to curse and to swear. Mar. 14. 50. And they all for∣sook him and fled. So Hezekiah, 2 Chron. 31. 20, 21. He wrought that which was good, and right, and truth, before the Lord his God. And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the Com∣mandements, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered. But Chap. 32. 25. Hezekiah rendred not again, according to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. See Davids fall, 2 Sam. 11. 5. Hence Rom. 12. 16. Isa. 5. 21. Woe to him that is wise in his own eyes. 6. Our life is a warfare. Iob 7. 1. and only
death dischargeth us from that service. Rev. 14. 13. Happy is the man that feareth alwayes. Prov. 28. 14. For thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. Prov. 27. 1. 7. Therefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12. [See Rom. 11. 20] Watch and pray. Matth. 26. 41. Take heed lest at any time. Luke 21. 34, 36. and work out your salvation with fear and trembling: Phil. 2. 13. What the Remonstrants hold not touching Perseverance. I. They hold not, that a Believers Perseve∣rance in faith is an effect of that absolute de∣cree, wherein God is said to have chosen some particular persons, without all respect to any condition of obedience. The Reason. Psal. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be remo∣ved, but abideth for ever. Rom. 11. 20. Thou standest by faith. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Kept through faith unto salvation. Ioh. 15. 4. As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it selfe, except it abide in the vine: no more can ye except ye abide in me. ver. 7. If ye abide in me &c. Iohn 14. 15, 16. If ye love me keep my Commandements, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you ano∣ther Comforter—that may abide with you for ever; 1 Thess. 4. 3, 4. This is the will of God, even your sanctification—1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others I my selfe should be a Cast away. Rom. 8. 13, 16. If ye mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace. 1 Pet. 2. 19. This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience towards God (not of necessity) endure grief, Psal. 15. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 10. If ye doe these things, ye shall never fall. Eph. 6. 10. to 19. Take unto you, and put on the whole ar∣mour of God &c. 2 Pet. 1. 5. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. 1 Tim. 6. 12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life. Phil. 3. 12. I pursue hard after, f that I may apprehend, &c. II. They do utterly deny, that true Believers cannot sin of deliberation, but onely of igno∣rance or infirmity.
The Reason. 1. From exhortations. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Re∣ceive not the grace of God in vain. 1 Thess. 5. 19. Quench not the spirit. Eph. 4. 30. grieve not the holy spirit. Hebr. 10. 35. 37, 38. Cast not away your Confidence; if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. 2. From expostulations, and admirati∣on &c. Iohn 6. 67. will ye also goe away? Isa. 1. 21. How is the faithful city become an harlot? Ier. 2. 12, 21. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this:—For my people have commit∣ted two evils:—Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45. Luk. 11. 24. 3. He taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked then himself. 4. Davids example. 2 Sam. 11. 4. He sent Messengers for Bathsheba, and lay with her. ver. 6. He sends for Uriah to cover the fact, and tempts him to that purpose, ver. 8. He made him drunk, ver. 13. Plotted and Contrived his death, ver. 14, 15. III. They do utterly deny, that true believers can by no sins fall from the favour of God.
The Reason. Rom. 11. 22. If thou continue in his good∣ness, otherwise thou shalt be cut off. 2 Sam. 11. 27. The thing that David had done displeased the Lord. See Chap. 12. 10, 11, 12. 1 King 11. 9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, be∣cause his heart was turned from the Lord. [See 1 Chron. 28. 9. Cant. 5. 2. to 6.] Isa. 64. 5, 7, 9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquitie for ever: behold, see we be∣seech thee, we are all thy people. Hos. 9. 15, 17. All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the wickedness of their doings, I will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more. Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. He said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie: So he was their Saviour. But they rebel∣led and vexed his holy spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemie, and he fought against them. 2 Chron. 32. 25. There was wrath up∣on Hezekiah. Deut. 32. 19. When the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provo∣king of his sons and of his daughters. Rev. 3. 16. I will spue thee out of my mouth. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee—know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord. Heb. 10. 39. [See verse 38.] Of them, who draw back unto perdition.
IV. They do utterly denie, that every man is bound to believe, that he is elected, and con∣sequently, that he cannot fall from that Electi∣on: or that a 1000. sins, yea, the sins of the whole world, cannot make his Election void. The Reason. See the places cited for conditional Electi∣on: and the 2. and 3. Affirmatives of this Article, and the reason of the foregoing Ne∣gative. To which adde Rom. 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: Rom. 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey. 2 Pet. 2. 19. For of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. John 15. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth, as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works. Rev. 3. 2. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die, &c. verse 15, 16. I would thou wert cold or hot, &c. Judas, being one of those, whom the Father had given to Christ, was lost. John 17. 12. He had po∣wer over all Devils. Luke 9. 1. Yet through
covetousness he made way for Satan to enter n to his heart. Luke 22. 3, 4. [See Mat. 26. 14, 15] It seems that he had some title also to one of those twelve thrones. Mat. 19. 28. But he forfeited his interest and never came to sit on it. V. They do utterly denie, that no sins of the faithful, how great and grievous soever they be, are imputed unto them; or that all their sins present and future are forgiven them. The Reason. Ezek. 18. 24. When the righteous turneth away from his righteousness—all his righte∣ousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned, in his trespass and sin shall he die. Psal. 89. 31, 32. 2 Sam. 7. 14. I will visit their ini∣quitie with rods. 2 Sam. 12. 10. Now there∣fore the sword shall never depart from thy house. See Psal. 6. & 38. & 51. 8, 9, 10. O Lord re∣buke me not in thy wrath, thy hand is heavy up∣on me. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast broken may re∣joyce. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out altmine iniquities, cast me not away from thy
presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Rev. 2. 4, 14. I have somewhat against thee. 1 Cor. 11. 30, For this cause many are weak, and sickly amongst you, and many sleep. Amos. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. See the reason of the third Negative. VI. They do utterly denie, that true believers falling into deadly heresies, and most heinous sins, as adulteries and murders (for which the Church, according to Christs institution is forced to testifie, that she cannot tolerate them in external Communion, and that unless they repent, they shall have no part in the Kingdome of Heaven) cannot, notwith∣standing fall totally and finally from faith. The Reason. 1 Chron. 28. 9. If you forsake him, he will cast you off for ever. Rev. 3. 11. Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. 2 ep. John vers. 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things, which we have wrought. Gal. 3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? Mat. 16. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdome of Heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt binde on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and chap. 10. 26. &c. For it is impossible [the Laws of the Church permits it not] for those who were once inlightned, and have tasted of the heaven∣ly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucifie to themselves the son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. So cha. 10. 26. &c. Wherefore giving all diligence, adde to your faith vertue; and to vertue know∣ledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to bro∣therly kindness charity: for if you do these things ye shall never fall. For so an entrance shall be ministred to you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. See the 2. and 3. affirmative, and the 1. and 3. Negatives.
Note. These five last Ne∣gatives, the Remon∣strants do reject with their whole heart and soul, as enemies to pietie and goodlife. Jacobus Arminius in Articulis perpenden∣dis, saith as followeth. I. THat opinion, which denies, that true be∣lievers can or ever do fall from faith to∣tally and finally, was never accounted for Ca∣tholick from the times of the Apostles to these our times, nor the contrary esteemed hereti∣cal; yea, the affirmative part had ever more for it. II. That a believer can be assured, without spe∣cial
revelation, that he shall not fall from faith, And that a believer is bound to believe that he shall not fall from faith, are two points, which were never accounted for Catholick in the Church of Christ: nor was the denial of them ever judged heresy, by the Catholick Church. III. That perswasion, whereby a believer doth certainly perswade himselfe, that he cannot, or shall not fall from faith, serves, not so much for comfort against despair, as for to breed se∣curity, directly contrary to that most whol∣some feare, wherewith we are commanded to work out our salvation, and which is very needful in this place of temptation. See Heb. 12. 15. Rom. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12. 1 Thess. 5. 3. Heb. 6. 11. Gal. 6. 1. Phil. 2. 13. 1 Pet 1. 17. Rev. 3. 11. Iob 9. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 27. 1 Cor. 4. 4. IV. He that thinks he may fall from faith, and thereupon fears lest he should fall therefrom, is neither destitute of needful comfort, nor tormented with anxiety of minde. [He that gives comfort and security upon any other terms,
doth sow pillows as in Ezek. 13. 18. &c. See Ierem. 6. 14. Ezek. 13. 10.] It being suf∣ficient for comfort, and freedome from an∣xiety, to know that he shall not by any power of Satan, sin, and the world, or any affection and infirmity of his own flesh fall from faith, unless himself shall willingly, of his own ac∣cord, yield to temptation, and neglect con∣scionably to work out his salvation. See Ioh. 10. 28. Rom. 8. 35. to the end. 1 Ioh. 5. 18. Jam. 4. 7. Rom. 6. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 19. This doctrine (according to the undeniable consequence thereof) will uphold, the ne∣cessity of an industrious duty, and the useful∣ness of a setled Ministery, and the peace of a good Conscience. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16.
The Postscript to the First part. TILENUS Thinks fit to give this further account of his design in the foregoing papers. He re∣solved at first onely to give the true state of the questions, and naked∣ly to lay down the tenents, as well negative as affirmative, in as few, significant and clear ex∣pressions as was possible. Afterwards he met with some temptation to affix quotations out of Scri∣pture, in the Margin, to prove the several branch∣es of these tenents. Then considering that most men pass over such proofs, as are only referred un∣to, though they have their bibles lying by them (which are not alwayes at hand neither) rather then give themselves the trouble to turn to them; He thereupon concluded, it would be for the Readers greater ease and advantage, if he cited the very words of Scripture, out of which such proofs are to be made; and he had not gone farre in this method, but it came into his minde to be a little more distinct in setting down the grounds of his Proofs and Reasons for his affirmative and negative tenents respectively; which is done ac∣cordingly in the later Articles. And yet in the former as well as these, are conteined such To∣picks
and heads of arguments, as a little skill (to reduce them to the rules of Art) will be suffi∣cient to improve, to thy impregnable establish∣ment in the present truth. And now Reader before Tilenus can dismiss thee, he thinks himself obliged to make thee sa∣tisfaction for having imposed upon thee in two or three particulars, when he personated the Infidel and the carnal man. One was in effect, that God is not serious when he forbids the wicked (Reprobates as they call them) to sin, and invites them to repentance and amendment of life. He doth this, they say, by his revealed will (which indeed they account not his will) but by his secret will (which is his will properly so called) he wills the contrary. Celari interdum à Deo (saith Beza) aliquid ei, quod in verbo Patefacit, repugnans. Resp. ad acta colloq. Mompel. Part. 2. pag. 173. & Piscator in disp. contra Schasm. saith, Deum interdum verbo signifi∣care se velle, quod reverà non vult: aut nol∣le quod reverà vult. Now because Gods inter∣course with Abraham about his offering up of Isaac Gen. 22. is the great instance usually pro∣duced to prop up that opinion (so dangerous to pi∣ety, and so dishonourable to the sacred veracity and sincerity of Almighty God, if not taken Cum grano salis, and qualified by some Commodious interpretation) according to that saying of Lu∣ther (in Gen. 22.) Deus dixit and Abraha∣mum:
Occide filium &c. Quomodo? Lu∣dendo, simulando, ridendo. And a little after, Atqui apud Deum est lusus, & si liceret ita dicere, mendacium est? Therefore Tilenus thought it an acceptable service to God and good men, if he could offer any thing to clear the re∣putation of that passage from the suspicion of be∣ing accessary to that doctrine in whose behalf 'tis so often pleaded. To this end let us examine the plea. Gen. 22. 2. God said unto Abraham, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Mo∣riah: and offer him there for a burnt offe∣ring, upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee of. (Where by the way the Reader may take notice that Abraham was to expect further orders from Almighty God before the utmost ex∣ecution of this affair: But to the plea) here, say they, we have Gods revealed will signified by a command, that Isaac should be slain: But by his secret will, that he would not have it so, ap∣pears as well by the event as by the Angels voice ver. 12. Lay not thine hand upon the Lad, &c. Therefore God commands what he nilleth &c. But Tilenus sees no such matter, no contradicti∣on, no opposition betwixt Gods secret and reveal∣ed will in this passage, being confident to affirm that God willed with his secret will, all that was commanded by his revealed; which was, not the occision or slaughtering of Isaac (to which
single act they usually restrain Gods revelation and Command) but Abrahams voluntary and free obedience, in devoting, Consecrating and rendring up his son for a sacrifice at Gods com∣mand; some particulars whereof are set down, Take thy son, goe into the land of Moriah, carry wood and fire, make an Altar, and binde Isaac and expose him upon it. That God will∣ed this, is clear by the event according to the ad∣versaries own rule, Ex eventu judicandum est de Dei Voluntate. And that Gods command, or revealed will intended the same and no more, appears by all those Scriptures, which (speaking of this matter) do positively affirm, that Abraham, did fully perform what God had commanded. So Hebr. 11. 17. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: And he that had received the promises offered up his only son. So Jam. 2. 21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? And so God himself interprets it, Gen. 22. 16. Because thou hast done this thing &c. To which purpose also 'tis observable, that God does not use the same phrase of speech in the Prohibition ver. 12. that he used in the injunction ver. 2. Here Gods will revealed is, offer eum in holocaustum, but there the will of God forbidding is (not ne offeras; for that was done already according to Gods in∣terpretation and requiry, but) neinjicias manum tuam super puerum.
Objection. The phrase and word of command in ordinary construction seemed to imply the slay∣ing of Isaac; because it was the custome to slay such sacrifices before they were burnt upon the altar. Resp. For answer to this, it needs not be re∣plied, that words and phrases in Holy Scripture (as well as in other authors) are used in diverse sen∣ses: but the answer is, that there was a necessitie (upon the matter) that Almighty God should use a phrase that carried such an obvious sense with it, because this was a special command gi∣ven unto Abraham for a signal trial of his faith and obedience, [And it came to pass that God did tempt Abraham Gen. 22. 1.] which there could have been no proof of, if God had expounded to him the sense of his command after this manner, Go, take thy son, &c. but thou needest not startle at the imposition, for my intent and pur∣pose is, only that thou shouldest bring him in∣to the land of Moriah, and blinde him and ex∣pose him there upon the altar, which thou shalt make for that purpose, and then I will accept thy obedience, and rescue thy son from the knife by a voice from Heaven. If God had thus far revealed his will, Abrahams faith had found no difficultie to contest against, and conse∣quently had not been capable of an approbation. The upshot therefore of all is this, that in this in∣tercourse with Abraham, God revealed his will,
and nothing but his will, but not his whole will, which he was not bound to do, neither could the doing of it consist with his design of trying the sin∣ceritie of Abrahams graces. But this is not to be drawn into example, when we speak of Gods ordinary external intercourse with sinners invi∣ting and calling them to repent, believe and obey the Gospel, upon promise of life and peril of dam∣nation. For 1. This would make the divine call, not only a continual temptation (which is absurd e∣nough) but also ridiculous; for this would not be such a temptation, as that which occurs in A∣brahams example; wherein the duty command∣ed was not only possible to be performed, but was also actually performed, so far forth, that God declared his own satisfaction in it by a voice from Heaven. But (according to the doctrin of those men we oppose) God is supposed to be alwayes tempting and trying, whether that will come to pass, which is altogether impossible to come to pass, that is, he tempts and tries again and a∣gain, whether the reprobate will believe and con∣vert, that is, whether he will do that, which Gods own decree hath rendred impossible for him to do. Which is, as if one should be very sollici∣tous to make an experiment, whether the blinde would see, or the dead walk. 2. This would make Gods calling of Reprobates, which is done by his signant will alone; (as they say) not only
an act of hypocrisie, in seeming to wish them well, by desiring their repentance and salvation, when his beneplacent will hath decreed otherwise: but also an act of cruelty; because by this calling, God is not only the occasion, or cause of their in∣fidelitie and disobedience (it being impossible for reprobates to answer that call) but of their great∣er punishment likewise, into which they do neces∣sarily fall for that their necessary and unavoid∣able infidelitie. From which it follows. 3. That that will whereby God wills not to give to reprobates sufficient grace to inable them to repent and believe (much less irresistible grace, that actually they must do so) should not be Voluntas beneplaciti, but rather Maleplaciti, a will of displeasure rather then of good pleasure; because it is an affection of the greatest hatred and aversa∣tion; where as notwithstanding Gods calling unto faith and to salvation (which is done by the word) is declared to be an act of his good pleasure and grace, [Ephes. 1. 9. 2 Thes. 1. 11. 2 Tim. 1. 9.] and an evidence of his compassion and love, as may easily be collected out of Holy Scripture. [2 Chron. 36. 15. Rom. 1. 7. Hos. 9. 15.] Lastly, according to the doctrin of that distin∣ction, and those men that make use of it, the whole revelation and ministery of the Gospel, goes for no more, but voluntas signi, the will of God to give out such a thing for a signe only, when in∣deed, it is the will of Gods beneplaciture and
is expresly so called, as shall appear in the second particular, wherein Tilenus offers the Reader sa∣tisfaction, which is, about the sense of another text perversly cited by him above upon another oc∣casion. Maccovius [Colleg. de Predest. disp. 2.] to prove that God would not have all men to be sa∣ved; no, not [voluntate signi] contrary to the most express grammatical sense of Scripture [1 Tim. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.] he saith, voluntas sig∣ni, non est propriè dicta voluntas, sed est ver∣bum Dei, that which is revealed and signified (in holy Scripture) to be the minde of God, is not his will properly so called, but it is the word of God, (as if it were consistent with his sacred veracitie to utter something disagreeable to his own will) and he affirms further [disp. 5.] that God doth not will, that is, not delight in or ap∣prove of any thing, but what he doth effect, and this he indeavours to prove out of Psal. 115. 3. a paralel place to which, we have Psalm 135. 6. against which doctrin these 2. assertions are clear. 1. That Gods word or his command revealed in holy Scripture, is his will properly so called. John 6. 38, 39, 40. I came down from Hea∣ven—to do the will of him that sent me—and this is the will of him that sent me. Rom. 2. 18. Thou art called a Jew—and makest thy boast of God, and knowest his will—being instructed out of the law. 1 Thes. 4. 3. This
is the will of God even your sanctification. Mat. 7. 21. But he that doth the will of my father, &c. See Mat. 12. 50. John 7. 17. chap. 9. 31. Heb. 13. 21. 1 John 2. 17. 'Tis that which is right in the eyes of the Lord. Deut. 6. 17, 18. & Heb. 13. 21. 'Tis that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. Rom. 12. 2. And if it be not so, how can we be assured, that we do please him, and are acceptable in his sight, when we walk according to this rule? 2. This will of God is not alwayes done, but many times the contrary. Isa. 65. 12. & chap. 66. 4. When I called ye did not answer; when I spake ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did chuse that wherein I delighted not. So Ier. 19. 5. & chap. 32. 35. They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my minde. Now to come to those passages of the Plalmist; when he saith, The Lord doth whatsoever plea∣seth him, it cannot be understood of mans work, whether we mean his sin or his duty. 1. Not of his sin; for that cannot be said to please God. For he is not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness. Psal. 5. 4. And there∣fore most of our adversaries are ashamed, direct∣ly to attribute the effecting thereof unto God. Nor yet 2. Can it be understood of mans duty;
for that pleaseth God, not as it is opus operatum [Isa. 1, 12. &c.] but as it is a duty, and a duty it cannot be, if it be Gods doing; for a duty is a work performed by an inferiour, in obedience to the command of his superiour, who hath authori∣tie over him; and consequently mans duty cannot be a work of Gods only doing: besides, he that commands a thing, he would have that thing, which he commands, to be done by him, to whom he doth command it: but he that does that thing (supposed to be under command) himself, he wills not that it be done by another: otherwise he should at the same time both will and nill it to be done by that other. The Psalmist therefore is to be understood, not of the things, which the Lord would have done (in a way of duty) by others; nor yet of such things as he promises to perform himself upon condition of mans obedience, which through default hereof many times are not accom∣plished, as Numb. 14. 30. 1 Sam. 2. 30.) but of all things, which he intends absolutely to exe∣cute and bring to pass himself (as Psal. 33. 9.) and so we may observe, that his power in these works, is opposed to the impotencie of Idols, who are able to do just nothing: see those two Psalms throughout, viz. Ps. 115. 3. &c. Psal. 135. 6. &c. But here a question may be moved, whether the will of God can at any time be defeated? To which the answer is, that 'tis most true in a good sense, that the will of God is alwayes fulfilled.
For the understanding whereof we must distin∣guish of Gods will and the objects of it. Some things God wills Absolutely, and they must of necessity come to pass, otherwise, that will of God could not be truly said to be fulfilled. Thus when 'tis said, God will give Christ for a Cove∣nant of the people; Whoremongers and Adulte∣rers God will judge, the faithful he will save; if Christ were not so given, or Whoremungers and Adulterers could avoid judgment, or the faithful fail of salvation, Gods will declared in those promises and threatnings, were utterly bro∣ken. Thus also, it being Gods absolute will, that man being a reasonable creature, should be a Free Agent, he must be so of necessity. Other things God wills disjunctively, and they come to pass contingently, or not at all; otherwise if they should come to pass of necessity, Gods will should be crost in them. For in these things his will is, that neither the one, nor the other particular should be necessary, but either that they should not be at all, or be Contingent. This distinction may be seen in his judgment threatned and propounded to David 2 Sam. 24. 12, 13. Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three things, chuse which of them I shall do unto thee. Wilt thou that seven years of famine come upon the land, or wilt thou flee three moneths before thine ene∣mies, or that there be three dayes of pestilence in thy land. Here God absolutely will'd to send
a judgment, and consequently the coming of it was necessary: but which of the three was re∣ferred to Davids choice, and so that was contin∣gent. But this distinction is more evident in Gods commands, establish't with promises and threatnings, relating to mans transgression and obedience respectively. So in his commands for temporal safety. Jer. 21. 8, 9. And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord, Behold I set before you the way of life, and the way of death. He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Caldeans, that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey. Here Gods will is disjunctive, and whether they continued in the city, and pe∣rish't there, or fled out to the Caldeans and were preserved by them, it was a matter of their own free choise, and so Contingent; but which soe∣ver of these two courses they took and succeeded accordingly, Gods will was fulfilled. So it is likewise in the matter of life and death eternal. Deut. 11. 26, 27, 28. Behold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a curse: A bles∣sing, if ye obey the Commandments of the Lord your God: And a curse if ye will not obey, but turn aside out of the way, which I command you, and Rom. 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through
the spirit, do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. So that whether they live by one means, or die by the other, Gods will is necessa∣rily fulfilled; because his will is not that they shall either necessarily observe his commands, or necessarily transgress them: But if they doe transgress (though that transgression be Contin∣gent, Death is the necessary Doom awarded to it. And if they do observe them though that observation be a matter of choise and so contin∣gent also, yet is life the necessary Reward, and absolutely designed to crown that obedience. It appears by this discourse, that God cannot fail of accomplishing such an end, and after such a manner as his wisdome thinks fit to pro∣pound in his intercourse with voluntary and free Agents; for if he cannot prevail with us (by such means, and such a manner of working as is agreeable to the condition of our intellectual na∣ture) to suffer our selves to be saved by him, in performing that service to which his goodness hath ordained us (which his good pleasure is set upon in the first place) then his good pleasure is fulfilled by inflicting upon us that punishment, which he treatned; according to that saying of S. Augustine, Facit Deus Voluntatem suam de eo, à quo voluntas ejus facta non est.
ANNOTATA QUAEDAM in FUNDAMENTALES Mri THOMAE PARKERI Theses De traductione hominis peccatoris ad vitam.
LECTORI. OCyùs te in pedes Conjice, Le∣ctor , ni mavis in harum Thesium Editoris substratos Encomiorum flos∣culis Casses incidere; vel perplexis earundem Autho∣ris plagulis irretiri. Neque tamen ab isto metuendum esset, Scholarum inaniis, ver∣borum{que} Captum humanum fugientium in∣volucris sensa mentis intricante, nisi viam aed periculum ille, incautus, opinor, Prae∣fator sic stravisset, Vir sanè, quicunque is est, Cordatus, quem nec hoc nomine tàm incusandum Censuerim, quòd ab Ecclesiae etiamnum Anglicanae doctrinâ, formulis{que} (ex praejudicijs imbibitis) abhorrere vide∣atur, quàm jure merito laudibus efferendum, quòd placidum se, & modesti ingenii vi∣rum, indiciis minimè obscuris, nec non bona∣rum literarum benè compotem praestiterit. Laudet sanè, ut sibi gratum faciat, Cameronem Scoto-Gallum, Twissium
Anglo-Britannum, Arminium autem & Corvinum Batavos, Tilenum etiam Gal∣lum, à Twissio, sc. Confossos proculcet. Rursus Robertum Parkerum, Amesium, Robinsonum, ad coelum laudibus vehat: nec tamen effecerit, ut Thomas hic tanto∣perè praedicatus Parkerus, Sanctissimum Ʋnici nostri Salvatoris Benedicti Evangeli∣um, decretorum Dei de salute & interitu humano fundum non subruerit, aut ipsi Justitiae soli tenebras non offuderit. Quasi verò, O boni, absque vobis esset defensori∣bus & hyperaspistis, ne ipse quidem Deus Socinum Arminiumque (Par impar pau∣lò invidiosiùs Praefatori Conjunctum, at toto coelo disseparandum) non esset refellendo. Nos ad Evangelium ipsius Dei Patris, Christi{que} Domini ex ejus sinu prodeuntis, & sancti utrius{que} spiritus inibi clarissimè lo∣quentis provocamus. Loquere jam, mi Parkere, verùm sicut Dei, Christi{que} oracula. En Praestò adsumus ut divinis Eloquiis fasces proni submittamus. Nostrûm neutri credatur: uni Deo fidei obedientiam praestare didicimus. Agè ergo: arrectis enim auribus documenta coelestia li∣benter expectamus.
LECTORI. SIste te parumper, erudite Le∣ctor, ut noris cujam & qualem pagellam compri∣mis, hoc scilicet solo nomi∣ne redarguendam, quod sit tota gemmea. In histo∣riis, compendia, dispendia; at in The∣ologiâ, polemicâ saltem, , atque instar montium, qui, quo sublimiori consurgunt cacumine, magis sterilescunt. Optandum ex Theologo∣rum disceptationibus, & colloquiis, ut puta Mompelgartensi, Hagiensi, aliisque suc∣cum & sanguinem exprimi, responsionum lacinias abradi, in personas, nominaque (quas vere rabiem & rixas Theologo∣rum vocavit Melanchthon) lituras expun∣gi: quibus sarmentis, siquis inter  (quos vocat Spiritus Sanctus Eccles. 12. 12. , magistros collectionum fi∣ve pandectarum. Merc.) no∣men suum professus, operam daret averrun∣candis, plus certe quam ex alio quovis scrip∣to elenctico proficerent lectores. Vide consilium I. Hornbeek. in sum, Controvers, de Papismop. 316.. Dicam
quod res est: misere ruspamur in controver∣sâ Theologiâ, & si quando veritatis impor∣tunâ fame confecti, margaritam offendimus. Exclamare libet, populus quod cla∣mat Osyri. Invento.— Nervosi siquidem sunt, & acuti Theologi Camero, ubi habet Tilenum adversarium, Twissius, ubi Arminium, Corvinum, eun∣demque Tilenum confodit; at! at! post∣quam pulmones in verborum cortice exagi∣taveris, vix tandem medullam sensus potis eris eruere anhelus lector. Inde est adeo laudabile institutum Reverendi Viri Tho∣mae Parkeri, authoris Thesium de Tradu∣ctione peccatoris ad vitam, qui eadem premit vestigia, nec taedio lectorem enecat. Neminem suppilavit, sugillavit neminem. Non habent scriptores, quem incusent stelli∣onatus, nec alii verbera violentae linguae pa∣tiuntur. Arminii, & Socini nomina re∣liquit intacta; non ita causam, & argu∣menta. Sentiunt se mori tacito vulnere, qui in argumentis aut Conversionis, aut Satisfactionis periculose, & infoeliciter dis∣putarunt. Hic is est, si nescis, lector, cujus pater
Robertus Parker, , tam e∣rudite & copiose scripsit de signo crucis, Descensu Christi ad inferos, & Eccle∣siastica politeia, in causa Religionis pa∣triae exul, qui una cum Amesio, notissi∣mum virum I. Robinsonum, Vide eundem Hornbeckium in Brownismo p. 625. ad sobri∣am in disciplina mentem revocavit. Dig∣nus est adeo hic noster Author tam istoc pa∣tre, quam hac prole. Id unice agit Vir Doctissimus, ut Gratiae Divinae suus con∣stet honos sartus-tectus; ut Gratia praeveni∣ens, excitans, pulsans, efficax & actuo∣sa habeatur, non segnis, & voluntatis no∣strae pedissequa, qualem adversarii com∣miniscuntur, qui Gratiae verbo abusi sunt, (ut Vidi quem admodum potuerit (Pelagius) etiam gratiam nominari sub ambigua generalitate, quid senti∣ret, abscondens, gratiae tamen vocabulo, frangens in∣vidiam, offensionemque declinans. Aug. de pecc. Orig. contra Pelag. & Caelest: cap. 37. Augustinus jam diu notavit) ad frangendam invidiam. Si cui minus arridet, quod à stili Evan∣gelici simplicitate abhorrere videatur; &  quaedam terminorum Philoso∣phicorum interpolasse, sciat velim, lectorem desiderari gravem, & in scholis exercita∣tum,
cui si sit ingenium Theologicum, nihil nocebit stilus metaphysicus; nec omnino desunt, quod dixit in re leniori Antonius, [lib. 9. sect. 3.] etiam in phrasi . Pro∣diere saepius hae eaedem Theses, cum aliis e∣jusdem commatis Amesii Tractatulis compa∣ctae, à doctis indoctisque pro Amesianis ha∣bitae, & citatae; sed quod dolendum maxi∣mè, mancaesemper, & imperfectae,  nonnunquam addita, loca Scriptu∣raefoedissimè distorta, & transversà tuen∣tia: quindecim integras theses nescio cujus sacrilegae manus depeculabantur. Pauci haec observarunt, miratique non superesse, qui plagiarium & stellionem insequeretur, & injus vocaret. Tu igitur, ingenue Le∣ctor, aequi bonique consulas, quod ego, qui in sacro sum satellitio ultimae sortis, in ex∣tremis Angliae oris ab omnibus paenè bonis literis exul, (—.) hanc qualemcumque opellam dabam, tribus
quatuorve exemplaribus MSS. & im∣pressis fideliter collatis, ut authorem tibi, authorique suum nomen & Theses vindica∣rem. H. S.
THESES DE Traductione Peccatoris ad vitam. THESIS I. DEus cum sit ens absolute primum Exod. 3. 14. propterea primum est ac summum bonum: & quia primum ens, proinde omnia ab ipso sunt: quia vero summum bonum, sum∣mus est finis ad quem tendunt. Si enim ali∣quid esset, quod non esset ab ipso, plura pri∣ma essent, & proinde non esset absolute pri∣mum: & si summum bonum, summus finis est, quia bonum finis est; & si summus finis, omnia ad ipsum tendunt, alioqui non esset absolute summus. Hinc Deus Apoc. 22. 13. , omnium entium ad seipsum Motor est. Irrationalium qui∣dem, quia sensuum conclusa limitibus, me∣diate
duntaxat: rationalium verò selectae multitudinis ad fruendum ipso. Cum enim proxime per intellectum & voluntatem ad Deum accedant, proximum eorum bonum erit unio cum eo quod summum est, seu frui∣tio Dei: quae divinae amicitiae & favoris est adeptio. Annot. Ad THIS. I. Ad Thesin primam paucula haec videntur adnotanda. 1. vocem [omnia] pag. 1. lin. 5. ad entia Creata restringendam (uti Parkerum voluisse fit vero simile p. 2. l. 8.) ne aut pec∣catum ens esse negetur, aut de numero esse creaturarum, & sub voce [omnia] Comprehendi debere affirmetur. Quod quorsum tendat judicare obvium est. 2. Eadem pag. 2. lin. & sequentibus intelligendus videtur, quasi entia irrationalia (mediatè licet) ab ipso Deo ad ipso fruendum moverentur; Dilutè nimis. 3. Cave ne hîc Dei ipsius (naturalem an su∣pernaturalem) quoad se, cum Dei de nobis fi∣ne voluntariè intento de nostri ipsius fruitio∣ne confundas. Versatiles n. sunt hae locutiones. THESIS II. Intentio finis hujus, pro modo indepen∣dentis ac supremae voluntatis ex consilio
agentis suo, ABSOLƲTA est. Rom. 11. 34. Isa. 40. 13. Nec enim  potest is esse, qui à conditione determinatur extrinseca: cui praescribitur ordinis ratio ab eo quod ordinatur ab ipso: qui discit ab homine agendi modum ac finem, adeoque regitur ab ipso ut mensurante actum suum. Quin contra  homo infinitus & inordinatus foret, quippe disponeret seip∣sum ad finem prius, quam disponatur à Deo. Annot. Ad THES. II. 1. Intentionem finis hujus h. e. Suiipsius] duriusculè dicitur, nec tamen sano sensu ac∣ceptum, [pro perfectionum divinarum mani∣festatione] admodum aversor, sed malè metuo ne fallaciâ sit insidiarum integumentum. 2. Ut maxime Consilio Dei (ex citatis lin. ult. pag. 2. Scripturae commatis) sua ab-omni∣creato independentia astruatur, non sequitur tamen voluntati divinae ad extra, omnimodam independentiam, & finis hujus, h. e. suiipsius absolutam quoad omnium, speciatim, per∣fectionum suarum, omni tempore, manife∣stationem, ascribendam esse. Non quod ne∣getur, sed quod ex istis locis sequi non constet. Quid? quod ex ipsa Dei voluntate absolu∣tâ, & consilio sit, ut finis adeptio non sit ab∣soluta, nisi media includantur.
3. Absolutam esse istam finis hujus intenti∣onem sano sensu admittimus, & libenter, nec tamen absonum videri debet si voluntas divi∣na dependere interdum dicatur à conditione aliquâ (quam ipse & statuit, & principaliter efficit) non quidem dependentiâ causalitatis ut∣pote , sed dependentiâ quâdam re∣lationis, uti Patrem à filio dependere, ut sit Pater, nemo sanus, opinor, negaverit. Nec obstat quod sequitur. Ipse n. Deus determinavit se hoc sic facturum, & homines ad finem (prout novit justitiam, mi∣sericordiam & sapientiam suam decere) dispo∣siturum. THESIS III. Hinc multo minus ex praevisa fide; haec enim medium est ad fruitionem Dei qui finis est: idcirco non antecedit intentionem finis ut conditio. Annot. Ad THIS. III. 1. Aliud est Praevisa fides, & ex eâ: aliud Praescientia fidei, & secundum eam. 1 Pet 1. 2. Fides n. est actus officii nostri: Praescientia actus perfectionis divinae. [ex] Causam, [Se∣cundum] ordinem notat. Ex praescita fide tanquam causâ dependere Dei intentionem fi∣nis seu praemii nostri negamus, fieri secundum
praescientiam cum S. Scripturâ affirmamus. 2. Finis hic sc. ad Deum unio, fruitioque (cum perfectionum divinarum viz. misericor∣diae glorificatricis paritèr & gloriosae, reliqua∣rumque manifestatione plenissimâ conjunctus) intelligitur vel ut Finis ex consilio voluntatis nudè consideratus, quo de hîc non quaeritur; vel quasi judicialiter, & Politicè, ut praemium & merces ex beneplacito Dei miserentis, mero, libero, absoluto, & independente, omnes{que} causas secundas antegrediente manans, & cer∣tis legibus promissa; at ex Dei veracitate & Constantiâ, legum seu conditionum harum observatoribus praestanda. Hoc modo, rectè, secundum S. scripturam, Voluntatis & Consi∣lii divini, declaratricem, affirmatur, fidem eti∣am in Dei intentione (Praescitam, nondum Praestitam) Praemii & Mercedis adeptionem an∣tecedere. 3. Notandum Anthorem sibi non satis con∣stare in fine Dei intentionis assignando, quem interdum seipsum respicere intendentem, inter∣dum hominem intentum indicat. THESIS IV. Via ad finem istum exhibita homini fu∣it in statu primaevo, quo viribus instrueba∣tur idoneis, quibus Deo, si voluisset, potuit
frui. Verum quia finitus, ideo mutabilis, & quia mutabilis, seducente Diabolo desci∣vit à statu illo: unde summi boni interrup∣ta est adeptio. Iis tamen quos ad finem istum destinarat, ex misericordia reconciliari vo∣luit Deus; ita tamen ut simul justitia ma∣neret illaesa: quare tum pro offensa satis∣facere oportuit prius, quam in conditio∣nem justitiae restaurari. Quia vero hoc â nobis, quippe nullarum virium, Rom. 5. 6. effici non potuit: aut per alium effici oportuit, aut de reconciliatione nostra actum. Hoc autem quia perficere non debuit alius nisi homo, nec sufficere potuit nisi Deus: hinc Christus  mediator desig∣natus; qui redemptionem à peccatis vir∣tute satisfactionis, & restaurationem virtute justitiae procurans, reconciliationem impetravit iis, quibus voluit Deus. Annot. Ad THES. IV. 1. Cavendum est, ne prima Theseos hujus verba temerè deglutiamus. Viam n. ad finem istum, Dei fruitionem (omni modo considera∣tum, sc. ut fruitio etiam Christi Mediatoris existentis, & Judicis, Remuneratorisque futuri, ex misericordiâ, justitiâ temperatâ, in∣cludatur)
non fuisse, homini in statu primae∣vo exhibitam, nec in isto statu, viribus ad Deo, hoc modo considerato, fruendum, ho∣minem instructum fuisse fidentèr asserimus. Quod est Authoris nostri . 2. Ut facilè largiar (quod tamen vix qui∣vis capit) hominem primaevum ideò mutabilem quia finitum (quamvis finitum et mutabilem fuisse procul sit omni dubio) summique boni adeptionem ex istâ suâ voluntariâ defectione, seducente Diabolo, interruptam fuisse; non sic tamen, ut Christus Mediator, Judexque noster sub istâ summi Boni Consideratione ve∣niat: ne (ut caetera infinita incommodatace∣am) Christus noster in Adamo primaevo, in∣tegro censitus, in ipso nobiscum laberetur, peccatique Originalis se alligaret, aut à Deo Patre, ejusdem reus censeretur, unde satisfa∣ctio (quam eum divinae justitiae Praestitisse, ne∣mo praeterquam qui absolutas Dei intentiones esse omnes crediderit, negare, nisi laesis prin∣cipiis potest) salusque omnis nostra corruat ne∣cesse est. 3. Si per eos quos ad finem istum destinârat Deus, intelligi vult absolutâ et praecisâ salvan∣di, seu ad summum finem perducendi, intenti∣one destinatos, non video ut seipsum sibi in eâ∣dem oratione reconciliet: Mox. n. subiungit, iis ex misericordiâ reconciliari voluit Deus, &c.
Sed cave, mi Parkere, ne ejus∣modi En sublapsarium. Vid. quae ad Thes. 10. de suprapositis fundamentis notavi. absoluta ad finem istum de∣stinatio reconciliationi dictae repugnet, et universam Christi satisfactionis necessitatem, vel etiam utilitatem funditus e∣vertat et aboleat. Quos n. ad finem istum de∣stinârat (intellige absolutè) Deus, iis certè jampridem erat reconciliatus, absque hoc, ut Christi interventu fieret satisfactio, et inde manans reconciliatio. Non insto ne asperior paulò videar. Annot. Ad THES. IIII. Caetera de Satisfactione, Sana existimo, ni∣si quod quaedam in fine sint obscura, et Phra∣sis ultima [reconciliationem impetravit (Chri∣stus) iis, quibus voluit Deus] animadverten∣da. Quid. n. Pro quibus voluit Deus ut im∣petraret? Pro lapsis et Perditis omnibus? Non opinor dicturum te cum S. Scripturis. Pro Reprobis? Nequaquam. Pro Electis ergo? Fieri non posse, aut esse superfluum videri po∣test, si absolute & praecisè ad finem summum à Deo priús destinentur, quàm in Christum po∣nantur Credituri, imò quàm Christus satisfe∣cisse, aut in satisfactionis pretium destinari di∣catur.
THESIS V. Hinc quotquot reconciliandi fuerant, propter Christi merita reconciliari oportuit: proinde ut applicetur reconciliatio, merita Christi applicandaprius. Applicanda ve∣ro homini cum fint qua intellectu ac volun∣tate praedito, propterea ut ab ipso (Scal. ex. 307. sect. 27. lin. 2.) recipienda, appli∣canda sunt. Hinc foedus Dei cum electis e∣mergit, se recipientibus Christum reconci∣liatum iri. Conditio à parte Dei, recon∣ciliatio es, in qua tamen debitor non nobis est Deus, sed sibi, qui seipsum negare non potest. Ea etiam finis ipse hominis est, non quidem quoad rem alius à fruitione Dei; relatione solum distinctus interruptionis prae∣viae. Conditio vero à parte nostra est Christi Receptio: conditio autem non ut ab homine dispensatore actus hujus, sed ut in homine quid ad reconciliationem praerequisitum. Annot. Ad THES. V. 1. Nota ut hîc sermonem in re prorsùs eâ∣dem licentèr variet. In Thesi 4. legimus
Deum reconciliari voluisse quibusdam; hîc homi∣es reconciliandi et reconciliari dicuntur, idque propter Christi merita. Quid ergo? An Chri∣stus non meruit ut Deus hominibus reconcilia∣retur? Non dixeris, opinor. At tantundem hîc dicitur. Certè Christus Deo, non homi∣nibus satisfecit. Verissimum quidem est, nos recte dici Deo esse reconciliandos, ut applice∣tur reconciliatio merito Christi impetrata: u∣tinam a apertius & liquidius nos docuisset, quo pacto merita Christi prius applicanda fue∣rint. 2. Exmeritorum Christi, ad hominem, quâ intellectu & voluntate praeditum, applicatione, Foedus Dei cum Electis emergens, hoc esse dici∣tur [se recipientibus Christum reconconciliatum iri] quod oracularem ambiguitatem, ex vo∣cum sono, referre videtur. Sed praestat sic intelligere, ac si clarè affirmetur, Deum re∣conciliatum iri recipientibus Christum: Quid a. sit hoc [Christum recipere] utinam explicâsset. Sed quid si noluit, ne quid infirmum subtèr latens exponeretur: aut non potuit, Thosibus, dicam, an hypothesibus salvis? 3. Non moror sequentium amphibolias di∣ctionum, nec minus exactas loquendi formas vellico. Conditiones audio; placet. At re∣conciliationem ad Deum non esse rem aliam ab ejusdem fruitione, sed idem hominis finis, nisi quod relatione interruptionis praeviae distingua∣tur,
fateor me non satis capere; non quod minus intelligam, quàm quod minus sanum esse judicem. Sed transeat. 4. Conditionem à parte nostrâ, Sc. Christi receptionem ab homine non propriis naturae viri∣bus praestari, sed à Dei praesertim gratiâ, da∣mus: modò hominis esse actum, à nobis, mediante Dei Evangelio, per spiritûs sancti gratiam productum, non negetur. 5. Meminerit lector, Conditionem hanc, ab Authore Concedi, esse in homine quid ad recon∣ciliationem Praerequisitum. THESIS VI. Applicatio utriusque conditionis fit primo per deductionem earum ad actum ut sint: deinde per conservationem in actu ut porro sint. Deductio autem ad actum est Recep∣tionis Christi prius, cum ex ea tanquam me∣dio praerequisito Reconciliatio ineatur. Haec vero vocatio dici solet, quae Motus est à Deo, quo Christi receptionem electis inge∣nerat. Annot. Ad THES. VI. 1. Advertat etiam, quod ex eâ, tanquam medio praerequisito, Reconciliatio ineatur,
eodem hîc fatente. An verò haec vocatio dici soleat (in sacris literis) ambigo. 2. Reconciliatio hîc dicitur vocatio, quae motus est à Deo, quo Christi receptionem electis in∣generat. Quid audio? Reconciliatio gene∣rat receptionem, quae receptio est reconcilia∣tione prior, seu quid ei praerequisitum? An∣non haec sunt valdè operosum nihil? Capiat qui potest. Fallor? An haec sibi contradi∣cunt? Certè Robertus Parkerus Pater tuus fu∣it, non idem tuus filius. THESIS VII. Motio hominis est: ideo Movens requi∣ritur, & Mobile quod movetur, & Mo∣tus moventis actus, & Res Motu Facta. De quibus ordine. Annot. Ad THES. VII. Motio hominis est, inquis. Cave dixe∣ris. Quid? An hominem affirmas actûs hujus dispensatorem, quod modò Thess 5. negâsti? Rursus haereo, nisi motio purè putè passivè in∣telligatur. Pergo.
THESIS VIII. MOVENS est, qui intendit finem: principium & finis Deus. Movens autem est, ut consilio agens; proinde decreto, quod pariter secundum proportionem decreti circa finem, absolutum est. Nec enim fi∣nis absolute ab ipso intenti, ex fallibili con∣ditione suspendi eventus potest. Annot. Ad THES. VIII. De fine, qui ipse Deus dicitur & est, litem non moveo. Sed an eodem modo Deus in∣tendat se ut finem suum, & hominis finem, seu mercedem magnam, Consilio, proinde decre∣to, meritò ambigo. Intendit quippe, se, finem suum, opinor, Naturâ; se autem homi∣nis finem, Consilio. Nec satis assequor, nisi statuendum sit Dei Decreta esse ipsum Deum, & posse seipsum non velle sicut decreta Potuisset facere non voluisse, & Deum seipsum, Sicut de∣creta secundum voluntatis suae Consilium face∣re, arbitremur. Non tamen negaverim hominis finem Deum (si media ad eum assequendum connotet) à Deo homini absolutè intendi. Neque hinc metuendum est, si Dei intentio finis humani
sic explicetur, ne ex fallibili (Deus n. falli nequit) Conditione (non dico necessitatâ) eventus suspendatur, quam conditionem suprà Thes. 5. statuisti esse Christi receptionem. Hanc. n. secundum Evangelii vocem dicentis, Qui Credit Salvabitur, in Decreto hoc circa homi∣nem includi affirmo. Adeò ut certò certiùs, & infallibiliter, finis huusmodi eventus ex fal∣libili conditione non suspendatur. THESIS IX. 9. Et sicut in comparatione ad finem, sic qua id quod decernitur est effectus entis pri∣mi; à quo sicut Rom. 11. 36. omnium entium dependent essentiae, virtutes, actiones, sic praecipue Jac. 1. 17. supernaturalis boni. Hinc vocationem independente consilio pro∣ducens, tum per sapientiam de forma deli∣berat, tum per voluntatem intendit secun∣dum illam formam ex suppositione potentiae. Forma illa exemplar est & mensura verita∣tis in re, ut prout ipsa fuerit, sic rem fore necesse sit dependenter ab ea. Hinc ex con∣ditione in re non vult conversionem Deus, sed secundum deliberationem sapientiae suae, vo∣luntas intendit, & potentia exequitur im∣mutabilis. Et quia secundum sapientiam
& bonitatem vult & potest, proinde futu∣ram praevidet virtualiter à voluntate pen∣dentem. Annot. Ad THES. IX. Sicut decretum circa finem, seu decretum secundum proportionem decreti circa finem (stylo & phrasi horridis, hactenus inauditis, & mortalium captum penè superantibus) sta∣tim dixerat, sic (quid hoc [sic] sibi vult?) id quod decernitur (quid tibi est [id] istud? An ne{que} motio, nec movens, nec mobile, nec motus, nec res mou-facta? Quanta hîc con∣fusio, quantus tumultus?) sic id quod discer∣nitur, inquis, est effectus entis primi; à quo dependere omnium essentias, virtutes, Rom. 11. 36. Jac. 1. 17. actiones praecipuè boni supernaturalis, nullus dubito. Quid ergo? Hinc, inquis, vocationem (reconciliationem suprà Thes. 6. dixeras) independente consilio producens (in fieri intelligis, dum productu∣rus est, an in facto esse, quando produxit? ambigua n. est oratio) tum per sapientiam, in∣quis, de forma deliberat, tum per voluntatem intendit secundum illam formam ex suppositione potentiae. Quid audis lector? Evangelium an scholam? Apostolos an Sorbonam? Tran∣seat hoc omne. Sapientia divina de recon∣ciliationis forma deliberat, voluntas secundum formam illam intendit, Potentia exequitur. Concedo. Perge.
Forma, inquis, illa exemplar est, & mensu∣ra veritatio in re, ut prout ipsa fuerit, sic rem fore necesse sit dependenter ab eâ. Audio, sed Cave ne mox, , te fallas & incauto Lectori Scandalum objicias. Tam Metaphysica veritas seu rei, quasi The∣matis incomplexi auditur, posteà (ut mihi etiam liceat griphos loqui) Logicam Axioma∣tis affectionem, veritatem Thematis Com∣plexi, quasi formae dictae exemplaris exempla∣tum, veritas rei, esset veritatis Axiomati∣cae exemplar, deducere satages. Frustrà. Re∣conciliatio seu vocatio (quando visum est sic confundere) sit sanè res à for∣mâ N. B. hanc rem mo∣tufactam, vocatio∣nem seu reconciliati∣anem non esse sed re∣ceptionèm Christi praerequisitam. Thes. 46. istâ dependens. Non quae∣ritur verum de modo, & ordi∣ne, quem satius est eruditè ig∣norate, quàm in abscondita Dei  te ingerere. Hinc, inquis, undè, inquam? ex conditione in re non vult conversionem Deus (reconciliatio, vocatio, conversio, Christireceptio, idem tibi sunt; ve∣rùm quo Doctore praeeunte?) Ex? Absit, Quid si secundum? Non affirmo. Sine conditione non vult. Quid si asseram? Certè bonâ tuâ cum veniâ fecero, utpote qui receptionem Chri∣sti esse quid reconciliationi praerequisitum, modò bis , affirmaveras. Sed de his, post opportuniorem dicendi locum inveni∣am. Quomodo igitur vult Deus conversio∣nem?
Secundum deliberationem sapientiae suae, voluntas, inquis, intendit, & potentia exequitur immutabilis. Rectè, si dictio [im∣mutabilis] pro non mutandâ postquam even∣tum sortita est, vel actu superaverit humanam resistentiam, intelligatur. Quid balbutis? Eloquere: Potentiam intelligis irresistibilem; & hanc Deum exerere, clarè fatebo, in rebus, actibus{que} ab ipso solo, nullo mediante, pro∣ductis. Sed an Conversio &c. sint hujusmodi suo loco. 2. An satis has voces [secundum sapientiam & veritatem vult & potest] ad exactam dicen∣cendirationem & obrussam exegerit, Lector judicet. Proind futuram, pergit, praevidet & virtu∣alitèr à voluntate pendentem. Futuram sc. rem. Quam? Conversionem, Christi receptionem. Praevidet futuram. Rectè, sed vereor an sensu tuo. A Voluntate Pendentem (Dei, intelligis, opinor) rectè: praecipuè: Sed quid sibi vult virtualiter? Nugae. Hactenus fundamenta operosè, in meta∣physicae, nescio cujus arenâ, & scholarum quisquiliis jacta, mole quantumvis exiguâ ruunt suâ. Qui possunt ergo quae superstruuntur omnia non labi, non cidere? Tantum abest ut his fundamentis positis error concidat, nisi qui istis inaedificatur.
THESIS X. Exsupra-positis hisce fundamentis conci∣dit error in gradu-triplici. Primus, decre∣tum Velleitatis, quo determinationem ad conversionis actum, ad quam necessitate ho∣minem nonposse creditur, desiderare solum fingitur Deus. Secundus, desideratae illius determinationis praevisio per scientiam me∣diam, quà dependentis ab homine. Ter∣tius, ex praevisa determinatione, conditio∣nati concursus intentio concomitanter in effectum. Et primo Vellcitas illa decre∣tum non est: hoc enim imperanti est exsup∣positione potentiae; illa vero purus volun∣tatis actus cum potentiae defectu. Si enim quod possum volo, effectum impero: si quod non possum, desidero; assequi enim non possum quod volo. Proinde etiam indignum Deo. Nam Omnipotenti potentiae defe∣ctum adfingit, & assequendi voti incertam spem Felicissimo. Quid enim felicitas a∣liud, nisi boni expetiti certa fruitio? Quid vero omnipotentia, nisi potentia omnium in omnibus? Denique, objecti etiam ratione impossibile. Primam enim potentiam
transfert in hominem, qui creatura est & . Annot. Ad THIS. X. 1. Exsupra-positis, inquis, hisce fundamen∣tis Concidit error gradu triplici. Quid video? Fundamenta supra-posita? Certè humi sternatur aedificium necesse est, mox Cor. 3. 11. Vide. An∣not. ad Thes. 4. fundamenta concidunt. Cave ne Je∣sus Christus inter supra-posita funda∣menta subvertatur. Sed ad rem. Nequen. in vocabulis moramur. Ex supradictis (vis dicere) fundamentis error triplex concidit; De velleitate, Praevisione per scientiam mediam, ex praevisâ determinatione conditionali concursus intentio concomitanter in effectum. Laconicè satis. Sed quid si nemo mortalium hos errores, aut eorum aliquem erraverit Sic enunciatum? Velleitatem agnos∣cet non-nemo  Deo rectè ascri∣bi posse, qui tamen eum ad Conversionis actum necessitare potuisse (absque esset decreto suo in contrarium) inficias non iverit, velle autem Deum, ordine decretorum stante, ae∣grè concesserit. Scientiam mediam ex permul∣tis S. Scripturae periodis astruent nonnulli, qui tamen determinationem (N B.) quà ab homine (solo, aut principaliter dependentem) rotundè negaverint. Denique vix, aut ne vix quenquam
reperias, qui errorē tertiū, prout hîc expressum, intelligat, nedum teneat. Conditionatum quen∣dam concursum quidem Concomitanter in effe∣ctum rectè explicatum, viz. ut post Dei gratiam pulsantem Praevenientem, operantem, cum co∣operante fi quis asserat, errare eum ostenden∣dum erat, non praestruendum, ex fundamentis (quid dico labilibus?) corrutis & coliapsis. Quid si decretum velleit as non sit? Non est ergo (ut hominum more & ad captum mor∣talium loquamur) velleit as? Est quidem vo∣huntatis actus, non à. (uti affirmas) in Deo cum potentioe defectu. Voluntas divina à me supponitur potentiam Omnipotentis quandam habere comitem, & executricem quotiès, & quatenùs voluntati ejusdem libet cam ex con∣silio suo exercere, non autem semper per po∣tentiam Omnipotentioe ubique voluntatem suam exequitur Deus: Praesertim ubi decretum est (ut formulis tuis utar) imperantis (sc. obedi∣entiam) aut proerequisitum quid (agnosce phra∣ses tuas) homini, sub praemii & poenae spe, me∣tuque. Pergis. Si, n. inquis, quod possum vo∣lo, effectum impero: Si quod non possum, de∣sidereo; assequi n. non possum quod volo. Quid mihi & tibi, bone vir, quid velis aut possis? De Deo loquimur; qui quod vult facit, & quod velle potest, facere, vel effectum dare potest. Quod vult facit, quatenus, & quo∣usque facere vult. Quid a. si non semper ve∣lit,
quousque tu eum velle facere opinaris? Noli Deum  et omnipotentem, tuo modulo metiri. Et tu tamen, nunquamne ex∣periris voluntatem tuam potentiae tuae non im∣perare ut ad extremum virium ubique et sem∣per agat? Si te causâ solitariâ res in arbitrio tuo peni∣tùs sita agenda fuerit, effectum dabis: secùs, opinor, eveniet, si cum causis sociis, aut in∣strumentalibus (quae ab officio cessare, vel te destituere possint, praesertim si hoc ex tuo ip∣sius instituto sit ut possint) imperatum sit per∣ducendum in actum. Sed quid tibi vult effe∣ctum Impero? Ambigua locutio, et Anglicis∣mum sapiens, si etiam intelligatur ut significet (uti hic videtur) finem seu effectum intentum assequor. Praeterea, si volo, inquis, quod non possum, desidero. Rursus ambigua dictio. Desidero, si Careo significet; recte: si Cupio; male. Quippe doles, desperas, irasceris, sie homines solent, quando, quod non possunt, volunt. At indignum est Deo, et Proinde: Quare Proinde? An quia, quod tu vis et non potes, desideras? At Deus quodcunque vult, quatenus vult, potest, & facit. At indignum est Deo: Quare? inquam; quia omnipoten∣ti potentiae, inquis. defectum adfingit. Mi∣nime, inquam, nec Omnipotentis potentiae cu∣juscunque modi, nedum omnipotenti potentiae cui resisti nequit. Si quem defectum ad finge∣ret,
hic esset voluntati ad fingendus non-impe∣ranti, minime a. potentiae, voluntatis (ut ita dicam) imperata semper facienti, sed secundum voluntatis intentionem, et imperium, et eo∣rundem mensuram. At ad fingit etiam, in∣quis, assequendi voti incertam spem Foelicissi∣mo: Noli timere, bone vir, salva res est. Fal∣li aut incertus esse, nequit Deus: hoc certò certiùs scio, etiamsi nec tu, qui Metaphysicâ totâ imbutus es, modum explicare potis fueris. Nescire velle quae Magister Optimus Docere non vult, erudita est inscitia. Quod de foelicitate, & Omnipotentia Philosopharis, praetereo, ne actum agam. Denique, inquis, objecti ratione est impossibi∣le. Quid est hoc impossibile? Quid objecti ra∣tione? Scilicet, opinor, vis, velleitatem (mo∣re humano loquor) quandam esse in Deo, impossibile esse. Quare, inquam? Primam, inquis, Potentiam transfert in hominem, qui creatura est et . Quis transfert pri∣mam, &c? Deus? Quid primam, &c. trans∣fert? Hic de velleitate error, opinor. Mini∣mè a. inquam, Ego, sed hominem non ne∣gabit, quoad sensum gratiae pulsantis et Prae∣venientis esse omninò Passivum, quamvis in consensu (dicam et assensu interdum?) Esse plerunque à gratiâ actum, activum. Sed pri∣mam potentiam omnes, certe Christiani in Deum transferunt, eique acceptam ferunt. Faces∣sant, qui aliter sentiunt.
THESIS XI. Proinde nec observatur determinatio illa scientioe medioe. Hinc enim idea rei prius in creatura esset, quam in Deo: cognitio∣nis etiam divinoe principium à re finita pro∣cederet: ipsumque adeo summum bonum, omnipotens, infinitum, purus actus, dependenter à voluntatis creatoe consilio & providentia moveret. Quinetiam impos∣sibile idem. Quippe fribile est ante scien∣tiam, sicut . Proeest autem, dum proecedit ipsius . At nihil est nec exsistit, quod à Dei voluntate non est nec exsistit. Si proescit igitur priusquam velit, proescit ni∣hil. At si aliquid esset in homine, quod si∣ne proeeunte voluntate proesciret; quale est in fieri proesciretur à causa dependens. Cau∣sa vero si non proedeterminetur à Deo, mere contingens est. Hinc incerta vicissim esset divina cognitio. Quare proescientia non esset, quoe effecti est non contingentis sed ne∣cessarii judicium.
Annot. Ad THES. XI. Quamvis mihi nulla necessitas incumbat Scientiam Mediam astruendi, quaedam tamen non obscura hujusmodi scientiae rerum, ex suppositione circumstantiae hujus aut illius e∣venturarum vel secùs, vestigia in S. literis ap∣parent. Ut exemplum mitam de Davide in Keilah notissimum, de Chora∣zin 1 Sam. 23. 12. Mat. 11. 21. Luke 10. v. 3. etiam et Bethsaid â. Con∣sule, inter alia ejusdem numeri, dicta salvato∣ris nostri ad sacerdotes & scribas sciscitantes, Num tu es ille Christus? Dic nobis: dicentis, si vobis dixero, nequaquam credetis. Et versu sequente, Quod si etiam interroga∣vero, Luke 22. v. 67, 68. nequequam respondebitis mihi, neque absolvetis. En tibi tres eventus non e∣venturos ex suppositione etiam ipsius Christi Domini nostri. Caetera mitto. Frustra er∣go à te quaeritur, vel potius supponitur, quid prius sit aut posterius, frustra etiam, (quod non capis) impossibile affirmas. Nec ratio∣nes à te productae aliud quid probant, quam quod plurimis S. Scripturae affirmationibus sole clarioribus oculos obnubis, ut refrageris. Nec minus ideò Praescientia Dei, eaque certa de ef∣fectis naturâ suâ contingentibus esset, quamvis tibi scientiam divinam ex tuâ finitâ & fallaci omnium mortalium metienti ita videatur.
Quid nos scire ex suppositione Possimus, vix ipsi cognoscimus: quid a. scire possit Deus, vix, ac ne vix; nisi quod omniscium eum esse, infallibiliter scire possumus, ac debemus. THESIS XII. Denique corruit simul ex conditione prae∣visa concursus intentio, quippe quae tum in∣dependenti naturae Dei repugnat, tum voca∣tionis decretum non est, ut postea declarabi∣mus. Annot. Ad THES. XII. Quia te posteà declaraturum, ais, paucula ista, quae de errore tertio dicenda habuisti, hîc istorum examine supersedebimus, Te illîc praestolaturi. At at talia cogitanti mihi jam subolet (dum sequentia perfunctoriè lustro) quamobrem hae Theses totae sc. gemmeae, et hoc solo nomine re∣darguendae (si Praefatori Credimus) Latinè etiamnum prostent, necdum vernaculam cal∣leant: nemo, opinor, apte, et ad mortalium captum, Anglico redderet, aut redditas intel∣ligeret. Lectorem haud facile invenissent, quae jam à nonnemine, nescio quo, eruditionis laudem captante, immane quantum! allaudan∣tur.
Quid ais Cl. Praesator, Istaene eaedem The∣ses cum Amesianis Tractatulis, idque saepius Compingebantur? Quam nollem Credere vi∣rum istum tam gravem, tot, tantaque, tamdiu (à Patria exulem an Profugum) perpessum, ob solam S. literarum (uti prae se tulit) Con∣fessionem & defensionem, has Metaphysicas, aerias, à S. Spiritus stylo penitùs abhorrentes Theses cum suis ipsius Operibus quicquam commercii habere permissurum. Verum sic u∣su venit, ut hujusmodi Scripta se in celebris a∣licujus Doctoris clientelam recipiant, cujus ut splendore cohonestentur, est votorum sum∣ma. Me quod attinet, potui hoc trihorium non sic perdere; nec libet cum juvenilibus his an anilibus larvis luctari, non tam quòd difficiles esse nugas duxerim, quam quòd inutiles et vi∣ris gravibus indignas. Praetereo, quod super∣vacaneum prorsùs fuerit in superstructis gem∣mis diutiùs immorari, quarum fundamenta Su∣pra-posita Corruisse jam vidimus. Hoc inte∣rim sanctè spondeo, me totum in veritatis, fi∣deique obedientiam (Deo benè juvante) liben∣tissime transiturum; eumque me esse profiteor, qui ex his Thesibus, aut alicunde, veritatem se∣cundum pietatem docenti, cumprimis herbam porrigam. Restat, ut apud Deum Opt. Max. suppli∣cibus votis contendam, ut ne porrò gliscat in∣ter
Christiani nominis professores, de vocabu∣lorum minutiis, qualis hodieque regnat conten∣tio. Tacete ò Parkere, Twissi, caeterique Metaphysico-verbi-potentes Logodaedali, ut audiaretur Jesus noster in aeternum benedictus, et à S. Spiritu acti Prophetae, Evangelistae et Apostoli. Ille ex aeterni Patris sinu ab intimâ inibi secretorum intuitione Prodiit: Hi ab eo, quicquid apud Patrem viderat et audiverat didicerunt, cumque Ecclesiâ, qua Sermone, qua Scripto communicarunt, integrum Dei de nobis Consilium secundum beneplacitum; [Act. 20. 27. Eph. 1. 9.] omne voluntatis suae circa salutem humanam mysterium, etiam secundum propositum. Hoc de uno S. Paulo, quiutro∣bique ad Ephesios verba facit, in sacris literis affirmatur. Quid attinet reliquos spiritus san∣cti Amanuenses commemorare. Denique rationum momenta artificialium, et Testimonia humana, si hîc adsint, non respuo, si absint, non defidero: decidi a. quae de homi∣num salute et interitu lites incidunt, ex S. prae∣sertim literis, nominatim Evangelio, et posse et debere, hoc est quod contendo. Vale, mî Parkere, et vivere malimus quam disputare, aut saltem S. Scripturis magis quam futilibus cerebri nostri argutiis rixisque muliebribus, amicè colloquamur. Raptim. Soli Deo Gloria.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D. and printed for R. Royston. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New-Testament by H. Hammond, D. D. in fol. The Second Edition now in the Press. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Trea∣tises in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatûs Jura ex S. Scripturis & Primava Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli & aliorum, in 4. 4. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schisme. A desence of the Church of England against the exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12. 7. Paraenesis or seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of England, in 10. 8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published of late, most of them in defence of the Church of England, Now put together in three Vo∣lumes. Newly published, in 4. 9. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books of the New-Testament, with some Additi∣ons and alterations, in 8. Books and Sermons written by Jer. Taylor, D. D. and printed for R. Royston, viz. , A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with a discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of the Office Ministerial, in fol.
2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever∣blessed Jesus Christ, third Edition in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Pray∣ers fitted to the dayes of the week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance rescu∣ed from popular Errours, in a large 8. Newly published. 7. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. 7. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. New. Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce, Re∣ctor of Brington. And Printed for R. Royston. 1. A Correct Copie of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation. The 2. E∣dition with some Additionals. in 4. 2. The Divine Philanthropie defended, in answer to Mr. Barlee. in 4. 3. The Divine Purity desended in answer to Dr. Rey∣nolds. in 4. new. 4. The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receiveth from Sin it self. A Collection of Offices or Forms of Prayer in Cases ordinary and extraordinary, taken out of the Scriptures, and the Antient Liturgies of several Churches, especi∣ally the Greek; in large 8. new.
