b3036a 52211890 175437
AN ANSWER BY Doctor Black: TO A LETTER WRITTEN To a Friend in the Countrey, concerning Dr. Broun's Vin∣dicatory Schedule, &c. By Philander. MUch hath been talked by some two or three young Physitians, Dol∣phingtouns Disciples (for through all Scotland they do not exceed that number) of his Answer to the Survey of the Vindica∣tory Schedule: It was said to be a piece, that would so Nettle the Physicians his supposed Antagonists, and so confound them; that they should wish never to have meddled in the Matter. Now it appears, and so Silly a piece
of Stuff is again obtruded upon the World, that it should not be thought worth the while to Answer it, were it not to invite these Gen∣tlemen to enter the Lists; for better than this cannot be expected from Dolphingtoun, or from any of his Abilities. The greatest part of the Survey being spent in exposing the Author, and his Schedule, about the end, the Hypothesis, and the method are seriously Refuted. It might have been ex∣pected that Dolphingtoun's Counsel should have suggested to him, to say something in Vindication of himself with respect to those matters of Fact, with which he stands brand∣ed; and something for the Hypothesis, which really is contrary to the circulation of the Blood, and to the mechanical structure of the Heart and Arteries; and somewhat like wayes in favour of his method from reason; as also in defence of the many passages of his Book, which are taxed with Nonsense, or Contra∣diction. But all these he hath industriously a∣voided, judging it fitter to amuse the World with general Terms, (which every Blockhead that meets with opposition, may say in his own defence) and reflections upon the Au∣thor of the Survey, whom he will not allow to be one; but through all his Letter he speaks
of him in the Plural Number; I suppose 'tis be∣cause having in the 9th page called himself a Champion, he thinks one too few to grapple with him. The truth is the greatest part of the Survey admits no Answer, it being either his own in Terminis, or most natural conse∣quences drawn from it, intermixt with mat∣ters of Fact, which he hath left, as he found them, not thinking it convenient to rip up old Sores. Before I enter upon examination of his Letter, it is to be observed that he hath got some good by the Survey; for his Friends have helped him to wipe his Stile, though not to any great degree: and under the covert of this, and the personating another, he ex∣pects to hide himself: Yet in spite of this ar∣tifice, his Synonima, which without doubt he hath learned at the Letren, and his per∣plexed Banter discover him perpetually. He begins his Letter with a ridiculous story of Grief, and Pleasure, which many have with relation to him and his method: They have grief, sayes he, when they consider that their Friends, who dyed of Feavers, were not treated by the purging method; since so much can be said for that method from reason, and experience. But for all this fair flourish
he sayes never a word for it either from Rea∣son or experience, except in the end, where he gives some instances of Cures (of which in their due place) and he leaves unanswered, what was said in the Survey against the me∣thod both from reason, and experience. In the next place he tells us that least the Physicians should be branded with over sight, or negligence because they have not been the first Discover∣ers or Entertainers of this method, therefore they suppress it. Which is a gross Calumny: I know no Physician either so wicked, or fool∣ish, as to refuse a better method, than what at present he practiseth, so he can be convinced, that there is any such: But I think no wise Physician will quite the method he has found succesful, for a new one established only up∣on the practice of one or two inconsiderable Physicians, and these as unsuccesful as o∣thers; especially since Reason hath formed so many prejudices against it, that 'tis impos∣sible for a judicious Person following the dictates of his Reason, to determine himself that way. Besides 'tis disingenous in Dol∣phingtoun to say that any foul means have been used to suppress this his method: I know some foul ones have been used to advance it, and its admirers; whereof some stand unan∣swered in the Survey.
The 2d. Parag. Is stuff't with Dolphing¦toun's kind sentiments of pleasure, that he's become an Author. For says he The inquisi∣tive are not a little delighted to find a concern so important handled so ingeniously, and a Design so profitable, prosecute so plausibly. Tho the medical Art be truly, if it contain any thing of certainty or reality, hid so deep from the eyes of Men, that the world is much in doubt whether it be an Art or Artifice: Yet I find as ye likewayes observe, that the Au∣thor in his Book has done prettily to prove it an Art. Truly Fool-Andrew (for I cannot otherwayes decipher this Philander) what you have said here may give the world a suffi∣cient Character of your Vanity. for sure I am; was never more Incense burnt to Self-conceit, than is done here: I must say Medicine has little to say for it self, it depend upon Dol∣phingtoun's prettily done Book to prove it an Art. What he talks of the Physicians faults in 3d, parag. I know none so guilty as himself of these faults for which he blames Others; nei∣ther do I know any Physician troubled about his charging them with faults, nor grudging at it; so he might have had spared his pains. 'Twas no wonder if the Physicians hu∣mours
had been raised, as he tells In the 4th, parag. To find an original piece of Banter obtruded upon the World, in defence of a new method in Medicine, Stuff't with a Col∣lection of things pick's up here, and there, at Random; which have no more relation to one another, then his Schedule hath to Learning, or Sense: But they have neither breathed out Malice, nor Spite against him; they have on∣ly told the truth to his Shame, were he Ca∣pable of any. The 5th, parag. Must be Usher'd in with Revolutions, Reformations, Strugle, and Commotion, Changes, and Earthquakes. One would think the Cat of Smalholm were pro∣phecying that the whole course of Nature should be in danger to be dissolved, when Dolphingtouns new method were introduced into the World. His Messenger of Satan did not succeed with him so well, to abuse the Scriptures again. As his Friend, I would advise him to quite his Tub-preaching to others. As to the 6th, parag. To bring in himself upon other mens practice, is as notable an in∣stance of his Envy, as any thing I know. Of Pride he hath arraigned himself already, ac∣knowledging he needed Buffetting for his loftiness of mind.
All that's said in the 7th, parag. about Splendour, and brightness of Truth, and light of raising Dirt and Mist to throw upon the Propagators and Advancers of Truth, is as far out of his road, as are his ridiculous stories of Luther, and the Devil; Sir, Satan, and Dr. Sherlock, But in his Schedule he gives us a Specimen of his reading in Medicine: Now he gives us one in Pamphlets. As for his Book, it has got a more solid Answer, than it de∣served: So he seems to be a false Prophet. For Answer to the 8th, parag. I know none that thought the debate in hand of great im∣portance: The method was Doctor Syden∣ham's, and the Schedule was published to strengthen the Doctors Reasonings; but by ill luck it weakened them: Solid reasons were given for the not using the method, but no∣thing can convince a head-strong Fool ena∣moured with the productions of his own brain: Neither is the Survey ridiculous, but so much of it as is his. And for the personal reflections, they are all very true, and are in relation to his practice; so that Merry Andrew hath ac∣quit himself like a man of parts, in giving an answer, such as the subject deserved, or could bear; like a man Probity, in exposing one, whose design is to Cozen the World: And
were Fool-Andrew a man of parts, he might Blush for his Book; but how it should Blush I doe not understand. If he will not be advis∣ed to leave off his Tub-preaching, at least he would take care to cite the Scriptures right, for Faith is here set down for Hope. For Answer to the 9th, parag. I shall not condescend upon these men he charges with Impudence, and Folly, since he thought it not fit to name them; but sure I am, they have a larger share of both, than any of my ac∣quaintance, if their Impudence or Folly come near his. The ancient practice in Feavers hath been more succesful than his new practice, my assertion is as good as his denyal, and much better grounded. If it be delusion to think to put off the world with Banter, &c. In such a weighty matter as this is, why hath he wrote a Book of Banter in this matter? and this very Letter of his is not free of it; for here is a new Essay of that kind, though the petulancy of some superficial Pates like the Authors, may be tickled, and Palats tinged with the same virulence of Malice with the Libellers, may be gratified with such scurrili∣ties: So natural is this stile to him, that in spite of his Feigned Person, and other endea∣vours to conceal himself yet his speech still bewrayes him.
There is nothing in the 10th, parag. That deserves observation. For Answer to the 11th, parag. The Sur∣vey sent him to Purgatory to Refine him from his Dross; but he, ever fertile of new methods, hath found out a new way of Re∣fining himself, which is to Snuff him, as they do a Candle, that his vertue may shine more bright. Here we have a new Essay something in kin to Banter, to Enconter Malice cartel Envy, and to defy detraction and defamation. For Answer to the 12 parag he knows that D, Dal. and D, Dav. Entreated him not to publish his Schedule, yet out it came, so im¦possible is it to perswade Fools who are ever Fond of their own Productions And since he subjected his Schedule to the consideration of all Ingenious Physicians, he hath got the senti∣ments of some of them about it little to his sa∣tisfaction; but nothing but applause will please him, which no Ingenuous Physician can give. For Answer to the 13th parag. her's ano∣ther Instance of his Fondness of his ofspring. I shall allow him to compare himself to the Fattest fruit (he means the Apples of Sodom) or to the Fattest Dear Horns and all together for I shall not deny him a vegetable or sensi∣tive Life: But to prefer himself to Themisto∣cles
who can endure this? That loftiness of mind has yet need of the Messenger of Satan. For Answer to the 14th parag. All the so∣ber and serious Men here are comprehended within the number of two or three young Physicians, who think to be taken notice off by pretending to something new, and out of the common road; but if they have nor much honour of their Master, I leave it to every in∣different Person to judge. He did well not to end his Latine verse, least he should fall into the same Soloecismes he did last. A ridiculous piece ought to be treated inridicule, which is not so sham a way of reasoning. If the Survey had been such Merry Andrew stuff, it might have been the more easiy answered by those who have so much Affinity to that kind of People; but it is a Pamphlet stuff't with so much reason and truth, that Dolphingtoun hath not found it convenient to attaque any particular part of it. But of all men alive why should Philander challenge Dr. Black for concealing his name. The rest of his Letter, is taken up in perform∣ing what the Schedule first prompted to be done. But were it not for fear to give offence to some Persons who do not desire their Rela∣tions to be named, the publick should get a counterlist of those that have died under Dol∣phingtouns
new method. I shall not question but some have escaped under this me∣thod, which only proves, that People though ill Treated may recover. But it is not at all reasonable that I should believe all those People had truely we Feaver, since Dol∣phingtoun had the impudence to call that a Feaver which two of the most eminent Physicians in Edinburgh said was none, what will he not say where he is sole Physician, and can meet with no contradiction. Upon the whole, that part of Hip. First Aph. may be very well applyed here, Experientia Fallax. The Letter wrote by Malthus to Dr. Pit∣carne came never to the Doctors hands, and was never seen by any but Dolphingtoun, so not to be Credited, but said upon design: But let is be so as he would have it, will the Testi∣mony of an Apothecary interessed upon Sy∣denham's Account, ruin a method approved by Thousands for many Hundred of Years, to establish a new one with such manifest con∣tradiction? I think 'twill not. Though Dolphingtouns ridiculous Hypo∣thesis was sufficiently refuted before in few words, yet finding some of our young Physi∣tians applauding it, I thought it would not be amiss to touch it again. I doe not think it
strange for one of Dolphingtoun's Education to have such a confused notion of things, he having never been Abroad at any University to follow the study of Medicine by the ad∣vice and direction of able Professors appoint∣ed for that end: And having received his De∣grees only at Aberdeen, where there is no pro∣fession of Medicine. Nothing less could have been expected from one who had never read the Institutions, had never seen any dis∣sections, courses of Chymistry, nor heard any Colledges upon the practice of Medicine. But for others to pretend to have had a more liberal Institution, and yet robe Proselites to Doctor Dolphingtouns; who can think they have any regard to their Reputation? There is nothing more absurd in all his Schedule than the, 7th and 8th, Sections about His Hypothesis of the Essence and cause of Fea∣vers. Every Physician knows that the heart is a Muscle endued with spiral Fibres fitted for Contraction; that it hath two Ventricles for reception of the Blood in its dilatation; that it hath valvules of two kinds to hinder the return of the Blood from the Arteries to the heart again; that the Arteries have trans∣verse Fibres, by which they contract them∣selves and press forward the Blood; 'Tis cer∣tain
that every part that is contracted has an innate faculty to perform that Action, which is done by the influx of the animal Spirits in∣to the Fibres of whatever kind they are. On the contrary it is as certain that all parts, that are dilated, can never dilate themselves, but when dilated they do ever suffer Violence from the humours, or what ever else they contain ('Tis true the Pharinx and the Car∣tilagines Aritenoides are dilated, not by any thing they contain, but by reason of the Mus∣cles joyned to the outside of either, so is the mouth dilated by the Muscles of the nether jaws.) 'Tis also certain that the Ventricles of the heart (every one of which containeth at least a Dragme of Blood when dilated) are of the same substance with the inner Coats of the Arteries and Veins, and are sensible of ir∣ritation; that in the dilatation of the Heart, the Quantity, the Heat, the Weight, and the Distention through the effervescence of the Blood doe irritat it; that this irritation makes the heart contract it self without respect to a final Cause (as this Dreamer Fancies to himself; that at the same instant of the hearts contraction, the Blood is thrust out with Vio∣lence into the Aorta and by Continuity in∣to all the Arteries of the Body, by which
they are dilated, while the heart is contract∣ed; and that the Pulse that stricks our Fin∣gers, is nothing else but the Dilatation of the Arteries, occasioned by the contraction of the Heart at the same instant. For Dolphing∣toun then to allow, that in a Feaver the pulses are more frequent, and yet to say that the mo∣tion of the Blood is more slow, this is the great∣est Nonsense one can be capable of For at eve∣ry pulse I suppose but adragme of the Blood to bethrust into the Arteries by the contraction of the Heart, this Blood can not return because of the Valvules, forward it must go, otherwayes the Arteries should burst asunder; and conse∣quently the more frequent the pulses are, the motion of the Blood must be the swifter. It has been alwayes a received Opinion, that heat in a Feaver is the effect of the ra∣pide motion of the Blood Neither does Dolph∣ingtoun's or Bontilo's objection destroy this position, for though the Blood Stagnat in an Inflammation, where the member is other∣wayes affected with more than ordinary heat; yet there being such a quantity of extra∣vased Blood, which does not coagulat, but is still fluid, because of the few Spirits it retains; And the capillary Arteries being distended with Blood, which is the cause of the pulse, where
there was none ; 'tis no wonder if that part be affected h more than ordinary heat, since it cains more than ordinary Blood; for where there is much Blood there Is much heat. I shall only send Dolphing∣toun home to Churn his Butter▪ to prove that there is heat in Fluids; after a few hours motion of the Churn he will find the heat he denies; I use this Familiar instance, because he never found the heat that is raised, when the spirit of Vitriol is poured upon the Oyle of Tartar, since he never saw the experiment. In immoderate motion of the Body there Is a frequent motion of the Blood, occasion∣ed by the frequent motion of the Muscles, by this motion the heat is raised before there be any Consumption or Waste. In this mo∣tion likewayes the Blood is rarified by the heat, the pores are opened, and sweat does for the most part follow: But because of the sepa∣ration of the serous part, the Blood at length becomes more thick, which does not fall out till the pulse settle again; But this Fool mis∣takes alwayes the cause for the Effect. His Diaphanous Blood, and his reflected, and refracted, rayes of heat in the Body are nonsense not worth the refuting.
After all, this ma  not given us the definition of a Feaver,  which we may know its Nature, and Ece, and its diffe∣rence from other Diseases. But being weary to answer a Fool in his Folly, I leave this Mis∣anthrope to his own evil Genius, with this assurance, that whatever further he writes, shall never be thought worthy of my Con∣sideration. FINIS.
