c5725e 53299007 179784
A CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE GHOST OF THE RUMP AND TOM TEL-TROTH. Together with her sad Complaint of that dismall and totall Eclipse that is like to fall out on the 20th day of April, 1660. GHOST Now like a gashly spright I do appear, Who once in Pomp, this Common-wealth did Steere Which way I pleas'd, But now at last I wot, No Voice is for me, or my daughter Scot To sit. Our falls decree'd, we must retire From hence to flames of ever burning fire. Printed for Mris Nurse the Rumps late Matron, and are to be sold at Kings-land-Court near the Bishoprick of Durham.
A CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE Ghost of Mris. RVMP, and her Adversary Tom Tell-troth. Ghost. WHat art thou that darst presume to ap∣pear on this sacred ground? whence come you thus booted and spur'd, I should known you, as being formerly acquainted with you, but 'tis so long that I have quite forgot thy name, pray let me crave it. Tom. In the name of blackness what art thou that thus disturb'st the Peace of an bonest passenger, by thy gashly countenance and shrill voice? Surely I am in England! or else I'me much mistaken, but this thy usage makes me doubt, for that I have so long been ba∣nished from my Native Country; Pray take compassion on a wan∣dring stranger, and lead him not astray, he was sent to England, & if it be so that you prove a happy guide, his name shall soon be dis∣covered to you. Ghost. Tis England, England! which I and my confederates have usurped the Government of, and should have none still, had not the Syren voice of a cursed Judas betray'd me. But pray let me know your name? Tom. Why then to put you out of doubt, my name is Tom Tel-troth, that have been banished for conscience sake out of my Na∣tive Country above eleaven years. Ghost. Oh Tom, it seems then you have a time wherein you may
shew your face which thus long we have compelled you to hide. Tom. You compelled me to hide my face, why pray, what are you that have compelled me so much? Ghost. Why have you then forgotten your Soveraign Rump that cast you into your long Exzile. Tom. I know well enough there was the Fagg end of a Parlia∣ment set at the Stearn at Westminster when I was forc'd to flie, but little thought I they had removed their Senate house from thence to this place. But pray tell me are you that Power (Rump as you call your self) if so ile assure you something is in the wind: have you of late been humbled for your sins, or whats the matter you have chosen such a lowly house to sit in such Malencholly weeds to adorn you withall. Ghost. Full sore against our wills are we confined to this stati∣on, we nourished a bird to pluck out our own eyes, who under pretence of remvoing a late obstruction coucht upon us, hath totally extirpated us from our habitation, vile Traytor and disloyal Subject as he is, we come to thee for judgement, and if as truth thou art thou wilt but Cohere to us and be so prevalent with the English People, as if thou pleasest we know thou canst, we will not tell thee how well we will reward thee. Tom. And are you met withall at last: and have you no place to settle your Rump upon? ho! ho! it makes my worship smile, I did think as much that your Ambitious wings at last either would be clipt, melted, singed, or subjected to some other disasterous chance, and are you caught in one of your own traps, a Jest worthy to be filed upon the Records of Will Summers. Ghost. Nay prithy Tom (for now I can think of your name, for my own ends) do not flout so: you may endanger my health: for I am late escaped from the perils of a hard and terrible team∣ing if ever pitty moved you, have compassion on a poor distressed weak despised friendless Rump. Tom. Why what would you have me do for you? Ghost. Onely help me up the stairs in Westminster Hall that lead you know whether, for I am so weak I am not able to stand, much lesse to go alone, and notwithstanding my weakness for neces∣sitas non legem habit if I take not possession again before the 20.
of April next, I loose my right by the Lawes of the Nation and am undone for ever; therefore good Tom pitty the case of a poor sick and weak Rump. Tom. Alas I cannot contribute any thing to your relief, for if I should put forth any thing to vindicate your innocency and harm∣lesness, and witness against the illegallity of your exturpation, the people would stone me for a false and lying prophet, and not re∣ceive it as the Oracle of Tom-teltroth. Ghost. Well hazard that, we know the simple meaning of the people so well, that if you will but regester us in your table book we shall imediatelv be invested with the Robes of Saints again, by the honest simple people of England. Tom. Well Admit I should play the Doctor for once and make your feeble Rump sit again, what can you say for your selves for demeaning your selves in your office if you chance to nestle there∣again? Ghost. Oh we will become the mildest of Rulers, and the mer∣cifullest of Governours, wee'l ease the Nation of all the heavy bur∣thens we have brought upon her, which none can remove so well as we have laid them on, wee'l vanish oppression and covetousness far from our Land, and utterly blot them out of our remembrance and will make glad the heart of all men from the Plowmen to the Merchant, and make her a Land that shall flow with milk, and trading shall flow in so great an abundauce that men shall not be able to find places to hoard up their treasure, all these and what else may be desired will we perform. Honest Tom play thou the man and we care not. Tom. Nay but hold a little, two words goes to a bargain, I do not intend to buy a pigg in a poak neither: you have made a very fair speech and when I have construed it I can say something to you, you say you will become the cruelest of Rulers and the un∣mercifullest of Governours or Tyrants, you will ease the Nation of all the heavie Burthens that is of all the money, plate, gold, Jewels and whatsoever riches she has saved from your ravenous and insatiate pawes, because none can remove them so well as you, that you mean by your new found wayes of Sequestration, Taxes, imposition, Excise, unreasonable Customes, Monopolies and o∣ther new found fangles of your own braines, you will establish
oppression and covetousness in a far greater light in the Land then ever, and most vigorously revive them in the Book of your re∣membrance, will you make glad the hearts of all men from the Plowman to the Merchant, viz. such as are joynts of the Rump but none else, but will make sorrow prove the sops of both the Church and States man, and give your phanatick puritie such a large liberty of conscience that without dispute then the Churches indeed shall suffer Martyrdom, and the Bells shall serve for Coyn to cheat the people whilst you follow the rule of Haslerigg and Preduaux in hoarding up the good mettal-baggs, the States man let you alone to plague and punish for he shall live by the sustenance of Gall and bitterness which shall be all the milk and hony shall flow in the Land, from your store houses by trad∣ing, Is meant the Lobstertorean trading with the people upon free quarter whereby their gains will be so great that they may put the same in their eyes and see never the worse, and thereby they will be (I must confesse) much puzled to find out such small places of hoarding up as their gained treasure will require, and at last you conclude very notably all this, and what else may be desired you will perform, tis not at all by me doubted but that you will per∣form the contempt now, how do you think if I should take the pains to Register you and set you forth in your colours the people will be either so mad and foolish to trust or believe you, therefore rest your selves contented for believe and you have had a fair time of it 10. or 11. years my masters what have ye no reason at all: there's reason in rosting of Eggs, pray let me go for I fear if you detain me any longer upon this helpless and vain account I shall at last learn the Language of the Beast, you see 'tis dark and I 'm a stranger in this Land, so that I scarce know my own father when I met him, he has so altered his tongue since I have saw him last and to tell you the truth, I have never a peny in my purse to buy a light, and I fear you will hardly afford me one out of your boun∣teous negerallitie therefore it is but reason you grant me a con∣ductor and none so fit as Atkins that I may smell my way like a blood-Hound what say ye Gentlewomen can you grant my re∣quest. Ghost. I grant it onely let me sprinkle you with a little holy water, which it may be may purge you from your filthiness, and
open your eyes to have a right reflextion on me, for your last ex∣position has only grounded a conceit in me, that the change of the Climate has formed you and intollerable Lunatick, nurse Haslerigg bring me hither a Bottle of sweet water of Mrs. Scots own distil∣ling that I may make this churle an aderifferous Gentleman: Quick, you see 'tis late. Nurse. Here's the Bottle pray sprinkle him to the purpose or not at all. Ghost. Nay Tom: What wo't not have a dram you know not the excellencie thereof. Tom. Pray tell not me of your poisoning stuffe de' think I 'm mad to be charmed: if you will grant my request if not ile groble out my way ith' dark following the sent of this thick Vapour. Ye cold A—st Rump that sat so long for nought had you your Egg to perfection brought you had not thus forlorne been left god wot to the mercy of the rope and slaughtring knott and farwel for I came but to tell you a few true Jests of your own Coyning. One of the Ghosts Emissaries. Oh what a wonderfull thing is this that men should know all our actions, and dive so into the secret of hearts to tell what I did in my life; Could better Lip∣solve been used then I applyed for the salving up the sore of the Common-wealths destruction, and yet in his construction he should hint so netlingly and truely at every particular point of our in∣tentions, so well vail'd by me, but I cry ye mercy his name is Tell-truth, I did not think he had his name for nothing, for had he been a thousand time in thee Mrs. Rump, he could not have spo∣ken more prophetickly then he has, well: I see there's no hopes of recovery ile return to my infernal habitation, for its in vain to prosecute the Design any further for a hundred to one, but he has blazed the truth of all before now, and has given all men time to provide for encountring us. GHOST. Before ile go to my infernal place Of torment, ile adventure here a space, And like the Phenix will at last expire And build a nest shall make the world admire,
Of pure refined glistering yellow Gol, And choycest Gems which now my Coffers hold, And there ile flutter with Icarius wings, Upon my Nest till all those glittering things, By bright Sols Beams shall swiftly opperate, My Rumpish body there shall penetrate; And make me drop from th' top of th' lofty Tree, Such Ashes, that a Phenix like to me Shall soon appear; With that a horrid cry She gave, and made the very Earth to fly About, and streight at least a thousand more Black Friends appear'd the like ne'r seen before, With thundring, lightning, flashes from the Sky And Smoaking stinks, Toms valour for to try, Which Tom beholding, in a grivous fright Departing nimbly bid the Ghost Good-night. Finis Coronet Opus.
