P595 R181486 52614819 176002
A PARTICULAR OF THE Ninety five thousand ACRES Of Fenny and low surrounded grounds, lying with∣in the Great LEVEL of the FENS. Which, by an ACT of PARLIAMENT of the 29 of May, 1649. were allotted to WILLIAM Earle of Bedford, HIS Participants and Adventurers for Dreyn∣ing of the same LONDON, Printed for Richard Baddeley within the middle Temple-gate. 1653.
THE PRINTER TO THE Reader. THAT the occasion of Printing the particular parcels of grounds ensuing, may be the better understood, the Reader may please to take notice, that this great Level of the Fennes containing neer 400000. Acres, was sometimes accounted the Paradise of England, if we may believe History, and the undertaking of recovering the same by Francis late Earle of Bedford; was a Work so famous and publick, that Hondius a Netherlander, who set forth Mercatours Geography of the World, called the New Atlas, printed at Amsterdam, in the year, 1636. makes particular mention of that un∣dertaking, declaring what the said Fennes were in the year 1200 after Christ, and of their surrounding, and of the many attempts to recover them by John of Gaunt, Margaret, Countess of Richmond, King James, and others, and all in vaine; (which, who so please to take the paines,) may see more largely in the 67, p. of that Book, where the Fennes are delineated in a Map. And because good men have seldome any other reward for workes of publick concern∣ment, then the memory of them. It is not impertinent to mention how that Noble Earle, upon the desire of the Gentlemen of those Counties, wherein those Fens lay, being Commissioners of Sewers, 47. in number, and Lords of Man∣nors, and Land-owners (within the Level,) was perswaded to undertake that Work, and for 95000a. parcel of those Fens, to dreyne the whole, and maintain them at his own charge, which will further appear to such as will peruse the Law of Sewers, made for that purpose at Lynne, in the 6th year of the late King Charles, how vigorously that Noble Earle, and such as after became parti∣cipants with him in that undertaking, prosecuted that Work with the expence of above 100000 li. is known to many who are yet the living Witnesses of the truth therof; & yet after the Work was effected, and the 95000 Acres, set forth for their recompence. In October, in the 13. year of the late King, by the meanes of some busie men; The very next year following, there was a com∣panie of Court-Commissioners of Sewers, sent to Huntington, who under pretence that the Work was not done, outed the good Earle and his participants of all the 95000 Acres for the late K. & 57000 Acres more to be taken from the Country, but there went no blessing with that enterprize. In stead of making new Works to preserve the Level, the old were suffered to decay, and the whole Level in great danger to be utterly lost again, had not the late Parliament en∣couraged William, now Earle of Bedford, the Son and Heir of his Noble
Father,) and his participants, to undertake the recovering and regaining so vast a quantity of rich grounds of so much advantage to this Common-wealth, for the old proportion of the 95000 Acres, as he that will but read the Act of Par∣liament, of the 29, of May, 1649. for dreyning the said Level, may see more at large; by which meanes the Countrey saved the 57000a. And the Work hath been so effectually prosecuted, that in three yeares after the expence of 300000.li.) the blessing of God going along with it,) the Work is compleated; and by the judgement of ten honourable and worthy Commissioners, appointed for that purpose, upon their view and hearing witnesses upon Oath, a final Judgement given for the said dreyning, and the 95000 Acres divided into the hands of several purchasers, wherein there are many Families concerned, most of the old Participants being ruined in their estates by the great charge of the Work: (a fate usually attending the first undertakers of publick Workes,) that there want not some unsatisfied with the Work, and yet thought it too much trouble to come so far as London to complain to the Commissioners ap∣pointed by the Act. And therefore the Honourable Councel of State in the interval of Parliament, for the ease of the Countrey, named 24. Commission∣ers of worth and integrity, residing upon the place, to hear the complaints of the Country; and when the businesse came to a full examination before them, and it appeared what charge had been expended, and what recompence al∣lowed; the most indifferent hearers thought the recompence scarce worth the undertaking, which is too apparent; for I have heard some of the Participants offer to sell all their adventure Land for the bare money they are out of purse, now the hazard is past; bt in regard there was some pretence before the said Commissioners, that the undertakers had taken above 95000 Acres accor∣ding to the Law of Sewers at Lyn, which the undertakers did with con∣fidence deny. The Commissioners according to Justice, and for the Countreys satisfation, did make the aforesaid Order, whereby all the particulars of the 95000 Acres, will appear.
A Particular of the ninety five thousand Acres of Fenny and low-sur∣rounded grounds, lying within the great Level of the Fennes, within the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincolne, and the Isle of Elie, which by an Act of Parliament of May 29. 1649. were allotted to William Earle of Bedford, his Participants and Adventurers for dreyning of the same; and formerly set forth by a Law of Sewers at St. Ives in Octo∣ber, in the thirteenth yeare of the late King Charles, with the par∣ticular towns and places where they lie; printed by order of the Com∣missioners, authorized by the Right Honourable the Councel of State, to heare and determine several matters and things, concerning the work of dreyning the great Level of the Fennes; which order fol∣loweth, viz. At the Meeting or Session by Adjournment at the signe of the Beare in Cambridge, upon Tuesday, Septem. the 20. and there continued by ad∣journment 21. and 22. of the same moneth, before Talbot Pepis Esquire, John Claypoole Esquire, Robert Vinter Gent. Dr. Richard Staynes, Henry Farrer Gent. Mr. Richard Tymbes, Dr. Symcotts, Mr. Ro∣bert Robson, Mr. Edward Barker of Denver, and Mr. William Life of Downham, Commissioners amongst others impowered to hear and determine several matters and things concerning the work of dreyn∣ing the great Level of the Fennes, by vertue of an Order and Decla∣ration of the Councel of State, June 28. 1653. It is ordered, that the Right Honourable, William Earle of Bedford, and his Participants the Adventurers for dreyning the great Level of the Fennes, do cause to be printed a book, setting forth the particular towns and places, wherein every several lot and part of the 95000 Acres of the said Adventurers do lie, for satisfaction of the Countrey, that no more then 95000 Acres are taken by the said Adventurers, which hereafter followes. COM. NORF. Denver. OUt of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Denver in the said County of Norfolk, lying on the West-side of the river Ouse, three hundred and fourescore Acres, (that is to say,) one hundred twenty foure Acres out of that part of the Fenne near Salters Lode, abutting Eastward upon the said river, and Northward upon the river called Bedford river. And the residue being two hundred fifty six Acres out of that part of the said Fenne that lieth next Salters Lode upon the North-side of the said new river, abutting upon the said new river, and Well-Creek. 0380 0 00 Out of a several Fenne-ground in Denver aforesaid abutting West-ward upon the grounds of Well, foure Acres at the South-end thereof next Denver Fenne. 0004 0 00
Helgay. Out of the common Fennes of, or belonging to Helgay, in the said County of Norfolk, one thousand three hundred Acres, (that is to say) one entire Fenne, lying between Sir Henry Willoughbies dreyne and Southerey Common, containing nine hundred eighty two Acres, and the residue being three hundred and eighteen Acres, out of that part of the said Fenne abutting Northward upon the imbanked grounds of Edmund Skipwith Esquire, and adjoyning to the said river Ouse. 1300 0 00 Out of the several Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Sir Henry Willoughbie Knight, called Reads Fenne, three hundred and sixty Acres, at the North-end of the said grounds, abutting upon Mayd Lode. 0360 0 00 Southerey. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Southerey in the said County of Norfolk, eight hundred Acres out of the common Fen cal∣led Adymore, abutting upon Helgay common Fenne, and the river Ouse. 0800 0 00 Out of the several Fenne-grounds in Southerey aforesaid, of, or be∣longing to Sir Henry Willoughby aforesaid, lying on the East-side of the river Ouse, seventy and six Acres at the South-end thereof, near to Modney-house. 0076 0 00 Out of one other several Fenne ground in Southerey aforesaid, of, or belonging to the said Sir Henry Willoughbie Knight, lying on the West-side of the river Ouse, seventy six Acres at the West-end of the same grounds. 0076 0 00 Out of one other several Fenne ground, lying in Southerey or Helgay, or one of them, of, or belonging to Thomas Gibbon Esquire, twenty Acres at the Westerne end thereof, near Priests houses. 0020 0 00 Roxham. Out of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Roxham in the said County of Norfolk, ninety foure Acres at the South-east part of the same Fenne, abutting upon Dereham Coat Fenne, and the river Wissey. 0094 0 00 Dereham. Out of the common Fenne grounds, of, or belonging to Dereham in the said County of Norfolk, two hundred Acres, (that is to say) ninety five Acres out of the Fenne called Dereham Coat Fenne, abutting up∣on Roxham Fenne, and the river Wissey, and the residue being one hun∣dred and five Acres out of the common Fenne, at the parts thereof, a∣butting upon the said river Wissey and Wereham. 0200 0 00 Woreham, Wretton and Stoke. Out of the common Fennes, of, or belonging to Wereham, Wretton and Stoke in the said County of Norfolk, five hundred, thirty and six Acres in one piece, next the said river Wissey, extending along the said river, from the North-side of Tokeshill to Weredike. 0536 0 00 Norwold. Out of the common Fenne grounds, of, or belonging to Norwold, in the said County of Norfolk, foure hundred twenty and nine Acres, (that is to say) the entire common Fenne lying on the North-side of the river Wissey, containing twenty nine Acres, and the residue being foure hundred Acres, out of the common Fennes, lying on the South-side of the said river, abutting upon the said river, and lying between Howhill and Whittington Causey, and between the said river and the hard lands of Norwold. 0429 0 00 Methwold. Out of the common Fennes, of, or belonging to Methwold in the said County of Norfolk, one thousand six hundred fourty and eight Acres, out of the Fennes called Southmore and Twinne Lodes, abutting North∣westward,
upon part of the said Common called Southmore, wherein Southerey doth inter-common North-Eastward upon the several Fenne grounds of Sir Edmund Mundford Knight, and Southward upon the common Fenne of Feltwel, called North Fenne. 1648 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of Methwold aforesaid, three hundred fif∣ty seven Acres at the west-end of two of the said severals next Southerey. 0357 0 00 Feltwell. Out of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Feltwel in the said County of Norfolk, one thousand six hundred ninety seven Acres, (that is to say) eight hundred and fourty Acres out of the Fenne called North-Fen, at the North-East part thereof, abutting up∣on the common Fenne of Methwold called Southmore. Out of the Fen called the Mowe-Fen, eighty Acres at the West-part of the same Fen next Brandon river. And the residue being seven hundred seven∣ty and seven Acres out of the Fen called the South-Fen, at the South∣west part thereof, abutting upon the said Mowe-Fen, and the several Fen ground belonging to Sir Thomas Woodhouse. 1697 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds of, or, belonging to Feltwel afore∣said, seven hundred fifty and one Acres, (that is to say) out of the seve∣ral Fen ground, now, or late of Sir Thomas Woodhouse Knight, abutting upon Feltwel South-Fen, and a several belonging to Sir Edmund Mund∣ford, two hundred and six Acres out of the middle part of the said several Fen, from North to South. Out of the several Fen ground of Sir Edmund Mundford aforesaid, abutting upon the said several of Sir Thomas Woodhouse aforesaid, one hundred ninety and seven Acres out of the middle part of the said Fenne, from North to South. Out of the several Fen-ground belonging to Christs Colledge, abutting upon the said several Fen-ground of Sir Edm. Mundford aforesaid, one hundred twenty six acres out of the middle part of the said ground from North to South. Out of the several fen-ground late of Robert Wace Gent. abut∣ting upon the said several ground of Christs Colledge, and the river of Brandon, one hundred seventy two acres out of the middle of the said ground from North to South. Out of the several Fen-ground, lying be∣tween the Fen-grounds of Christs Colledge aforesaid, & the river of Bran∣don fourteen acres, abutting Northward upon the several Fen-ground of Thomas Gibbon Esquire. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or be∣longing to Thomas Tyrel Gent. lying between the aforesaid Fenne-grounds of Sir Edmund Mundford Knight, and the river of Brandon, thirteen Acres, and twenty Perches at the South-East end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground lying between the several Fen of Sir Thomas Woodhouse aforesaid, and the river of Brandon, ten Acres and three Roods, at the South-part thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground late of Robert Wace Gent. abutting upon the hard lands of Feltwel aforesaid six Acres and ten Perches at the North-west-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground lying between Feltwel Mowe-Fen, and the river of Brandon, six Acres and ten Perches at the North-west end thereof. 0751 0 00 Hocwold and Wil∣ton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Hockwold and Wilton, in the said County of Norfolk, nine hundred and fifty Acres out of the common Fenne, adjoyning to the common Fennes, and the hard lands of Feltwel, and abutting upon the said hard lands of Feltwel. 0950 0 00
Out Of the several Fen-grounds of William Heveningham Esquire, two hundred Acres (that is to say) out of the several ground called Poolings, one hundred Acres at the North-side thereof, abutting upon Feltwel Mowe-Fen, and the river of Brandon, and out of one other se∣veral ground lying on the South-west side of the said river of Brandon, one hundred Acres abutting upon the Fenne called Redmore grounds, and the said river of Brandon. 0200 0 00 Out of the several Fen-ground of Osbert Pratt Gent. lying next the Fen called Sea-Fen, ten Acres at the North-end of the same ground. 0010 0 00 COM. SƲFF. Brandon. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging unto Brandon in the Countie of Suffolk, three hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say) one entire Fen abutting upon the East-part of the Com∣mon Fen of Lackingheath called Stallard, one hundred and ninety Acres, and the residue being one hundred and sixty Acres out of a Common Fen abutting upon the said entire Fen, at the West-end of the said Com∣mon Fen. 0350 0 00 Lacking∣heath. Out of the Common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Lackingheath, in the said County of Suffolk, one thousand and eight hundred Acres (that is to say) the moiety or one half of the common Fen, called Little-shell of East-more, being ninety two Acres at the Easterne part thereof, next the common Fen called Archingstal. The said entire common Fen called Archingstal, containing one hundred seventy foure Acres. One entire common Fen, abutting upon the river of Brandon. Audry Love, and j the several Fen ground of William Heveningham Esquire, containing fourty seven Acres. One entire common Fen lying on the North-side of Brandon river, between the common Fen of Hockwold and Wilton, called Sea Fen, and the several Fen of William Heveningham aforesaid, containing fifty eight Acres and a halfe. The entire common Fen, called Town-more, containing five hundred seventy nine Acres; And the residue being eight hundred fourty nine Acres and a half, out of the great common Fen, abutting upon Plant Lode, and the said Fen called Town-moore, at the North-west part thereof. 1800 0 00 Lacking∣heath. Severals. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Lackingheath a∣foresaid, two hundred and fourescore Acres (that is to say) out of the several Fen grounds of Unley-Farme, lying between the common Fen grounds of Lackingheath aforesaid, and the Sedge-Fens of Milden-hall, one hundred twenty three Acres and two Roods at the West-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground, now, or late of William Steward Gent. lying at the West-end of the common Fen called Stallard, three Acres and one Rood at the West-end of the same ground. Out of one other several Fen ground, now, or late of the said William Stew¦ard, lying on the North-side of Brandon river, six Acres and one Rood at the North-west end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground abutting upon the said common Fen called Stallard, and the high Lode, foure Acres at the North-end of the same ground. Out of a triangular several Fen ground, abutting upon the said common Fen
called Stallard, and the high Lode, one Acre, three Roods and twenty Perches, at the South-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground, lying between Winter Lode and Crosse-water, at the meeting of the same Lodes, one Acre, three Roods, and twenty Perches, at the North-west end thereof. Out of a several Fen ground, lying near Willow-Lode, incompassed on all sides with the common Fen of Lackingheath aforesaid, two Acres at the West-part of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground, lying on the East-part of the last mentioned several ground foure Acres and one Rood at the North-west end thereof. Out of one other several Fen ground, lying on the East-part of the several ground last mentioned, and abutting upon Crosse-water, eight Acres at the North-west side of the same ground, next unto Crosse-water aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground, lying between the last mentioned several ground and Willow Lode; two Acres and three Roods at the West-end of the same ground Out of the several Fen ground, abutting upon the West-side of Winter-Lode, and high Lode aforesaid, fifteen Acres and two Roods at the North-west end thereof, abutting upon high-Lode. Out of the se∣veral Fen ground, abutting upon the common Fen called East-moore, and the several Fenne called the Boats-gangs, two Acres at the North-west end thereof next to Delfe Dyke. Out of the several Fen grounds called the Boats gangs, sixty seven Acres and a half at the West-end hereof, a butting upon Plant load and Delfe Dyke. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of John Crane, abutting upon High-load, and the several ground now, or late of William Barne Gent. eight Acres and two Roods, adjoyning upon the said several ground of William Barne, and the said High-load. Out of the said several fen-ground now, or late of William Barne aforesaid, ten Acres adjoyning upon the said several ground of John Crane. Out of one other several Fen ground now, or late of the said John Crane, lying near the said several ground of Willi∣am Barne aforesaid, six Acres and two Roods at the North-west side of the same ground, abutting upon High-load aforesaid, Out of the greater of the two several Fen grounds, lying between Delfe Dyke and Brandon river, eight Acres and two Roods at the North-west side there∣of. And out of the other smaller several, lying between Delfe-dyke and Brandon river, three Acres and three Roods, at the North-end of the same ground. 0280 0 00 Millden-hall. Out of the common Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Milden-hall, in the said County of Suffolke, two thousand nine hundred and twenty Acres, (that is to say,) one entire common Fen called Burnt Fen, con∣taining one thousand seven hundred and thirty seven Acres. Two en∣tire Fen grounds called Sedge Fens, lying between Burnt-Fen and Town-Moore in Lackingheath aforesaid, containing eight hundred and fourty Acres. And the residue being three hundred fourty and three Acres out of the common Fen, lying between the several Fen-grounds of Unly Farme, and Baldwins Loade, at the West-part of the same Fen. 2920 0 00
COM. CANTABR. Iham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Isleham in the County of Cambridge, nine hundred and thirty Acres, (that is to say,) one entire common Fen, abutting upon the common Fens of So∣ham, called great Metlam and little Metlam, and the river of Milden-hall, containing three hundred and eight Acres. Out of the Mowe Fen of Isleham, abutting upon the fore-mentioned common Fen of Isleham, and the said river of Milden-hall, foure hundred thirty two Acres at the North-part thereof. And out of the common Fen of Isleham, called West-Fen, abutting upon the common Fens of Soham, called little Metlam and the Hasse, one hundred and ninety Acres at the North-end of the same Fen. 0930 0 00 Soham. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Soham and Barway, in the said County of Cambridge, one thousand and eight hun∣dred Acres, (that is to say) the entire common Fen, abutting upon Wickin high Fen, called Fordey, containing one hundred fifty six Acres and a half. Out of the common Fen called Barway middle, se∣venty foure Acres and a half at the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Sea Load, and the river Ouse. The two entire common Fens called great Metlam and little Metlam, containing one thousand two hundred and ten Acres. And out of the common Fen called the Hasse, three hundred fifty nine Acres at the North-part thereof, abutting up∣on little Metlam aforesaid. 1800 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground in Soham aforesaid, of, or belonging to Sir Robert Heath Knight, foure hundred and twenty Acres. Out of the several Fen ground called great Metlam, abutting upon the Common called great Metlam, and the river of Milden-hall, at the East-part of the said several Fen. 0420 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground in Soham aforesaid, lying between the fens, called East Fen and Calf Ten, eight Acres at the East-end thereof. 0008 0 00 Out of the several Fen-ground in Soham, called Bugbeach, one Acre at the West-end thereof. 0001 0 00 Fordbam. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Fordham in the said County of Cambridge, lying between the Fen grounds of Burwel, and the hard lands near Wickin, twenty seven Acres at the West-end of the same Fen. 0027 0 00 Wickin. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wickin, in the said County of Cambridge, foure hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say,) out of the common Fen called the Sedge-Fen, or broad med∣dow, three hundred Acres at the Western end thereof, abutting upon Reach Load, the hard lands of Wickin, and the imbanked several grounds of Isaac Barrow Esquire. And the residue being one hundred and fifty Acres out of the common Fen called high Fen, at the North-east part thereof, adjoyning upon the several ground of Thetford, called the Bots gangs, and the river Grant. 0450 0 00 Out of the Fen-grounds of Wickin aforesaid, being Mowe Fens, or
Lamas grounds, consisting of the lots or doles of divers persons. One hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the mowing ground lying on the West-side of the river Grant, fifty five Acres, and three Roods, at the West-end of the same lots or doles, abutting upon the common Fen of Water-beach, called Joyst Fen. Out of the mowing grounds, lying between the hard lands of Wickin aforesaid, the river Grant, the seve∣ral Fen grounds of Upmeere farme. And the way leading from the hard lands of Wickin, unto Dimockes Coat, twenty three Acres and one Rood, at the middle part of the said Mowe Fen, where the said doles or lots do abutt one upon another, extending from the said hard lands of Wickin, to the said way leading to Dimockes Coat. And out of the Mowe Fen ground lying between the said way, leading to Di∣mockes Coat, the river Grant, the high Fen of Wickin, and the hard lands of Wickin, twenty one Acres at the middle part of the said Mowe Fen, where the said doles or lots do abutt one upon another, ex∣tending from the said way leading to Dimockes Coat, unto the way leading to Wickin high Fen aforesaid. 0100 0 00 Out of a several Sedge Fen of Isaac Barrow Esquire, lying in Wickin aforesaid, twenty one Acres at the North-west part thereof. 0021 0 00 Out of a several Sedge Fen, of, or belonging to Sir Edward Payton, Knight and Baronet, fourteen Acres at the West-end thereof. 0014 0 00 Out of other several Fen-grounds lying in Wickin aforesaid, twen∣ty Acres, (that is to say) out of the imbanked several Fen-ground of I∣saac Barrow aforesaid, seven Acres at the West-end thereof, abutting upon the hard lands of Wickin aforesaid. Out of the several Fen grounds belonging to Upmeer farme, five Acres at the North-east end of the same grounds, abutting upon the Mowe Fen of Wickin and the river Grant. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Sir Edward Payton aforesaid, lying upon the West-side of the river Grant, five Acres at the South-west end thereof, abutting upon the river Grant. And out of the several Fen-ground of  Dalton Gent. adjoyning to the said several Fen of Sir Edward Payton and the river Grant, three Acres at the South-west part of the same several ground. 0020 0 00 Burwel and Reach. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Burwel, and Reach in the said County of Cambridge, seven hundred Acres at the North-west part of the same Fens, abutting upon Wickin Load and Reach Load. 0700 0 00 Swafham. Out of the intercommon Fens, of, or belonging to Swafham, Prior Swafham, Bulbeck Botsam, and Reach in the said County of Cambridge, or to some or one of them, one thousand foure hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen called white Fen, foure hundred and eleven Acres, abutting upon Swaffham Load and White Fen lake. Out of the common Fen called the Croyle, foure hundred and foure Acres, abutting Eastward upon the common Fen, called great Sedge Fen, Southward and Westward, upon the residue of the same common Fen, called the Croyle, and Northward upon the common Fen called the high Fen. Out of the said common Fen called the high Fen, foure hundred and five Acres at the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Reach Load and the river Grant. And out of the common Fen, called great Sedge Fen, one hundred and eighty Acres at the North-end
thereof, abutting upon the high Fenne and Reach Load. 1400 0 00 Botsam. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Botsam in the said County of Cambridge, lying between White-Fen Lake and the ri∣ver Grant, one hundred and fourty Acres at the North-east end of the same Fen-ground, abutting upon Swaffham high Fen, and the river Grant. 0140 0 00 Horning∣sey, Qui & Ditton. Out of the intercommon Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Botsam-Horningsey, Qui and Ditton in the said County of Cambridge, or to some or one of them foure hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen called High Fen, one hundred Acres at the Easterne end thereof, abutting upon the common Fen called the Rough. And out of the said common Fen called the Rough, three hundred Acres at the westerne part thereof, abutting upon the said high Fen. 0400 0 00 Water-beach. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Water-beach in the said County of Cambridge, seven hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say) out of the Fen called the Joyst Fen, six hundred thirty eight Acres at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the several Fen grounds of Stretham and Wickin. And out of one other Fen, lying between the said Fen, called Joyst Fen, the river Grant, and the hard lands of Water-beach, one hundred and twelve Acres at the North-east end thereof, abutting upon the said Fen called Joyst Fen, and the river Grant. 0750 0 00 Cottenham. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Cottenham, in the said County of Cambridge, two hundred and fourty Acres at the East-end of the common Fen, lying between the common Fens, called Sech-hill ens and the lots. 0240 0 00 Rampton. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Rampton in the said County of Cambridge, sixteen Acres, (that is to say) out of the Mowe Fen called Hempsal, thirteen Acres at the North-east end there∣of, abutting upon Smithy Fen in Cottenham. And out of the common Fen-ground called Iram, three Acres at the East-corner thereof, abutting upon Hempsal aforesaid. 0016 0 00 Wiveling∣ham. Out of the common Fens, of, or belonging to Wivelingham in the said County of Cambridge, one hundred eighty three Acres and one Rood, (that is to say) out of the common Fen ground called Hempsal, fifty three Acres at the North-part thereof, adjoyning upon Smithy Fen and Audrey Causey. Out of the common Fen called Middle-ditch Fen, seventy seven Acres and one rood at the South-east part thereof, abut∣ting upon the several Fen ground called Babies Hurne, and the river Ouse. And out of the common Fen called Clattox or Langrige, fifty three Acres at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Over, and the several Fen-grounds in Wivelingham, called the Meere-grounds. 0183 1 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of, or belonging to Wivelingham afore∣said, fourty Acres & three Roods (that is to say) out of the several ground called Shelfold, consisting of the lots or doles of divers persons, twelve Acres and three Roods at the South-west end of the said lots, next unto the Fens of Over. Out of the several Fen called Babies Hurne, thirteen Acres and three Roods at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the ri∣ver Ouse. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of James Pas∣call
Gent. called Stacks, seven Acres at the North-east end thereof, a∣butting upon Andrey Causey. And out of the several Fen of John Crane Esquire, called little Shelfould, seven Acres and one Rood at the North-East corner thereof, near Erith-Sluce. 0040 3 00 Over. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Over in the said County of Cambridge, one hundred seventy one Acres; Out of the Fen called the Marish at the East-end thereof, abutting North-west∣ward upon the East-end of the lots or doles of divers persons, extend∣ing from the place called the Haywards Swath, unto the bank of the ri∣ver Ouse Eastward, upon the several, or the late inclosed grounds of Over aforesaid, called Blunts Meer, and Southward upon the residue of the said Fen called the Marish. 0171 0 00 INSƲLA ELIEƲM IN COM. CANTAB. Hadden∣ham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Haddenham in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, three hun∣dred seventy eight Acres, (that is to say) out of the Fen called Gaule Fen, three hundred and nine Acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon Berry Fen. And the residue being sixty nine Acres, out of the common Fen called Berry Fen aforesaid, at the West-side thereof, a∣butting upon Gaule Fen aforesaid. 0378 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Haddenham aforesaid, one hundred thirty and eight Acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen ground, called Ewell Fen, thirty six Acres and two Roods at the West-part thereof, abutting upon Gaule Fen, and the Delfes in Haddenham. Out of the Mowe Fen called Lindon-doles, nine Acres at the South-side thereof, abutting upon the river Ouse. Out of the several Fen called Priests Crost, one Acre at the South-end thereof next the river Ouse. Out of the greater Fen-ground, called Hill-doles, twelve Acres and twenty Perches at the North-side thereof, next Haddenham small Fen. Out of the lesser Fen-ground, called Hill-doles three Acres, one Rood and twenty Perches at the North-end thereof, next Sutton-Mead lands. Out of the several Fen-grounds cal∣led Ovtr-delfes and Pingles, being eighteen in number, lying on the South-side of Erith-Causey, between the several Fen-grounds of Ed∣ward Carter and Henry White, fourty two Acres, as the same is already by Lockspits or small trenches, droportionably divided and set out at South-end of every of the said eighteen several Fen-grounds abutting up∣on the river Ouse. Out of the several Fen-grounds called Nether-delfes ly∣ing between Erith-Causey and the said Fen, cal'd Gaule-Fen, being fifteen in number, twenty nine Acres, three Roods, and twenty two Perches, as the same is already also set out proportionably, and by Lockspits or small trenches, severed and divided from every of the said fifteen several Fen-grounds. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late in the tenure or oc∣cupation of Henry White, lying next Ewell Fen, one Acre and ten Perches at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the bank of Ewell Fen afore∣said. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late in the tenure or oc∣cupation of Thomas Pamplin Gent. lying on the North-side of Erith
Causey, two Roods at the East-end thereof, abutting upon the Angle of the said Causey. Out of the several Fen-ground called Calley Crost, lying on the North-side of Erith Causey, two Roods and eight Perches at the West-end thereof, abutting upon the said Causey. Out of the several Fen-ground of Humberston March Esquire, lying on the North-side of Erith Causey, one Acre at the West-end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Richard Wine Gent. lying on the North-side of Erith Causey, near Erith Bridge, one Rood and ten Perches at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the said ground of Hum∣berston March aforesaid. And out of the several Fen-ground, lying be∣tween Andrey Causey and Ewell Fen aforesaid, two Roods and thirty Perches at the South-end thereof. 0138 0 00 Wilburton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wilburton in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, one hundred, se∣venteen Acres and two Roods. Out of the Fens called Skeg Fen and Rush en, at the West-sides of the said Fens, abutting upon the com∣mon Fens of Haddenham, the river Ouse, and the hard lands of Wilbur∣ton aforesaid. 0117 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wilburton afore∣said, six Acres and two Roods, (that is to say,) out of the several Fen-ground of Sir Miles Sandys Knight, fifteen Perches, abutting upon Skeg Fen. Out of the several ground now, or late of  Ware Yeoman, thirty Perches abutting also upon Skeg Fen. Out of the seve∣ral Fen-ground now or late of  Sanders Yeoman, fifteen Perches, abutting also upon Skeg Fen. And out of the several Fen-ground of Thomas Towers Gent. six Acres and twenty Perches at the West-part thereof, abutting also upon Skeg Fen, and the bank of the river Ouse. 0006 2 00 Stretham and Thet∣ford. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stretham and Thetford in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, one hun∣dred seventy two Acres and two Roods, out of the Mowe Fen of Stret∣ham aforesaid, called Chair-Fen Plain, at the East-side thereof, abutting upon Chittring Dyke, and the river Ouse. 0172 2 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stretham and Thetford aforesaid, seventy seven Acres and two Roods, (that is to say) out of the several Fen-grounds of Sir Miles Sandys Knight, sixty Acres. Out of the several Fen-ground called Fidwell Fen, at the South-east end thereof, abutting upon the Severals of Wickin, and the Joyst Fen in Water-beach. Out of the several Fen-ground called Langmore, two Acres and one Rood at the North-west end thereof, next the com∣mon Fen called Goulds Moore. And out of the several Fen grounds of Thetford aforesaid, called the Boats Gangs, fifteen Acres and one Rood, (viz.) the entire several Fen-ground, called the long Roods, a∣butting upon Wickin Fen, containing nine Acres, one Rood and ten Perches. The entire Fen-ground called the short Roods, abutting upon Soham Fen, containing two Acres, and five and twenty Perches Out of the several ground of Oliver Cromwel Gent. called Moonshell, thirty five Perches at the South-side thereof, abutting upon the said Fen called Short Roods. Out of the several fen of Gislingham Gent. cal∣led the lot, thirty five Perches at the East-end thereof, abutting upon
the common lots: The entire Fen-ground called common lots, abut∣ting upon the long Roods aforesaid, containing two Acres and three Roods. And the entire common lot, lying near Harrimore house, be∣tween the rivers Ouse and Grant, containing two Roods and fifteen Perches. 0138 0 00 Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to the Town and City of Elie, in the said Isle of Elie and County of Cambridge, one thousand three hundred and fourty Acres, (that is to say) out of the com∣mon Fen, called Little-shell or East-more, ninety two Acres at the West-side thereof, abutting upon the common Fen called Great-shell. And the said entire common Fen called Great-shell, containing one thousand two hundred and fourty eight Acres. 1340 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging unto the Town and City of Elie aforesaid, two hundred twenty and foure Acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Shippy Farme, fourty Acres at the South-part thereof, abutting upon the common Fen called Great-shell. Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belong∣ing to Quanie Farme near Stuntnie, one entire Fen ground called the Bye, encompassed with the common Fens of Elie, containing twelve Acres. Out of the several Fen-ground of William March Esquire, called Spain-Delfe, lying near unto Shippy Farme, eight Acres at the North-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belong∣ing to Thorney-Farme, fourty seven Acres at the South-east part there∣of, abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Norney Farme, and the several Fen-ground of Sir Robert Heath Knight, in Soham, called great Metlam. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Norney Farme, seventy nine Acres, abutting Westward upon the black bank Northward, upon the grounds of Thorney Farme, and Southward and Eastward upon the residue of the same Fen-ground of Norney. Out of the several Fen-grounds late of, or belonging to Sir Simon Steward Knight, lying in Stuntney Farme, two and twenty Acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the grounds of Norney-Farme. Out of eight se∣veral Fen-grounds, lying between the common Fens called Dunstal, the several grounds of Thorney-Farme and Stock-load, twelve Acres, as the same is lockspitted and set out, at the North-east ends of the same grounds, abutting upon Stock-Load aforesaid, and the grounds of Thorney-Farm aforesaid. And out of the several Fen-grounds of Breame Farme, foure Acres at the South-east end thereof, next the river Ouse. 0224 0 00 Out of the common Fens of, or belonging to Stuntney, thirty two Acres, abutting Eastward upon Soham Causey, and Southward upon the common Fens of Soham, called the Borders. 0032 0 00 Little Port Out of the intercommon Fen grounds of, or belonging to Elie Down∣ham, and Little-Port in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, or to some or one of them foure thousand two hundred and ninety Acres, (that is to say) one entire common Fen called Lowell Moore, containing one hundred seventy foure Acres; and the residue being foure thou∣sand one hundred and sixteen Acres, out of the great common Fen called Whelpmoore, abutting North-eastward upon part of the same Fen, lying near Priests houses, the several Fen grounds of Thomas Gibbon Esquire,
the several Fen grounds called Redmore grounds, and the several en grounds of William Heaveningham Esquire, and Southward upon the said common Fen, called Lowel Moore. The common Fen of Elie, called Great Shell, and the several fen grounds of Shippy Farme, and Spaine Delfe, and toward the North-west upon the river Ouse.4290 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds of, or belonging to Little-Port a∣foresaid, seven hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the several im∣banked Fen-ground of, or belonging to Sir Miles Sandys, Knight and Ba∣ronet, three hundred Acres at the North-east end thereof, abutting North-westward upon the several Fen-ground of Thomas Towers Gent. North-eastward upon the several Fen-ground of Sir Henry Willoughbie Knight, and Thomas Tyrel Gent, and South-Eastward upon a Close, par∣cell of the same imbanked grounds, and the Bank of the said grounds, near unto the house called the Chaine house near the river Ouse. Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Thomas Towers Gent. called Crouchmore, seventy Acres abutting upon the several fen-grounds of Sir Henry Willoughby Knight, and the said imbanked grounds of Sir Miles Sandys aforesaid Out of the several fen-ground, of, or belonging to William Hawkins Gent. called also Crouchmore, fifty five Acres at the North part of the same Fen, abutting upon the common Fen, called Hale Fen. And the several Fen-ground of Sir Henry Willoughby Knight. Out of the several Fen-ground of Thomas Tyrell Gent. lying near Priests houses, twenty seven Acres at the West-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground, late of Nicholas Milsop, lying near Apeshall, called the Wood-ground, fourteen Acres at the North-West part of the same ground, abutting upon Westmoore, and the several grounds of Ape∣shall Farme aforesaid. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belong∣ing to Apeshall farme aforesaid thirty Acres. Out of the several fen called Garnars, abutting upon the common fen called Westmoore, and the river of Wellney. Out of the several fen-grounds, now, or late of Henry Milsop Gent. twenty Acres. Out of the several fen called Arch-Deacon Crost, at the West-part thereof, abutting upon the said seve∣ral fen-ground of Thomas Milsop, and the said river of Wellney. Out of the several fen-ground called Cades Crost, five Acres, two Roods and twelve Perches, at the North-west side of the same ground. Out of the several fen-ground of Thomas Crab, five Acres, two Roods, and twelve Perches at the North-west side therof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Roger Collin, three acres, one Rood and ten Perches at the South-east-side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of John Smith, ad∣joyning to the Vicarage Crost, one Acre, three Roods, and twenty five Perches, at the North-west side of the same ground. Out of the adjoyning several fen-ground, now, or late of John Horne, one Acre, three Roods, and twenty five Perches at the South-east side of the same ground. Out of the several fen-ground of John Hand, foure Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches, at the North-west side thereof. Out of the adjoyning several fen-ground of Widow Alderton, foure Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the South-east side thereof. Out of the ad∣joyning several fen-ground of William Cooke, three Acres and twenty Perches, at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Wadley, three Roods, and twenty Perch∣es
at the East-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Willi∣am Goates, lying near Cambridge Croft, one Acre and thirty two Perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the adjoyning several ground of Andrew Neale, three Roods and twenty Perches at the North end thereof. Out of the adjoyning several ground of Thomas Crabbe, one Acre and twenty Perches at the West end thereof, next VVellney river. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Vernell, one Acre and fifteene Perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Day adjoyning unto Bell Croft, five Acres, three Roods, and twen∣ty five Perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground late of Jane Chambers, two Acres, two Roods, and thirty Perches at the Easterne corner thereof. Out of the adjoyning several Fen-ground of VVilliam Smith, one Acre, three Roods, and fifteene Perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of George Wilson, one Acre, three Roods and fifteene Perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the adjoyning several Fen-ground now or late of John Payne, one Acre, two Roods, and thirty Perches at the South-side of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Goates lying near the grounds of Apshall Farme, three Acres, one Rood and thirty Perches, at the North-west side thereof. Out of the adjoyning several Fen-ground of Robert Aspland, one Acre, two Roods, and twenty five Perches at the South-east side thereof. Out of the ad∣joyning several Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Milsop, one Acre two Roods, and twenty five Perches at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Robert Groom, two Acres, one Rood, and twenty five Perches, at the South-east side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Sir Miles Sandys Knight and Baronet, six acres and fifteen perches at the North end of the ground adjoyning to New-dike. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Milsop, six acres, one rood, and ten perches at the South-East side there∣of, abutting upon New-dike. Out of the several Fen-ground of Henry Meadowes, seven acres, two roods, and thirty perches at the West-side of the same ground. Out of the several fen ground now or late of Robert Alexander, one acre, two roods and twenty perches at the East-side thereof. Out of the adjoyning several fen-ground of William Haukins, two acres and ten perches at the West-side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground, now, or late of John Crabbe, adjoyning to the ground called the Common Acre, three acres at the North end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground, now, or late of Thomas Milsop the elder, ad∣joyning to Arch-Deacon Croft, three acres, and one rood at the South-end of the same ground, abutting upon Wellney river. Out of the seve∣ral fen-ground now, or late of Richard White, adjoyning to the fore-mentioned ground of Thomas Milsop, one acre, one rood and fifteen perches, at the South-east corner of the same ground next Wellney river. Out of the several fen-ground now, or late of William Wright, three acres and three roods on the West-side thereof, adjoyning to the ground belonging to Wellney Chappel. Out of the said several fen-ground belonging to Wellney Chappel, one acre at the East-corner thereof. Out of the adjoyning several Fen-ground of Christopher Clark, two acres and three roods at the West-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground
now, or late of Nicholas Veres, one acre, two roods and twenty perches at the South-east side of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Richard Mares, one acre, one rood, and twenty perches at the West-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Sharp, three acres two roods, and twen∣ty perches, at the West-side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Thomas Wilson, near adjoyning to the Fen-ground, called the hun∣dred acres, three acres and one rood at the East-side rhereof. Out of the adjoyning Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Milsop, nine acres, one rood, and twelve perches at the West-side thereof. Out of the se∣veral fen-ground of Richard Ward, three acres at the East-part there∣of. Out of the several ground of Robert Lukin Esquire, being part of the ground called the hundred acres, fourteen acres at the West-side thereof. Out of the several ground of Widow Crab, being also part of the ground called the hundred acres sixteen acres and three roods at the west-side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of John Cole Gent. adjoyning to the ground called Garners, seven acres two roods, and ten perches at the East-part thereof, abutting upon Wellney river. Out of the several fen-ground now, or late of William Johnson, foure acres and two roods, at the North-west corner thereof, abutting up∣on Wellney-river. Out of the several Fen-ground of  Goats Yeoman, adjoyning to the common acre, three roods, and ten perches at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Day, adjoyning to the common acre, one acre, two roods and twenty perches, at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Plimme and Thomas Clarke, one acre and ten perches at the South-end thereof, next the Wood grounds of Apshall Farm. Out of the several ground of Samuel Kinswick, at the South-end thereof, one acre one rood, and ten perches. Out of the several ground now, or late of Thomas Paynter, one acre, two roods, and twelve perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Hand, adjoyning unto the Fen-ground called Apshall aforesaid, one acre one rood, and twenty perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Thomas Boughton, three roods and twenty perches, at the North-west part of the same ground. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of John Glasier, one acre and thirty five perches, at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Thomas Milsop, called Whinne-bush Croft, three acres and twenty perches at the North-west part thereof. And out of the several ground, called Cambridge-Crofts, eight acres, two roods, and ten perches at the West-side thereof, abutting upon Wellney-river▪ and the Mare Fen.0700 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground, of, or belonging to Thomas Gibbon Esquire, lying between the common Fen called Whelpmoore, and the river of Brandon, one hundred and ninety Acres at the South-end thereof, abutting upon the fenne grounds called Redmore grounds. 0190 0 00 Redmore grounds. Out of the several fen grounds called Redmore grounds, lying between the said common fen, called Whelpmoore and the river of Brandon, one hundred twenty six acres at the South-part of the same grounds, abut∣ting
upon the several fen ground of William Heveningham Esquire, and the said river of Brandon.0126 0 00 Downham in the Isle. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Downham in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, called west-fen, three hundred eighty eight acres and two roods, abutting South-west∣ward upon the common fen grounds called Pyemoore, and Ashwell-Moore. 0388 2 00 Out of the several fen ground of John Carter, lying near Downham Hive, one acre and two roods at the North-east corner thereof. 0001 2 00 Westmoore. Out of the great intercommon Fen, called Westmoore and Cranmoore, in the said Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, five thousand Acres, (that is to say) three thousand acres on the South-side of Bedford river, bounded North-westward with the same river Eastward, with Well∣ney river, and the several fen grounds of Littleport and VVellney, adjoyn∣ing to the said river of VVelney, and westward with Oxewillow Load and the residue being two thousand acres out of that part of the said Fen, that lieth on the North side of Bedford river aforesaid, abutting upon the said river and Oxewillow Load aforesaid. 5000 0 00 Coveney. Out of the common fen ground called Hale fen, lying in or near Cove∣ney in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, one hundred and eighty acres, abutting Eastward upon the hard lands of Coveney, and the gravel-way leading to Coveney, and on all other patts, upon the re∣sidue of the same fen. 0180 0 00 Out of one other common fen ground, lying in or near Coveney a∣foresaid, called Ashwell-Moore or Sedge fen, foure hundred twenty three acres, abutting Eastward upon Pye-Moore VVestward, upon the several fen ground of Coveney, called Hale fen, and Northward upon VVest-fen in Downham aforesaid. 0423 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney afore∣said, called the great Dams, one hundred fifty seven acres, three roods and ten perches, (that is to say,) out of the several fen ground of John Davis three acres, two roods and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Thomas VVhine Junior, three acres, one rood, and twenty foure perches at the South-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of VVilliam Smith, two acres, three roods and thirty six perches at the South-west side thereof. Out of the several ground now, or late of Thomas VVatson, three acres, three roods and twenty perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of John VVatson, two acres, three roods, and thirty perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Joane Pope Widow▪ ten acres, two roods, and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of John Lin∣wood, eighte es and fifteen perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Richard Gooday, seventeen acres, three roods and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the se∣veral fen ground of Thomas Smith, three acres and one rood at the East-corner thereof. Out of the several fen ground of John Smith, three acres and thirty five perches at the South-east corner thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Thomas Winter, adjoyning to Coveney Load, nine acres at the North-east side thereof. Out of the several Fen
ground of Robert Matthewes, eight acres, three roods and ten perc at the North-side thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Humber∣ston March Esquire, abutting upon Coveney Load, and the way leading unto Biall Fen, eighteen acres and twenty perches at the South-east end thereof. One entire fen ground of William Sharp Gent. lying between Biall Fen, and the way leading from Biall Fen to Cove∣ney, containing sixteen acres and two roods. Out of the several Fen ground of Peter Rider, one acre and thirty perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John VVhinne, three acres, two roods and ten perches at the East-end thereof. One entire several Fen ground, lying between Bial Fen, and the ground of Robert Andrewes, containing fourteen acres and two roods. And out of the several Fen ground of Peter Andrewes, sixteen acres, one rood, and thirty perches at the East-end thereof.0157 3 10 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney afore∣said, called the New dams, fifty five acres, two roods, and fifteen perches, (that is to say) out of the several fen-ground of Francis Sanderson, two acres and one Rood at the North end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Mary Rusden, one acre, one rood, and fifteen perches at the North end thereof. One entire several fen-ground of Robert Mat∣thewes abutting Westward upon the hard lands of Coveney, containing fourteen acres. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Cocke, three acres at the East end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground called the Town-damme, three acres at the East end thereof. And three entire several Fen-grounds of William Sharp Gent. lying together, and abut∣ting upon Ashwell Moore, and the hard lands of Coveney, containing thirty two acres. 0055 2 15 Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Coveney afore∣said, called Hall fen, thirty Acres, three roods, and thirty perches at the East-side thereof, abutting upon Ashwell Moore. 0030 3 30 Out of the several fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney afore∣said, called Block-moores, nineteene acres, one rood, and five perches (that is to say) out of the three several fen-grounds of John VVatson, Agnes VVatson, and Hellen VVatson, one rood apiece at the North ends of the same grounds. Out of the several fen-ground of Moses VVhite∣cake three roods and thirty four perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Iohn Gavestock, three roods and thir∣ty perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Mary Allen, three roods and thirty five perches at the South-west side thereof. Out of the two several fen-grounds of Iohn Kaye and Iohn Hill Clerk, one rood, and thirty eight perches apiece at the North-west ends of the same grounds. Out of the several fen-ground of Robert Andrewes, one acre and two roods at the Nost end there∣of. Out of the several fen-ground of Henry Biddle, one acre, two roods, and ten perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Katherine VVinter, five acres and thirty perches at the west-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Elizabeth Bar∣ber, three acres, three roods and ten perches at the west-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Richard Gunton, one rood and thirty foure perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground
of Thomas Meakes, one rood, and twenty six perches at the North-end thereof. And one entire Fen of William Sharp Gent. adjoyning East-ward upon the hard lands of Coveney, containing one acre and three roods.0019 1 05 Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney afore∣said, called the Pingles, thirteen acres, one rood, and twenty perches, (that is to say) one entire several Fen ground of Thomas Winter, lying between the hard lands of Coveney and Coveney Load, containing e∣leven acres. And out of the several Fen grounds now, or late of Thomas Hobbie and Francis Sanderson, two acres, one rood, and twenty perches at the North-west end thereof. 0013 1 20 Biall Fen. Out of the great intercommon Fen ground, called Biall Fen, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, two thousand and two hun∣dred acres, (that is to say) two thousand acres, abutting upon the North-west side of Bedford river, and westward upon Langwood Fen, and Wicham Mead lands. And South-westward upon Gaule Fen in Mepall; and two hundred acres, abutting upon the South-east side of Bedford river, and Oxwillow Load. 2200 0 00 Maney. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Maney in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, called the Dams, abutting upon Stoney Fen, two hundred and thirty acres at the west-side thereof, abutting upon Twisle Load. 0230 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Maney afore∣said, twenty acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen grounds of Robert Neale, adjoyning to the Dams of Maney aforesaid, ten acres, abutting upon Twisle Load, and Stoney Fen in Dodington, Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Sisson, lying next Cranmoore, three acres at the East-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Ri∣chard Wellbie, thirty six perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of George Wright, one rood and six perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Nathaniel Thinne, two Roods at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Sisson, two roods and twenty perches at the South-cor∣ner thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of William Jenes, one rood and thirty perches at the East-corner thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Oliver Galloway, two roods and thirty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Jeremy Freeman, one rood and thirty foure perches at the West end thereof. Out of the several Holt Fen grounds of John Goulden, two roods and twenty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the several Holt Fen ground of John Hill, twenty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of William Harrison, two roods at the South-end thereof. And out of the several Fen ground of VVilliam Free man, two acres, two roods, and foure perches, at the South-east side thereof. 0020 0 00 Wichford. Out of the common Fen ground, called Pyemoore near Wichford, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, one hundred fifty two acres, abutting upon Downham west fen, and Ashwell Moore. 0152 0 00 Gruntey-Fen. Out of the common Fen ground called Gruntey Fen in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, foure hundred twenty six acres,
abutting North-westward upon the hard lands, and on all other parts, encompassed with the residue of the said Fen. 0426 0 00 Out of the common Fen ground, of. or belonging to Wicham in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, called Widdon, ten acres, abutting westward upon the several Fen-grounds of Mepall, cal∣led Widdon, and Northward upon the several Fen-grounds of Wicham, called Cawcroft. 0010 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of Wicham called Cawcroft, consist∣ing of the Lots or Doles of divers persons, twentie nine Acres and two Roods, as the same is Lockspitted and set out at the North end of the same Lots next Biall Fen. 0029 2 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of Wicham aforesaid, called Wicham-Mead-lands, thirty Acres and two Roods (that is to say) out of the se∣veral Fen-grounds of George Peacock, Thomas Gooday, and John Merell, three Acres and one Rood, as the same is Lockspitted, divided, and set out at the West-end of the same grounds abutting upon Mepall Gaul-Fen. Out of the Lots or Doles lying between the last mentioned grounds, and the Lot or Dole of John Belwood, belonging to divers persons, twelve acres, three roods, and ten perches, at the North-west-end thereof, abutting upon Block-Fen. Out of the Lots or Doles ly∣ing between the great lot of George Peacock, and the old Darie-house of John Merrell, belonging unto divers persons, seven acres, one rood, and thirty perches at the South-end thereof, abutting upon Biall Fen. Out of the two lots of the said John Merell and of  Chap∣man Gent. called North doles, seven acres, as the same is lock-spitted, divided, and set out, at the North-ends of the same doles, abutting up∣on Langwood Fen. 0030 2 00 Mepall. Out of the common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Mepall, in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, called Gaule Fen, fifty three acres, abutting upon the North-side of Bedford river, and upon Biall Fen. 0053 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Mepall afore∣said, called Widdon, eight acres (that is to say) out of the several Fen ground of Robert Brown, two roods and two perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of  Clinch, lying next but one to the said ground of Robert Brown, three roods and eighteen perches at the North-east end thereof, next Wicham Severals. Out of the adjoyning several Fen ground of Thomas Whinne, three roods and seventeen perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of  Bradford Gent, one rood and thirty five perch∣es at the East end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of William Smith, two roods and twelve perches at the Easterne end thereof, Out of the adjoyning several fen ground of Thomas Aspland, one acre at the Eastern end thereof. Out of the several fen grouod of John Phippe, two Roods and two Perches at the Easterne end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of George Aspland, one Rood, and thirty four Perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground in the occupation of widow Smith, one Rood and thirty Perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Edmund Aspland, one
Rood and thirty Perches at the East end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Iohn Addams, three Roods and eight Perches at the East end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Iohn Whiting, two Roods and eight perches at the East-end thereof. And out of the several Fen-ground of William Whinne, two Roods and four Perches at the East-end thereof. 0008 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of Mercy Carter Widow, belonging to Mepall aforesaid, twenty five Acres at the North-end of the ground called the Holts. 0025 0 00 Out of the several Fen-ground in Mepall aforesaid, called Fur-fen, twelve Acres, three roods, and four Perches at the South-side thereof, abutting upon Bedford river. 0012 3 04 Out of the several Fen-ground of  Gederel Gent. lying be∣tween Gaul-Fen and Wicham-Mead-lands, six Acres and two Roods at the North-west end thereof. 0006 2 00 Out of the several Fen-ground of John Phippe lying in Mepall afore∣said, abutting upon Block-Fen, one Acre, and twenty two Perches at the South-end thereof. 0001 0 22 Out of the several Fen-ground of  Wigmore Gent. lying in Mepall aforesaid, and joyning unto Block-Fen, one Acre, two Roods, and thirty Perches at the North-east end thereof. 0001 2 30 Out of the several Fen-ground of Thomas Aspland, lying in Mepall aforesaid, adjoyning also unto Block-Fen, one Acre, and one Rood, and twenty four Perches at the North end thereof. 0001 1 24 Mepall se∣verals. Out of the several or late inclosed Fen grounds of Mepall afore∣said, called Block Fen, or Block Moore, lying on the North-side of Bedford river, one hundred thirty nine acres and two roods, (that is to say) out of the grounds of Thomas Whinne, and divers others, lying to∣gether undivided, adjoyning unto North Fen in Sutton, fourteen acres, three roods and five perches, abutting upon Bedford river aforesaid. One entire Fen ground of John Whinne, abutting upon Sutton North-Fen, containing one acre and two roods. Out of the several Fen grounds of Thomas Aspland, John Adams, James Adcroft, Richard Hold∣ing, William Bird, and Widow Ratham, adjoyning unto Sutton North-Fen, eleven acres, three roods and ten perches, as the same is propor∣tionally set out and lockspitted, at the West-ends of the same grounds, next Sutton North-Fen aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Aspland the elder, adjoyning to Sutton North Fen, three acres, and thirty perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Widow Brown, adjoyning upon Sutton North-Fen, two acres, two roods, and ten perches at the West-end thereof. Out of the several Fen grounds, lying between the said ground of Wi∣dow Browne, North Fen in Sutton, the grounds of Chatteresse, and the way in Mepall block Fen, sixty acres, three roods, and thirty foure perches, proportionally set out, lockspitted and divided from every of the said grounds. Out of the several Fen ground of  Wigmore Gent. abutting upon Bedford river, and the way in block Fen, one acre a∣butting upon Bedford river aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground of Mercy Carter Widow, lying between Fur Fen, and the way in block Fen. eighteen acres and fifteen perches at the North-end of the same
grounds. Out of the several Fen ground of George Wabie, adjoyning unto Fur Fen, three acres at the East-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of George Aspland, adjoyning upon two Fen grounds of Widow Ratham, two acres, three roods and thirty two perches. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Whinne, lying between the grounds of Richard Cooper and John Adams, three acres at the west-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground of John Adams, lying between the grounds of Thomas Whinne and William Whinne, three acres and ten perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the next adjoyning several Fen ground, now, or late of William Whinne, three acres and one Rood at the East-end thereof. Out of the next ad∣joyning several Fen ground now, or late of Th mas Whinne, three acres, two roods and eighteen perches. And out of the several Fen grounds now, or late of Richard Cooper, adjoyning upon block Fen in Chateresse, six acres, two roods, and thirty six perches at the North-side thereof. 0139 2 00 Sutton in the Isle. Out of the several Fen-ground called Middle-Moore, lying in Sutton in the said Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, thirty seven Acres abutting upon the South-side of Bedford river. 0037 0 00 Out of the Fen-grounds in Sutton aforesaid, called North-Mead-lands and South-Mead-lands, one hundred seventy five Acres abutting upon Middle-Moore aforesaid, and upon the North-side of the said New-ri∣ver, called Bedford river. 0175 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground of Perrey Jederel Gent. lying in Sutton aforesaid, near the place called Sutton Gravell, and encompassed with divers Osier Holts, one acre, and one rood at the East-end thereof. 0001 1 00 Out of foure other ancient several Fen grounds in Sutton aforesaid, lying near Erith Causey, called Cocks nests, foure acres and three roods, (that is to say) out of the grounds belonging to the Deane and Chap∣ter of Elie, one acre, two roods, and twenty perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the ground of  Drury Gent. one acre, two roods and ten perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the ground of  Carter Gent. three roods and twenty perches at the South∣side thereof. And out of the grounds of John Taylour, two roods and thirty perches at the South-side thereof. 0004 3 00 Out of the several or late inclosed Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton aforesaid, lying on both sides of the said new-River, called Bed∣ford river, eight hundred sixty and two Acres (that is to say) Out of the several and late inclosed Fen-grounds lying on the North-side of the said New-river, six hundred Acres (viz.) out of the several Fen-grounds called little Halwood, fourty three Acres, one Rood, and fif∣teen Perches at the South part of the same ground, abutting upon the Fen-ground called North-Mead-lands, and the West-water. Out of the several and late inclosed Fen-grounds lying in West-Fen, on the North-side of Bedford river, being one hundred and sixteen in number, two hundred fifty eight Acres, three Roods, and eleven Perches, as the same is alretdy by Lockspits or small Trenches proportionally set out and di∣vided from every of the said hundred and sixteen several Fen-grounds. Out of the several and late inclosed Fen-grounds lying in Middle-Fen, on the North-side of the said river, being eleven in number, twenty
three acres and eleven perches, as the same is also already by lockspits or small trenches proportionally set out and divided from every of the said eleven several Fen grounds. Out of the several and late inclo∣sed Fen grounds, lying in North Fen, on the North side of the said ri∣ver, being ninety foure in number, two hundred seventy foure acres, three roods and three perches, as the same is also already by lock-spits or small trenches proportionally set out and divided, from every of the said ninety foure several Fen grounds. 0600 0 00 Sutton South of Bedford river. Out of the several or late inclosed Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton aforesaid, lying on the South-side of Bedford river, being one hundred twenty two in number, two hundred sixty two acres, as the same is already by lockspits or small trenches proportionally set out, severed and divided from every of the said one hundred twenty two inclosed grounds, (that is to say) out of the inclosed Fen grounds called Tween ditches, being eight in number, fourteen acres, as the same is propor∣tionally set out as aforesaid. Out of the late inclosed grounds, called Many-mans doles, lying between Sutton-Causey, and the way leading to South-Mead lands, on the South-side of Bedford river, being foure in number, five acres, two roods, and twenty foure perches, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying between South-Mead lands, the said grounds called Tween ditches, the said grounds called Many-mens doles, Sutton, Gravell, the hard lands of Sutton, the grounds of divers men in South Fen, lying undivided, the ground of Robert Gunton, abutting upon Haddenham Fen, and the com∣mon Fen ground of Haddenham, called small Fen, being fifty seven in number, ninety one acres, one rood, and thirteen perches, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying between the Fen ground of Robert Peacock, abutting up∣on Hadd lenham Common aforesaid. The several Fen ground of  Jederell Gent. lying in South-Fen aforesaid, the hard lands of Sutton, the common Fen grounds of Wentworth, and the said common Fen of Haddenham, called small Fen, being twelve in number, seventy two acres and ten perches, as the same is also set out and divided as afore∣said. Out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying between Sutton, Gravell, North-Mead lands, and the grounds in West Fen, and called also Many-mans doles, being nine in number, thirteen acres, two roods and sixteen perches, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late inclosed Fen ground called the Berry lot, fourteen acres and seventeen perches, as the same is set out and divided as aforesaid, at the South-west part thereof. Out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying in West Fen, on the said South-side of Bedford river, being fourteen in number, twenty two acres, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying between West-Fen aforesaid, the Gaultway. and the hard lands of Sutton, being foure in number, six acres and twenty perches, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. And out of the late inclosed Fen grounds, lying between the said Gaultway, the said new river called Bedford river, the grounds of Mepall and the hard lands of Sutton, being thirteen in num∣ber, twenty three acres and twenty perches, as the same is also divided and set out as aforesaid. 0262 0 00
Chartresse. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Chartresse, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, three thousand eight hundred twenty six acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen cal∣led Normore, one thousand six hundred and ten acres, abutting upon Dodington Hame, and the hard lands of Honey. Out of the common Fen, called Langwood Fen, nine hundred and twenty acres, adjoyning upon Block Fen & the Fen called Wenney or Whinney Fen, and the Mead-lands of Wicham. Out of the said common Fen ground, called Wenney or Whinney Fen, three hundred Acres abutting upon Langwood-Fenne and Block-Fen aforesaid. Out of the common Fen-ground called Rough-West-moore, five hundred ninety six Acres at the North part of the same Fen, abutting upon the Common Fen called Beeselings, and the hard lands called VVilly-Heath. And out of the Common Fen-grounds cal∣led Curfe and Gore, four hundred Acres, abutting upon Dodington Leame, and the Gravel way near the old Eaw, leading unto Dodington. 3826 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging unto  Wendy Esquire, lying in Chartresse aforesaid, being parcel of the several Fen, called Abbots Holwood, two hundred thirty foure acres, abutting upon the several grounds in Chartresse aforesaid, called the old Haues, and upon the west-water. 0234 0 00 Out of the Fen ground in the several possession of Besteney Betts E∣squire called block Fen, eighty nine acres and a half, abutting upon Wicham Mead-lands, and Langwood Fen aforesaid. 0089 2 00 Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartresse aforesaid, called the old Haues, one hundred and five acres, one rood and twenty perches as the same is already proportionally by lockspits or small trenches, divided and set out, (that is to say) out of the ground called the Town Meddow, two acres, two roods, and thirty three perches at the South-east part thereof. Out of the ground of Besteney Bruce, three acres, one rood, and thirty perches, at the North-east part thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Matthewes, foure acres, two roods and thirty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground of  Trice Gent. called Pickerells Fen, foure acres and one rood at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Keete, two acres, two roods and five perch∣es at the North-west end thereof. Out of the ground of John Legerton, two acres, three roods, and thirty two perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the ground of William Dring, foure acres, and six perches at the North-east part thereof. Out of the ground of Richard Reade and William Dring, two acres, three roods and ten perches at the North-East part thereof. The entire Fen ground of Robert Vintner Gent. lying between the grounds of Besteney Bruce aforesaid, and Richard Campe, containing eleven acres, three roods and twenty perches, Out of the said ground of Thomas Campe, one acre and two roods at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of John Tye, one acre and two roods at the East-part thereof. Out of the ground of Robert Rash, Reynold Walsham and Thomas Curde, five acres, two roods, and fifteen perches, set out as aforesaid, at the East-part of the same ground. Out of the ground of Widow Duke, two acres at the North-part thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Tye, two acres, two roods and twelve perches at the North-west part thereof. Out of the grounds of Robert Bruce, Ro∣bert
Reade, William Dring and Robert Edges, seven acres and one rood set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said grounds. Out of the adjoyn∣ing grounds of Martin Bend and Richard Cooper foure acres and one rood, set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said grounds. Out of the grounds of Richard Lambe, John Reae, Thomas Wright, Thomas Rose, and John Reason, seven acres and ten perches set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said grounds. Out of the ground of  Castle Gent. lying next the several ground of  Wendye Esquire in Abbots Holwood aforesaid, nine acres, two roods and ten perches at the North-east corner thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Reade, one acre, three roods, and thirty two perches at the west-part thereof. One entire Fen ground of Richard Dring, lying between the last mentioned grounds of Thomas Reade, and the ground of Thomas Campe, abutting upon the said several ground of  Wendye aforesaid, containing seven acres, two roods and ten perches. Out of the ground of John Rutter, six acres, two roods and five perches at the East-side thereof, abutting upon the ground of Thomas Campe. And out of the said ground of Thomas Campe, lying next the several Fen grounds of Sut∣ton, called the Middle, eight acres and three roods, abutting upon the said grounds in Sutton. 0105 1 20 Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartrisse aforesaid, called Honey-Fen, fourty acres at the South-part of the same grounds, abutting upon Langwood Fen and Bial Fen. 0040 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartresse aforesaid, called the Restiges, fourty acres and twenty perches, (that is to say) one entire se∣veral Fen ground of Besteney Betts Esquire, abutting upon Beeselings Fen in Dodington, containing twenty seven acres. Out of the ground of the said Besteney Betts, called the Mile, foure acres and sixteen perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the ground late of Sir Thomas Hed∣ley Knight, two acres, two roods, and thirty foure perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of William Reeve, three acres and twen∣ty perches at the East-end thereof. And out of the ground of Ro∣bert Peyton Esquire, three acres and thirty perches at the East-part thereof. 0040 0 20 Dodington, Wimbling∣ton, March and Ben∣wick. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Dodington, March, Benwick and Wimblington, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, or to some or one of them, seven thousand seven hundred ninety seven acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen called Pulver Fen, and Turfe Fen, one thousand three hundred acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the Fen called Beeselings Fen. Out of the said common Fen called Beeselings Fen, three hundred fourty foure acres at the South-end thereof, abutting upon west-water. Out of the com∣mon Fen called Dikamoore, seven hundred fifty six acres, abutting upon the west-water, and the bank called Copalder bank. Out of the com∣mon Fen grounds called Stoney Fen and block Fen, one thousand and seven hundred acres at the East-part thereof next unto Maney. Out of the common Fen ground called Burrough Moore, five hundred acres, a∣butting upon Ransome Mo re, and the river Neane. Out of the com∣mon Fen called Whitemoore, one thousand acres at the North-west part thereof, abutring upon Plant-water, and the common Fens of Wis∣bich.
Out of the common Fen called Wich Fen, two hundred acres at the South-part thereof, abutting upon Dodington Leame, and the com∣mon Fen called Stwe Fen. Out of the common fen called the Middle, two hundred acres, abutting upon Plant-water and the river Neane. Out of the common fen called great Binnie Moore, foure hundred and fifty acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the fen called Grayes Fen, and the lake called the old Chaire. Out of the common fen called Creek fen, foure hundred and sixty acres at the North-east part there∣of, abutting North-ward upon the common fen called Ladus Fen, and upon the several fen grounds of Robert Peyton Esquire. And out of the common fens called Horse Moore, and little Binnie Moore, eight hundred eighty seven acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the imbanked several ground called Horse Moore. 7797 0 00 Out of the fen called west-fen, lying between the river Neane, Plant-water, Sterne, Ea, or South-lake, the new Dyke made from Sterne, Ea, or South-lake aforesaid unto West-fen Close, the said ground called West-fen Close, Whoredome lake, and Witlesea Dyke, two thou∣sand foure hundred eighty three acres at the South part of the same ground, abutting Eastward upon Plant-water, and the river Neane South-ward upon Witlesea Dyke, called at that place Saddle-bowe mile, and westward upon Whoredome Lake, West-fen Close, and the new Dyke aforesaid. 2483 0 00 Out of the imbanked several Fen ground late of Robert Peyton Esquire, one thousand five hundred and fifty acres, (that is to say) out of the seve∣ral imbanked fen ground called Stoney fen, one thousand three hundred twenty five acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the fen called Chafer fen, the fens of Maney called the dams, and the common fen called Stoney fen. And out of the imbanked several fen ground now, or late in the occupation of William Sames, Doctor of the law, called Horse Moore, two hundred twenty five acres at the North-east part thereof abutting upon the fens called Grayes fen and great Binnie Moore. 1550 0 00 Out of the other several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Dodington March, Benwick and VVimblington aforesaid, nine hundred and nineteen acres, (that is to say) out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Robert Peyton Esquire, one hundred thirty three acres and twenty perches, (viz,) one entire fen, lying in Norwood severals, abutting upon the several fen ground of VVilliam VVrag, containing one hun∣dred and three acres. One other entire fen ground, abutting upon the bank of VValdersey, and a several ground belonging to Henry Fini∣more, containing eighteen acres and three roods. And out of a seve∣ral fen ground adjoyning to the part of VVhitemoore, called Maries Hurne, and the several fen ground of Thomas Tyrell Gent. eleven acres, one rood, and twenty perches at the South-part thereof, next VVhite-moore aforesaid. 0133 0 00 Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Robert Balam Esquire, lying near Waldersey Banck, sixty nine Acres, one Rood, and five Perches (viz.) one entire Fen-ground abutting upon Soapers drove and Waldersey bank, containing fourty nine Acres, and one Rood, and five Perches; and out of the several Fen-ground lying on the East side of Norwood Causey, twenty Acres at the West end of the same ground
abutting upon the several Fen-ground, now, or late of Widow South-well. 0069  05 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Henry Finimoore Gent. lying in March aforesaid, fourty two Acres, and two Roods at the North-east side of the grounds called Otter Holts, lying near Plant-water, abutting upon Plant-water, and the several Fen-ground of Thomas Shep∣heard. 0042 2 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Thomas Tyrell Gent. fourty five Acres, one Rood, and ten Perches. (viz.) one entire several Fen-ground abutting upon Plant-water and West-Fen, contain∣ing thirty five Acres and two Roods. And out of his several ground lying in Norwood Severals, betwixt two several grounds of Robert Peyton aforesaid, nine Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the West-side thereof. 0045 1 10 Out of the several Fen-ground called the hundred Acres, lying near unto Maney, twenty five Acres at the South-end thereof, next the seve∣rall grounds of Maney aforesaid. 0025 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground called Grayes-Fen, fourty four Acres at the North-end thereof, abutting upon great Binnie-Moore. 0044 0 00 Out of the several Fen-ground called Reads-Fen, thirty Acres abut∣ting upon Well-Pingle and the river Neane. 0030 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Robert Pierson, twenty one Acres, one Rood, and thirty five Perches, (viz.) out of the ground lying near unto Hobbs-dike, eight Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the South end thereof, abutting upon the old Drove-way. And out of a several Fen-ground of him the said Robert Pierson, lying in the Fen called Edmunds Severals, twelve Acres, two Roods, and twenty five Perches at the East-end thereof, abutting upon the several Fenne-ground of Thomas Tyrell aforesaid. 0021 1 35 Out of the several Fen-ground of VVilliam VVragge, lying near unto Grainford, nine Acres, and three Roods, and twenty eight Perches at the East-side thereof. 0009 3 20 Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Peter VVilliams, thirty four Acres, two Roods and ten Perches (viz.) one entire several Fen-ground lying within a several Fen-ground of Robert Peyton afore∣said, in Norwood Severals, containing eleven Acres. And out of one other ground of him the said Peter VVilliams, lying in the Fen called Norwood Severals aforesaid, abutting upon the old Drove way, twenty three Acres two Roods, and ten Perches at the East part thereof, abut∣ting upon the last mentioned ground of Robert Peyton aforesaid. 0034 2 10 Out of the several fen ground of John Mobbe, abutting upon VVal∣dersey bank, ten acres and three roods at the North-end thereof, next the said bank. 0010 3 00 Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to John Pierson, twen∣ty seven acres and two roods, (viz.) out of the several fen ground, ly∣ing near unto great Crosse, five acres and two roods at the North part thereof. And out of one other several fen ground, in the occupation of him the said John Pierson, abutting upon Plant-water, and the several fen ground of Henry Finnimore, twenty two acres at the west-side there∣of, next the fen called west-fen. 0027 2 00
Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Shepheard Gent. abutting upon Plant-water, and the last mentioned several ground of Hen∣ry Finimore, fifteen acres at the west-side thereof, next west-fen a∣foresaid. 0015 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground called west-Fen Close, twenty five acres at the East-part thereof next west-fen. 0025 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground called great Bradney moore, abutting upon Bishops Dyke, and the river Neane, one hundred sixty two acres and two roods at the North-end thereof, abutting upon Witlesea Dyke. 0162 2 00 Out of the several Fen ground called Whites Fen, one hundred and nineteen acres, and one rood at the west-part thereof, abutting upon Glasse lake and Brownes Fen. 0119 1 00 Out of the several Fen-ground, in the tenure or occupation of Willi∣am Sames, Doctor of the Law, called Brownes fen or Cookes Fen, fifty acres and twenty perches at the North-west part thereof, abutting up∣on Glasse lake aforesaid. 0050 0 03 Dodington small Seve∣rals. Out of nineteen other small Severals, belonging to Dodington, March, and Benwick aforesaid, fifty three acres two roods, and thirty two perches as the same is already proportionally by lockspits or small trenches, divided and set out from every of the said nineteen several fen grounds, (that is to say) out of the ground of Widow Cattel, lying near Grainford, one acre at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground of  Barret Gent. called Mundfords lands, two acres, one rood, and thirteen perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Walsam, called also Mundfords lands, three acres, two roods, and five perches at the East-part thereof, next unto the drove-way. Out of the ground of Thomas Emerson, one acre, three roods, and fifteen perches at the South-side thereof. Out of the ground of John Neale, two acres, one rood, and twenty perches at the North-part thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Southwald, adjoyning unto Norwood Causey, five acres and twenty perches at the North-part thereof, abutting upon Waldersea bank. Out of the ground of William Shepherd, lying in the several Fen called Edmunds Severals, three acres and twenty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground late of  Death Yeoman, lying in the Fen called Joane Sadds hole two acres, one rood, and six perches at the East-part thereof. Out of the ground of John Shereman, lying near Burrough moore, six acres, three roods and fifteen perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of Everard Buck∣worth Esquire, lying near Nuses green, three acres, one rood, and eight perches at the west-side thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas South-wold, abutting upon Norwood green, two roods at the South-corner thereof. Out of the several ground of Thomas Walsame, lying near Norwood green aforesaid, three acres, three roods and ten perches at the East-side thereof. Out of the ground of Reynold VValsame, lying near Norwood green aforesaid, two acres, three roods and eight perches at the west-part thereof, next unto the Common. Out of the ground called VVisamouth, foure acres, three roods, and thirty eight perches, at the North-west end thereof, abutting upon the river Neane. Out of a ground near Benwick, called Pagdole, two acres, three roods, and
twenty foure perches, at the North-west end thereof. Out of the ground of William Smith in Dikemoore, abutting upon Beeselings load, and the west-water foure acres at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of Samuel Wright, Doctor of Divinity, lying in Dikemoore a∣foresaid, three roods and ten perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Cole, lying near Benwick meere, one acre at the North-end thereof, next west-water. And out of the ground of Robert Burroughes, lying near Benwick, one acre and twenty perches at the North-east side thereof, abutting upon the river Neane 0053 2 32 Witlesey. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Witlesey, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, five thousand five hun∣dred twenty seven acres, (that is to say) the entire common Fen called North-Fen, containing one thousand seventy eight acres, abutting west∣ward upon the Mowe Fens of VVitlesey, called Northey, Northward up∣on the several Fen grounds called Priors Fens, Eastward upon Delfe-Dyke, and Southward upon Mortons Leame. The entire common Fen, lying between the new drain, or way extending from Witlesey to the hard lands of Upwood, Witlesey Dyke, and the new cut or drain cal∣led Bevels Leame, containing two thousand seventy eight acres, abutting westward upon the said new drain, or way Northward upon Witlesey Dyke, and South-eastward upon the said new drain called Bevels Leame. The entire common Fen called South-Pingle, containing fif∣ty nine acres, abutting westward upon the hard lands of Lipney North-ward upon the Causey leading unto Eldernel, and the several grounds of Eldernel, and South-eastward upon Eastrea Lake or South-lake. The entire common Fen called the Middle, containing seven hundred thirty foure acres, abutting westward upon the several grounds of Eldernel, and upon Lords Dyke, Southward upon South-lake, or Sterne Ea, Eastward upon the Dyke, extending from Mortons Leame, near mid Fen tree, unto South-lake or Sterne Ea aforesaid, and Northward upon Mortons Leame aforesaid. Out of the common Fen grounds lying near unto Estrea called Eastrea Fen, or the VVipe, nine hundred thirty and two acres, abutting westward upon Beggers Dyke, Southward upon the new drain called Bevels Leame, Eastward upon the new Dyke, ex∣tending from West-fen Close unto South-lake or Sterne Ea, and North-ward upon South-lake or Sterne Ea aforesaid. And out of the common fen ground called the Moore, six hundred fourty six acres at the North-west part thereof, abutting westward upon Steds Dyke, and Northward upon the said new drain called Bevels Leame. Witlesey Severals. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to VVitlesey afore∣said, called Priors Fens, one hundred eighty nine acres as the same is already divided and inclosed from the residue of the said Fens (that is to say) out of the ground of Richard Auldfield, fifty acres at the South-east part thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Pennie, two acres, one rood, and twenty eight perches at the South-part thereof. Out of the grounds of Henry Prat Gent. adjoyning to the grounds of Richard Auldfield aforesaid, called Ashe Fen, fourty seven acres, three roods, and twenty perches at the South-west end thereof, abutting upon North Fen. Out of the grounds of John Elkin Gent. fourty foure acres, three
roods, and two perches at the South-east part of the same grounds. Out of the ground of  Darson Gent. three acres, one rood, and fifteen perches at the west-end thereof. Out of the ground of 0189 0 00 Summer Gent. three acres, one rood and fifteen perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of  Armested Gent. eleven acres, three roods, and thirty perches at the west-end thereof. Out of one other ground of the said Henry Prat called Cawcroft, nineteen acres, three roods, and thirty five perches at the South-west corner thereof. And out of the ground of  Rose Gent. five acres, one rood, and fifteen perches at the South-east corner thereof. 0189 0 00 Stanground Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stanground in the County of Hunt, called Flegge-Fen, and White-Fen Close lying in the said Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, one hundred twenty seven Acres, abutting Northward upon Mortons Leame, and Eastward, and Southward upon the several grounds of Witlesey. 0127 0 00 Out of the mowing Fen-ground belonging to Stanground aforesaid, called Northea, lying in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, sixty four Acres, as the same is already divided, and inclosed at the South-east part of the same ground. 0064 0 00 Thorney. Out of the Demeane Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to the Lordship of Thorney, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, four thou∣sand Acres abutting Eastward upon the Common-Fen of Wisbich, cal∣led high Fenne, and the Common Fen-grounds of Sutton in Holland, Southward upon the Fen-grounds of Witlesey, called Bassen-hall-moore and Northward upon the South Ea bank. 4000 0 00 Sutton in Holland. Out of the Common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton in Hol∣land, in the County of Lincolne, lying in the said Isle of Ely, and Coun∣ty of Cambridge, four hundred and fourty Acres, abutting Eastward up∣on the common Fen of VVisbich, Southward upon the lake called the Wride, and westward upon the Fen ground of Thorney, called Knarre Fen. 0440 0 00 Wisbich. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Wisbich, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, two thousand six hun∣dred fourty eight acres, (that is to say) one entire fen ground, lying near Guy Hurne, between Mortons Leame, the new drain called Bevels Leame, Sterne ea or South-lake, and the common fens in Witlesea, cal∣ted the middle, containing foure hundred ninety one acres and two roods. One other entire fen ground, lying between Mortons Leame aforesaid, the fen grounds of Witlesea, called Bassen hall Moore, and the drain called the five and twenty foot-drain, conteining foure hundred twenty foure acres, and two roods. And one other entire fen ground conteining one thousand seven hundred thirty two acres, lying between the said five and twenty foot draine, Knarre lake, and the drain or way leading from Pekirke meddow unto Guy Hurne. 2648 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground, belonging to Wisbich aforesaid, cal∣led Throcken Holt, fourescore acres at the west-end of the same ground, abutting Northward upon South-Ea bank. 0080 0 00 Elme. Out of the common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Elme in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, lying between Coldham bank, and Elme Leame, fifty acres at the South-west part thereof, abutting
Elme Leame, and a several fen ground of Robert Peyton Esquire, called great Sedge Fen. Out of the several Fen ground in Elme aforesaid, belonging unto the Bishop of Ely, lying between Elme Leame, and the old Ea, thirty acres, abutting upon the South-east end of the common Fen ground of Elme aforesaid, and the said several ground of Robert Peyton afore∣said. 0030 0 00 Out of the several Fen ground of Robert Peyton aforesaid, called great Sedge Fen, adjoyning unto Elme Common aforesaid, one hundred and seventy acres, abutting upon Coldham bank, the said ground of the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the said common Fen of Elme. 0170 0 00 Ladus Fen. Out of the common Fen ground called Ladus Fen, and Lake Fen, lying within the hundred of Wisbich, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, six hundred and fourescore acres at the South-west end thereof, abutting upon part of the common Fen of Doding∣ton and March, called Creek Fen, lying between Elme Leame, and the river Neane. 0680 0 00 Eausie-Moor. Out of the common Fen ground called Eausy Moore, lying within the said hundred of Wisbich in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, bounded with the river Neane, Wellney river, Darcie Load, and the Lake called the old Chaire, one thousand nine hundred sixty foure acres at the North-west part thereof abutting upon the said Lake called the old Chaire, the river Neane, and the Dyke called the new Dyke. 1964 0 00 Out of the common Fen ground, called Tucks Moore Hurne, or Well-Pingle, lying within the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, be∣tween the said Lake called the old Chaire, and Reads Fen in March, thirty six acres, abutting upon the old Chaire aforesaid, and upon the river Neane. 0036 0 00 Upwell, Outwel and Wellney. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Upwell, Out∣well and Wellney in the County of Norfolk, and in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, or some or one of them, one thousand five hundred and fourty acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen grounds called Neat Moore, and the lots, seven hundred and fifty acres at the East-end of the same ground, next unto Well Creek, abutting Southward upon the Fens called Londoners Fens, Northward upon Lon∣don Load, the Fen ground in the occupation of Tristram Diamond Gent. and the common Fen called Outwell Pingle. Out of the common Fen grounds called Shevens, two hundred acres at the East-side thereof, abutting upon Causey Dyke, and Hacket way. Out of the common Fen grounds called Common piece and Hale Fen, five hundred and nine∣ty acres, (viz.) the said entire fen called the Common piece. And the residue being foure hundred fifty six acres, out of the said common Fen cailed Hale Fen, at the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Bedford river, and the several ground belonging unto Wellney Chappel, called Sedge Fen. 1540 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds called Londoners Fens, being late parcel of the common fens of Upwell and Wellney aforesaid, 800 acres, as the same is already set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from the residue of the said fens, in manner and forme following, (that is to say,) one entire fen ground belonging to Sir Robert Bell Knight,
called Lilly-pooles, containing five acres. One other entire fen ground, belonging to the said Sir Robert Bell, lying between Lilly-pooles afore∣said, the fen ground called Cades fen, the several fen grounds belonging to Wellney Chappel, called Knobbals, and the several fen ground of Thomas Fincham Gent. containing eighty eight acres, and three roods. Out of one other ground of him the said Sir Robert Bell, lying between Cadys fen and London load aforesaid, fourty two acres and three roods at the west-end thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of Sir Lewis Tresham Knight, lying between Cadys fen and Wick fen, nine∣ty three acres and one rood at the South-end thereof, abutting upon the several fen ground, late of  Fincham Gent. in the occupation of him the said Sir Lewis Tresham. Out of the several fen ground, late in the tenure or occupation of Sir William Cokayne Knight, adjoyning unto Cadys fen aforesaid, and the several grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats Knight, one hundred seventy one acres at the South-part thereof, abutting upon the ground of Thomas Parlet. Out of the several grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats Knight, three hundred fifty two acres and one rood, abutting upon Maid load, the forementioned ground, late of Sir VVilliam Cokayne, and the drove-way leading through the middle of the said grounds of him the said Sir John Wats. Out of the several fen ground of Thomas Fincham Gent. lying between Cadys fen and Wick fen, eleven acres and three roods, abutting on both sides of Bedford river. Out of the several fen ground, late of  Fincham Gent. now in the occupation of the said Sir Lewis Tresham, thirteen acres and one rood at the west-side thereof, abutting upon Cadis Fen. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Ha∣man le Strange Esquire, abutting upon Cadis Fen and Maid Load, twelve acres at the East-side thereof, next Bedford river. And out of the several Fen ground called Hen-middle, abutting upon Maid Load, on the North-side of Bedford river, ten acres, adjoyning to the Fen grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats aforesaid, and upon the several grounds of Thomas Parlet Yeoman. 0800 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds belonging to the Chappel of Wellney, one hundred seventy eight acres, as the same is already set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from the residue of the said Fens, in manner and forme following, (that is to say) out of the Fen ground called Knobbals, twenty eight acres. (viz.) one entire piece thereof, lying on the North-side of Bedford river, containing nine acres. Out of the ground late in the occupation of Edward Lechland Esquire, or his Assignes, lying on the South-side of Bedford river, ten acres, a∣butting upon the said river. And out of the residue of the said ground called Knobbals, nine acres at the East-end thereof, abutting upon Wick Fen and Reads Fen. Out of the several fen ground called Sedge Fen, one hundred and fifty acres, (viz.) one entire piece thereof lying on the North-side of Bedford river, containing eleven acres. And out of the residue of the said Fen one hundred thirty nine acres at the South-west part thereof, abutting upon Hale fen and Bedford river aforesaid. 0178 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds belonging to Outwell aforesaid, lying between Popham Eau, and new dyke, 65 acres, as the same is already pro∣portionally
set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and di∣vided from every of the said three several fen grounds, in manner and forme following, (that is to say) out of the several fen ground, be∣longing to the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, thirty five acres at the East-end thereof, abutting upon Neat-Moore and Popham Eau aforesaid. Out of the grounds of Tristram Diamond Gent. twenty five acres at the South-east part thereof, abutting upon Neat-Moore aforesaid. And out of the ground of Sinolphus Bell Esquire, five acres at the East-end thereof, abutting upon the said grounds of the said Tristram Dia∣mond Gent. 0065 0 00 Out of three several fen grounds lying in Ladus Fen, fifty two acres and two roods, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from every of the said three fen grounds in manner and forme followieg, (that is to say) Out of the ground called Langbeech, on the South-west side of Bishops Dyke, seven acres and two roods at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground called Marmond, twenty seven acres and one rood at the South-part thereof. And out of the ground now, or late of Sir William Reade Knight, lying near Newes Cote, seventeen acres and three roods at the North end thereof. 0052 2 00 Out of the several fen ground called Farmers fen, fourty eight acres at the East-side thereof, abutting upon the common fen, called Eausie Moore. 0048 0 00 Out of the several fen ground called Loveokes, twenty one acres at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the fen called the common piece. 0021 0 00 Out of nineteen several fen grounds, belonging to Upwell and Wellney aforesaid, or to one of them lying on the west-side of Wellney river, be∣tween Pophams Eau, and Darcie Load, two hundred fifty two acres, and thirteen perches, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from every of the said nineteen several fen grounds, in manner and forme following, (that is to say) out of the imbanked several fen ground of John Moyse Gent. one hundred and five acres, and thirty six perches at the South-west part thereof, abutting upon Eause Moore. Out of the imbanked ground now or late of  Taylor Gent, fourty six acres, two roods and twenty perches at the South-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of William Bellamie, two acres and two roods at the South-part thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground now, or late of John Bellamie, two acres, one rood and twenty perches at the west-part thereof, Out of the ground now, or late of  Fiske Gent. called Rollingham, fifteen acres, two roods, and twenty two perches at the west-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of  Calverley, Doctor of Divinity, eight acres, three roods, and ten perches at the South-corner thereof. Out of the ground called Town-land, abutting upon the several ground of William Drue, one acre and thirty foure perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the said ground of William Drue, two acres and two roods at the North-end thereof. One entire fen ground of John Dixon Gent. abutting upon Maggs Lake, conteining six acres, rwo roods, and thirty six perches. Out of the ground now, or late of Edmund Man,
abutting upon Maggs lake aforesaid, one acre and twenty perches at the North-west corner thereof, One entire ground now, or late of Thomas Blithe, adjoyning to the said ground of Edmund Man, containing five acres, three roods, and thirty six perches. One other entire fen ground now, or late of John Bellamie and Matthew Bellamie, abutting upon Fri∣day lake, containing foure acres and two roods. One other entire fen ground now, or late of Sir William Reade aforesaid, abutting also up∣on Friday lake containing seven acres and ten perches. Out of the next adjoyning ground now, or late of Haman le Strange Esquire, nine acres, one rood and twenty two perches at the East-part thereof. One entire fen ground now, or late of Thomas Fincham, adjoyning to the last mentioned ground of Haman le Strange aforesaid, containing thirteen acres and two roods. Out of the next adjoyning ground now, or late of Roger Prat Esquire, seven acres and two roods at the South-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of John Gray, one acre, two roods and twenty five perches, at the North-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of  Reve Cler. three roods and twelve perches at the South-west part thereof. And out of the ground of Tho∣mas Crosse, abutting upon the North-side of Darcie load, eight acres, three roods and thirty perches at the west-end thereof. 0252 0 13 Out of fifteen other several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Upwell and Welney, lying also on the West-side of VVelney River aforesaid, be∣tween Darcie Load aforesaid, and the several grounds of Little-port, ly∣ing upon the same River, seventy three Acres, one Rood, and twenty Perches, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from every of the said fifteen se∣verall Fen-grounds in manner and forme following, (that is to say) out of the ground of Thomas Crosse, abutting upon the South side of Dar∣cie Load, eleven Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the West-end thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground of Robert Webster, two Acres, one Rood, and twenty eight Perches at the South corner thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground called Lewis Meadow, seven Acres, and twelve Perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the next ad∣joyning ground, now or late of Simon Hudson, eight Acres, three Roods and thirty eight Perches at the South-part thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of John Stanbridge, five Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the East-side thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of Robert Goulden, three Acres, one Rood, and eighteen Perches at the East corner thereof. Out of the ground of Everard Buckworth Esquire, eight Acres at the West part thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground late of VVilliam Bond, one Acre, three Roods, and ten Perches at the South corner thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of Thomas Birt, four Acres, two Roods and six Perches at the West corner thereof. Out of the ground, now, or late of Edward Bond, one Acre, two Roods, and ten Perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of Francis VVaters Gent. five Acres, one Rood, and eighteen Perch∣es, at the South-west part thereof. Out of the ground now or late of Richrd James lying near VVellney, two Acres, three Roods, and thirty two Perches at the North-west corner thereof. Out of the ground now
or late of VVilliam Gabie and John Gabie, lying on the South side of Bedford river, one Acre, and two Roods at the West-end thereof. Out of the ground belonging to the Deanary of Peterborough, abutting up∣on Marmond Meadow, three Acres, two Roods and eight Perches at the West part thereof. And out of the said ground called Marmond meadow, five Acres at the North-west part thereof. 0037 1 20 Out of twenty three several Fen-grounds belonging to Upwell and VVellney aforesaid, or to the one of them lying on the East side of VVellney river, between Pophams Eau and the several Fen-grounds be∣longing to Little-port, one hundred and fifty Acres, and seven Perches, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from every of the said twenty three several Fen-grounds in manner and forme following, (that is to say) out of the ground now or late of Sir John VVats Knight lying near Popham Eau aforesaid, ten Acres, one Rood, and twenty six Perches at the East part thereof. Out of the ground of Henry Gouldwell adjoyning unto the Common Fen called Sheuens, extending unto the said River of VVellney, one Acre, and twelve Perches at the East corner thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of Sir Robert Bell Knight, abutting upon VVellney River and the ground belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, eight Acres, and one Rood, and thirty Perches at the North-east part thereof. Out of the ground now or late of VVilliam Drue, abutting al∣so upon the said ground of the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, fourteen Acres, one Rood, and twenty Perches at the East-end thereof. Out of the ground of Haman Le Strange Esquire, called great Greenes, twenty six Acres, three Roods and ten Perches at the South part thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of John Bellamie and Matthew Bellamie, four Acres, three Roods and thirty eight Perches at the East end thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground of John Goddard, one Acre and two Roods at the North side thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of VVilliam Gabie, three Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the North-east part thereof. Out of the next adjoyning ground, now or late of Tristram Diamond Gent. three Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the East corner thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of Edmund Man, adjoyning unto the ground now or late of John Dixon, two Acres, two Roods, and twenty eight Perches at the South-east cor∣ner thereof. One entire Fen-ground, now or late of John Dixon a∣foresaid, bounded with the Common Fen called Sheuens, and the River of Wellney, containing seven Acres, and two Roods. Out of one other ground, now or late of him the said John Dixon, abutting upon the afore∣said ground of Edmund Man, eight Acres and two Roods at the North-side thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of William Parlet Gent. abutting upon the ground of the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, lying near Darcie Load, four Acres, two Roods, and ten Perches at the South-side thereof. One entire several Fen-ground belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, lying near Dare Load aforesaid, containing thirteen Acres, and thirty Perches. Out of the ground, now or late of John Bloome, abutting upon the ground of John Marshall Gent. two A∣cres, three Roods, and thirty three Perches at the South-east side thereof. Out of the said ground, now or late of John Marshall aforesaid, ten Acres,
three Roods, and ten Perches at the North end thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of Thomas Crosse, abutting upon Causey dike, four Acres, two Roods, and ten Perches at the West-end thereof. Out of the ground, now, or late of Sir William Reade aforesaid, abutting up∣on Causey Dyke near Wellney, three roods and ten perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of Sir John Wats Knight, abutting upon Maid load, three acres at the East-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of John Stanbridge, lying near Wellney, one acre at the East-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of James Ravens, one acre at the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Bed∣ford river. Out of the ground now, or late of Francis Waters, lying on the South-side of Bedford river, abutting upon Hale Fen, and Wellney river, eleven acres and two roods at the South-east end thereof. And out of the ground now, or late of Richard Ward, lying near Pralls were three acres and twenty perches at the North-side thereof. 0155 0 00 COM. HƲNTINGDON. Somersham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to the Soake of Somersham, in the said County of Huntingdon, one thousand six hundred and five acres, (viz.) out of the common Fen, called Erith Fen, two acres adjoyning to Bedford river, on the South-side of the same river, near to Erith sluce. Out of the Mowe Fen, called Croll load, seventy acres at the west-part thereof, abutting upon High Fen. And out of the said common Fens called High Fen and North Fen, one thousand five hundred thirty three acres, abutting upon the said Fen called Croll load, and adjoyning Southward upon the low Fen of Somersham and the hard lands. And Northward upon the common Fens of Warbois and Fenton load. 1605 0 00 Out of a several Fen ground in Somersham, called Rowey, eleven acres at the North-part thereof. 0011 0 00 Warbois. Out of the common Fen grounds of VVarbois or Ramsey, in the County of Huntingdon, lying between the west-water from St. Bennets Crosse unto Fenton load, and along the said load unto the hard lands of Warbois, and by a straight line, extrnded from Wistowe stone in the Fen, unto St. Bennets Crosse aforesaid, one thousand eight hundred sixty eight acres at the North-west part of the same ground. on both sides of the new drain, extending from the hard lands of Warbois, unto the west-water, abutting upon the said west-water. The Commons of Ramsey called East-moore, and the common Fen called Wistow Fen. 1868 0 00 Wistowe. Out of the common Fen-grounds called Wistowe Fen, in the said County of Huntingdon, belonging to Ramsey, Wistow and Berry, or to some or one of them, and bounded with the said common Fens of Warbois or Ramsey, the hard lands of Wistowe and Berry, the Mowe Fenne of Berry, and the lake called Sallaries Raft, three hundred eighty six acres at the North-east part of the said Fen, abutting upon the said common Fen of Warbois or Ramsey, and the said lake called Sallaries Raft. 0386 0 00
Out of the common fen ground belonging to Berry in the said Coun∣ty of Huntingdon, called Berry Mowe Fen, fourty five acres at the South-part of the said Fen. 0045 0 00 Rsey. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Warbois or Ramsey in the said County of Huntingdon, or to the one of them called East-moore, bounded with the said lake called Sallaries Raft, the fore-mentioned line extended from Wistowe Stone, in the fen unto St. Bennets Crosse, the common Fens of Dodington and Benwick, called Pulver fen and Turfe fen, Ramsey Meere, and the inclosed grounds of Sir Oliver Cromwel Knight of the Honourable Order of the Bath, one thousand foure hundred ninety and six acres. Out of the South-east part of the said Fen, or both sides of the said new drain, extending from the hard lands of Warbois unto the west-water, and adjoyning upon Pulver Fen and Sallaries Raft aforesaid. 1496 0 00 Out of one other common Fen ground of Ramsey aforesaid, called Middle-Moore, one thousand, eight hundred, seventy and five acres, abutting westward upon the new drain, or way leading from the hard lands of Upwood unto Witlesey, South-ward upon the river Neane, and North-eastward upon Delfe Dyke, and the several grounds called the Steds. 1875 0 00 Out of one other Fen ground, of, or belonging to Ramsey, Upwood, and Raveley, or to some or one of them, lying near unto Raveley in the said County of Huntingdon, two hundred twenty nine acres, abutting upon the hard lands of Raveley, near unto a place called Raveleyes nook, and upon the Fen grounds claimed as parcel of the Mannor of Wood-walton. 0229 0 00 Out of one other common Fen ground, of, or belonging unto Ram∣sey or Upwood, in the said County of Huntingdon, or to the one of them, lying between the hard lands of Upwood, and the river Neane, eight bun∣dred fifty six acres, abutting westward upon the drain, or way leading from the hard lands of Upwood, unto Witlesea aforesaid, Northward up∣on the river Neane, and Eastward and Southward upon Bill load, and the hard land of Upwood aforesaid. 0856 0 00 Out of one other common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Ramsey aforesaid, lying between Ramsey Meere and Delfe Dyke, one hundred and eight acres, abutting upon Delfe Dyke, and the river Neane. 0108 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds of Sir Oliver Cromwell Knight of the honourable order of the Bathe, lying and scituate in Ramsey aforesaid, called Abbots Pingle, Wigin Moore, Ramsey Park and Asbech, one hun∣dred seventy seven acres, (viz.) the said entire Fen ground called Ab∣bots Pingle, containing eighty acres, the said entire Fen ground called Ashbeech, containing seventy six acres, and the residue being twenty one acres. Out of the said Fen ground called Wigin Moore, at the South-east part thereof, abutting upon Abbots Pingle aforesaid. 0177 0 00 Severals of Ramsey. Out of the other several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Ramsey a∣foresaid, in the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred fifty five acres, (that is to say,) out of the Fen ground called Upper Steds, five acres, two roods and twenty perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen grounds called Nether Steds, eighteen acres and one rood at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground
now or late of  Beale Gent. lying near Witlesey Meere, three Acres, one Rood, and ten Perches at the North-east part of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-grounds of Thomas Cromwell Gent. called Dantree and Bagdole, thirty three Acres, one Rood, and ten Perch∣es at the North-east end of the said ground called Bagdole. Out of the several Fen-ground of  Houson, called also Bagdole, twelve A∣cres and two Roods at the South-west part thereof, abutting upon Witle∣sey Meere. Out of a several Fen-ground belonging to Sir Oliver Crom∣well aforesaid, lying on the South-side of Ugg Meere, six Acres at the South-west part of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-grounds called Beaupre Closes, eight Acres and one Rood, abutting upon Delfe-dike and the River Neane. Out of the several Fen-grounds called great Hilkes, twenty eight Acres and one Rood at the East part thereof, abut∣ting upon Ramsey Meere and the river Neane. Out of the several Fen-grounds called little Hilkes, two Acres and two Roods at the 0073 1 20 part thereof, next unto the mouth of Ramsey Meere. Out of the seve∣rall Fen-ground called Pollins, two Acres, and two Roods at the East part thereof. Out of the greater Close called Bears-arse, lying near Hilkes on the North side of the river Neane, two Acres, three roods, and ten Perches at the North-east end of the said ground. Out of the lesser ground called also Beares-arse, one Acre and twenty Perches at the South-west-side thereof. Out of the severall Fen-grounds adjoyning upon the hard lands of Wistowe, or Warbois called Vicars Closes, sixe Acres and ten Perches at the West part of the said Closes. Out of the several Fen-ground, now or late of Anne Netleton, lying near Ram∣sey Town, one Acre at the South part thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now or late of Thomas Cock, one acre and three roods at the North end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of  Crock∣ston, one acre and one rood at the North end thereof. Out of the se∣veral fen ground now, or late of John Bateman, two acres, and twenty eight perches at the North-end of the same ground. Out of the seve∣ral Fen ground now, or late of John Lavender, one acre one rood, and foure perches at the North-part thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of John Leeders, one acre, two roods and foure perches at the North part thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Wil∣liamson, two acres, two roods, and twenty eight perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen grounds of Widow Holmes, two acres, two roods and sixteen perches at the South-end of the greater ground belonging unto her, abutting upon the load. Out of the se∣veral Fen ground ot Thomas Barnes, two acres and ten perches at the East-part thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Knight, three acres, three roods, and thirty perches at the west-part thereof, abutting upon the ground of William Cakebread. Out of the several Fen ground of Richard Allen, lying near High Northey, two roods at the North-side thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Robert Booth, two roods at the South-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Howson, one acre at the North-end thereof. Out of the se∣veral Fen ground of  Farmer Gent. three roods at the East-side thereof. And out of the several Fen ground, lying on the East-part of
Stocking-Fen, in the occupation of Ralph Allen, one Acre and two Roods on the North side of the same ground. 0155 0 00 Wood-walton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to VVood-walton in the said County of Huntingdon, nine hundred thirty seven Acres (that is to say) three hundred ninety three Acres out of the North end of the same ground, abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Hignie Farme and Brick-Meere, claimed by John Marshall Gent. And the residue being five hundred fourty and four Acres out of the North part of the said Fen, abutting upon Ugg-Meere and the common Fen-grounds of Ramsey and Upwood, late in the possession of and claimed by  Law∣rence Gent. 0937 0 00 Out of the two several Fen-grounds of the said John Marshall lying in Wood-walton aforesaid, next unto the Fen and hard lands of Santrey, thirty six Acres at the North end of the said grounds, abutting upon Santrey Fen and the hard lands of Hignie Farme. 0036 0 00 Out of the one other Fen-ground in VVood-walton aforesaid, lying between the hard lands of VVood-walton and Hignie Farme and the said Fen of VVood-walton, claimed as Several by the said Iohn Marshall, fif∣teen Acres, abutting upon the hard lands of Wood-walton at the South-east part of the said ground. 0015 0 00 Hignie. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Hignie Farme in the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred Acres at the North-end of the said grounds, abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Conington, and upon the common fen grounds of Holme and Wood-walton aforesaid. 0100 0 00 Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Santrey, in the said County of Huntingdon, two hundred and six acres at the South-east part of the same Fen, abutting upon the several fen grounds of Santrey and Woodwalton aforesaid, and upon the hard lands of Santrey. 0206 0 00 Out of two several Fen grounds in Santrey aforesaid, lying near un∣to Woodwalton aforesaid, nineteen acres at the North-east part of the greater of the said several fen grounds, abutting Eastward upon the se∣veral Fen grounds of John Marshall aforesaid. 0019 0 00 Conington. Out of the several Fen grounds of Conington in the said County of Hun∣tingdon, two hundred eighty and one acres, abutting South-ward up∣on the common Fen grounds of Santrey aforesaid, Eastward upon the Fen grounds of Higney Farme, and Northward upon the common Fen called Holme Fen. 0281 0 00 Holme and Glatton, Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Holme and Glatton in the said County of Huntingdon, one thousand and twelve acres abutting Eastward upon the river Neane, and Ugg Meere, Southward up∣on Brick Meere, and the said several Fen grounds of Higney Farme and Conington, and westward upon the hard lands. 1012 0 00 Denton. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Denton in the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred fifty six acres at the South-east part of the said Fen, abutting upon Holme load, and the hard lands of Holme. 0156 0 00 Caldecott. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Caldecott in the said County of Huntingdon, fifty six acres, (that is to say) out of the Mosse Fen, belonging to the Right Honourable Edward Lord Monta∣cute,
eighteen acres at the South-west part of the same ground, abutting upon the ground called the Turfe lots. Out of the said ground called the Turfe lots, foure acres, three roods, and twenty perches, at the North-end of the same ground, abutting upon Caldecot Dyke. Out of the ground called the Mowing lots, eight acres and three roods at the west-end of the same ground. Out of one other several Fen ground of the said Lord Montacute, fourteen acres, one rood, and three perches, abut∣ting upon part of the aforesaid Mowing lots, and upon Denton Fen. Out of three several Fen grounds now, or late in the occupation of Thomas Hall, three acres, three roods, and twenty five perches at the North-part of the same grounds. Out of five several Fen grounds, in the tenure or occupation of Sir Thomas Cotton Baronet,  Williamson Gent.  Fuller Gent. Thomas Hall aforesaid, and William Ashton, lying between the aforesaid Fen ground of the said Lord Montacute, Denton Fen, and the drove-way leading to the same grounds, foure Acres at the West-ends of the said five several Grounds. Out of five other several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging unto the said Sir Thomas Cotton, the said  Williamson Gent. the said  Fuller Gent. the said Thomas Hall and William Ashton, lying between the a∣fore mentioned Drove-way, and the hard lands, two Acres and two Perches at the Fast part of the same ground. 0056 0 00 Stilton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stilton in the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred and sixty Acres, abutting up∣on Caldecott dike, the Turfe Fen of Stilton, and the Common and Seve∣rall Fens of Yaxley. 0160 0 00 Yaxley. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Yaxley in the said County of Huntingdon, six hundred, thirty and two Acres at the North-east part of the same Fens, abutting upon Pigge-water, VVitlesey Meere, and Trundle Meere. 0632 0 00 Out of the several Fen-grounds of Yaxley aforesaid, twenty nine A∣cres, (that is to say) out of the Mowe-Fen called Westerne Meadow, eight Acres and two Roods at the North-east side of the same ground, abut∣ting upon the River Neane. Out of a Holt belonging to Thomas Gen∣till, lying near the town of Yaxley, three roods and five perches at the South-end of the said Holt. Out of a Holt belonging to John Isop, one rood and five perches at the South-end of the same Holt. Out of the Holt belonging to Widow Pierson, one rood at the South-end of the said Holt. Out of the Holt belonging to Pinchbeck Pierson, one rood and twenty perches at the South-end of the same Holt. Out of the several Fen ground of Bartholomew Brown, abutting upon Witlesea Meer, one acre and one rood at the part of the said ground next Trundle Meere. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Wats, lying near Yaxley town, five perches at the South-west part of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground of Emmanuel Probie Gent. lying near Yaxley town, one rood and thirty perches at the South-west part of the saidt ground. Out of two several Fe grounds, belonging to the said Pinch∣beck Pie son, lying near Yaxley town, two acres and twenty five perches at the South-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of George Hopkins, two roods and twenty perches at the South-west part of the same ground. Out of the several fen ground, belonging to the said
Emmanuel Probie, abutting upon Stilton Fen, eight acres and two roods at the North-east end of the same ground. Out of a several Fen ground, lying between Witlesey Meere and Trundle Meere, three acres and three roods at the East-part thereof. Out of another fen ground, lying also between Witlesey Meere and Trundle Meere, one acre and one rood at the Bast-part thereof. And out of the several Fen ground, lying at the end of Conquest load by Witlesey Meere, three roods, abut∣ting upon Witlesey Meere aforesaid. 0029 0 00 Fasset. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Fasset in the said County of Huntingdon, nine hundred and fourty acres, abutting Eastward upon the Fen called Middle-moore in Ramsey, and Southward upon Witlesey Meere. And upon two several Fen grounds, belonging to Fasset aforesaid, adjoyning to the said Meere. 0940 0 00 Out of the several Fen grounds of Fasset aforesaid, one hundred sixty and two acres, being two entire fen grounds, abutting upon the aforesaid common fen grounds of Fasset aforesaid, and upon Witlesey Meere. 0162 0 00 COM. NORTHAMPTON. Peterbo∣rough. OUt of the common fen ground, of, or belonging to the Soake of Pe∣terborough, in the said County of Northampton, called Burrough great fen, two thousand six hundred twenty and two acres, abutting East-ward upon part of the said common fen, lying near Einshed Crosse, and the grounds of single sole Farme, Southward upon the drain or way leading from Peakirk meddow to Guy Hurne Northward, on the new bank of the river Welland, and upon the common fen ground, called the foure hundred acres. 2622 0 00 Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Peterborough, or Crowland, or to the one of them, called the foure hundred acres or Alder Holt, lying in the County of Lincolne, two hundred and ninety acres at the west-end thereof, abutting upon the said fen called Burrough great fen, and the common fens of Crowland. 0290 0 00 Out of one other common fen ground, of, or belonging to Peter∣borough aforesaid, in the said County of Northampton, called Borough little Fen, eighty eight acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon Muscot water, and Oxney load. 0088 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging unto single sole Farme in the said County of Northampton, fourty five acres, abutting Eastward upon Catwater, Southward upon the several fen grounds of Northam Farme, and westward upon Peterborough great fen. 0045 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to the said Northam Farme, in the said County of Northampton, eighty acres, (that is to say,) fourty acres in one parcel, adjoyning Eastward upon Catwater, Northward upon the said several Fen grounds of single sole Farme a∣foresaid. And the residue being four acres, out of the several Fen called Cranmoore, out of the South-east part thereof, abutting upon the Fen called the Harpe, and upon the hard lands of Eye. 0080 0 00 Eye. Out of the Fen called the mowing Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Eye, in the said County of Northampton, fifteen acres, three roods,
and thirty perches, out of the said mowe fen, called small acre furlong, and Chillham tree furlong, (that is to say) out of the ground called small acre furlong, twelve acres, one rood, and thirty perches at the East-side of the same ground, abutting upon Catwater, and the residue being three acres and two roods, out of the said ground called Chillam tree furlong, at the North-side thereof, abutting upon the several ground of Northam Farme called the Reaches. 0015 3 30 Out of the several Fen grounds of Richard Darbie, lying between the said grounds called Chillam tree furlong, and small acre furlong, one acre and ten perches, abutting upon Catwater. 000 0 0 Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Taholt arme in the said County of Northampton, thirty acres and three roods, being one entire Fen, called Newthred, abutting upon Catwater. 00  0 Out of the several Fen grounds▪ of, or belonging to Oxney me, in the said County of Northampton, twenty six acres, abutting North-ward upon the old Engine, and the hardlands of Eyberry, and the Fen grounds of Tanholt Farme aforesaid, and South-eastward upon Catwater, the bank near Burrough little Fen, and the other grounds of the same Farme. 0026 0 00 Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to the Right Ho∣nourable Francis Earle of Bedford, lying in Eyberry, in the said Coun∣ty of Northampton, eleven acres out of the ground called Alder fen, a∣butting upon high Edgerley Common. 0011 0 00 Out of the lot fen ground, belonging to Eye aforesaid, called the Harp, foure acres and two roods at the East-end of the same, abutting upon the hard lands of Eye aforesaid. 0004 2 00 Out of the several fen grounds of John Troughton, lying in Newwark Edgerley, three roods at the East-part of the same ground. 0000 3 00 Out of the several fen ground of Widow Bucher, and the Heires of Giles Burrough, five acres, in two parcels lying together in the fens, cal∣led the Holts, abutting upon Peterborough great fen. 0005 0 00 COM. LINCOLNE. Crowland. OUt of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Crowland in the said County of Lincolne fens, foure hundred acres at the East part of the same fens, abutting Eastward upon St. Guthlakes Crosse and Catwater, Southward upon the common fen called the foure hundred acres, or Alderholt, and Northward upon the fen grounds of Crowland aforesaid, called Porsand fen. 0400 0 00 FINIS.
