W2142 99884351 182820
The Loyal Non-Conformist, OR; An Account what hedareswear, and what not. I Fear an Oath, before I swear, to take it; And well I may, for 'tis the Oath of God: I fear Oath, when I have sworn, to break it; And well I may, for Vengeance hath a Rod. And yet I may swear, and must too; 'tis due Both to my Heav'nly and my Earthly King: If I assent, it must be full and true; And if I promise I must do the thing. I am no Quaker, not at all to swear: Nor Papist, to swear East, and mean the West: But am a Protestant, and shall declare What I cannot, and what I can protest. I never will endeavour Alteration Of Monarchy, or of that Royal Name: Which God hath chosen to command this Nation; But will maintain his Person, Crown and Fame, What He commands, if Conscience say not nay, (For Conscience is a greater King than He) For Conscience sake, not Fear, I will obey; And if not active, passive I will be. I'II pray, That all his Subjects may agree, And never more be crumbled into Parts: I will endeavour that His Majesty May not be King of Clubs, but King of Hearts. The Royal Oak I swear I will defend; But for the Ivy which doth hug it so, I swear that is a Thief, and not a Friend; And about Steeples fitter for to grow. The Civil Government I will obey, But for Church Policie I swear I doubt it: And if my Bible want th' Apocrypha, I swear my Book may be compleat without it. I dare not swear Church-Government is Right As it should be: but this I dare to swear, If they should put me to 't, the Bishops might Do better and be better than they are. Nor will I swear for all that they arc worth; That Bishopricks will stand, and Doomsday see. And yet I'll swear the Gospel holdeth forth; Christ with his Mysteries till then will be. That Peter was a Prelate, they aver; But I'll not swear't when all is said and done: But I dare swear, and hope I shall not err, He preach'd a hundred Sermons to their one. Peter a Fisher was, and he caught men; And they have Nets, and in them catch men too: Yet I'll not swear they are alike; for them He caught he sav'd; these catch, and them undo. I dare not swear that Courts Ecclesiastick Do in their Laws make just and gentle Votes: But I'll be sworn that Burton, Pryn and Bastwick, Were once Ear-witnesses of harsher Notes. Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters are brave men By Canon, not by Scripture; but to this, If I be call'd I'll swear and swear agen, That no such Chapter in my Bible is. I'll not condemn those Prechyterians who Refused Bishopricks and might have had 'cm: But Mistress Calamy, I'll swear, does do As well as if she were a Spiritual Madam. For Holy Vestments I'll not take an Oath, Which Linnen most Canonical may be: Some are for Lawn, some Holland, some Scotch-cloath, And Hemp for some is fitter than all three. Paul had a Cloak, and Books, and Parchments too; But that he wore a Surplise I'll not swear: Nor that his Parchments did his Orders show, Or in his books there was a Common-Prayer. I own Assistance to the King by Oath; And if he please to put the Bishops down, (As who knows what may be) I should be loath To see Tom Beckets Mitre push the Crown. And yet Church-Government I do allow, And am contented Bishops be the men: And that I speak in earnest, here I vow Where we have One I wish we might have Ten. In fine, the Civil Power I'll obey; And seek the Peace and Wellfare of the Nation: If this won't do, I know not what to say; But farewell London, farewell Corporation; LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDC LXX.
