B5012A R175623 [ocm]64550998 184394
ew DVENTE For LAW-BOOKS to be disposed of by LOT, Wherein all are Gainers. THE Remainder of the Impressions of the following LAW-BOOKS, being come into the hands of Dan. Brown and John Nicholson, containing about 2400 Books of the Reports in Folio, and near 500 Books of Entries, and other valuable Law-Books in Folio, many of which are in several Volumes, and all of the best Editions: They are proposed to be dis∣posed of in QUIRES, by Lots wherein will be no Blanks; every Person, putting in a Guinea, being sure of a Book or Books at least worth his Money, and 'tis not Two to One but he gets what is worth twice his Money, nor Four to One but he gets what is worth four times his Money, besides the First and Last Lot. In Law-Books the very great Charge in Printing is to be consider'd; and 'tis apat the Adventures in this, one with another, get what cost near double the Money in Paper and Print, s they can never be reprinted at any such Price, and all these are of the last Editions, with intire Tables, References, Judges Opinions, &c. There is a farther Advantage to the Adventurers, that the taking off the whole Number will make the Books scarce, and so consequently very dear; so that in all probability the Person that gets the worst Lot for his Guinea, may in a little time sell it for more Money. For as in the Case of Modern Reports▪ Vaughans Reports, Stiles Reports, Jenkins Reports, and many more, being disperst in Gentlemens hands and scarce, will now yield above double the Money they did when Common; which will be the Case of these. The PROPOSALS are, That Fifteen Hundred Tickets be deliver'd out at a Guinea per Ticket; that it shall be drawn after the usual Method, by putting 1500 Numbers roll'd up in a Glass, and 1500 Tickets with some one or more of the following Books, according to this Scheme, in the other Glass; and these Gentlemen have promised to be present at the time of Rolling up the Tickets and Drawing, to see the whole managed with all Care and Faithfulness, viz. Sir Henry Chancey, Kt. Serjeant at Law; William Stringer, of Greys-Inn, Esq; James Wright, of the Middle-Temple, Esq; William Fisher, Gent. and Mr. Benj. Motte. The DIVISION of the Lots, 70 Lots of these 3 Moor's Reports first value 4 l. Keble's Rep. in 3 Vol. Dalison & Bendloes Rep. 70 Lots of these 3 Palmer's Reports value 3 l. 10 s. Keble's Reports in 3 Vol. Carter's Reports 100 of these 2 Dyer's Reports value 1 l. 10 s. Jones's Reports 98 Lots of these 3 Dalison & Bendloes Rep. value 1 l. 14s. Palmer's Reports Jone's Reports 100 of these 3 Kelway's Reports value 1 l. 15s. Palmer's Reports 7 Tryals, viz. of Charnock, Sir John Friend, Sir Wil. Par∣kins, &c. 58 Lots of these 3 Hansard's Entries val. 1 l. 18 s. Kelway's Reports Arguments, City Chart. 40 Lots of these 2 Plowden's Comment. value 1 l. 8s. Argument. Chart. 62 Lots of these 2 Palmer's Reports value 1 l. 5s. Dalison's Reports 98 Lots of some 2 of these Books several, worth more than their Money, viz. Dyer's Reports   Dalison's Reports Carter's Reports Cowell's Interpreter Keble's Justice. Cotton's Records, Large Palmer's Reports 804 Lots of some one of these Books, viz. Moore's Reports 180 Keble's Rep. 3. vol. 407 Dyer's Reports 98 Moor's Reports large Pap. 2 Ventris Reports 18 Dyer's Rep. large Paper 28 Sydersin's Reports 2 Saunder's Reports 10 Leonard's Reports 16 Bulstrode's Reports 36 Year-Book, compleat, with Maynards Edw. II. 2 Rolls's Abridgment 1 — Reports, compl. 1 Cook's Entries 1 Rastal's Entries 1 Crooke's Rep. last Ed. 3 vol. 1 1500     First and last Lot gets, besides the Books drawn with it, a compleat Set of Year-Books, with Maynard; Kebles Reports, Moore and Dyers Reports both large Paper, Palmers Reports, Ventris Reports, Kelways Re∣ports, Dalisons Reports, Carters Reports, and Jones Reports, Arguments about the City Charter, all neatly bound and letter'd on the back, Value at least 20 l. And as the Lots and Numbers are drawn, they shall be respectively enter'd in two Books, and put on a File, and the whole speedily printed, that every Person may know what Books they are to demand, which will be delivered t he several Adven∣turers so soon as drawn. The Proposals being so fair and advantagious, it has already met with such Encouragement, that it will be drawn on Thursday, July 21. 1698. Proposals and Tickets may be had of the Undertakers Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible with∣out Temple-bar, and John Nicholson, at the Kings Arms in Little Britain; and also of Mr. Will. Hensman in Westminster-hall; Mr. Harrison at Lincolns-Inn Gate in Chancery-lane; Mr. Hartley over against Greys-Inn Gate in Holborn; Mr. Rich. Hargrave at the Rainbow Coffee-house in Fleet-street; Mr. Knaplock in St. Pauls Church-yard, and Mr. Rich. Parker under the Royal-Exchange in Cornhil; and of most other Booksellers in Fleet-street and near the Inns of Court. Timely notice shall be given of the Place where drawn. ☞ The Second Part of Modern Reports, being a Collection of several Special Cases most of them Adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas, in the 26▪ 27, 28, 29 and 30th Years of the Reign of King Charles II. when Sir Fra. North was Chief Iustice of the said Court. To which are added, several select Cases in the Courts of Chancery, Kings-Bench, and Exchequer in the s rs. Carefully Collected by a Learned Hand. Printed for Charles Harper at the Flower  against  stans Church in Fleetstreet, 1698. Price
