M463a [ocm]17197031 206345
The manner of the BURNING THE POPE IN EFFIGIES IN LONDON On the 5th of November, 1678. WITH The manner of carrying him through several Streets, in progression to Temple-Bar, where at length he was decently burned. ALSO A Particular of several Bloody Massacres done by the Papists upon the Bodies of English, Irish, and French Protestants. With Allowance. LONDON, Printed for D. M. 1678.
The manner of the burning the Pope in Effigies in London, on the 5th of November, 1678. IT is a singular Prerogative attributed particular∣ly to our Nation, and seems undissolvably in∣tail'd on our Clime, that our Children, even whilst so young that they can hardly ask for the necessaries of Life, do yet in their sports and deportments divulge as particular a liking to Gene∣rosity and Virtue, as they demonstrate and irrecon∣cileable Odium to Treachery and Deceit, which are their Contraries. This is most apparent by their earnest Celebra∣tion of this 5th day of November; a day, which the oldest of us all indeed ought not to remember without sending up Vollies of Congratulations to Heaven, from whence we undeservedly receiv'd so extraordinary, and miraculous a deliverance, from that Hellsh Gunpowder-Plot contriv'd in the year 1605 and levelled not only at the dissolution of our King and Peers, but at the total subvrsion of Reli∣gion, and the ruine and destruction of the whole Land.
In that Age wherein this Conspiracy was contrived, and designed to have been effect∣ed, it was lookt on as so monstrously impudent, that it would admit of no parallel; All the Trea∣cheries of Europe compounded would not come near it; nor all the Inhumanity of the Turks and Pagans give it but a faint resemblance, so that 'tis no won∣der if the very remembrance of it did sharpen the Mothers Milk, and their Children sucking it in with their sustenance, became instinctively irritated at theirs and their Parents intended Murder. But that danger being over, who could expect the unwelcome repetition of any thing of the same nature by the same Party: But alas, it is little won∣der to see such bad Practices from those, who by principle reckon upon't as meritorious to under∣take them. Why should not even our Youth then espouse a noble Indignation at the injustice and by their resent∣ments on the Effigy, divulge a deserved contempt of the Original. Which to effect, on this present Fifth Day of November, they caused several of the said Effigies, or Resemblances of the Pope, to be made; some of them displaying
him in one posture, and some in another; but all of them were followed with lowd and numerous acclamations to their several places of Execution. He of them who might best pretend to the priority in point of Workmanship and invention, was raised on a small Pavillion, born like Pageants on Mens Backs, with a large Cross filled with Lamps, which in much majesty stalkt before him, whilst the Effigies, curiously adorned with his Triple Crown, Neck-lace of Beads, and all his other superstitious Accouterments, came very sump∣tuously behind, in procession from the Royal-Exchange to Temple-Bar, and visiting most Streets, Courts, and Alleys as he walkt a∣long. So frollick was he, that he danced before the Flames, and when he came near Temple-Bar (the place of Execution) cut a Caper into a great Bonefire, provided on purpose to entertain him, whose abominable civilities
had been so great, as heretofore to provide such large ones for others. In fine after this feigned Pope had been suf∣ficiently exposed to the Vulgar Reflections, he was hurl'd, Canopy, Triple Crown, Beads, Crucifix and all into the Bonefire near Chance∣ry-Lane end, in Fleet-street, where a world of People celebrated his fall with a general Ʋti∣nam, that all his Majesties Enemies, or the per∣verters of the Protestant Religion, or English Government, may ere long be reduced to some such Fate.
A brief Account of the Papistical Massacres and Cruelties towards Protestants. THE first we shall insert, was done about 100 years since in Paris; in which Massacre so many thousand Protestants fell, and with them that famous Commander Col∣ligny, whom the Roman Chronicler, because he would pen that story to the Life, has not omitted to tell Posterity, how that Noble Ad∣miral was thrown out of a Window into the Street, to be used as we do Cats, and Dogs, in Protestant Countreys; but good enough for an Heretick, whom the worse they use, the better they are. The next Cruelty, and no less barbarous than the former, was the Irish Massacre in 1640. wherein were aboce 300 thousand Protestants murdered; several that escaped
with their Lives, were yet cruelly dismem∣bred, some of their Tongues, others of their Hands and Privities, &c. and the rest driven into Bogs and Wildernesses. The last of their Inhumanities we shall at present insert, shall be that never to be for∣got Murder of Henry the Third and Henry the Fourth. The first whereof because he would not give his consent to Murder all the Hugo∣nots or Protestants in his Kingdom, though himself was a Papist, yet for the Reason a∣foresaid they cruelly murdered him; And the latter because inclining to the like lenity, though their Convert, they serv'd in the same kind. FINIS.
