O467 [ocm]31355420 205961
THE LONDON-MASTER: OR, THE JEW DETECTED, CONTAINING I. A True Discovery by what Tricks and Devices the Ship Laurel of London, with a rich Cargo, worth several thou∣sand pounds, was cast away in a most horrible manner in the River of Kill∣mare in Ireland. II. The evil Motives of Lucre that insti∣gated them to that Wickedness. III. Their bloody Designs to have Six∣teen Innocent Persons question'd for their Lives, for pretended Fellony and Treason. IV. A brief Apology to the Clergy, the Army, and the London-Masters. V. An Appendix to prove every Allega∣tion, directed by the Margent. Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. Printed at Dublin, and are to be sold at the Treasury Cof∣fee House in Crane-Lane, at Mr. Norman's in Dames-Street, Dublin; at Mr. Jones's in Cork, and Mr. Letcher's in Tralee. And the Original Vouchers are to be seen at the said Coffee-House. 1694.
To the Right Honourable, CHARLES Lord Baron of Shelburne. May it please your Lordship, HAving the Honour of being a Servant both to your Lord∣ship and your Excellent and most Worthy Father, and from my Infancy a dependance upon your Family, I humbly presume to dedi∣cate the following Narrative to your Lordship, being an Account of a most Scandalous Examination, given by one Jacob Myars (a Jew) which has not on∣ly brought me, but also a great part of the Kingdom, under severe Censure and Reflexion; as if the Ship Laurel had been most barbarously plunder'd by the Countrey through some Contrivances of mine; a Crime so abominable, that were I guilty, I deserve not only to be dismist your Lordships service, but to be stigmatiz'd, and excluded from the So∣ciety of Mankind. Yet as the glim∣mering
Candle being snuff'd, does straightway give the clearer Light, so I doubt not but your Lordship will find by perusing this Narrative, That their false Insinuations and Unjust Aspersions will cause my clouded Innocence to shine so much the brighter. These and other Considerations obli∣ges me to publish matter of Fact: And since Addresses of this kind are a mode of the Times, and that it hath pleased the Divine Powers by their several Endow∣ments of Learning, Wisdom, Justice and divers other Honourable and Vrtuous Qualities, to bless You as a Pattern to the Age You live in; I shall not omit, in all Humility, to beg Your Lordships Fa∣vour in other Occurrences, but to this no manner of Patronage, other then to Read and Judge one that desires Life no longer than while he demeans himself a faithful Subject to their Majesties, and in all Sincerity and Truth, Your Lordships most steady, and most Obedient Servant, RI. ORPEN.
IN LOCO PRAEFATII. SInce it is in a manner as unfashionable to write without a Preface, as it is to Dance before you have first made your Honours; so it may be as morose to urge the Reader to jump at once from the Title page into the Book, without leading him thither Modishly by a Preface; tho' otherwise the Title page it self might have sup∣plyd that. When an infamous Rumor has once taken place in the minds of the Publique, it's as difficult a matter to remove the impression, as to confute a Bigot in his first received Opinion of Religion; the nature of the one aspiring to judge, being prone to Positiveness and Censure, is as ready to condemn upon false information, as on the other side to ap∣plaud and cry up a person for some great Merit, that never deserved it: so the other shall, for want of Arguments, stand up, Rail and Redden, nay venter his life, and fight for that which he knows no more of then the Game-Cock when car∣ry'd
from the Pit, knows of the grounds of that Battle wherein he has all day so inveteratly ma∣naged the Gauntlet against his like ignorant Chal∣lenger. The more uncensorious and impartiall, are perhaps waiting for the true Narative of that mat∣ter, which is said to be nine parts of ten of the pre∣sent discourse of many Courts, Exchanges, Walks and Coffee-houses throughout Christendom. But least this may be over-masted, and so provoke the passionate Inquisitor impatiently, to say that There is too much Sail for such a Vessel, we shall here put the Reader aboard, and then let him speak as he finds.
THE LONDON-MASTER: OR, THE JEW DETECTED, &c. IN the West of Ireland, in the Province of Munster, lieth the River of Kilmare, about 11 Leagues from the Main up into the Countrey, adorned on each side with divers capacious and defencible Harbours, wherein thou∣sands of the best Ships may safely ride at once, with ready Outlets for the Outward or Home∣ward bound Ships; and many Conveniencies for great Fisheries, as Herring, Pilchard, and Sal∣mon; To say nothing of divers kinds of Hook-Fish, as Hake, Cod, Ling, Polluck, Mackarel, &c. wherewith this River aboundeth, capable l Trade both by Sea and Land; as it was before he last War, after Sir William Petty had erected everal considerable Fisheries, built the Iron-Works, opened the Lead-Mines, and promoted he Trade of Rape-Seed on each side of the Ri∣er, and planted a Collony there of 815 Souls f English Protestants at his Expence of above 0000 l. Sterl. to the general Enrichment of
that part of the Kingdom, and the great Aug∣mentation of the Kings Revenue; all which were demolish'd and destroy'd by the last Wars and not above 75 of those Protestants now left in being; so greatly the Heirs of Sir William Petty, and this Collony of Protestants, have been Suf∣ferers in the late Troubles by their Adventures in that desolate part of the Kingdom, where the Natives by the right Numbering of the People were found to be above 900 Papists to one single Protestant; who were never thorowly subdu'd since the War of 1641, nor in the best of times brought ameanable to the Laws of England, until the same was performed, in a great measure, by this English Plantation; where now again, ever since the last War, 20, 30, and sometimes 100 at a time of Toryes have march'd openly in Arms up and down that Country, and upon the approach of any consider ole part of the Army, have disperst themselves into smaller Companies, and are conceal'd among the Glins and Fast∣nesses; where if any of the Inhabitants are suspe∣cted as Discoverers, They and their Friends are immediately destroyed, by burning thei Houses, cropping their Ears, and cutting ou their Tongues, and sometimes keeping them Pri∣soners whole Nights, stark naked, in the ope Fields. Into this River, as a place for the purpose, ar∣rived the Laurel of London, Christopher Ly Master, she carry'd ten Guns, Burthen 150 Tun
richly Laden (as gather'd from the Master and People belonging to her) with Sugars, Log∣wood, Fastick, Lyme-Juice, Indigo, Ginger, Cotton, Paint, Pemento, and great store of Gold and Silver, and divers Ingots besides; from Jamaica, bound for London, having on Board as Passengers, Jacob Myars (the Jew) and Peter Row, as also one Mr. Spyers, who was said to be Son-in-law to one of the Owners of the Ship, but so indispos'd and sickly, that it's doubtful whether he vvas concern'd in the Stratagem or not. They gave an account that on the 27th of January 1693, in the morning, they were four Leagues to the West of the Bull, Cow, and Calf,  when first they made them, and believ'd them to be the Skellox, until they were undeceiv'd by the Main Land so near them; and tho' they de∣clar'd a Resolution for Kinsale, and to lye there  until some Ship of War could come and receive them into her care, and convoy them safe for London; yet one may conclude that they shap't an extravagant careless Course, to stand for the River of Killmare; vvhereas the wind being at West, four leagues to the west of the Bull, &c.  They might sail in a manner right before it, for the Old Head of Kinsale; The heavens acted no∣thing to the contrary; and had they designed vvhat they pretended, It's very manifest by Scale and Flovver-de-luce, and by the accompts of the Winds, and the sufficient good order of the Ship, that she might have arrived there vvith less diffi∣culty then she did in Killmare.
But Killmare was the place alloted for the fa∣tal knock, which without Resolution, or pre∣meditated intention, could not be well accom∣plish'd in that River, by reason of the many Har∣bours gaping on every side thereof to receive and entertain any Ships whatever, and by reason of the boldness of the Shores upon the River, and all these Harbours; so as a Ship Turning up the River, or into the Harbours, may safely dare to Nose every Rock with her Boltsprit; I say not  well to be accomplisht, especially while the wind held its own at W. the River lying W. S. W. and E. N. E. but two points from blowing directly up the River, and might very well serve for putting into any of these Harbours; Capanacossy is the only Shole and lyeth near the upper end of the River; But so landlockt, that there is no manner of Danger, because the greatest Winds  have not power to create Seas, or to make any,  more then a small cockling of the water; And 'tis to be observed for ever, that it's the Seas, and not the Winds, can do a Ship any considerable prejudice in cases of distress of this kind; for let the Winds be never so violent, a Ship shall never beat in smooth Waters. Into this River, as the place of Execution, they arrived on the 27th of January 1693, in the evening, and dropt their best Bower, and so came to an Anchor under Rossmore-point, about mid∣way up the River, where, as the winds continued still at West, she might ride well enough, as she
did all that night, for they were not resolved to cast her away untill they had fix'd upon a con∣venient shore to save themselves, and their mo∣ny, in their long boat. That evening they had a full prospect of the greatest part of the River, and the openings of the several Harbours; Next morning, a little after Six a clock, they cut their Cable, pretending that she would not ride for want of the Mizen-Mast, for they had taken care to cut That by the board, before she came into the River, to prevent her yawing as she sayl'd afore the winds, as tho' nothing could prevent it, but the cutting away of that Mast; But the rea∣sons why they wounded and hackt the main-yard, the fore-yard, and the fore-top-saile-yard in seve∣ral places about the middle of the yards, are yet  kept to themselves. But would they speak ingeni∣ously, they must say 'twas done that they might crack and break in sunder when the sails should  fill with the violent winds, and thereby make the greater shew of distress? Having cut the Ca∣ble, she drove up along the north side of the Ri∣ver, and coming towards Black-Water, a very good Harbour, and right afore the wind, which  now veer'd to the S.W. they made ready, and the  Master, Passengers, and the whole Ships company,  got out with their Treasure of Gold and Silver, and in their long-boat they came ashore at Black-Water,  and presently sunk their boat, and marcht  up by land along the River side, about two miles from Black-Water to the house of one Dermot
mac Owen, at Cappanacossy, about seven a Clock that morning; but their Ship was got  to Cappanacossy almost as soon as they, without  a Soul on board her, where she drove to and fro  before their faces, with the Flood and Ebb, all  that day; while the Master, Passengers, and  Company, divided the Treasure among them∣selves,  to every one a share; and sent for Li∣quor  from on board, to make themselves and  the Country People merry, Renouncing their Ship, and declaring her a Wreck, in a place  where a Ship could not be lost, but by some Sinister means. But their greatest concern was how to provide Horses and Conveniencyes to carry themselves  and their Treasure out of the Country, without any manner of regard to their Ship or Cargo: They mockt and spurn'd at every body that ad∣vised them to betake themselves to their Ship; And such as were importunate to have her saved,  they caused to be soundly drubb'd. Having spent that day in jollity and carrous∣ing after the Treasure was distributed, The  Master at length was prevail'd upon to write to Mr. Thomas Palmer, a Minister, and one of the Justices of the peace of that County, living about three miles up the River side from Cap∣ponacossy. And in his letter he pretended some  distress, and that he had not a sail left; tho' at  the same time, there was a whole suit on board:  Whereupon Mr. Palmer went to him in the even∣ing,
and told him that his Ship was in very  tle danger, and advis'd him to get his men to∣ether,  and go on board again; But the Ma∣er seem'd to despair of ever getting her out of  at place, and desir'd that some of the Country  eople might make the most they could of her. ut Mr. Palmer bid him still be of good courage, nd told him that she could be saved without any anner of difficulty; And then by further discourse, e understood that they had great quantityes of old and Silver at Dermot mac Owen's house, d did therefore alarm them to go on board  ith their Treasure; telling them, that the untry abounded with Toryes, and that their  ip was the best Garison in those parts; upon  hich apprehension of the Toryes, the Master  ssengers, and Seamen, repair'd again to their  ip with all expedition, and were afterwards re cautious in their designe; Yet took no nner of care to preserve the Ship; but dis∣untenanced, and rejected several skillfull Sea∣n  of the Country, when they offered to bring  r into a good Harbour. Mr. Palmer Returned home that night, and  t several of the English People with Men, and  ats, to fetch off the Ship, the night being fine  d calm; And sent some Soldiers likewise on  rd, lest the Rabble of the Country, or the To∣s,  should make any attempt upon her; But all  o purpose, for the master would not suffer  m to get her away, But got up a Cask of
Rum, and therewith set all that were on board  to make themselves merry; and so the Master  and the rest of the Ship Crew, pass'd away that  fine night, without suffering her to be brought to a convenient Harbour. Next morning being the 29th, Jacob Myars  Peter Row, the mate of the Ship, and the greatest part of the seamen, went off by Boat with their Treasure in some Chests, and put the same a∣shore at Mr. Palmer's house, which were handed in by their own men, and set them in an open  room to the view of every body that came in,  without acquainting Mr. Palmer that there was any thing besides their cloaths in the Chests; And on the same day Mr. Palmer and Mr. Myars rid down to Cappanacossy, and took along wit them one Mr. Richard Orpen (Son in law to Mr. Palmer) to consider the best and speedyest mean for saving of the Ship, &c. he having judgment in  Shiping, who went on board along with Mr. My∣ars, leaving Mr. Palmer (being a corpulent man)  ashore; As soon as Mr. Orpen got a board (being  about half flood) he examined the Pump, an  found that the water was black and stunk; An thereupon told the Master that the Ship was tight and that she was in no manner of danger, an told him also that there were a great many me  coming down from Mr. Palmers to lighten an get off the Ship, and that they vvould bring h off that very tyde; And desired him to hoist u all the heavy Goods that could be readily come
to be put ashore, and also his Guns, for that their weight aloft, would incline her to swaddle; ad∣ding, that one pound aloft would do her more prejudice then ten a low, and bid him strike the ore-top-mast as well as the main-top-mast, and old him that she would ride the quieter, especially while she had no Mizen; To all which discourse, the Master answered nothing, onely said, that he could not part with  his Gunns, that he must keep them for his defence, east peradventure he should be at any time at∣akt by the French Privateers; whereupon Mr. Orpen told him that the Gunns could be of no great use to him in that condition, since that the Privateers could engage him (where he lay) n no other manner than in their Longboats; and  still advised him if he would putt his Gunns a∣shore, and make a Battery near his Ship; twould do much better, and that he should be furnish'd  with men enough with small-arms on board, which would be more proper against the Long-boats, one of the Gunns countervailing the weight of eight men or thereabouts; But the Master would not hearken to it; Mr. Orpen discourst him further, nd asked him how many men belonged to the Ship, he answered nine, and two boys; and being  sked how many of them he quartered to each Gunn? and how many to the small-arms? He retted at the discourse, and said, tho' he had  ot men enough for the Gunns, yet he would not art with them, but would keep them for a shew;
a very pretty shew indeed! when all the Gunn except two, lay heads and points along-ships u  and downe the decks, and remain so still; Bu the dialogue rested not there, for Mr. Orpen en∣quired of him about his Anchors and ground tackle, and their condition; and what anchors h had then out? The Master answerd that sh  ridd only by the Kedg-anchor and a small warp That they had lost their best Bower at Ross-more when they cut two days ago, and that the had a very good Cable. But their sheet ancho wanted a stock; upon which Mr. Orpen desire the master to send his Carpenter, who was the  on board to make a stock, and shewed him whe there was good season'd timber within two hun¦dred yards of the Ship: And promised, th some of the Tenants should assist the Carpente  and that a stock should be fitted for him in l then an hours time; But the Master would n accept of the offer: This kind of discourse he them till near two o'th'clock, about which tim  'twas high water; and Mr. Orpen walkt upon th Quarter-deck, and sent down for the Master, wh was making merry with some company in th great Cabbin, and observed to him that the Sh fleeted, and sheard to and again, and bid him s his men to work and get her off, the wind bein temperate, and kindly shifting to the N. W  whereupon he made a sputter up and down th Decks, as tho' he would have got his men to wo upon the Ship; but at length, he answerd that all h
Ships Company, to two, were ashore at Mr. Palmer's, along vvith the Passengers; so that he miss'd getting her off that Tyde for vvant of his men; vvhose minds leand more tovvards the Trea∣sure, than tovvards the Ship and Cargo. While Mr. Orpen was yet on board, he or∣dered that a Countrey Fellow, who was brought before him for some Petty Larceny, should be forthwith ty'd Neck and Heels, and be exposed  upon the Open Deck, that others might take Ex∣ample by him; but the Master neglecting to have it done, the Fellow slipt over the side into a Boat: But so zealous was Mr. Orpen to serve the Master, that he ordered the Fellow to be brought on board again, and had both his hands ty'd to the Gang-Way, and with a Ropes-End was beaten with many stripes, to the terror of  others of the Countrey that were present, and be∣held this severe Infliction for so small a Trans∣gression against the Master. In the mean time, the greatest part of the Seamen went from Mr. Palmers to Roughty Bridge, a small Village about 2 miles from thence, and carry'd their Proportions of the  Treasure with them. Mr. Orpen took leave of the Master in the Evening after Sun-set; and presently afterwards there came to the Ship several stout boats manned with English men and their servants, which were  sent by Mr. Palmer to bring the Ship out of that
place, and being amost glorious calm night, full Moon, the Ship fleeting, and the spring Tyde ye increasing, nothing was more possible then to tow her away as in a Mill-pond. The men went on couragiously on board, overjoyd to see how the Winds, the Tyde, the hea∣venly Luminaryes, and every thing, conspir'd to∣gether towards their good success, to relieve the Master in that his pretended misfortune; and heartily spoke to him and told him; Sir, we are  now come to bring off your Ship, which (with the help of God) we will accomplish without any  manner of difficulty; whereupon the master answer∣ed  them in a wrathful sort of dialect, and in a rage  bid them all get out of his Ship; some of them  reply'd, That they came to do him good service, an  deserved not to be so treated; and admired hi  meaning, and told him, That they heard that the Torys did resort near the shores, to robb people a they came and went by land to and from the Ship, and that themselves could not well row back a∣gainst the violent Ebb of a spring, (being the near high vvater) and 'twas not safe for them t go ashore, least they should fall into the hands o their enemies: but he told them again that h cared not what became of them, and if they did no hasten out of his Ship, he would fire upon them  and so retires furiously, as though he resolved t  bring some small arms to fire at them through th port-holes of the steerage; vvhich astonish' them to see the Master so highly incense
against them for their kindness. But to avoid his malice, they got into their Boats again, and so went ashore. That night about 12 a clock, Mr. Palmer's house was set on fire in several places by the To∣ryes, who made several Shotts in thorow the doors; he men then in the house, were Mr. Palmer, the Ships Mate, Mr. Spires, Mr. Myars, Mr. Row and George Fleming, from whom several hotts were returned out of the doors and win∣dows; but the fire increasing vehemently about heir ears, they were forced to break open the doors, and submit themselves to the Toryes, who presently entred the house, and Mr. Myars shew'd hem where the Chests lay that had the mony; which the Toryes immediatly took away out of he house; wherein (besides the Treasure) were great store of fine embroider'd cloaths both for men and women, which (as suppos'd) did be∣ong to the right Master of the Ship and his wife. All thinking People of that part of the King∣om, agree, That the putting the treasure of he Ship into Mr. Palmner's house after this clan∣estine manner, without acquainting him there∣with (especially while their Ship lay in no dan∣er) was for some sinister ends; and nothing ore evident, then that the Master, Passengers nd Seamen were resolved to slip away with the  Mony and Gold, and by some devilish instigati∣n,  had concluded to destroy the Ship and Car∣o,  whereby they might be allow'd some room
to alleadge that all this Treasure was likewise plun∣der'd & rappareed by the Rabble of the Country. But designes of that sort, have their end most commonly, not unlike their begining, for its be∣lieved, that the master, passengers and Ships com∣pany, had as little right to that treasure, as the Toryes that Robb'd them; Neither did it pro∣sper much better with the Toryes, for soon after∣wards, they grew into high variance about divi∣ding the spoil, and their leader who had the great∣est share, was shot through the body with three bullets, by such another as himself, whereof he dyed without giving any manner of account where he had hid his Talent; Thus the iniqui∣tyes of the wicked have fallen upon the heads of the righteous: for Mr. Palmer, whose Life and Conversation have been an Ornament to his Pro∣fession, and who has always had an unspotted Re∣putation, is hereby, together with his Family, ut∣terly ruined, his house and all his substance, burnt to the ground; himself, his wife and child∣ren, forced to flee naked out of their bedds, without saving so much as their wearing Apparel  But the projections of the Master rested not here, for next morning betimes, being the 30th o  January, he had an account of what hapen'd at Mr. Palmer's; Then began his confusion in  mind; What, says he, all the mony lost, and the Ship still alive! If I save her now, and sail her for London, the Owners will be upon my back for the mony; For, how can I answer such an unpre∣sidented
thing, to put the mony ashore, when the hip was in no manner of danger? O wretched state of Man! which greatest things To greatest downfal and confusion brings. Had not the mony been lost, I had enricht my self, nd could have made the better terms about it, hether I had sunk the Ship or saved her, Had ot the mony been lost, I could have sunk the hip, and pretended that all was lost together, nd havockt away by the Country: What shall do? The holes are already bored throw her ottom, and much water already in her hold, she es now in three foot water at lowest Ebb, and nd how will it be with the Sugars when it flows 2 foot more this next Tyde? Come, I am re∣olved; Sirrah go flip the Warp that she rides y, and let her fill, and beat, and drive to the  evill that possest me, when I first possest her; will veil this prank of the mony, by comitting worse upon the back of it; Let her split, and rownd, and be damn'd. The Master was heard to put forth several eja∣ulations  of this kind, whilst he ranged about from  he great Cabin to the Deck, and from Poop to  row, snarling at every body that spoke to him. ut no body knew yet what he meant by saying at the holes are bored throw her bottom. While e was thus railing at his fate, and cursing his arrs, The People with the boats (whom he
had turnd out of his Ship last night for offering  to save her) came on board again, and profered  their service, which the Master still renounced  and refused; But at length, the winds arising  hard at Southwest, the Master about 12 a clock,  and young flood, called to them, and told them  that all the Goods would be lost that Tyde; and  bid them save what they could for themselves,  and told them that the Ship would soon split  in a thousand pieces; and when they had put  nine casks of Indigo, and some other things into  their boats, He bid them again to take all for  themselves, and desired them to take two  Casks of Indigo, and save them for him, to  bear his charges out of the country, and that he would never trouble them any more, and charged every one to hasten out of the Ship, for that she had five foot of water already in her hold: Where∣upon they all left her to take her chance, to sink,  beat or drive; The Master having taken care to  slip the warp whereby she ridd, leaving her loose to take her fortune. With three boats & several of the English with them, He came ashore in the afternoon at a place  called Killowen, a small English village, bringing  with them the nine Barrells of Indigo and some  other things, besides the two barrels for the  Master to bear his charges out of the Country, which were all landed there, and put into a Cellar, and the people were contented to take some small part for Salvage. As soon as the Master came
ashore, he met Mr. Orpen, and told him that all the  Cargo was lost by that time, and that he believed  the Ship was splitt in pieces; However, he desired him to go and save what he could, seeming very  confident that she could not hold out till next  Tyde; Mr. Orpen dispatcht several people to the Ship; amongst them was one Mr. Bryan Kelly  whom he called back and sent him to the Master for a note under his hand for Salvage, which Mr.  Kelly accordingly did, and got Richard Clark, Samuel Aldwell, Charles Carthy, Dermot Sulivan and Dermo: Sulivan Junior, to be named in the note (along with himself, knowing them to be Mr. Orpens friends) as soon as he had got the  note, being about night-fall he repaired to the  Ship, and found that the rest of the people em∣ployed  by Mr. Orpen were got on board her, and  having loos'd the foretopsail; and placed a man  at the helme, they brought her with much pains and industry into a convenient Creek; and after she was brought to the Creek, Mr. Kelly went on board her, and told them, that Mr. Orpen  had sent him to desire them to be careful of every thing, and that himself came directly from the Master, who had put the whole concerns of the  Ship into Mr. Orpens management, and that he  would be with them out of hand with men and boats, who accordingly came next morning be∣times  on the 31st with men and boats, and having fitted Teakles and Cannhooks, &c. fell to work  to discharge the Cargo, which was not without
some difficulty, for the Rabble and Rapparees  crouded into her in great Numbers, insomuch that Mr. Orpen was forced to bring his people  to their arms, and thereby expelled the intruders and employed Mr. Aldwell, Capt. Carthy, Squire Sulivane and Mr. Kelly, to oversee the safe putting of the goods ashore into convenient houses, which  was done with the best Care that the then circum∣stances  would allow, being at a time when the  whole Country about them abounded with great  Numbers of Rapparees and Tories, well befitting such designs as were then on foot (of the Master, passengers and Ships company) to destroy the Ship and Goods, and slip away with the Gold and Silver; several of the goods were put ashore that  day; and the night following, the Ship was close∣ly attackt by rhe Rapparees, so that Mr. Orpen and his men had very hot work, being all that night at close firing; and it is credibly reported, that above twenty rapparees were wounded in that nights service. They appeared several nights  afterwasds before the Ship, yet never made any  further attempt upon her. But its very manifest  that had not Mr. Orpen undertaken to manage and defend the concern, that the Rabble & Rapparees  had wholy destroy'd the Ship & goods; Being in∣deed  no more but what the Master, passengers, and  company hop'd for; For had the Ship and Cargo  been utterly ruined (especially before the mony  was lost) they had their ends, and might have kept the mony, and had wreck-room enough
to say that the Sea or Land had swallowed it from them along with the Ship and goods; and the only cause of crime against any of that country, is because that any thing was saved. The next day being the 1st of February, (the third day after the Ship was stranded,) The Master came again  to the Ship, and the first thing he did, was to come  privately under her sterne to view her deaths  wounds, Vizt. the holes which he had made in the bread-room thorow her bottom, the morning he quitted her, where he found the water gushing out of her, as its said, the blood freshens at the murtherer when he is brought to lay his hand upon the Corps before the Inquest; But stepping  on board, Mr. Orpen shewd him that the water was in her hold within a foot and a halfe of the Beam; whereupon the Master ordered that a hole  should be made to let it out, which was according∣ly  done, and desired the Master to stay on board and take an account of things, and to see the holes stopt, and likewise desired him to send for his  men; one seaman being worth five landmen for working in a ship. But he stayed no longer  aboard, then to order great part of the Sugars  (which had received some damage) to be given away to the Country people and to see it done, and having filled some baggs with the white Sugars, carry'd them with him to his quarters;  but returned not again untill five days after, nei∣ther did he send any of his men, but hastned them away out of the country, without keeping one of  them to stay in the Ship.
Upon the 2d of Febr. Capt. George Gregory commander at Ross-Castle, and Mr. James Bland Minister of Killarny, came to the Ship, where they made about two hours stay, and returned again, with full assurance, that she was ensured, or that the Master, passengers and company had willfully destroyed the Ship and Cargo for the lucre of the Gold and Silver, and said that it was a just judgment upon them that they were robb'd by the Toryes: Next day, being the third, Mr. Bland writt the following Letter to Mr. Thomas Crump the Kings Officer, wherein are high enducements that Capt. Gregory ought to be attended with some presents or bribes: with menaces of perill in case of Failure. Glannerought Febr. 3d. 93. Mr. Crump, THough Capt. Gregorye's modesty will not give him leave to ask any gratuity for his Soldiers service, yet I hope your discretion will tell you what he may expect upon this occasion; and I hope what his extraordinary Civility forbids him to ask, your Gratitude will make you give him; he has sent away the Bagg of Sugar, having the con∣veniency of a Guard But he setts a very small value upon it; If you deliver two Firkins of Lymejuice to his Serjeant, and what ever else you think worth his acceptance, it will come safely to his hands; The Captain of the Ship says, there are Sweetmeats Chocolett and Jamaica Peper and Ginger aboard; But I need not advise you in this case, You that have been so much conversant in those things, need not to be at a loss what to do; only I take leave to tell you as a friend, that as you may incur his Favour by this, So you may his Displeasure, by the neglect of it, which
may prove more dangerous then you imagine. My service to Mr. Orpen. Sir, I am Yours, JA. BLAND. It's very evident what unjust errands the Capt. and Mr. Bland went upon the day before, when they visited Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump on board the Ship, which, though (as the Letter speaks,) bashful to ask for, yet they blush not to write for, next day; Mr. Orpen, returned this answer, That the Soldiers must be paid if they did any service; And as cases stood, he would not dispose of any thing; but hop'd that in a little time, a division would be made; And as soon as he had his share Set out, which was due to him for Salvage, he would pay his respects to them, with Presents of every sort; which unsatisfying answer not fuiting well with the covetousness of the Captain and the Parson, proved of ill consequence to Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump; For the Capt. and Mr. Bland set up for the Master and Crew, Ma∣ing them now Saints, whom but lately before they had condemned for Devills; they incensed Edward Herbert the high Sherrif, a man of no small Power, and Charles Monk Esq; Collector of the County of Kerry, against Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump, as tho' they were the only persons that had destroyed the Ship and Cargo; And had forced the Master by head and shoulders out of the Ship; And having obtained from the Master and Passenger what Orpen, had refused to give
upon the request of that most disingenious Letter, They still continued to raise and foment divers evil reports, especially against Mr. Orpen, as though he had been, not only the principal de∣stroyer of the Ship, but that he had also contriv∣ed the burning of Mr. Palmer's house: Haste is now the necessity; and Major Steers the Grand Informer of the County of Kerry, was posted away to Dublin, to fill that City with the noise. The Sh. joines with the Capt. and Mr. Bl. and represents Orpen as a person very obnoxious and culpable in the whole proceeding of the Ship. What cannot a man accomplish, tho' never so ill a member? Can he want Friends while he has any thing to give away? The Sh. the Cap. & Mr. Bl. have received Presents from the Master, Pas∣sengers, &c. whom they immediately restored to their reputation again; and Mr. Orpen is as soon traduced to the World: vvho if he had been but earlier in Presents then the Master, had un∣doubtedly bore the Bell; But neglecting to pay the Twenty Guinnyes which the Sh. desired to have, as a br. or gift, and for refusing comply∣ance to an unlawful Request of a Minister, is now under those dangers which are preacht out a∣gainst him and Crump, in the perclose of Mr. Bl's Letter. The Capt. having carry'd away several con∣siderable  goods of the Ship to Ross-Castle, leaves the Sh. in Glannerought to come up in his place, Giving him the command of his men; The stores
being nevertheless frequently robb'd while the Sh. and the Master had care of them; No  marvel it should be so, while the Soldiers, the  Toryes, and an ill pack which attended the Ma∣ster,  were continually about the place. Now let any unbyast man consider the condi∣tion of that part of the Country, and how ly∣able the poor inhabitants thereof are to entertain Toryes in their houses, when Capt. Gregoryes Soldiers have made such neighbour-hood with them, which is not obsevable altogether in them only, for the Cap. himself who lives by the sword,  whose trade is to fight, and receives the Kings pay upon that account, is of resolution as far from engaging the Toryes as his Soldiers are from be∣ing at War with them. And you shall find that the Cap. hath no manner of inclination to sup∣press  the Toryes, and that his men have been kind to him, for allowing them to quarter where the Toryes have reforted: not to kill or take them,  but to have leave to Range upon free quarters, whereby the remedy is become allmost as bad as the disease; upwards of thirty familyes having Fled, bag and bagage, from the cruelty of these Soldiers, who could not expect that kind of li∣berty,  if there were no Toryes; and the Cap's own behaviour in this Affair, describes him no otherwise than a Moderate Fighter, or Worse; of which the former indeed is more dispensable: For, if a man be not inspired with Courage, how can it be expected where it is not? And if God
and Nature design'd it for him, he must blame the ineptitude of his own Organs, or the Imbeci∣lity of the Womb that did not sufficiently purifie them, so as to make them capable to entertain a Spirit suitable to his Profession; Oportet ut mens sana, sit in corpore sano; It is a thousand pities that a Man of his Nerves should want a Mind: For the other there can be no manner of Pardon in any Person whatsoever, that is false to his God, and Traytor to his King; and for a small Pattern of his Heroick Atchievements, look into the Ap∣pendix, pag. 35, 37, 40, 26. And are not the rest of the Noble Acts of Cap. Greg. and his Men, (and how they have ruined above a hundred Fa∣milies) writ in a particular Book of his Life, while he ruled in that Countrey? But behold, while they are thus in Neighbour∣hood with the worst and most bloody of the To∣ries, Lo! they are at the same time at work before  the Lords Justices and Council against Mr. Orpen Cashier'd Servants were tamper'd with, Indigent Persons tempted, and Scavengers on every side, were employ'd to rake up Dirt against him; a length they produc'd a Letter of his, (which has lain asleep since October last) to the Commander  of Ross-Castle, to set at liberty one Cnohor Boy, if he were not guilty of some Crime, being no Tory at that time, but had been the Detector of  Fourscore and odd notorious Robbers, by whose  means rhey were brought to condign punishment,  and in all probability had effected the like upon
all the rest of the Tories throughout the Province of Munster, if he had not been ill rewarded for his good Services, and so forced to escape; whose Liberty would not be granted to Mr. Or∣pen for the Publick Good: And it being then dis∣covered  to the Tories, that he had been, and was to be their Discoverer, and being also eagerly  pursued without intermission by the Soldiers on he one side, and the proclaimed Tories on the he other, he was forced for Self-preservation, to et up a Company of Tories for himself, there  being no Peace to be had for him, either from the Soldiers, or the unrighteous Mammon; and so fterwards became the most notorious Robber in  he Kingdom. Thus, we our selves have forced them to be Toryes, that were the very Instruments to detect hem. Thus with a seeming Zeale to the cause, hey run to the Government (the Fountain of ustice) with their clandestine complaints against Mr. Orpen about Cnher Boy; whereas indeed it s with no other design then to sculk behind the Laws, for that complaints of this kind, are cog∣isable before any Justice of the peace in the pro∣er County, against a person that is not of the rmy: nor in the Comision of the peace. See how hey have dealt with the Government in this atter; after all their noise about Cnoher Boy,  shew them at length a Reed shaken with the ind, for the intent of that great clamor could im no further, then highly to involve Mr. Or∣pen
into Censures and Expences, and so have him condemn'd before he was heard, thereby to wound him sorely in his Reputation and Purse, the better to carry on their other designs against him, about the Ship; for why did not they after all the stir which they made in Dublin about the Toryes, bring somewhat of that kind against him before the Grand-Jury at the last General Commission of Oyer and Terminer held in Kerry on the 26th of March 1694, when he dared them to it in open Court, and when the Ld. C. J. Pine told Major Steers their late confident in Dub∣lin, that 'twas now a very firt time to do it. But to return again to the Ship, without ma∣king five days, digression, as the Master did, for he  came not nigh her again until the 7th of Febru∣ary, that Mr. Monk perswaded him to go on board, and then he made but about an hours stay, and went not to her again until the 12th where  he stay'd about another hour (Leaving one Mr. Richard Clarke to look after things on board) who until that day never went to concern  himself with the Ship, or any thing belonging to her: But the work being over for several days before, and all the Salvable part of the Goods (except some damnified Ginger, and the Fustick, which lay in the Balast) being already brought away by Mr. Orpen; Mr. Clark Rumidg'd for an hour or two up and down her hold, and be∣twixt Decks; and then left her, and the Master went not nigh her any more until the 15th. Now
had the Master any manner of inclination for the preserving of the Ship and Goods, he would not have lain away from her, while her Decks could be kept dry; Nay, tho' he were forced to lye in his cloaths all the time. All this while the Master, Passengers and Seamen never mention'd  any thing of the holes that were bored in the Ship, but kept it private until about the 10th of February, that the Country began to ring of it. For it seemes the Mate or Carpenter as they tra∣vel'd, had made discovery thereof to some per∣sons that brought the account of it back to Kill∣mare. Then and never before, the Master own∣ed, that there were holes bored in the Breadroom thorow her bottom, and that he did it pur∣posely to lodge her in the strand, that by the weight of water in her hold, she might Sit the faster from beating; But sure he will not im∣pute  it to his own Ignorance that he knew not that she was but 10 foot in the Hold and that she lay in 15 foot water in that place. During these Transactions, the Master, Mr. Myars, Mr. Row and Mr. Orpen, were very good Friends, save that one Firebrand was cast in among them by Capt. Gregory, by Stirring up both sides to speak hard of each other, and carry'd the same from one to t'other; which lost nothing in the carriage; so that he rais'd some heats which lasted not above a day or two; and it appears, that hitherto Cap. Gregory's incen∣diaryes, took no great root among them, for that
the Master and these Passengers went frequently to eat and drink at Mr. Orpen's house; and upon the 11th of February after dinner, all three call'd him aside, and told him, how well satisfied they were with his behaviour in that affair of the Ship and Goods, and desired him to take the trouble  of the future mannagment thereof, promising  that he should have his Salvage, and that they resolved to go together for England; but would first make a conveyance of all to him, and he to deliver up the same to them or their Orders upon  demand, after allowing him his Salvage; where∣upon they call'd Mr. Monk, and having made him acquainted with what they had motion'd to Mr. Orpen, they pray'd the favour of him to draw writings between them to that effect: and in the evening, they took leave of Mr. Orpen, and every one went to his uarters, and Mr. Monk spent a considerable part of the night in drawing the Instruments. But the Sh. who lay all the while in ambush for a grasp at the Goods, lodg'd in the same House with Mr. Monk, and by some means pry'd into the Writings, and next morning he came along with Mr. Monk, accompany'd with Cap. Gregory, to Killowen, where they found the Master, the two Passengers, and Mr. Orpen, very friendly together. Now or never was the time for the Sh. to set them at variance, which indeed he accom∣plish'd with a witness: For he plainly saw that he was at that instant like to be put by from ever
having any concern with these Goods: And there upon, in vehemency and wrath he insinuated to the Master and Passengers, That himself vvas high Sh. of the County, a Justice of peace of the County, Lieut. of the County, vvho could com∣mand the Army, as vvell as the Militia of the County; and vvhat was it that he could not do in the County? And withall told them soberly, that they were under some censures for casting away their Ship, and destroying the Cargo; and that he, and only he, could set them right with their Owners in England, and with the Govern∣ment in Ireland; And then turn'd to some old Law-Book, directing (as he pretended) that all Wrecks ought to be deposited with the Sheriff. The valiant Cap. Gregory, (who had made them understand by the daily Out-rages of himself and  his Men, that he govern'd indeed with no less Arbitrariness than the high Sh. and as Despotical  as he for his Life) entertain'd them with his Mili∣tary Rhetorick, hovv absolute he vvas in all mat∣ters of Government and Command: Yet that himself and the high Sh. vvere but as one Man, vvho being a person vvell practic'd in Controver∣sies, could either raise or depress them as he plea∣sed; and advised them to quit all others, and stick to the Sh. One Horse Nabs another; and People of a sort soon agree: The high Sh. the Cap. the Master, Jacob Myars, and Peter Row, sprung presently as a sworn Covey, and Mr. Orpen was no more to be consulted with, but look'd upon as
a Person qualified to ruine their Councils and De∣signs. From hence forth Cap. Gregory, the high Sh. and Mr Bl. (being well sweetned with some of the best Sugars) became Patrons to the Master, and these Passengers, & by the frequent incursions of the first, That part of the Country about Kill∣mare, was harass'd as though it had been the Ene∣myes Quarters; for he had always a ravenous pack at his heels, who prey'd upon the Country day and night, without paying for the Provisi∣ons which they exacted from the poor People in their continual marches, under the notion of search∣ing for the Ships Goods, Tumbling and tossing all their little housholdry, and janting it in that manner, from house to house, they beat and wounded the Men, Ravish'd Women and Maids, and set Houses afire; But when they had Forced the People to give them all their mony, they put out the fire again. These doings past under the notion of serving the Owners, who have also paid dearly for their Services, and had they thought fit to have consulted Mr. Orpen, he had made appear the many havocks which were commited by the Master, Passengers, the high Sh. Cap. Gregory and Mr Bl. and they should find at what rate the Master and Passen∣gers have bought the patronages of those three Gentlemen; which began more openly upon the 12 of February; and on the 13th the Sh. fram'd an advantageous Narrative by his Letter
to the Government, in the behalf of his Sweet Clyents, and becomes Merchant for great part of the Goods, and waited at Killmare for an or∣der (in answer to his Letter) to Seiz both Ship and Goods into his own possession; and so by his power of Shrievalty, Replevins, &c. to wrest from Mr. Orpen and the rest of the English of those parts, what was due to them for Salvage; and by his merit of that kind, to win the Owners favour, into some great Presents for his good ser∣vices, whom the Master and Passengers in the mean time visited by their Letters, Setting forth the worthyness of the Sh. as the only persen fit to be trusted in the whole concerns of the Ship and Goods; and how highly he had appeared against Mr. Orpen and the rest of their Ene∣mies. But Mr. Orpen and the English Petitioned to the Government against the proceedings of the Sh. who waited big with expectation of a power to seize, &c. But no such thing appearing, nor finding the success he wisht for, and that his Letter was not so taking as expected, Mr. Myars hastens away to Dublin, well trained to every particular requisite to back the Letter of the 13th, who ar∣rived there about the 5th of March, and on the 6th made his examination ready, and on the 7th was examined before the Honble Sr. Henry Ec∣clin, one of the Barrons of the Exchequer, which Examination scream'd so loudly against the beha∣vior of Mr. Orpen and the English, that the Go∣vernment
conceiving it necessary to take cogni∣zance thereof, sent to the Right Honourable Sir Rich. Pyne, Lord Chief Justice of their Majesties Court of Common Pleas (then upon the Munster Circuit) to inquire into the whole matter, and to report the same, and Colonel Denny and Col. Hasset, two of the Deputy-Governours, and Justices of the peace for the County of Kerry, were required to have Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump ap∣prehended, and thereupon they issued their War∣rant to the H. Sh. to that purpose, who was overjoy∣ed to see the growth of his labour and wit arrive to that perfection, and put the Warrant in exe∣cution after a strange manner; Not by himself, or any of his under-Officers, but employ'd Serjeant Fullerton (brother in law to Capt. Gregory) who with ten Musquetteers came to Mr. Orpens house, and took him prisoner, without letting him know upon what account, other then that their Capt. had commanded them to do it; He askt them, was it by warrant or by order? The Serjeant told him that he had a warrant; But would not be prevailed upon to shew it, or to give the least hint of the purport thereof. But at length he said that it was for Harbouring of Toryes, and gave out to the neighbourhood (inter alia) that 'twas for supplying the Torys with ten quarts of Powder. Notwithstanding that Mr. Orpen seemed un∣concerned at these proceedings; Yet the new English Collony which he brought into that
Country, began to repine at their misfortune, and wisht that they had never come out of England; And finding him thus troubled on account of  Toryes, whom they knew to be one of the greatest suppressors of Malefactors throwout the  Province, and well assured in their consciences, that  he was no way guilty of such a crime, they con∣cluded that the Sh. Ca. Gregory, and Mr. Bl. would soon have them all accused, and prosecu∣ted upon the like account, and thereupon resolved to be gone bag and baggage as fast as they could out of their reach. The Serjeant and party took away Mr. Orp. out of his house in great hurry, not affording him time to put on his cloaths, to the great glory of the high Sh. to see his prisoner carry'd thro' the Towns with ten Musquetteers; a very unpracticable way of executing the warrant of the Civil Magistrates. But Mr. Orpen is now Prisoner at Tralee, and by the 23th of March was Examined, and Bail'd to appear the 26th, being the day that my Lord Chief Justice had appointed for the Tryal; which was bu very short time to provide him∣self and his wittnesses, being at that time of the year accounted four days Journey from thence home to Glannerought, and back to Tralee again; However, he was there on the 26th, with several Witnesses. But his Enemies having informed hemselves who they were, made interest to have hem all accused for Felony; and thereupon pro∣cured  a Warrant from the L. C. J. and had them
apprehended for this pretended Felony, to put them off with Fear and Expence, from giving their Testimonies. Upon the 27th in the morning, a Bill of In∣dictment against Orpen and Crump, was found by the Grand Jury, for taking two Hogsheads of Sugar, and eight Hogsheads of Lime-Juyce, of the proper Goods of Peter Row, out of the Ship Laurel; In the afternoon they were call'd: but for want of Witnesses to prove the Accusative Al∣legations, 'twas put off till next morning; and the Tryal could not yet be brought on, for want-of such Witnesses: Whereupon Mr. Orpen told the Court, That he confess'd to have saved such Goods, and that he would prove the Master's Or∣ders for it; and prayed to have the Tryal go on; not thinking what kind of Preparations were made against him. The Couragious Major Steers, who was principal Engine to inform against him in Dublin, and a chief Cock-Feather in the Jews Cap, was call'd to be Foreman of the Jury; Theo∣philus Morris, who was not of the County, but Agent for the Owners and Merchants, was the next call'd, both which were excepted against by  Mr. Orpen; and some were call'd and answer'd,  but for private Reasons were struck out by the Sh. without any Exception of either side. But a Jury being Empanell'd and Sworn; The Ma∣ster, Samuel Aldwel and Bryan Kelly, were sworn on behalf of the Prosecutors. The Master made (in terms) a long Harrangue of his Course, and
Departure, in his vvhole Sailing, until his Arrival in Kilmare, and how he vvas forced in by distress  of Weather, how his Ship had lost all her Sails, hovv he lost his Sheet-Anchor-Stock, how he forsook her on the 28th of January in the morn∣ing,  after cutting his Cable; hovv he vvent on board her again, and bor'd holes in her to set her fast from beating, and how he carry'd eleven barrels of Indigo ashore when he forsook her out right on the 30th of January. But deny'd that ever he desired Mr. Orpen to save any thing belonging to her, and that he went into her with∣out his consent, and turned out those whom the Master had employ'd, Vizt. O Sulivan More, Capt. Carthy, Mr. Aldwell and Mr. Clarke. Mr. Aldwell swore, That himself went not on board, till after she was brought safe to the Creek, And that Mr. Orpen did not turn  him out, but employ'd him to help to save the goods; That he never pretended any power  from the Master; That Mr. Orpen shewd them a Broad Seal, but 'twas to encourage the men to their Arms against the Rapparees. And that had not Mr. Orpen taken the matter upon him, the Ship and Cargo had been destroy'd, as appears by his Affidavit. Bryen Kelly Swore that he was present when the Master desired Mr Orpen to go on board and save what he could, who thereupon employ'd him and others; But sent him to the Master for  a note under his hand, which the Master gave;
That none of the persons which the Master pre∣tended to have been employ'd by himself, came  unto her until others employ'd by Mr. Orpen had brought her safe to the Creek; as appears by his Affidavit. There were Sworne on the behalf of the Tra∣versers, Joseph Taylor, Charles Mansfield, and Tymothy Murphey; Joseph Taylor Swore, that the Master shew'd a full resolution against saving the Ship: That he exprest several frivolous pre∣tences  against lightening her; That he refused to  accept of a stock for his Sheet Anchor, That she fleeted, but no care was taken by the Master to save her, pro ut his affidavit. Charles Mansfield Swore, That the Master had no mind to save the Ship; And that he was with him the day he left her, being the 30th of January, when he desired Mr. Orpen to go and save what he could, and that Mr. Orpen did Ac∣cordingly employ several persons, who saved her,  and what they could of the Goods; that the  Master came not near her again until the 3d day, and then he ordered another hole to be made in the Ship, but would not be perswaded by Mr. Orpen to stay and bring his men to help to save the Goods, but promised him Salvage. Vide his Affi∣davit. Timothy Murphy swore, That he was present on the 30th of January, when the Master desi∣red  Mr. Orpen to go and save what he could;  that himself was one of the Persons employ'd by
Mr. Orpen to go on board, who went accord∣ingly, and loosed the fore-top-sail, and placed a Man at the Helm, and so brought her safe to the Creek; that the Persons which the Master pre∣tends were employ'd by himself, went not on board until the next morning; and had not Mr. Orpen defended her from the Rabble, they had torn her to pieces; That the Seamen broke open the Hatches, and made havock of the Indigo, and of the best of the Goods. There were 14 Witnesses more on the Tra∣versers behalves; but Bryen Kelly being snubb'd in Court by the high Sh. for giving any Evi∣dence in favour of the Traversers, and the rest of Mr. Orpen's Witnesses being frighted by the Warrant for the pretended Felony, they held their Tongues, for fear that Mr. Bl. whom they suspected had contrived to have them thus falsly accused, should with no less just prosecution pre∣vail to have them Arraigned and Tryed for their Lives; fore-thinking that whoever had gone so far into such a Ford, would leave nothing unat∣tempted to wade quite thorow, to the utter Ru∣ine, if not of their Persons, at least of their Purses. By thus much you may plainly perceive, how far the Presents made by the Master had prevail∣ed: And though the Lord chief Justice gave him such a scope of delivering himself, as might satis∣fie the World that all Gates were open for Stran∣gers to come before his Lordship for Justice; yet
the whole Court took notice how he fetter'd him∣self in his own Discourse: For being ask'd by his Lordship why he refused the Assistance of a great  many English and their boats, and would not suffer them to bring off his Ship? He answered, That 'twas a most dismal stormy night, and so dark, that a man could not see his hand. Whereupon Mr Orpen cry'd out for an Almanack, and proved it to be full Moon, and the Witnesses proved it a  most Glorious calm Night, and that the Ship fleeted every Tyde; and against his alledging that she had five foot water in her when she struck first, 'Twas prov'd, that she was tyght, and that the Water stunk, being the infallible Sign that there was no manner of leak; whereto he reply'd,  (for want of other excuse) That the Sugar made it stink; The like reason was never heard before, for Sugar in divers things is as great a Preserva∣tive as Salt; and where it is so much less than any liquid Body, as that it cannot reach to a Sy∣rup or Conserve, (if it does at least to a relish) it never fails to set it upon the ferment, even al∣tho' it were the very worst of Sugars: These and such-like Absurdities were past by in Court, with∣out any manner of Correction or Carp, he being a Stranger. But the Jury soon returned to the Court with two Verdicts to this Indictment; First, That Crump was not Guilty of any thing, but Orpen was Guilty of the whole Cargo, except the Lyme Juice, though indicted only at the Suit of Peter
Row for two Hogsheads of Sugar and eight of Lyme Juice; Secondly, That he was Guilty of two Hogsheds of Sugar, and no more; Though it doth not appear by the Examination of Peter Row, or any other Examination taken hitherto, that Peter Row ever had any Sugar in that Ship; but Mr. Orpen told the Court that he hop't that one Verdict was Sufficient to one Indictment; whereto the Sh. answered, Another time, Mr. Or∣pen, another time. But the Witnesses for Mr. Or∣pen,  who were brought in for the preen Felony,  were not indicted nor question'd. Though there  wanted not mallice enough to do it; yet Mr. Or∣pen  (by reason that his wittnesses were Snubb'd and Frighted) had no manner of liberty for a fair Tryal, by which means the Court Remain∣ed misinform'd of the whole affair. And observe how eagerly they follow these irregular proceed∣ings. The Master, Captain Gregory, Major Steers, &c. met together soon afterwards in Dublin, and upon their consult, a Writ mark'd ten thousand pounds, was taken out of the Kings Bench against Mr. Orpen, at the Masters Suit; so that he that was lately but principal Evidence, is now made Plaintiff. Consider how naturally the Master Swore at the Tryal to carry on a cause wherein he design'd that himself should be Plaintiff afterwards; Mark that, with the Rest. But least Bail should be given in to the Action, they prepared another Ex∣pedient, (being the last Shift common to turbu∣lent
Spirits) That is, to Accuse a man falsly into some plot or conspiracy against the Government, which they intended should admit of no Bail. Thereby to plague him further with Imprison∣ment and Expence, until he could obtain a Try∣al. And the better to accomplish this barbar∣ous design, they passed by the late Commission o Oyer and Terminer, and framed a new and a mos unnatural Accusation against him, viz. That h had Traiterously contrived the Burning of (his Fa∣ther-in-law's) Mr. Palmer's House; and in orde thereunto they procured a Warrant of Treason, from one of the Judges of the said Kings Bench, against him. And in fine, the Sh. made him Prisone upon the writ and the warrant, and for the further suppression of Justice, and to carry on their design against him with the more facility, they have provided fresh warrants of Felony to hamper an at will to aw all those who they think may serve as witnesses for him, and have promised great rewards to such as will swear on their side. While he is in custody, their Agent is very buisie about taking away all the goods that were saved, and the Sh. stands by to grant Replevins, if in case that any of the goods should be stopt for Salvage. But to make sure work, and to pre∣vent Orpen's bringing Actions against the same, he is hurryd away by the Sh. and their Agent hurrys the goods away as fast, without giving Mr. Orpen any manner of satisfaction for saving
the Ship and goods; Notwithstanding that its plainly proved, that all had been lost had not he and his men taken upon them to save and defend the same as appears under the hands and  aths of those very people whom the Master  pretends were employed by himself, and turned  ut by Mr. Orpen, and by the oaths not only of  he most indifferent or mean people, but like∣vvise  of the most credible Gentlemen of that  Country, against whom we may hear perad∣venture that Warrants of Felony will be issu'd, nd others Tamper'd with, as soon as it's un∣erstood that they can evidence for Mr. Orpen. And that this is no more than what has been lready Attempted, will appear by the following Affidavit. Edward Dunigan of Nedeen in the County of Kerry, Yeoman, came before me this day, and made Oath, That on the 31 of January last, he this De∣onent, being a Servant to the Reverend Mr. Thomas almer; was employd along with others, by his said Ma∣er, to search and pick up whatever things they could find n the Rubbish of the walls of his Masters house, which was urnt and Robb'd the night before by the Toryes, And ith that amongst several pieces of Metal, some Brass, ome of Pewter, &c, there was a Lump about a pound & alf weight, taken up and thrown among the rest; And aith that 'twas reckon'd at Brass. And saith that this De∣onent reacht it to one William Mabury, who put it up in is pocket, And the Shape thereof was about two Inches road, about three inches long, and about three quarters f an inch thick, after the Shape of a disorder'd square, & hicker in some parts then other; And ruffish; And this
Deponent saith that in a very few days after, he this De∣ponent was along with the said William Mabury, as the said Mabury was coming from the burnt Walls, where he the said Mabury had left the said Lump; And saith, that he this Deponent saw the said Lump with him the said Mabury; And saith, that the said Mabury told him this Deponent, that Jacob Myars the Jew, a Passenger of the Ship Laurell, had sent for the said Piece or Lump, the said My∣ars alleadging that he had left a Gold Wedge in the house, when it was set on fire, and believed that the said Lump was the Wedge of Gold; and this Deponent saith, that he saw Mr. Monk the Collector, Mr. Myars, Mr. Orpen, and the said Mabury, walk away privatly into Mr. Ald∣well's Garden at Killowen, and this Deponent believes, the said Mabury did then deliver the said Lump unto the said Mr. Myars. And saith, that presently afterwards the said Myars call'd to this Deponent and askt him (after he had shew'd the said Lump to this Deponent) Was that the same that was taken up by him this Deponent within the burnt walls of Mr. Palmers house, which he had deliver∣ed to Mr. Mabury? This Deponent told the said Mr. Myars, That it was the the same; Mr. Myars askt him again, Was he sure of it? This Deponent answered, that he was sure of it. But, said Mr. Myars again, Can you take your Oath that it is the same? This Deponent Repli'd, he could; And this Deponent doth still say, that he is very well as∣sured that the piece or lump which was shewed him by Mr. Myars was the same which this Deponent had reacht and delivered unto William Mabury at the burnt Walls aforesaid, on the said 31 of January, and that he this De∣ponent knew it by some remarkable Specks which were on the upper side thereof; And this Deponent further saith, that one James Barret came to this Deponent, and tempted this Deponent to Swear, That the Lump which the Depo∣nent Saw with the said Mr. Myars, was not the same which the Deponent had formerly delivered to the said Mabury. The Deponent told him, That 'twas a hard matter for any man to do it: The said Barret told the Deponent, That Cap∣tain
Gregory, Governour of Ross-Castle, and Mr. Bland, the Minister of Killarny, had sent him to this Deponent, and to assure him that if he would but swear that it was not the same Lump, he this Deponent should have Twenty Pounds. But the Deponent told him, That for a Thousand Pounds he could not do it. And the Deponent saith, That one Thomas Hely did likewise tempt the Deponent in the same manner; and saith, that the said Hely told him, that Mr. Bland had sent him to give him Twenty Pounds, if he would but swear that the Lump which the said Mr. Myars had from Mabury, was not the same Lump which the Depo∣nent had formerly delivered unto the said Mabury. Ed. Dunigan. Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Comit, Kerry, 28 die April, 1694. J; Blenerhaffet, This Affidavit is a Sample of the contrivances now on foot concerning a wedge of Gold, which Mr. Myars pretends he threw aside under the bed when the Toryes entred the house; and by the Philosophers Stone revers'd was turned into Brass. But whether he threw it there or not, there was a lump of Metal taken up among the rubbish, and being delivered to M. Myars, he did at several times in the hearing of several Gentlemen, own and declare that it was the same lump or wedge which he had throwne by, and described it by the colour, shape, and size, and by several private marks, and particularly by two specks or bubbles upon the upper surface thereof; Now whether he left any such lump there as he pretends; or
whether he would not, if he thought 'twere Gold, have laid his Challenge to any lump, were it the right one or no; or whether, if it were the right one, he had not a mind to deceive the right owner of it, and so caused a counterfeit to be made after∣wards; or whether he was cheated in Jamaica, is yet a question; But it admitts of this discourse, that it's very manifest that the piece or lump which was delivered by Mr. Mabury to Mr. Myars, carryed the several marks and specks upon the upper-side or upper surface, as the true piece had, which is indeed an infallible assurance (if Mr. Myars description were true) that it is the right piece, be it Gold, Brass, or any other Metal whatever; For though its in the power of any ordinary capacity that can run Metals, to imitate in some sort in the bottom sides or ends of the Counterfeit the marks of the true Piece, yet the specks, or bubbles, or any other mark upon the upper surface, are accidentals in casting, (and in a coat as different from the rest, as the upper coun∣tenance of a Pann-pudding differeth from every part of the Geometricall superficies of the sides and bottom) and not to be imitated by the best of Artists; and for further satisfaction in this point, Enquire at all the Laboratories and Foun∣deries within Humane management, and they will tell you that its as impossible to raise (ad libitum) a single bubble or two (or more properly hony-comb) of exact shape and place upon the upper surface (that side only in such flat castings
being lyable to this kind of windy sputter) as it is in the power of a Physician to lay a well man to bedd and bring a small pox through his Skin in exact numbers where and when he pleases; and what man will take two pails of water of equal Cylinder and Depth, and having set out upon the margins the 32 points with their Aliquots, and by the plounce of a Pebble-stone having raised a bubble accidentally in one of the pails, shall afterwards undertake that in the dropping a thousand pebbles more into the other pail, to raise a single bubble of exact shape point and distance from the Center, with the former? And if he ever accomplisheth it, he may afterwards say that its a thousand times more impossible to raise (ad libitum) in any Counterfeit a hony comb of exact depth, shape, and place, with the copy. Notwithstanding that Ca. Greg. and Mr. Bl. were unsuccessfull in their adventure if they designed to lay out their twenty pounds a piece with Edward Dunigan for this intended subor∣nation, which in some parts of the Kingdom, and among some sort of folks, migh perhaps have pur∣chased a Post-knight for every pound, especially when a poor man is threatned to be hang'd if he refuses to swear what is desired; yet they were cautious of laying out their money with every man, being as supposed only in trust for the Master and Passengers, who perhaps would not allow of the charge, unless they saw the value thereof in good Thundering Oaths, such as
would lay to the ground all whom they had de∣signed for the slaughter, to save their own Cre∣dits; so that not above two or three of the Coun∣try are yet got to Swear, upon this particular; one being a Black-Smith, and a very boon Com∣panion at the Pot and Noggin, and has often join∣ed with the Minister Fervently in that sort, and sometimes it has been observed that a few Pots of Ale shall prevail more with a drunken Fellow, than Tvventy Pounds vvith another. This Fellovv has svvorn, as it's said, That Mr. Mabu∣ry ask'd him, Could he cast a Piece of Brass of some certain size or shape, which would serve his turn? Or to that effect. But this Affidavit being a very slight one, its supposed to be no more than the price of some small Reckoning at the Alehouse. But if he swears thus far it self for nothing, or in Forma Pauperis, what will his Affidavit be, when the Minister shall receive Orders from his Owners to lay out the Tvventy Pounds? Do they play upon the Easiness of his soft Temper? Or vvill they use him as the Blind do a Staff, vvhich they thrust out before them to grope out their vvay among the Sloughs, to save their Feet from the Mire, and their Heads from knocking against the Walls? And though that the many Allegations and Assertions herein mentioned, can be proved by divers good Gentlemen, Yet to avoid too great a volumn at present, take only this Small Ap∣pendix as a relish of what the whole Country ar
Eye wittnesses of, and can manifest to be true, whilest his Enemyes are in the mean time, con∣triving by their dark devices, to take away Mr. Orpen's life; for no less then that, can be lookt upon as Satisfaction, for such soul Crimes where∣of he stands now accused; But their Mountain-belly'd conceptions ended only in an abortive Mouse, for having brought him Seven-Score miles in custody upon this Warrant of Treason into the Court of Kings Bench, Mr. Myars was there present, and made no less violent pro∣secution against him, then Mr. Bl. had done for∣merly against the 14 Wittnesses upon the pre∣tended Felony, who after they were apprehend∣ed and brought in, had not a word to say against them: But Mr. Myars took an occasion to slip away immediately out of Court, and so out of the Kingdom; Leaving the Judges of the Land to consider the horridness of his Judaical Informa∣tions; Tu fixo aculeo fugis: and so the Treason came to nothing, save that Mr. Myars Savour'd [of a False Informer] in the nostrills of common Justice. 'Twas the Boy's ambition to rule the Equi∣feros; and the Jew would be the man should punish the great Malefactor; the Butcher that should bring the mad Bull to the Ring, the Cop∣ped-Crown-Goose to pen up the Fox; But should the due merit of the matter come to his Ears, then his Caravan of pretty Girles would rock this Son of Clymene in his Phaetontical Chariot, and so tumble him down with a vengeance, in the name
of him that sent him, In quo quis pecat in eodem punietur: O the powerful ingenuity of a Jew, when the same is mixt with the Tipto-wit of a Jesuitish Master, Envigoratly boyl'd up to a Scum by a Sh. a Capt. and a Minister. But every one to his Trade; and had Major Steers revised this Juramentum of the Jew with as much Judg∣ment in the Oeconomy of a Navy, as he has in extending of a Tenterhookt Examination, he had questionless, by the Shooing—horn of his pra∣ctice, fitted it on to the design with an exquisite adaptness: But as it is now, 'tis so extravagant∣ly too wide for the pretty designing Foot of the little Ulyssis, that a Gigantick Polyphemus may jump into it with both Feet at once; and it's past Work for a Cobler now. Lest his great Provocations might carry Mr. Orpen into insufficient Arguments, as to his own Vindication. or into less becoming words as to the Authors of his Sufferings, he shew'd his Pape to several of his Friends; one whereof sent him the following Letter. SIR, I Take as a Favour your permitting me the sight  your Papers, which I have read with all the Care  could; and to answer the confidence you have put i my Friendship and Judgment, I have made a few Alterati∣ons in some Words and Phrases; I hope that none of th Army, any more then the London Masters, can take ill you defending your self; especially while you do it so directly against a particular enemy only. But I have also made a Asterisk (*) where I would have you consider whethe
somewhat more caution should not be used in Speaking of Mr. Bl. so indefinitely as you do sometimes, by the Appel∣ations of Parson and Minister, looking like a reflection on his Order, no less then Himself; Its wonderfull to me why these Gentlemen should drive at you with such an impetuous flood of Iniuryes, for the good Services you have done; I hope that what I attempted to do you in this small instance, may be Acceptable, because I am willing to be esteemed, SIR, Your Obliged Friend and Servant, R. T. The Answer. SIR, THis Morning I had the favour of yours; what I have said, is but the flash of my Pan, for (since I conceive my self reciprocally oblig∣ed to draw them to the Life on horseback, that would paint me a Prodigie upon all four) I have writ a more profess'd account of this whole matter which I may publish after my Tryal, to embalm my reputation against my Enemyes putrid Vapours, which may be an Oyntment that none of their Ven∣mous Flyes will dare lick of; With a Series of my owne Services and Sufferings; Another shall e, The Privateers Packet Boat, or the Magne∣ick Influence of an Ensured Ship, upon a Py∣ats Light, &c. very usefull for the times. They that accused my Wittnesses for Felony, and my self for Treason, having plaid Bo-Peep with he Government and the Laws, whereby I live, may oppress me too; Sed nemo me impune Laces∣sit;
If I am hurt by popular Rage; I am not the first; I, that have received Good things, must be content to take my share of the Evill also; If stormes of Injustice for pretended Felonyes and Treasons, or other vexations, should continue, I shall admire at the long suffering of God, and Sing Evigila Domine, quare Dormires, &c. But the Judges who will understand the Justness of my Cause by the true Harmony of my Clamours; will be Just, when many dare not venture to be so. You have perus'd my Narrative, and yet you wonder at my Enemyes impetuousness against me; Don't you plainy perceive that its mostly for these three Reasons? First, Because I have saved what they had re∣solved to destroy, whereby they are exposed for ever. Secondly, They would revengfully deprive me of my Salvage, which after all their Juggles, will be allow'd me by the Law; Since that the Ship and the Salvable part of the Goods are Sav∣ed Thirdly, They would prevent my having any Publique Employment; but they are highly mis∣taken; for I desire none, while any of these are to be my Yoak-fellows. I owne my self highly obliged for your kind Re∣mark (*) But when its understood how nearly I am related to more then a few Ministers; I presume that it will not be easy to win any man to believe, That I mean reflection on their Order; I, that have
suffer'd so greatly for the Protestant Religion, shall (with due submission) for ever have an Honour and regard to the Teachers in that Faith, where∣by I hope, after this Life, to possess a Heavenly Mansion, in a fuller perfection then the Tongue of Man can express: I mean no other, then in par∣ticular Himself to be taken notice of, for too much abusing the Order by his uncooth behaviour in and out of his drink; sometimes taking upon him the mean Office; that is, What would you say, if he hath in person executed the Sherifs Warrants? Since I averr it, that he hath made a Gentleman priso∣ner at the Suit of another: and that some of his Parishoners have slighted the Church, and dare not come to the Holy Communion, for fear of being Clap't upon the Shoulder by the Ghostly Father. So that as for Mr. Bl. and the Jew, or any other Professors, who Labour by such indirect methods to be what they would be, and so manifestly abuse what they should be, I would have it known, that I contemn them, and do not in the least fear the con∣sequences of declaring it; I have no such guilt as may compel me to daub with any such persons, and do call to God and all good men for Judgment. And by London-Master, in the Title-page, Mr. Lyel only is singled at, for his singular Skill in Au∣gur-holes; I have had the good fortune of being acquainted with many of the London-Masters, and understood them to be Gentlemen of good Reason and Sence, and most able Artists, and too ingenious o imagine that ever I should designe the least. De∣rision
or Reflection upon any of them. But why should you think that any of the Army would resent my holding of Cap. Gregorye's Glass before him? I am confident, I stand well with them, or at least with so many as know me; for when I was employed by his Grace the late Duke of Schomberg, and afterwards by the Government to command the Artillary-shipping, I kept the Coast to and fro, as the Army advanced and retired, during the late War, and furnished them duely from Sea; and so I did the Sea-port Garrisons; which I performed from time to time, to the satisfaction of the Government, and the Generall Officers, as by their ample Certificats may appear; I don't Re∣member that I have said, or meant any thing that even malice it self can wrest, to the disrelish of the meanest Just Man in the Kings pay; But if a particular Cap. or so, should come obstreperously in my way, with design to have me beaten out into a Whim-wham for a Horse-Mill; I hope that others of the Army will not judge me rude at the Table, if I hold the Brimmer to his Nose, and make him drink as himself has brew'd. I am sorry I can∣not alter any thing pursuant to your wholsom Counsell; However I heartily acknowledg your kind Caution, and subscribe, SIR, Your truly Affectionate Friend and Servant, R. O. To R. T. Esq;
DUring the whole Transaction hitherto, an Examination of Jacob Myars, the Jew, taken before the Honourable Sr. Henry Ecclin, one of the Barrons of Their Majesties Court of Exchequer in Ireland, upon the 7th of March 1693, was kept private from Mr. Orpen until about the last of May following, that the Copy thereof came to his hands from his friend in Lon∣don. The reason of this great privacy, was, be∣cause the same contained the main grounds of incensing the Government; and Mr. Orpen was not to know the Contents thereof, least he should too early Answer it, and so ruine a Design yet in Embryo, before it had received its birth into the world. Here you have that most abomina∣ble Examination in its distinct Paragraphs, with the several Remarks inherent thereto, respect∣tively, Viz. I. This Examinate saith, That on the 28 of January last past, the Ship Laurel of London, burthen 150 Tunns, Captain Christopher Lyell Commander, from Jamaica, bound for London, was drove into the River of Killmare in the County of Kerry, by distress of weather, and very heafy, that the Ships Crew could hardly perceive any land, onely the tops of the Mountains. Answ. They were four Leagues to the west of the Bull, Cow and Calfe, and took them for the Skellox, the wind at W. Was it distress or design that forced them into Killmare? she came into the River on the 27th, and Anchored at Ross∣more, about midway up the River; But the Ex∣aminate
says nothing of cutting the Cable, and driving from thence, and it was on the 28th a∣bout 7 in the Morning that she drove to Capana∣cossy,  near the uper end of the River; If by chance the Examinant has mislaid his Journall, its not so high a mistake, as when they saw nothing but the tops of the Mountains; whereas its the tops and upper parts of the Mountains that are al∣ways mostly covered in heasy weather, in that part of the Kingdom. Vide all the Historyes of Ireland. II. And in the distress of weather, the Ship lost all her sailes, so that she could not be steer'd any longer, and the Commander of the said Ship, Crew and Passengers, hoist out the long boat and row'd ashore to save their lives; and on 7 a clock the same morning, they all came ashore, and travell'd on the land about two miles from the place where the Ship lay; and afterwards, found the said Ship drove in among the Rocks. Answ. Diametrically Opposite, she had all her  Sayles, and very good Sayles too; Vide Affada∣vits  of Charles Mansfield, John Kelly, &c. There  was no danger of their Lives or Ship, being got  into quiet water, and had they hoodwinkt her, she  had undoubtedly followed after the Long-boat  into Black Water, (right afore the wind) a ve∣ry  good Harbour, which being not for their  purpose, they made her look another way; and  contrary to their hopes, she hapened to come a∣shore  at Capanacossy upon easy ground, at low wa∣ter, where she toucht no Rocks; but drove to and  fro all day, with Flood and Ebb, before their
faces, while they made merry, and beheld her  close by them. What means the Examinant by Where she lay, for she lay no where until she drove to Cappanacossy, two miles from the place  where they all forsook her, where there was wa∣ter for a Ship of three times her burthen. What made them forsake her in such a place? when  she struck not in two miles from it; And being at  low water, she drove on farther, along the strand  for want of dropping an Anchor; Not one word of the Treasure which they brought and carryed  by land to Cappanacossy, and divided among  themselves. III. That about two of Clock in the afternoon the said Captain, Passengers, and all the Crew, returned on board; and the said Captain being informed that one Thomas Palmer, Clerk, and Justice of peace in that County, was near him, he wrote to him, to desire his assistance and advice to save him from the Irish Rabble; on which the said Palmer immediatly came down & sent on Board a Corporal and five Soldiers, to guard them, which was all the assistance he said he could assist them with, and advised them to stay on Board, which they accordingly did, the storm yet continuing. Answ. They returned not on board until the  Capt. had first writ, nor alter Mr. Palmer came,  untill he (understanding that they had their  Treasure ashore with them) told them, that they were in danger of the Toryes; Then indeed,  they hastned into the Ship again, which was a∣bout Sunset; but dropt no Anchor to stop her,  as she drove down again with the Ebb; the Master in his Letter seemed to be in great distress,
and that he had not a Sail left; would any Ma∣ster, if his Ship was not in a willful distress, stand  ashore, and behold her all day driving to and fro,  and pretend he had not a Saile left, when she  had all her Sails? Mr. Palmer did promise more asistance then the Corporal and five Soldiers, and  accordingly sent Men and Boats that evening  (being fine and calm, and not stormy, as the Examinant says) But the Master would not Suf∣fr the Ship to be brought off; Mr. Palmer told  them their Ship was the best Garison in the Coun∣try, and advised them to stick to their Ship, but  they all forsook her again next morning; Except the Master, Gunner, and Carpenter. IV. The next morning (being the 29th of January) they all thought it most convenient, for the saving of their lives and mony, the Ship lying so very dangerously between the Rocks, that some of them should go ashore and carry the mony with them to the said Mr Palmer's house; and that accordingly this Deponent, and the rest of the Passengers, and a few of the Ships Crew, brought the mony ashore, about 12 a clock, to the said Mr. Palmer's house at Needen, and on the account of the Captain and themselves, desired the said Mr. Palmer to shelter the same; which did amount, in pieces of Eight and Wedges of Gold, to the value of 2500 l. or thereabouts, which he accordingly did. Answ. They must needs think it convenient  to go ashore to secure the Mony, when they had  resolved to destroy the Ship; otherwise there  was no danger of either that or their lives, upon easy ground and calm water, and the Ship Fleet∣ing every Tyde; Does the Examinate call it but
a few of the Ships Crew, when they left but two of the Crew on board? And they did not ac∣quaint  Mr. Palmer with the Treasure in the Chests, until after the house was burnt and Robb'd. V. That the said Examinate was ordered by the said Captain to desire the said Palmer to come downe to the Ship, to advise him the best way for saving the Ship and Cargo; who accordingly went down with one Mr Richard Orpen his son-in law; and sent the said Orpen on board to advise with the Captain; whose Advice was that the said Captain should send his Gunns ashore, which he re∣fused to do, saying it would disable him from the com∣mon Enemy, (the French) who not long before, had taken two Ships out of that River. Answ. When Mr. Orpen went on board, he try'd the Pump, and found that the water in the Ship was dirty and stunk, whereupon he told the Mast∣er  his Ship was Tyght, and that he would have her off forthwith; and advised the Master to pre∣pare to put out the heavy Goods from aloft, as her Guns, &c. But the Master could not abide to  hear of putting his Guns ashore, for fear of the  enemy; Mr. Orpen told him that a Battery on the shore, within Pistol Shot of the Ship, would do much better, and small Arms would do much better on board. For the Enemy could not attack him any way, but in their boats. But the Master would not hearken to it; Though his  Guns lay at that time (and so they have ever since) useless, heads-and-points along-Ships. Mr. Orpen askt him about his Anchors, and how he rid? The Master answered, By a small Kedger that  had a Warp to it; That his best Bower was lost;
That his sheet Anchor wanted a stock. Then Mr. Orpen desired him to send his Carpenter a shore,  to make a stock, and Shewed him where there was good Timber within pistol Shot of the Ship, and that he would set some of the Country Car∣penters  to work with them, and fit up a stock in an hours time; but the Master could not abide  to hear of it. While they were thus discoursing;  the Ship Fleeted, which Mr Orpen observed to the Master, but the Master (though 'twas fine Weather) Excus'd the not getting her away that  tyde, saying, that all his men (except the Gun∣ner  and Carpenter) were ashore at Mr. Palmer's. VI. That the said Captain agreed with Mr. Palmer to send him seven or eight Long Boats to unload part of the Cargo, whereby the said Ship might be lightned; and so with the first opportunity of a moderate wind and high water, be got off from the said Rocks. Answ. Mr. Palmer without any agreement,  onely his promise, sent several Boats well mann'd; but the Master would not suffer them to bring his Ship to a safe harbour; but pack't them away again as soon as he understood that they were re∣solved  to save her. And for opportunityes of  Wind and Tyde, there wanted none; if her driv∣ing  up and down with Flood and Ebb the first  day, and her fleeting every Tyde afterwards, in  mild Weather, were Opportunityes; as for Rocks,  she toucht none, until after the Master and all had forsaken her, on the 30th of January, and  then the wind arose hard at S. W. upon which op∣portunity  the Master made three holes in her bot∣tom, and turn'd her a drift.
VII. That the Examinate, with the rest of the passengers, and some of the crew, being in the said Palmers house about 12 a clock of night, the Torys or Rapparees came and set the house on fire upon them, which as they supposed were upwards of sixty in number, and shott in upon them throw the windows and doors, so that they were forced to rise out of their beds and defended themselves about a quarter of an hour, but the fierceness of the fire increased, and they were forced to break open the doors to save their lives, and immediatly the Torys entred the house, brought out the Chest and opened it, and took all the mony that was in it; and stript this Examinate and some of the passen∣gers, of their very Shirts, and beat them extreamly. Answ. Now when the house was set on fire and Robb'd, Mr. Palmer was made to understand that this great Treasure was brought into the house  in the Chests, but never before; which if they had but told him of sooner, he might have sav∣ed all, and prevented his owne ruine, there being a party of 30 Soldiers quarter'd contiguous to his house. VIII. That on the 30th in the morning the Captain came ashore to see what was become of the passengers, and left the Ship with an Anchor and Cable out to keep her from floating, and orderd the Carpenter to bore two or three holes in the Bottom of her, to hinder her from rising where she lay, that she might not float and beat against the Rocks; for by that means the Ship would lye safe, which was accordingly done, the lower Tyre of the Sugar being all wasted by the leakiness of the Ship in her voyage, and the rest of the Sugar lying high with the Indigo and Cotten, Ginger, and Logwood, Fustick, and Roman Vittrioll, could come to no damage by boring of the holes. Answ. The Examinant was sadly put to it to find an excuse for the Masters forsaking the Ship,
To see what was become of the Passengers, as tho he had past a Bill of Lading for them, and for fear he had lost them, he goes ashore to get a receipt for their bodyes, Leaving the whole Ship and Cargo to a Mob, whose mercyes are very crueltyes,  without riding her by any Cable, Warp, or any  thing whatsoever; And to prevent her driving,  he caused the Warp whereby she rid, to be slipt; And to Preserve the Sugars, Indigo, Cotton, Vi∣triol, &c. he order'd three holes to be bor'd tho∣row  her bottom, as she lay in three foot water at low water, and Flows 12 foot more at high wa∣ter; the most modern fashion now extant to pre∣serve a rich Cargo in a Ship that is but ten foot in the hold; and the poor lower Tyre (forsooth) exactly condemned as lost before she came there,  by her leakiness, though the water stunk in her  when she arrived there. But this was done to pre∣vent  her beating against the Rocks whereon she lay, whereas she toucht not a Rock until after the Master had turned her loose; But if he had been well practic'd in Water-Clock-work, he might the better have understood how many inch-and-quar∣ter augur-holes, are requisite in so many hours be¦fore next high water to fill the lower Tyer, if it were empty, and if he knew how much the same would contain; But for want of Judgment in such branches of the Mathematicks, and to avoid the exactness of the triplicit augur-holes, you may perhaps hear, that in his next trick, he will contrive (willfully by mischance) to have
three Guns fired at once thorow her hold, and then he need not doubt her speedy Sinking. IX. That the Captain advised with the Examinate who they should do to save the said Ship and Cargo from the Rabble and Toryes, and thereupon they thought fit to desire O Sulivan More, Captain Carthy, Mr. Aldwell, and Mr. Clark, two English Protestants, to go on board to secure the said Ship and Cargo from the Toryes, O Sulivan and Captain Carthy, of the Irish the head in that Country, and this deponent beleeves that by that means to prevent the meaner sort from useing any violence, That the said four persons went accordingly on board and promised to secure the Ship and Cargo, having an order from the Cap∣tain, and an instrument under his hand to have the one half for the Salvage. Answ. They had it seems pack'd the Cards be∣fore they could well hide the cheat, and without  doubt advised with one another in all secrecy  how to make a shew of innocence, and since the  mony to their greif was all lost, and the Ship to their disgrace safe in a Creek, It remained now how to blind the owners and the world, that they might not see the mony carryed ashore with any other then a harmless intention to save it; and to manifest their industry, he says, that these four persons employ'd, went aboard; But had not Mr. Orpen sent Mr. Kelly to have them named in the instrument for Salvage, as in trust for him the said Orpen, and as his friends, It's presumed that  the Master had never thought of them. But none of the said persons went on board in that manner as the Examinat speaks of, for Capt. Carthy, and  Mr. Aldwell went not aboard until the next morn∣ing
after the Master had deserted her, & until af∣ter  the Ship was (to his shame) brought safe to the Creek by others employ'd under Mr. Orpen; Mr.  Clarke came not near her in ten days after, O Su∣livan  More knew not any thing of the matter,  and never came at all to her, neither was he em∣ployed  or desired by any body whatever to be  concerned, as appears by his and the rest of the  Affidavits. X. That after they went on board, they confest they found all things in good order save 2 barrels of Indigo which the Captain brought ashore, and one hogshead of Indigo, whereof some part was taken out. Answ. What a confession is here exprest by the Examinat, when that the Master in open Court declared upon Oath, and as you see by the Affi∣davits  of several good Gentlemen, that there were eleven (some barrels, some hogsheads) of  Indigo brought from Shipboard along with the  Master when he forsook her, Every thing was in  a monstrous good order when the water was with∣in  a foot and half of the Beam, and the Ship Plun∣dered  by her own men, and that by the Exami∣nats  order. XI. That the same night the said Orpen, and one Mr. Thomas Crump along with him, came on board the Ship, and demanded of the said O Sulivan More, by what authority they came on board, who thereupon shew'd them their order from the Captain; But the said Orpen and Crump forced the said order from them, and seized the said Ship and Cargo, the sad Orpen for the Admiralty, and Crump for the King; the sid Orpen producing a Broad Seal, and turned the men ashore which frightned them away. Answ. The Exminant runs on with a most
chymerical Concatenation of falsityes; For 'twas in the morning that Orpen and Crump went on board; and how was O Sulivan More Demanded  to produce his order, and how was the same taken  from him; who never went near the Ship and  never was employed or desired by any person to  be concerned; and how then was O Sulivan  More turned ashore that never was on board, and  Mr. Clark that came not near her until ten dayes  after, and Mr. Aldwell and Capt. Carthy, who came not till next morning and were then em∣ploy'd by Mr. Orpen to help to save the Goods: But now comes the dead doing Blow, Orpen for the Admiralty, and Crump for the King, Seized the Ship; and Orpen shewed a Broad Seal. O Ter∣rible peice! what necessity for a broad Seal after  his People and Servants had brought her safe to  the Creek by virtue of the power which the Mast∣er  gave him the day before? Neither did Orpen  perform one Ceremony that belongs to a Seisure, yet there was indeed an old broad Seal produced, which was not against any right Claymant, But to encourage the men to their arms, against the  intruding Rabble and Rapparees, as appears by  Mr. Orpen's discourse to the Master when he re∣turned  to her, which was not until 3 days after she  was brought into the Creek by Mr. Orpen's men,  who then desired the Master to stay in his Ship, and bring his men to save the Goods; adding  that one Seaman, was worth five Landmen upon  such Service, but the Master thereupon hastned away all his men out of the Country.
XII. That when they left the Ship they gave charge to the said Orpen and Crump to take care of the goods being in the condition they found them in as aforesaid, and then went to the Captain, and gave him an account of what was done, who the next morning, with several of his men, went a board and demanded the reason of their proceedings. But they turned the Captain and his men ashore, and quite dispossest him, having seized her as afore∣said; The Captain charged them to take care of her, and not to imbezle the Cargo on board, for that they should be accountable for it and their proceedings. But they answerd him that he needed not to concern himself, he neither had nor should have any thing to do with it. Answ. He goes on still with the same thred  of his first spinning; when did O Sulivan More  and Mr. Clark leave the Ship, that were not near  her, and when did Captain Carthy and Mr. Ald∣wel leave her, that went not aboard till after she was safe in the Creek, and were employed all along by Mr. Orpen; and the Master went not to the Ship in the morning, but in the afternoon, being the third day after he had deserted her; neither had he of his men along with him any more then the Gunner, who was one of the prin∣cipal Caballers about boring the holes; and though the Examinate says that they were quite dispossest; Its manifest they were earnestly intrea∣ted,  especially the Master, to stay on board and  bring all his Men to help to work; but he would not be advised, which is directly contrary to what the Examinat swears. Its true he attended so long  as vvhile he filled about half a dozen baggs vvith the best Sugars, and carryed the same with him to his quarters.
XIII. That the next day this deponent saw several hundred horse-loads coming from the said Ship, loaded with part of the Cargo belonging to the said Ship, by the said Orpen and Crumps order; and this Examinat sayth, that he was told by several who bought thereof, that the said Orpen and Crump disposed and sold the said goods to every one that would buy. Answ. Tis very probable that the Examinate savv some horses, but not one hundred, laden vvith the Ships goods; The greatest part vvhere∣of  vvere vvith goods sold and disposed by her  ovvn men, and some vvere laden avvay vvith  Logvvood to the store houses appointed by Mr.  Orpen, and others carryed avvay the Sugar in great quantityes, vvhich the Master gave them vvhile he vvas aboard. But its not in the povver of man to say that Orpen or Crump sold a penny vvorth of the vvhole Cargo, though hundred will prove that the Master, Passengers, and seamen,  made havock thereof to every one that would  buy, and never exceeded Robin-hoods penny  worths. XIV. And the said Crump being Officer for the King, forgave the buyers the duty and discharged them thereof; and also gave them Permitts, and that the said Crump and Orpen sent eight horse-load of the said goods (as this Examinat is inform'd) to Kinsale to Captain John Waller Deputy Governour of Charles-fort. Answ. What paines would not the Examinat undertake to out the Kings officer, or any one that had a hand in saving vvhat they vvould have destroy'd; at length he performs it vvith this most execrable assertion, that he had forgiven the
Kings duty, and gave Permits, the onely taking thing to turne him our, vvho vvas never guilty of any such behaviour, and before the Wars vvas employ'd for 20 Years together, and for his faith∣fullness and integrity, vvas in very great esteem with his Superior Officers; Nor does the Exami∣nat regard how he bespatters any person of what vvorth or quality soever to rid himself and Crevv of that indelible spatter vvhich they vvill never be rid of; The Lt. Governour of Charles-Fort, who is known to be a person of Honour, and ab∣hors any dirty action, must be brought into the story for eight horse-load of Goods sent him; and  is as true, as that O Sulivan More was turned out  of the Ship, which he never Saw. XV. And that the said Orpen sent several boat loads of the said goods up the River to his own House, and other places, by which proceedings of Orpen and Crump, there is not visibly left the value of 500 l.'s worth of goods of all the said Cargo; Though at the time that the said Orpen and Crump took possession thereof, it was, and this Examinat beleeves to be worth between 5 and 6000 l. the whole damages sustained both as to Ship, Mony and Cargo, being about 10000 l. Answ. A farr fetcht aggravation, That Orpen carryed some of the goods to his owne house. Had there been room for them, he had sent all the rest  to the same place, but for want of conveniency,  he sent most part of them to be secured in the houses of the best Gentlemen of that Country. If 500 l.'s worth of the goods were saved, its 500 times more then was expected or hop'd for by the
People belonging to her and in all appearance the Ship, Cargo and mony, was worth some thou∣sands of pounds; but observe, it [was] and then he [believes, &c.] all which might indisputably have been saved had not the Examinat and the rest car∣ry'd the mony ashore, with some sinister design, and had not the Master caused the holes to be bor'd  to destroy the Cargo, and turned the Ship adrift,  that she might beat, and be torn to pieces, by  the Rabble and their own men. XVI. And this Aexaminat saith that the said Orpen and Crump took the very Sails, Riggins, and Furniture that were left of the said Shp, and conveyed them away among the rest of the goods. Answ. How now, Mr. Examinat! you want the main property of the fourbe or fripon. Wit, a good memory: Has the tediousness of your bladder∣blown Examination made you forget in the Rear what you have said in the Van therof, it's not above half an hours reading since you have plainly said in Page 56. that she had lost all her sayls; Had the Saylers, Master, and Examinat, been as sound at heart as the Sayles, all had been well, and the adventerous Owners might have received a Suc∣cessful return. Now Mr. Examinate, you must call aloud to your high Sh. Captain, and Mr. Bl. and try if t'other bagg of Sugar a piece, to each of them can help you? Nay can any pecuniary mulct wipe this Blot out of your Escutchcon, if you have any coat of Arms? What Hocus-Pocus tricks are here? 'Tis and 'tis not. The Master in his Letter
of the 28th of January to Mr. Palmer, and you in the forlorn part of your Examination, agree, that she had not a sail left, yet towards the fagg∣end of the same Examination, Orpen and Crump took away the very sayls, &c. But least the curious Reader might be at a loss to know which is which,  or where to believe you; 'tis most obvious to the  World, that she had a very good suit of sayles  when the Master forsook her, and had not the unlawful lucre of the 2500 l. withdrawn the hearts of the Saylors, the Sayls might have carryed the Ship far enough from Orpen and Crump. XVII. That this Examinat, Passengers, and Ships Crew, being strangers in the Country, the said Orpen and Crump gave out ridiculous reports about them, purposely to frighten them, and make them odious to the Country, the said Orpen confest to this Examinat; and afterwards advised him to run away and leave Ship and all behind them, telling them that if they would stay, he believed they would be all knockt in the Head. Answ. Though they were strangers in the Country, 'twas the Mate and Carpenter that gave out ridiculous reports of them, and discove∣red the whole intrigue of destroying the Ship; 'twas their own Consciences, whose ghastly Spe∣ctrums they could not be rid of, and not Orpen and Crump, that advised them to flee from the place where they had committed so vile a fact; but few abiding upon that ground where themselves have been Guilty of Blood-shedding, or other foul crimes.
XVIII. That within 12 days after the said Orpen and Crump had taken possession of the said Ship, Mr. Charles Monke the Kings Collector for that County, Mr. Edward Herbert the high Sh. Mr. Gibbings the Surveyor, and Capt. Gregory Governour of Rosse-Castle, came with several Soldiers to take the Examinate and the rest belonging to the Ship prisoners, the said Orpen having informed them by Letters that they were Pyrates, or little better. Answ. The Examinate has not yet found his Journal, for 'twas within Seven dayes after the possesion, that Mr. Monk, Mr. Herbert, Capt. Gregory and Mr, Gibbings, came into that Coun∣try; and the Soldiers came to guard them, and not to take the Examinate and company Prison∣ers; Neither were there any such Letters as the Examinate Speaks of. But there wanted not grounds enough to have them taken up; The Carpenter having upon Oath, before the Capt. and high Sh, discovered the whole plot that de∣stroyed the Ship. and Cargo; But they had more Grace then to take them up, having a far greater appetite to take up some Wallets of Indigo and Sugar. XIX. But the said Collector understanding by their Clearings of the Office and Government of Jamaica, which the Captain produced, that they were wronged, gave no Credit to the said Orpen and Crump, but was highly in∣censed against them, and told them that he would ac∣quaint the Government of their villanys, whereupon the said Orpen delivered up the Ship to the said Captain, But stopt the goods that were visible in his posession, alleaging that he ought to have the half Salvage, and quitted the seizure. Answ. The Collector never understood by their
Clearings that they were honest men; for they  produced but very imperfect Bills of loading, particularly there was for the Indigo no other In∣voyce but thirteen barrells, whereas Mr. Orpen made it appear to their faces that there was a great deal more, and other sort of Casks, as Pun∣chions  and Hogsheads of Indigo and other Goods,  which were havockt away by the Examinant and by the rest of the Ships Company, But this Lyell was never Shipt as Master; but the Master dying (as they alleage) after they left Ja∣maica, Mr. Lyell (as he pretends) was desired to take upon him the charge of the Ship; and thus  he became Master, yet all this while the former Masters pocket-book, or any other thing to shew their honesty from Jaimaca, or a true Invoyce from thence was never produced, so that whether any part of the Cargo was transhipt into any o∣ther Ship at Sea, is yet doubtful. And though they appeared as very honest men to the high Sh. Capt. Greg, and Mr. Bl. It was not so until some hand∣som oblations of Sugar, Indigo and Cotton, were first made. But as for delivering up the Ship, &c. the Master would not be perswaded upon any terms to look after her, & had not Mr. Monk cry'd  shame at him, he had not gone to her any more; and though by much ado he was now in a man∣ner  forced to go on board, Yet he left her the same day, and came not to her in five dayes after, nor then, until he was Soundly raild at again by Mr. Monk for his Neglgence; and tho' he remained
in the Country for three weeks afterwards; so careful he was, that he went away and left the Fustick lying among the water and Ballast. XX. The said Examinat further saith, that the said Orpen produced a Letter to him, which he said he recei∣ved from Thomas Farren Esq; Judge of the Admiralty as Cork, and the said Captain Waller, ordering him to seiz the said Ship and Cargo aforesaid. Answ. There was no Letter from Mr. Farren; and Capt. Wallers Letter was dated the 25th of February being 12 dayes after the Examinate left that Country, in which Letter, are these words [Be carefull of every thing belonging to the Ship Laurell, for since the men are saved, the Ship and Goods are still the Owners, for which you are to have Salvage] but the distorted opticks of the Examinant have extorted words of other shapes and hews, from a Letter which he never saw. XXI. And further saith that the said Orpen did con∣fess to this Examinat, that he gave out many false and Scandalous reports upon the said Captain and company, but it was in passion. Answ. This is such another confession as O  Sulivan More's, where the Examinat sayes that he confess'd that he found all things in good Order on board the Ship, who never was on board her. XXII. And this Examinat further saith, that the said Captain Gregory, the Surveyor and the high Sh. of the County of Kerry told him that the said Orpen did offer to bribe them purposely to set them against the Ships company, but they refused to do the same, and this Examinat saith that he hath bribed several on that account, as this Examimat has been enformed.
Answ. Notwithstanding that it's believed that the Sh. and Captain Gregory would say any thing for their votaries, its a question whether the above Paragraph be not the Examinats own, tho' after the Country had laboured greatly under the fre∣quent extortions of the Captain and his Soldiers; And the Sh. sometimes granting his Replevin to these Soldiers against the new English, with no other design then to possess himself of their Goods, and then Superseading his own Replevin when be found that the Soldiers would not bring the goods to himself; The whole Country being in a tumult through these oppressons, which asto∣nisht the English to find the Laws administred in this manner, where they expected such upright∣ness as might be leading to all the rest of the  Country; The Sh. profering 23 Guineas and 2 C. weight of Sugar, to get the Masters Note for Sal∣vage  out of Mr. Orpen's hands, His sending to Mr. Orpen that if he would give him Twenty Guinea's, he would compose all matters to his content with the Master, and alwayes fide∣ing with one or another, and setting the people of the Country & the people of the Ship at variance; It's very manifest that tho' there was no Bribery, there wanted not Inducements of the first Rate. XXIII. And this Examinate further faith that the said Orpen wrote to one Captain Cuningham then Governour of Ross, as he was enformed, to let one Cnoher Boy O Suli∣van, who was then one of the chief of the Toryes, then in custody, to make his escape; who accordingly made his escape and was the head of the Toryes as this Examinat
was enformed that burnt the house and Robb'd the Exami∣nat and company of their Money aforesaid. Answ. Though this paragraph is already ans∣wered, page 27. yet it's not amiss to ask the question, How came Cnoher Boy to escape at Mr. Orpen's instance, when Capt. Cuningham's own  Letter denyes any such thing, and was vext at the escape? If he was a Tory, how did the Capt. dare  let him go? If he was not, it's not a farthing mat∣ter at whose instance he escap'd: If he escap'd at Orpen's instance, how came it that he carryed his  Irons away with him? as also the Centinells Mus∣quet? If he escaped at Orpen's instance, why was he pursued immediately by the Soldiers? If he  was a Tory, why did not he sorthwith after his escape, Joyn the Toryes that were then out up∣on their keeping? But it being discovered that he was a Spie upon them, they sought his life on the one side, and on the other side, he was in∣cessantly  pursued by the Soldiers, and at lenth for∣ced, se defendendo, to set up a company for him∣self, and became the worst of Toryes. But has Capt. Gregory commited one Tory to Goal dure∣ing the whole time of his Governing in that Country? Mr. Orpen has, by the discoveryes of Cnoher Boy, brought into Goal great numbers  of notorious Murderers and Robbers; and for fear he should by the same means, bring in the Rest in the same manner, and so spoil the Soldiers Trade of free Quartering, Cnoher Boy was forced  to become Tory, and Orpen (who was the great∣est
Prosecutor of Malefactors) must now be accused as a friend to such. In the mean time, while these Loyalists are telling a story of Cnoher Boy; they have sufferd great part of that Provence to be over Run with Toryes; and these Soldiers (be∣ing a sort somewhat tamer) do imitate their foot∣stepps, and under pretence of beating for them, (whether for want of Pay, or to oblidge their Capt.) have Robbd the Country almost of what the Toryes lest; And the Commissioners of the Revenue will find but a very sorry return from thence for many years to come, by reason that great numbers of Families have fled from the crueltyes of the lawless Robbers, and as little Lawfull Government of this Captains Soldiers, the latter having plundred at the heels of the former, those parts are in a manner laid waste. But this being a Discourse which hath a vo∣lume of its own; Its high time to return again to the Examinat, who has made such a horrible Nar∣rative in his topsy-turvy Examination of things, that were and were not, in a sort of Legerdemaine and sometimes a Hysteron Proteron Scene, where there was no manner of Horse at all to be found, nor a Cart to set afore him; yet from the 30th of January to the 7th of March (being the day whereon his abominable Examination came into the World,) was a considerable time to frame his Heteroclitical Modell of the whole procee∣dings upon the Ship Laurel, who left her the  29th of January, and was never any nearer to
her afterwards, then 3 long miles distance; Quae∣cunque  novato ritu deficiunt superantve Heterocli∣ta sunto, and after this his Pike-and-dagger-account, (some too long, as some too short for any recon∣cilable medium of Truth) the religious man will judge, that the Jew had but little regard to either Testament, when he fired off this Examination at random with both eyes winkt at once; The tonitruous bellowing whereof, has not onely frigh∣ted away many innocent people from their Hou∣ses, but has also smitten the minds of the Nations with a wrathfull concussion of concern'd displea∣sure against them; and at length it prov'd A Puddle-Fight, or Battle of Squirt; Ne'er a Man kill'd, and no Body hurt. Save that it graz'd upon Mr. Orpen, and so stunn'd him into 5 weeks confinement in Kerry; and from thence tumbled him most Unbailably head∣long for 7 score miles together, in custody, closely begirted with some of the treasonable Chain-Shots; But in open Court, He brake those Withs as a thred of tow when it toucheth the fire. But Mr. Myars went not to Dublin upon that affair, without the advice of the high Sh. who having by his letter of the 13th of February given the Government a partiall account of the proceedings upon the Ship, did not omitt to in∣struct the Examinat in such particulars as were re∣quisite to justifie that Letter.
NOw the Unbyast Inquisitor may from hence make the following Observations, vizt. 1. That the Ship was 4 leagues west of the Bull,  Cow and Calf, and the wind at west, when first they made them, and designed for Kinsale, and might have Saysd thither right afore it, when they stood extravagantly for Killmare; and then what danger could there be when they were got nine leagues up into such a River? 2. That they cut and hackt their yards that  they might break and make a shew of distress. 3. That they forsook their Ship at Black-Water-mouth,  where there was no manner of  danger, and carry'd their mony ashore, and sunk their boat, and trickt the Ships helme that she might not follow them afore the wind into the Harbour. 4. That the Master and the Examinate have  both averr'd that they had not a Sayle left, when  there was a very good suit of sayles on board at the same time. 5. That they resolved to go no more aboard  untill Mr. Palmer told them of the Toryes. 6. That Mr. Palmer told them their Ship  was the best Garison in the Country; and why  then would they carry their mony ashore? the Ship being in no manner of danger. 7. That she drove to and fro before their  faces all that day, with her sayles lower'd a hull,  no anchor dropt; and all means for preservation  despised; at length the Kedg-anchor was
dropt by a stranger, and she fleeted day and night. 3, 12, 29, 14. 8. That the Master denyed that he had any  stock for his sheet Anchor, whereas the stock was then on board. 9. His refusing to have a stock made in an  hours time. 10. That the Examinate positively saith that O  Sulivan More, Mr. Clark, Mr. Aldwel and Capt.  Carthy were turned out of the Ship; Whereas O  Sulivan More never came near her, Mr. Clark  came not in 10 days, Mr. Aldwel & Capt. Carthy  (who came not until next morning) were em∣ploy'd  by Mr. Orpen, to whom all do attribute the right of Salvage. 11. That the whole Cargo (especially the Su∣gars)  was in a manner damnified, before Mr. Or∣pen  went on board, by means of the holes which  the Master made in the Ship. 12. That the Master (when he forsook the  Ship for good and all) desired only 2 Casks of  Indigo to bear his charges out of the Country, and  bid every body take the Rest, a hopeful invita∣tion to the Country to come in and tear her all to pieces. 13. That by Peter Row's Examination before Barron Ecclin, and by all other Examinations hitherto, it never appeared that he had any Sugar at all in that Ship; yet Orpen was found guilty for two hogsheads which Mr. Row had not in the Ship, and not guilty for the Lyme-juice which was in the Ship.
14. That the Master at the Tryal of the indictment, answered upon Oath, that he could not Accept of the assistance of the boats to bring  away his Ship, because 'twas a most dismal stor∣my night. and so dark, that he could not see his hand; whereas it was proved in open Court to be full moon, and a glorious calme night. 15. That the Master declar'd that she was ve∣ry,  leaky and in regard that the water stunk, he  alleg'd that the Sugar made it stink. 16. That there's one thing more observable in Mr. Orpen's Justification, Viz that there were but eight hogsheads of Lyme juice on board, and so many he saved without imbezlement, and might have done the like with the Sugars and all the  rest, had not the Master bored the holes and slipt  the warp, and turn'd her loose to the Mob and her own men. 17. That the Examinate gives a long account  though he never went near her after the 29th of  January 1693, being the day before the Master  forsook her; But, what has leak'd away through  the warpt hulk of his wind-shaken memory (touching the Sayles that were and were not,  Turning the people ashore that never were on  board; That she rid by a Cable, when there was not so much as a Warp out, &c.) is Supple∣mentally repaired in his idaeal Examination of the whole proceedings, which he likewise never saw, and were not. 18. That Cap. Greg.'s men sold the Ships Goods,
and he imprisoned the Buyers till they compound∣ed with him for 6 Guineas Bribe, and then set them at Liberty, yet sent his Brotherinlaw and o∣ther Soldiers to take away the Goods. 19. That it's admirable, that neither the Ex∣aminate nor the Master, hath in all this progress, given an acompt that they fired some great num∣ber of Guns for Pylots, Since they fired none at all during the whole time of their pretended distress. 20. That by their own confession upon Oath,  she came ashore after 7 a Clock in the morning,  and suppose that there were no wittnesses to prove  that she fleeted afterwards, as there are, the  whole Country, that she did all that day to and  fro' with Flood and Ebb; Lay it before all the  Mariners in the world; If a W.S.W. Quarter S. Moon gives high water in the River of Killmare, then, about 8 a Clock in the morning on the 28th of January last, gave low water in the same place; and all those Mariners will say that a Ship striking at low water vvas never before knovvn to stick in a calm pool, but infallibly brought off, unless some leaks had set her dovvn, and so kept her fst as the yde arose. But to clear that point she Remains (in Killmare) Tight to this day, save the holes that the Master caused to be made in her, which was not till three dayes after she struck. 21. That the Master, Passengers and Ships Company have no way to save themselves, but by laying their horrid Crimes upon others; and what will not such Principles alleage, say and Swear?
And what will they not give for wittnesses, rather  then ly in Goal for such a Cargo, and so much mo∣ny? Look back to 43 and 44. 22. That the high Sh. Capt. Greg. and Mr Bl. have been more then ordinary mercenary in the whole proceedings, Et dabit Deus his quoque finem. 23. Why is Mr. Orpen prosecuted, who saved  all that was to be saved, and gave a fair account, and may be most serviceable to the Owners? And why are th th have imbezled above a thousand pounds worth of the goods, tamper'd with to be prose∣cutors and witnesses? Is it not because the greatest Plunderers were the greatest Friends to the design? 24. How easyly all the mony might have been  saved, and Mr. Palmer's ruine prevented, had they but told him in time, that the Treasure was in his house, which he was never made to under∣stand till after all vvas lost. 25. That the Lucre of the 2500 l. has been the Ruine of the Main Cargo; And the whole Practices hereupon have been absolute combina∣tions, &c. as the profering Ed. Dunigan 20 l. for a  false Oath. Look back to 43, The apprehending of Mr. Orpen's vvitnesses for Felony upon no other  account then to frighten them from giving their  testimony &c. The Sh. and the Master offering 23 Guinnyes and 2 hundred weight of Sugar to get the Master's  note for Salvage out of Mr. Orpens hands &c. The Sh. sending to Mr. Orpen for twenty
Guinnyes and he would settle matters with the  Master to Mr. Orpens liking; and because he could not have the 20 Guinnyes, he swore that Mr. Orpen offer'd to bribe him, &c. 26. That all the Ships crew (except two)  kept ashore with the Chests, and never regarded the Ship any more, and by chance saved their  shares of the Treasure, having carry'd away their proportions before the house was set on fire, and  left the Master, the Carpenter and Gunner to,  manage the destruction of the Ship and Cargo, to colour their slipping away with the Treasure. 27. That Mr. Orpen had full power to ma∣nage  the Ship and Goods, and brought her safe  into a Creek to the Masters shame, though she had  much water in her vvhen he forsook her. 28 That the Note vvhich the Master passed  for Salvage, vvas for Mr. Orpens use and behoof,  and for no other end vvhatever. 29 Why did the Master profer 23 Guinnyes and 2 hundred vveight of Sugar as a bribe to get  that Note back out of Mr. Orpens hands? 30 The abstruseness of the Examinats Ex∣cuse, for the Master's forsaking the Ship, [To see what was become of the Passengers] leaving a  rich Cargo in a fine Ship of 10 foot in the hold,  with three Augur-holes, in 15 foot Water, with∣out  Warp or Cable, to a merciless Mob, headed  by her own Men. 32. That they had premeditately resolved to  cast her away, but could not, without some Ar∣tificial
Prejudice first done unto her. 32. That her own Men were the first that  broke open the Hatches, and made havock of the  best of the Goods. 33. And you may remember that it hath been an ancient custom when Ships have been willfully cast away in this manner, to have the Owners or Merchants embroil'd into Law Suits by the Mast∣er, and to have the Country (though never so in∣ocent where such wickedness hath been commit∣ed,) made a Sacrifice to the Loosers, for a warn∣ing to future ages that all others might hereafter flee from a Ship in distress, and shall not dare presume to save her, for fear that the Master had premiditatly resolved to throw her away; As the la∣mentable consequence which happened soon after∣wards to the Joseph of Bristol burthen 260 Tuns, from Mevis with a rich Cargo, being forced into a real distress near Killmare, nothing was more posible then to have saved her with a very little assistance; But the Country who were freshened with the late fate of Killmare-people; That are impeach'd as a pack of Traytors for performing a work of Christianity; made fast their doors, and with their vvhole familyes wives and Children, fled from their houses as from an epidemical plague, and Returned not again till she and her Cargo were utterly lost for want of help. And must the nations suffer shipwrack thus for the Laurells sake? The Mob indeed might basten in to rend out Gods penny (so called) But People of repute who could
help and preserve, Sneakt away from her relief, for fear they should soon be forced to run the Gantelop of prepaired Combinations; Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. 33. That Mr. Orpen has taken and sent to  Goal 92 most bloody Murderers and Robbers,  Cunarum labor est angues Superare mearum. And though Capt. Gregory has not brought in one du∣ring the vvhole time of his Governing in that Country; yet he serves novv as an Informer to impeach him for a Traytor that brought in the 92; But God forbid that such doings should e∣ver incline the mind of any good Subject to that odd saying upon true Service contemn'd, Think not by doing well, a Fame to get; But be a Villain, and thou shalt be great. And hovv necessary the consequences of such im∣peachments can be to the good of the Kingdom, the Government vvill undoubtedly Judge. And when the most Just GOD, that seeth in∣to the bottom of all hearts, shall in his due time think fit that these and such-like Gentlemen (who have disturbed the greatest part of Their Majesties Dominions, with their false and scanda∣lous Insinuations; and the better to pass in Ms∣querade with their horrible Machinations, have laboured to fix their vile clandestine Facts upon the Innocent) should be called to a Court of Ju∣stice, to receive their condign Punishments from
Humane Judicature; Then the Bells of the Na∣tions would counter-ring their Stratagems to the World; and so the Owners, which are indeed the greatest Sufferers, would come to know the grounds of their Misfortune; and the Loyal Sub∣ject would stand right with the Government, and be well look'd upon for his good Services. A POST-SCRIPT To the Owners of the Laurel. Gentlemen, I Heartily condole your bad fortune in that Country where I am concern'd: But yet since it was a design'd Wickedness, it's all one to you upon what ground it happen'd: Tho' it is not so to me, that have suffer'd so much by it in my Reputation. Now whether the Jew, the Master, the high Sh. Captain Greg. or Mr. Bl. was the Atteria Magna that gulpt out the respective motions to every one of the rest in his Station, of Transform∣ing good Service into Felony, Treason, &c. I pre∣sume Mr. Myars can best inform you, and the Rea∣sons thereof. Who were the chief Projectors to ruine a rich ship, thereby to gain an opportunity to carry off the Trea∣sure behind the Curtain? Mr. Lyell may tell you that it was Mr. Myars and himself.
Who brought the Ship (of ten foot in the hold, with their 3 politicall Augur-holes in her bottom, in 15 foot water) into a safe Creek? I take that upon my self, as done by my people. But, Who were they that Dabbled up to the Elbows in dirt for Witnesses? Perhaps these two Gentle∣men will excuse themselves, and say that Capt. Greg. Mr. Bl. and that Braying Engine of Information, the Major, profer'd their service. And as for the barsh account which they have given you of my Behaviour, I conceive it to be some Miscelany Scraps of the Jew's Examination, which he forgot to put into Writing whilest he was in Ireland. Therefore for the General Satisfaction, and very much for yours (for its you indeed that have paid the Piper) I have here stept into the Press, with this short Narative, which I hope you will find sufficiently justified by the fol∣lowing Appendix. Most heartily wishing that you, and all other good Men, may never have Occa∣sion to put confidence in such a Master as Mr. Lyell, or such a Friend as Mr. Myars; I take leave to subscribe, Gentlemen, Your very humble Servant, R. O. FINIS.
ERRATA. In the Book, Page 18. line 7. for good, read Goods; in page 41. line 11. for present, read pretended; page 75. line 29. for the, read these. In the Appendix, Page 22. line 13. for extraordinary, read ordinary; p. 31. l. 1. for 1694, read 1693. p 45. l 3. leave out not. THese being the most material Faults that have escaped the Press, the Printer desires the Reader to amend them, and to excuse the literal Errata; and for others (if any be) to enquire of Mr. Orpen himself for his own Sence concerning them.
AN APPENDIX, Containing the Vouchers that Justify the fore-going NARRATIVE. TImothy Turtane of Toasista in the County of Kerry, Mariner, came before me this day, and made Oath, That on the Twenty-Eighth day of January last, the Ship Laurel of Lon∣don came up the River of Kilmare with her Fore-sail and Main-sail loose in disorder, without any person on board her, and saith that about seven in the Morning she drove up to Cappanacossy upon the Srand; and about the same time the Master came to Cappanacossy with several Bags of Money, carried by his Ships Company, and went all together into the House of Dermot Mac Owen, about a quarter of a mile off the hip; and saith that the Master remained there about eight hours, without seeming to take any notice of the Ship, which drove to and fro in his sight, as the Tyde ebb'd and flow'd; but saith, that the Master sent for a quarter Cask of Rum, and about one hundred pounds of Sugar, wherewith the Master and his Com∣pany, together with some of the Countrey People, made themselves merry ashore, while the Ship was dri∣ving up and down with the Flood and Ebb before their Faces; and saith, that towards the evening the Master ent on Board, as did likewise this Deponent, and the
Ship was still driving to and fro, without any Anchor dropt; whereupon this Deponent ask'd the Master to put out an Anchor; the Master answer'd, That his Cable was not in order; this Deponent told him that he this Deponent would put out the Kedge-Anchor that had a small Warp to it; the Master told him he might let it alone; however this Deponent by the Masters consent at length dropt that Anchor; and saith that the Ma∣ster never caused any other Anchor to be put out, but that the Ship rid out wholly by that small Warp until the Master deserted her, which was the third day after, notwithstanding that there were then on board the Sheet Anchor, and small Bower, with Cables suitable; and saith that he called to the Master, and old him that his Ship was Tight, and that the worst Weather made but very little Seas in that place, and that she was in no manner of danger; and told the Master that if he would permit him, that he and his Boat-men woud save the Ship, and get her off immediately. The Master then bid this Deponent hold his Tongue, and that he would be this Deponents Friend. The Deponent finding that the Master was then resolved to cast her away, came no more near him, but told every Body he met with, that he was so resolved; and saith that the Ma∣ster did accordingly leave her most shamefully at a time when a Man could wade to her side, as there did five men, who having no Boat, waded to her side, and went on Board, presently after the Master and all the Men quitted her; And saith, that two Days before the Ship was so deserted by the Master and Men aforesaid, the Master caused the Men to open the Hatches, and take out several Goods, and made havock thereof to the Countrey People. And saith, that one Ned Dunegon did also profes to save the Ship the first day she came to Cappanacossy, and the Master would not abide to hear of it; but Dunegon being incessant upon the matter, the Master got him well drubb'd, and turn'd ashore. And
saith, that the Mate of a Canary Ship was likewise on Board, when this Deponent discours'd the Master to have his Ship saved; and this Mate likewise told the Master that he the Mate would get her off presently; the Master told the Mate that he should meddle with what concern'd him. And this Deponent verily believes that the Master and some of the Passengers had a Design to carry away the money which was in the Ship, and to cast her away, that it might be pretended that the mo∣ney and all was lost together; and saith that most of that Country believes the same. And saith if the ma∣ster had not caused holes to be bor'd in the bread∣room through the bottom of the ship, he could not well have cast her away in such a place where she lay with∣out some artificial prejudice done first unto her. And saith that but very little of the sugar remain'd undamnified being in a manner all spoil'd by the water which came into the said Ship by means of the holes which were made through the bottom before the master deserted her. Tim. Turtane. Jurat coram me, Trices∣simo Die Martii 1694 Ri. Pyne. CHarles Mansfield of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me, and made Oath, That he went on Board the Ship Laurel, Christo∣pher Lyel Commander, as she was in Distress on the 29th day of January last, in the River of Kilmare, and saith that she then rid only by a small Warp, and the ground whereon she lay was sandy and gravelly, and the Ship was in no great danger, for that the place where she lay was good ground and the greatest winds made but very little Seas; And saith, that that day the Ship fleet∣ed, and this Deponent saith, that he told the Master that she fleeted, and that he this Deponent with several Eng∣lish men, would bring her off forthwith; but the said
Mr. Lyel would not by any means consent thereunto. And further saith, That the Night following was a very fair Moon-shine Night, and this Deponent told the Ma∣ster, that they would stay on Board with him, and get off his Ship, whereupon the Master turn'd this Depo∣nent and the rest out of the Ship; and saith that next day, being the 30th of January aforesaid, about Noon, the Master called to all the People on Board, and bid them save what they could, and carry away in their Boats every man for himself; whereupon Nine Barrels of Indigo were put into two Boats, and the Master then desired this Deponent to save Two Barrels, to bear his Charges out of the Countrey, and all the rest for them∣selves; and presently the Master and all the People then on Board went off, and deserted the Ship; and saith, that as soon as they came ashore, the Master mett with Mr. Richard Orpen and told him he left the Ship in a bad condition and desired Mr. Orpen to get all the hands he could to go on board to Save her, and desired him the said Orpen again to make haste on board with all the hands he could; whereupon the said Orpen sent Se∣veral men on board the Ship, and next morning Mr. Orpen went himself on board. And faith, that when Mr. Orpen went on board, that several of the Rabble and Rapparees were Crouded into the Ship, and that Mr. Orpen commanded his own men to their arms, and ex∣pell'd the Rabble and Rapparees, and proceeded forthwith to discharge the Cargo, and this Deponent saith, that the Master when he deserted the Ship, declared that there was five foot of water in her, And that all the goods would be lost the next Tyde; And saith, that the ma∣ster while this deponent was on board, did always re∣nounce and deny all help whatever to Save the Ship, and often times wisht that she would Split. And saith, that when others would have Saved her, and often of∣fer'd to Save her, that the master told them they should hold their Tongues and he would be their friend;
And further saith, that the Master did not return to the Ship again, until the third day after he had desert∣ed her; and saith, that when the Master came then on board, that Mr. Orpen desired that he and his Ships Company would come and help save what they could, but the Master did not give any manner of Assistance, neither did he set any of his Men about the same; and saith, that the said Orpen told the Master, that there was much water in the hip; they both lookt at the water in the Hold, and the water was then within a foot and half of the Beam; and saith, that the Master did thereupon order that a hole should be made to let out the water, which was accordingly done; and Mr. Orpen desired the Master again to stay on board, and take Account of things, and see the hole stopt again; but the Master neglected every thing; and this Depo∣nent further saith, that when the Master and all the people dserted the Ship on the 30th of January last, that one Serjeant Fullertone then on board, told the Master, that he ths said Serjeant had no mind to desert the Ship, and did often beg the Captain not to desert the Ship, and told him the Master, that while he would stay, he the said Fullertone would not go out of her; but the Master would not be perswaded to keep on board upon any perswasions whatsoever; and saith, That if the said Orpen had not been extraordinary Active in preserving the Ship and Goods, they had in all probability been destroy'd by the Rabble and Rap∣parees; and saith, That the Master did often approve of the said Orpens diligence, and did frequently in this Deponents hearing declare, that Mr. Orpen deserved to have a reasonable Salvage, and that he would write to his Owners for an Order from them, to give the said Orpen what two indifferent persons would award unto him the said Orpen. Charles Mansfeild. Jurat Coram me, 29 Mar. 94 Ri. Pyne.
And the same Deponent came this day before me and made Oath, That at the Tryal of the Indictment against Mr. Orpen on the 28th of March last, at the Commission of Oyer and Terminer; he this Deponent Swore in Court to the same effect of the foregoing Affidavit Sworn before my Lord Chief Justice Pyne, on the 29th March aforesaid. Cha. Mansfeild. Jurat coram me, 30 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset. BRyen Kelly of Gurtamullen, in the County of Kerry, Gent came before me this day and made Oath, That on the 28th of January last, the Ship Laurel of London, Christopher Lyell Master, drove up the River of Killmare close along before the Black-Water, which being a very good Harbour, the Master, some Passengers and the Ships Company came ashore there in their Long-Boat, and brought great quantities of Gold and Silver with them in Bags, and as soon they came ashore they sunk the Boat; and this Deponent verily believes, that some contrivance was used in the Rudder to cause the Ship to stand up the River, otherwise, that she had in all likelihood put into that Harbour right afore the Wind, which was then at S. W. and the said Harbour lying N. E. out of the River, and saith, that the Ship drove up about two Miles from Black-Water to Cappanacossy, upon a fine easie Strand about seven a Clock in the Morning; and in the mean time the Master, Passen∣gers and Ships Company walkt up by land to Dermot Mac Owens House at Cappanacossy almost as soon as the Ship, where they behld the Ship driving to and fro with the Flood and Ebb from Morning till Night, without any Soul on Board her, save that some of the Seamen and one John Kelly went on board her, to
fetch out some good Liquor, as also the Masters best Cloaths and Sword, wherewith they return'd on shore again, without dropping an Anchor, or taking any other care of the Ship; and with the Master and alto∣gether made themselves merry ashore with Rum and Sugar all that day, while the Ship continued driving to and fro before their Faces, and saith, That the Master, Passengers and Ships Company were often de∣sired to go on board their Ship and take care of her; but still they reply'd, God Dam her for a Bitch, they would never put foot into her while they breathed; with many other Expressions to the same effect; and saith, that the Master, Passengers and Company did divide this great store of Gold and Silver among them∣selves, to every one a proportion or share thereof, and particularly the Mate of the Ship drew out a small Handkerchief full of Gold Rings, and distributed the same likewise among them; and saith, That the Ma∣ster Ordered his own share of the Treasure to be put into a Window near himself; saying to the rest of the passengers and company that each had his share given to him, and let every one look to his share; as for him∣self the master, he would not take care of any more than his own share which lay there near him in the Window, And saith that had not Mr. Palmer come in the evening and put them into Some apprehensions of the Toryes, he verily believes, that they would never have Returned to the Ship again; But after Mr. Palmer had alarmed them and told them their Ship was the best Garison in the country, and put them in fear of the Toryes, they repair∣ed on board again about the fall of the night with all their money and Gold; And afterwards were more cauti∣ous and carefull thereof; but saith, That that Night was a very fine calm Night, and that several skilful persons, particularly the Mate of a Canary Man told the Master, that he would bring the Laurel away forthwith into a safe Harbour without any manner of
difficulty; but the Master bid him meddle with what concerned him; and in the like manner he the Master did slight divers other Mariners when they offer'd to save his Ship; and saith, That he this Deponent heard the Master and most of the Ships Company often say, that she ow'd them much Wages, and Swore that she should never owe them any more; that they had divi∣ded the money among them, and would be gone, some to Cork, Kinsale, and other places, to be ready to leave the Kingdom by the frst opportunity; and saith, that when the Master and Company were got on board, that none of them took care to drop an Anchor to stop the Ship from driving up and down, until one Timothy Turtane dropt a small Anchor that had a small warp to it; and saith, that she rid by no other than that small warp all he time after; and saith, that the Pas∣sengers and most of the Company went up next day in the morning by Boat, and carry'd some Chests along with them to Mr. Palmers House, about 3 miles up the River, wherein 'twas believed, that their best Cloaths were; and saith, that the Master, Passengers and Sea∣men were about fifteen in number, and that the Pas∣sengers, Mate and most of the Seamen seemed rather to have a mind to stay about Mr. Palmers House to to look to the Ghests, than any-wise to be con∣cerned any more for the Ship and Cargo; but saith, that towards the evening fix of the Seamen went to Roghty Bridge, about two miles from Mr. Palmers and carried their share of the money thither, and their best Cloths, and that Night being the 29th of January Mr. mer's House was set on Fire and Robb'd by the Teries, and this Deponent desired the mate and men to go to their Ship again; but the mate told this De∣ponent, that the Master, Seamen, Passengers and all were resolved to destroy the Ship and Cargo, and that there was no concealing thereof any longer; and next morning several of the Seamen went on board again,
and gave the master an Account of the Fire and Rob∣bery; whereupon the master and every one on board quited the Ship, and came ashore at Killowen in three Boats, wherein they brought several Barrels of Indigo, and other things belonging to the Ship, where they were met with by Mr. Richard Orpen, this Depo∣nent, and several others; as soon as the master stept ashore, h told Mr. Orpen that all the Goods would be lost that Tyde, and that the Ship would inevitably split in pieces out of hand; and desired the said Orpen to go with what hands he could make, and save what they could; whereupon Mr. Orpen did immediately employ some Souldiers, and several of the Country People to repair forthwith to the Ship to save what they could; and saith, that Mr. Orpen employ'd this Deponent also to go along with the rest, but call'd him back again, and bid him go to the Master first, who was gone to an Ale House hard by, and get from the Master a Note under his hand, of what was fit to be given for Salvage, which this Deponent accordingly did, and got Richard Clerk, Samuel Aldwell, Charles Garthy, Dermot Sulivan and Dermot Sulivan Junior, whom he this Deponent knew to be the Friends and People belonging to Mr. Orpen, to be Named along with him this Deponent in the said Note; wherein the Master promised one half for saving the other; and saith, that he this Deponent did procure the said Note upon no other Account, than to the true use and be∣hoof of the said Orpen; and saith, that he left Mr. Orpen behind, to provide men and boats; and that he this Deponent repaired away towards the Ship that Night, being as soon as he had got the Note Signd by the Master; and when he cam there, he found that the rest of the people employ'd by Mr. Orpen were got on board, and loosed the Fore-top-sail, and had placed a man at the Helm, whereby they brought the Ship safe into a convenient Greek, though she had
beaten somewhat by means of the Masters leaving her loose in a very ill condition, without riding her by any Cable, Warp, or any thing else whatever. After she was brought safe to the Creek, this Deponent went on board and shew'd the Note which he had got from the Master, and told all the people that were on Board, that the business of the Ship and Goods were wholly put into Mr. Orpens Hands by the Master, and told them that Mr. Orpen had desired them to be careful of every thing, and that himself the said Orpen would come immediately with men and boats; and saith, that the said Orpen came accordingly in the Morning be∣times with men and boats, and fitted up Teachles and and Cannhooks, and fell to work to save the Goods; and saith, that Charles Carthy, Dermot Sulivan Jun. and Samuel Adwell came also on board about the time at Mr. Orpen came on board; and saith that Mr. Or∣pen did not force, or expel them from the Ship, but commanded some of his own men to their Arms, and thereby expell'd the Rabble which by that time had crouded in abundance into the Ship, and he the said Orpen did forthwith employ the said Aldwell, Carohy, Sulivan, and this Deponent, to oversee and help put the Goods safe a shore into the most convenient Houses, where the same might be best preserved; and saith, O Sulivan More, and Dermot Sulivan, Senior, were never on board the Ship at all, and that Richard Clerk was not on board her, until ten days after she was Stranded; and saith, that when this Deponent came first on board, that sh had water in her hold, within a foot and half of the Beams of her lower Deck; so that every Cask of Sugar in all, or in part was Dam∣nified; and saith, that the Master came not nigh the Ship, until the third day after she was Stranded; and saith, that the Master, Passengers, and Ships Company never mentioned any thing of their boring the Holes in the Ship, but kept tho same private, until that about
ten days after she was Stranded, 'twas spoken of all over the Country, which was discovered by the Mate, after he was gone out of the Country, and then (and not till then) the Master own'd it, and pretended 'twas to prevent the Ships beating. Bryen Kelly. Jurat coram me, un Justiciar. Com. Kery 28 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhassett. And the Deponent further saith, That in Court at the Tryal of Mr. Orpen on the 28th of March last, at Tralee; that he the Deponent Swore to every thing before mentioned, except what is said about the money, and had declared, that also if he had not been interrupted by the High Sheriff; and thereupon the Deponent was put by and heard no further; this Deponent saith, That the master and the High Sheriss of Kerry did often offer this Deponent three and twenty Guineas, and two hundred weight of Sugar, if he this Deponent would but get the Note back from Mr. Orpen, which the master had given for Salvage. Bryen Kelly. Jurat coram me, 28 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhassett. JOhn Kelly of Grenune, in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day and made Oath, That on the 28th of Jannary last, about 7 a Clock in the morning the Ship Laurell of London, Christo∣pher Lyell Master, drove up to Cappanacossy in the Ri∣ver of Killmare, without any person on Board her upon very good easie ground; and saith, that present∣ly afterwards, the master came up to the House of Dermot Mac Owen of Cappanacossy; and saith, that
the Master and Company brought several bags of mo∣ney with them to that House; and this Deponent dis∣cours'd with the master, and found that the Ship came from Jamaica, and that the master and compa∣ny had quitted the said Ship at Black-Water, about two miles West ward of Cappanacossy, and admired that they did not bring the Ship into Black-Water, being right before the Wind, which was then at S. W. or thereabouts, and being a very good Harbour; and saith, that the master sent for Rum and Sugar in a∣bundance from on board the Ship; and there with he the Master and Company, with some of the Country People, made merry till towards Evening; and saith, that the Master, Mr. Myars, and Peter Row (two Pas∣sengers) enquired very earnestly for Horses and Con∣veniencies to carry themselves and their money out of the Country, to Cork or Kinsale; whereupon this Deponent and others advised the master rather to betake themselves on board with what money they had; whereto the Master Reply'd, That she was good for nothing, and a Wrack, and let the Devil take her, as for himself he would never lay his Leg over her side again while he breathed, and this Deponent saith, that the said Dermot Mac Owen, this Deponent and others, told the Master again and again, that she could be no Wrack in that condition; for that by her fleeting up and down with the Tide and Ebb, it appeared, that the was Tight, and in regard that the worst of Winds made no Seas in that place, she was not in danger; and they still desired him the said Master to betake himself and Company to their Ship again; but the more the Master was advised to go and save his Ship, the more he abhorr'd her and re∣nounced her, and continued saying, that if he could but get Conveniencies to carry himself, Company and Passengers, and their money our of the Country, he did not care if the Devil had the Ship and all that
belonged to her; but at length by the perswasions of this Deponent and others, the Master writ a Letter to one Mr. Thomas Palmer a Justice of the Peace in that Country, wherein he seemed to pretend that his Ship was in distress, and craved Aid, and mentioned in his Letter, that he had not a Sail left; and this Deponent saith, that next day he this Deponent was on board, and saw in the Gun Room 4 or 5 large Sails, which this Deponent believes were New Sails; and this De∣ponent saith, that in the Evening, Mr. Palmer came to the Master at Cappanacossy on the 28th aforesaid; and saith, that Mr. Palmer discours'd the Master, and finding that he had great quantities of Gold and Silver at Dermot mac Owen's House, Mr. Palmer then told the Master that he was in danger of losing his Money, for that the Tories were said to be hard by. Upon which apprehensions of the Tories, the Master with his Com∣pany and Passengers, went on board again that Night, about an hour after Sun set. But this Deponent veri∣ly believes that if the Master had not been afraid of the Tories, that neither the Master, nor any of the Com∣pany or Passengers, had ever returned again to the Ship, for that the Master, Passengers, and Ships Company had divided the Money and Gold amongst themselves, to every one a share, before the Letter was sent to Mr. Palmer, and remembers that the Master bid his Boy to carry his, viz. the Master's share of the Money, and lay it by in the Window; and added in these words, That every one had his share of the money divided and given to him, and let every man secure his own share; And saith, that the mate and men declared that the Ship owed them a years Wages, and swore that she should never owe them any more; that they had divided what Money was in the Ship among them selves, that they would be gone, some to Cork, some to Kinsale, &c. And this Deponent further saith, That while the Master, and the company, and passengers aforesaid,
were at Dermot Mac Owen's house; that they made themselves ready to go away out ot the Country with their Mony, having put on several Shirts a piece, and drest themselves up with their best cloaths; And saith, that the Master had also drest himself to be gone; And saith, that he this Deponent was the person that brought the Master his best cloaths, and a fine Sword, out of the Ship by the Masters orders; And saith, that when the division of the Mony and Gold was made, that the Mate drew out a handkerchief that had about fourscore Gold Rings in it and divided the same likewise, among them, and saith that all the said persons belonging to the said Ship, left a great parcell of their worse cloaths upon the Green, and threw the same away near where the Ship was driving to and fro as aforesaid; And saith, that one Timothy Turtane, and several others, told the Master before and after the Master went on Bard, on the 28th at night, that they would save the Ship, and carry her into a safe Harbour forthwith. But the Master still re∣fused, and would not consent to have her brought out of that place; And saith that the Ship was driving to and fro, and after the Master and the rest of the persons be∣longing to her; were all on Board again, no body took any care to drop an Anchor; And faith that Timothy Tertane desired the Master to drop an Anchor; the Ma∣ster answered, that he had no Cable in order; Turtane told him he would drop a small Anchor which was on board, that had a small Warp to it; the Master told him he might let it alone; but at length the Master con∣senced that it should be dropt; And saith, that she rid by no other than that small Warp, until she was desert∣ed by the Master, which was the third day after she ar∣rived at Cappanacosy; And saith, that before the Ma∣ster deserted the Ship, he often said that she was not worth looking after, and that all her Cargo, except the Indigo, was all damnified and ruined before she came in∣to the River of Killmare. And this Deponent further
saith, that on the 30th of January last, the Master and all the company deserted the Ship; And saith that as soon as he came a shore, he the said Master met with Mr. Richard Orpen, and told him that the Ship was left in an ill condition, and that the Goods were all lost by that time, and that the Ship would split presently; and desired Mr. Orpen to send all the hands he could aboard, to save what he could, and desired the said Or∣pen to go and take care of the same; whereupon the said Orpen sent several persons on Board, who took care of the Ship, and brought her safe to a Creek; and saith, that Richard Clerk, Samuel Aldwel, Bryan Kel∣ly, Charles Carthy, Dermot Sulivan, and Dermot Suli∣van Junior, came not nigh the said Ship, until after the other people employ'd by Mr. Orpen, had brought her safe to the Creek, John Kelly. Jurat coram me, April 7 die, 1694. Fran. Burton. WHereas it hath been alledged that Coll. Daniell O Sulivan More of Dunkeron in the County of Kerry, (being the chief of the Irish Gentry in those parts) was lately employd or desired by Christopher Lyell Master of the Ship Laurell of London to go on board the said Ship as she was in distress at Cappanacossy after the Mast∣er had deserted her on the 30th day of January last, And that the said O Sulivan More was turned out of her by Mr. Richard Orpen. Now for the manifestation of truth, the said O Suli∣van More came before me this day and made Oath, That the said Master, or any other person whatever, did never employ or desire him the said O Sulivan More, to be con∣cerned in or about the said Ship or goods at any time whatever; And saith that he the said O Sulivan More nevar went nigh the said Ship upon any accompt
at all; And that there is no other O Sulivan More but himself in this Kingdom, neither can there be any other while he this Deponent is alive; and that there hath been no other O Sulivan More in the Kingdom for many years past but only he this Deponent. Dan. O Sulivan. Jurat coram me, 28 die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset. CAptain Charles Carthy of Nedeen in Glannerought in the County of Kerry, the chief of the Irish Gentry of that name, upon the River of Killmare, came before me this day, and made Oath, That had not Mr. Richard Orpen gone on board the Ship Laurell of London when she was stranded near Cappanacossy, And taken upon him the management and defence of the said Ship, he verily believes that she and the Cargo had been destroyd and torn in peices by the Rabble and Rapparees, and severall of them wounded by him, who were crouded in and about her in great numbers, and were expell'd and disperst by the said Orpen. And saith, that the said Mr. Orpen did not expell nor turn him this Depo∣nent ashore out of the said Ship, but employd him this Deponent to help save the Goods; and saith, that this de∣ponent was never spoke unto or employ'd by any person belonging to the Ship, to go on board her, neither was he this Deponent ever concerned therein, upon the account of any of them; And saith, that he was named in the Note which the Master gave, wherein he promises one half for Salvage. And this Deponent saith, That he was named therein upon no other account, than as a Friend of the said Mr. Orpen, and employed by him. And this Deponent saith, that he this Deponent did not go on board the said ship after the Master had forsook her on the 30th of January until the 31th in the morning, which was after she was brought safe to the Creek by some
other People employ'd by Mr. Orpen the day before; And saith, that none of the said Persons named in the said Note for Salvage, went on board her, until she was brought safe as aforesaid into the Creek. Charles Mac Carthy. Jurat coram me un Justi∣ciar. Comitat. Kerry, 2 die May, 1694. J. Blenerhasset. RObert Payne of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Yeoman, came before me this day, and made Oath, That he was on board the Ship Laurel, a∣long with several of the English of Glannerought, when she lay at Cappanacossy on the 30th of January last, and saith, that about 12 a Clock that day, the Master, af∣ter he heard that Mr. Palmer's House was Burnt and Robb'd, bgan to curse and rail at the Ship, and often wish'd her in a thousand pieces, and call'd all the People that were on board, and bid them save what they could for themselves; and after he had given them Nine Bar∣rels of Indigo, he desired them to help him out with two Barrels more for himself to bear his Charges out of the Country saying that all would be Lost forthwith, And faith that he told the Master that one of his men had slipt the warp which the ship rid by, who took no man∣ner of notice of it. But the Deponent ball'd out to him again and told him that the ship would drive as soon as the Tyde would rise, whereupon the Master fell to cursing and damning at the Deponent, and bid him get out of the Ship; and then the Master and all the People on board quitted the Ship, without riding her by any manner of Warp, Cable, or any thing else whatever: And saith. that as the Tyde arose, the Ship did accordingly drive along the ground. Robert Payne Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Com. Kerry, 28 April, 1694. J. Blenerhasset.
CHarles Mansfield of Glannerought in the County of of Kerry, Gent. came before me this Day, and made Oath, That when he first went on board the Ship Laurel of London, being upon the 28th of Ja∣nuary last, he found some of the Ship-Yards hack'd and cut in several places about the middle, as the same hung at the Masts squar'd, and verily believes 'twas done at Sea with an intention that the same might break to pieces when the Sails should fill, and thereby to make a shew of distress at Sea; And saith, that when he was aboard, he saw a whole Suit of very good Sails in the said Ship, viz. a Fore-sail, Fore top-sail, Main-sail, Main-top-sail, and Mizen-sail; and saith, that while Mr. Orpen kept the Keys where the Ship-Goods were at Killowen, there was no Waste nor Imbezle∣ment thereof; But after that the Master and the High-Sheriff had taken the same into their care, there were several Imbezlements, and the Stores frequently Robb'd; and saith, That several great quantities of In∣digo and other Goods, were plunder'd and carry'd away out of the Ship Laurel by the Men belonging to her, and that they broke the Hatches in pieces, and forced into her Hold; which they dd by the order of Jacob Myars the Jew, who bid them publickly go take what they could of the Ships Goods for themselves; and this De∣ponent saith, that he was in discourse with two of the Seamen about their Sailing, who averr'd to this Depo∣nent, that they were four Leagues to the Westward of the Bull, Cow and Calf; and the Wind at West, when they first made the Bull, Cow and Calf; and all the Ships Company took them to be the Skellox; and tho' they designed for Kinsale, yet the Master caused to shape a Course for Kilmare. Charles Mansfield. Jurat coram. me uno Justitia. Comit, Kerry, 28 die April, 1694. J. Blenerhasset.
COrnelius Sulivan of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Shipwright, came before me this day, and made Oath. That he was one of the men that were employ'd by Mr. Thomas Palmer to go in the Boats to bring off the Ship Laurel from Cappanacossy on the 29th of January last in the Evening; and saith, that there went two very stout Boats well mann'd that Evening, and several lesser Boats also well mann'd; and when they told the Master that they would bring off his Ship, he rejected them, and bid them be gone out of his Ship; they told him that his Ship fleeted, and that the Night was very still and calm, and had hands enough to tow her from thence, and that they came on purpose to bring her away; The Master fell into a great rage, and bid them be gone, or he would fire at them; whereupon they all went ashore with their Boats; admiring at the Masters diskindness to them, for their kind offers: And saith, that he was aboard the said Ship, when the Master and all the People deserted her on the 30th of January last at Cappanacossy; and saith, that when the Master had intelligence that Mr. Palmer's House was burnt and robb'd, and all the Money lost which was carry'd thither out of the Ship, the Master sell to cursing and damning, and rail'd at his own felf for suffering it to be put ashore before the Ship was in danger, and that there could no better come of bad Designs, and cursed the Ship, and swore he had no Business to carry her for London, and that she should never leave that place, and that such do∣ings could thrive no better; and commanded one of his men to let slip the Warp that she rid by, which was accor∣dingly done, and left her to ride by nothing; and the Master bid every man aboard to save what they could for themselves, for all would be lost before next Tyde, and to save two Casks of Indigo for himself; and commanded every one to be gone sorth out ot the Ship; whereupon the Master and every body left her; and this Deponent told the Master, that surely the Ship would drive and beat, having nothing to ride by; whereunto the Master ask'd
this Deponent, What was it to him this Deponent what be∣came of her, and bid him hold his Tongue; and saith that the Master never caused the Fore-top Mast to be struck, during the whole time of the Ships lying at Cappanacossy, and saith, that the Master; Passengers, and Seamen took no manner of Care of her, but believes in his Conscence that they had one and all a full resolution to cast her away; And this Deponent further saith, that when the Master was going out of the Ship, one Serjeant Fullerton told the Master, that he the Master was a damn'd Rogue for leaving her, and begg'd him to stay and look to the Ship, but the Master would not be advised to stay; though if a Cable had been out, she could not be in any manner of Danger, and the Serjeant bid the Master again to stay, and that if he would stay, he the Serjeant would stay with him; but the Master fell a Cursing of her more and more, and said, let her split and drive to the Devil; and saith, that that day in the Afternoon, the Master came ashore at Killowen, and desired Mr. Richard Orpen to employ people to go on board to save what they could; whereupon Mr. Orpen employ'd several people immediately and sent them on board; and saith, that when they went aboard, they found her wallowing to and fro as the water arose, and drove upon the ground for want of Warp or Cable out; and saith, that they brought her safe to a Creek that Night, though she had much water in her hold; and saith, that the Master came not aboard till the 3d day after he had deserted her, and seeing much water in the hold, he the Master order'd a hole to be cut in her, to let out the water, which was accordingly done; and saith, that the Master Order'd 6 or 7 Hogsheads at a time of damnified Sugar to be hoisted over board to the Country people; saying, 'twas better they should have it, than that it should be lost; and Mr. Orpen desired the Master to stay on board, and bring his men to work to save the goods; but the Master slighted every thing, only
that he took some sugar in Bags and carried the same to his quarters; and saith, that the Seamen of the said Ship came on board among the Rabble, and were the first that broke open the Hatches, and took up a Puncion of In∣digo and several other Goods, and made havock thereof to the Country people, before Mr. Orpen went on board, and this Deponent saw the Seamen receive money for the same. Cor. Sulivan. Jurat coram me, uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April, 1694 J. Blenerhassett. COrnelius Turtane of Foromore, in the County of Kerry, Mariner, came before me this day, and made Oath, That on the 28th of January last, he saw the Ship Laurel driving before Black-Water, with her main-sail and foresail loose, and lower'd a Hull beat∣ing and fluttering upon the Gunnells and Anchor Floks, being about seven a clock in the morning and low water, when she drove up to Cappanacossy upon fine easie ground, and as the Tyde rose, she drove on farther and farther upon the shoal; and saith, that the master, passengers and seamen, stood and beheld her; and saith, that the wind ceased, and as the Tyde fell, she drove back again, and this Deponent went on board along with part of the ships crew, which return'd ashore again, with a Barrel of Rum for the master to make merry withal, and none of them took care to drop an Anchor; and this Deponent saith, that he the Deponent saw then a very good Anchor stock on board, and that the same was the stock for the sheet Anchor; and he this Deponent askt the seamen why they did not put the stock to the Anchor, they answer'd, Let her be Damn'd for a Leaky Bitch, as for their parts they were resolved never to trouble themselves more a∣bout her; whereupon the Deponent sounded the Pump,
and found but fourteen Inches of Water in her, and that it stunk grievously; and saith, that towards Night, the master and all the people belonging to her went on board again by the perswasion of Mr. Thomas Palmer, and carried several bags of money with them; but none took care to drop an Anchor, until one Timothy Turtane, a seaman of the Country got leave to drop the Kedge An∣chor that had a warp to it; and saith, that he this De∣ponent is very well acquaint d with the Western coasts of Ireland; and tht on the 30th of January, the Ship lay in three foot water at low water, the day whereon the master left her; and that it flows twelve foot at the same place at an  ordinary Spring Tyde; and saith, that neither of the top-masts were struck, when she drove to Cappanacossy, but the fore top-yard had the Sail bent to it, and that the fore-top-sail-yard was newly hackt and out about the middle; and that the main top-sail-yard was likewise served so, and broken off in the middle, and hung flattering against the mast before she drove to Cap∣panacossy; and further saith not, &c. Cor. Turtane. Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry 28 Die April, 1694. J. Blenerhasset. TImothy Murphey of Gurtagasse in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day, and made Oath, That on the 30th of January last, Christopher Lyell, with all the people on board the Ship Laurell of London, deserted her at Cappanacossy, and left her as a Wreck; and when the said Mr. Lyell came ashore, being a little after twelve a Clock, he desi∣red Mr. Orpen to employ people to save what they could; whereupon Mr. Orpen employ'd this Deponent and seve∣ral others, who went on board that evening and found no body in the Ship; and saith, that the Winds blew hard at S. W. and that the Ship beat with her broadside ha∣ving
much Water in her hold; that this Deponent did loose the fore-top sail, and placed a Man at the Helm, and with Labour and Pains he and the rest employ'd by Mr. Orpen brought her safe to a convenient Creek; and saith, that he left Mr. Orpen providing of Men and Boats, who came next morning betimes with men and boats to save the goods; and saith that Bryen Kelly, Samuel Ald∣well, Charles Carthy, and Dermot Sulivan, Junior, came not to the said Ship until after she was brought safe to the Creek; and saith, that Dermot Sulivan, Senior, and O Sulivan More came not nigh her at all; and that Ri∣chard Clark came not to the Ship, until ten days after Mr. Lyell had deserted her; and the Deponent further deposeth, that the Rabble of the Country came down, and fell upon her with their Hatchets and Tools to tear her in pieces, and had not Mr. Orpen beaten them off, they had undoubtedly destroy'd her and her Cargo; and saith, that no body did dare resist them, until Mr. Orpen came and did rout them all from the place; and saith, that some of the Seamen belonging to the said Ship came on board the said Ship, and while this Deponent and the rest employ'd by Mr. Orpen were busie about securing the Ship, they the Seamen did forcibly break open the Hatches, and took up a Punchion of Indigo, and broke it open, and made havock of the same, and of the best of the Goods in the Ship, and distributed them to the people of the Country; and the Deponent saith, that he Deposed in Court, at the Tryal of the Indictment against Mr. Orpen, on the 28th of March last, to the same Ef∣fect as he now deposes here. Tim. Murphy. Jurat coram me, un. Justiciar, Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset.
JOseph Taylor of Killowen, in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day, and made Oath, That he was on board the Ship Laurell of London, Christopher Lyell Master, on the 29th of January last, when Mr. Richard Orpen came on board her; and saith, that Mr. Orpen was very ready to assist the Master in eve∣ry respect, to get his Ship out of Cappanacossy; and first Examined the Pump, and finding that the water was fil∣thy and stunk, told the Master that his Ship was yet very Tyght and well enough; and that he the said Orpen would bring her off forthwith; but the Master did not in the least incline thereto; Mr. Orpen told him, that his heavy Goods, as his Guns should be immediately put a∣shore, for that their weight aloft would make her swad∣dle, and would do her more injury than ten times so much below; but the Master Answer'd, That he could not part with the Guns, but must keep them for fear of the French Privateers; but Mr. Orpen told him, that they could not Attack him but in their Long-Boats, and that 'twere bet∣ter to have small-Arm Men, wherewih Mr. Orpen told him he could furnish him; and that a small Battery on shore within Pistol shot of the Ship, would do much be∣yond what he could expect from the Guns, if he kpt them aboard, and discourse to this Effect; but the Master did not like the Discourse, but Answer'd at length, that he would keep the Guns for a shew; and saith, that all her Guns except two lay in disorder, not fit for service, heads and points along ships, and remained so still; and saith, that Mr. Orpen discours'd him about his Anchors, and askt him how he rid; he Answer'd by a small Kedge Anchor, that had a small warp at it, and said he had lost his best bower, and that his Sheet Anchor wanted a stock, Mr. Orpen told him, that there was very good season'd Timber within Pistol shot of the Ship, and desired him to send his Carpenter thither, and told him, that he would send some of the Country Carpenters to help him, and tha he should have a stock in an hours time, but
the master slighted it; and this Deponent saith, that the master pretended that he had not a Sail left, and were forced by distress into this River; but this Deponent saith, that he saw a very good main-sail to the yard, and saw a great parcel of Sails in the Gun Room, which he believes were new Sails, but there being none of the men belonging to the Ship on board all that day, only the Master, Carpenter and Gunner: Nothing was done to∣wards the getting the Ship away from that place, tho' she flected, and the Weather temperate; and this Deponent saith, that while Mr. Orpen was aboard, there was a man of the Country brought before him for some misdemea∣nor against the master, whom Mr. Orpen ordered to be tyed Neck and Heels, but the man slipping over the side into a Boat, Mr. Orpen order'd to have him followed forthwith and brought into the Ship, and there caused him to be tied by both hands to the Gang-way, and with a Ropes end to be beaten with many Stripes, for Exam∣ple, that no others might dare presume to Transgress; and this Deponent further saith, that the Night follow∣ing being a Calm Glorious Night, several of the English came with their Boats to the Ship, and told the Master, that they would bring her off, for she fleeted that Tyde; but the Master instead of accepting of their kind offer, turned them all out of his Ship, and next day after, he heard that the money was lost, he forsook her most shamefully, and said all would be lost that Tyde, and bid every body take what they could for themselves; and desired them to save two Cask of Indigo for him to bear his Charges out of the Country; and this Depo∣nent saith, that the Master and all the people that were on board, came up in three Boats to Killowen, with the Nine Barrels of Indigo and other things which the Master had given those People, and the Two Barrels of Indigo for the Master, to bear his Charges out of the Countrey; all which were put up in this Deponenrs House, for the use of the Master and People aforesaid; And saith, that
about three days after the said Goods were brought to this Deponents House, that James Charters, John Charters, and several others of the Souldiers belonging to Captain Gregory, were very abusive to this Deponent and his Fami∣ly, and put Quarrels upon him, and struck him several Blows, and with their Naked Swords fell upon him, inso∣much that he was forced to make his Escape through a Window to save his Life; having no manner of Weapon about him, wherewith to defend himself; and they then kill'd a Mastiff Dog of the Deponents, which was then in the House; and saith, that about four or five days after∣wards, this Deponents House was robb'd, while those that killed the Dog were guarding the same; and two Barrels of the Indigo were carried away by the Robbers. And this De∣ponent saith, that the Master came not nigh the said Ship again, until the third day after he had deserted her; and that Jacob Myars or Peter Row, came not at all unto the said Ship, after she was deserted by the Master on the 30th of January aforesaid. And further saith not, &c. Jos. Taylor. Jurat coram me, uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April, 1694. J. Blenerhassett. SAmuel Aldwell of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day, and made Oath, That had not Mr. Richard Orpen gone on board the Ship Laurel of London, when she was stranded near Cappana∣cossy, and taken upon him the Management and Defence of the said Ship, he verily believes that the said Ship and Cargo had been destroyed and torn in pieces by the Coun∣trey people; and saith, that the said Richard Orpen did not expel or force him this Deponent out of the said Ship, but employed him to help to save the Goods; and saith, that he this Deponent did not insist upon being employ'd by Mr. Lyell the Master of the Ship; neither did he to the
best of his remembrance, all the while the Goods of the said Ship were unlading, say to the said Mr. Orpen, that the Master had ever desired him this Deponent to go on board to save any thing on the Account or Order of the said Master; and saith, that after the Master had deserted the said Ship on the 30th of January last, he this Deponent did not go on board her until the 31th in the morning af∣ter she was brought safe to the Creek; and further saith not, &c. Sa. Aldwell. Jurat coram me un. Justi∣ciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 die April, 1694. J. Blenerhasset. Comit. Kerry. The Deposition of Daniel Crag and Hugh Wilson, Soldiers in Captain Cuningham's Company, in Col. Michelburn's Regiment. THe Deponents being duly sworn, say upon Oath, That on the 30th day of January last, Captain Lyell, Commander of the Ship Laurel of Lon∣don, deserted the said Ship, and so did likewise the whole Ships Company, and left her as a Wreck in the River of Kilmare; and that immediately after she was so deserted, these Deponents went on board her, along with several ohers, employ'd by Mr. Richard Orpen, to save the said Ship and Cargo; and saith, that when these Deponents and the rest went on board, they found no living creature in the said Ship; and saith, that the said Ship was beating and driving upon the ground, for want of having some of the Fore-sails loosed, whereupon some of the persons em∣ploy'd on board, did loose the Fore-top-sail, and brought her Head about directly before the Wind, and so they
brought her safe to the shore into a convenient Creek, save that she took in abundance of Water by her bul∣ging as aforesaid; and further saith, that one Bryen Kelly came on board to these Deponents, and the rest employ'd to save the said Ship, and brought them a Paper from Mr. Richard Orpen, wherein the said Orpen desired them to be very careful of the Ship, and all things on board her, and that he the said Orpen would be with them on board immediately; and saith, that the said Orpen came forthwith on board, and commanded that no body should come on board, but such as the said Orpen had employed, to work upon the Ship to save her and the Goods; and saith, that the said Orpen procured Boats, and fitted up Teakles and Cannhooks with all speed, and proceeded to discharge the Cargo with expedition; and saith, that the said Orpen was very Active in saving every thing be∣longing to the Ship, and put a careful Man in every Boat to see the Goods safely put into such Houses as the said Orpen had appointed to secure the same; and saith, that be the said Orpen provided Provisions for these De∣ponents, and the rest employed on board; and saith, that as soon as the said Ship came to the shore, great multitudes of the Rabble and Rapparees came down up∣on her, and forcibly entred on board her, and saith, that the said Orpen and his Company got themselves to their Arms, and fired upon the said Rabble and Rapparees, and expell'd them out of the Ship, and forced them to fly from the shore; and saith, that the said Orpen and his Company were often constrain'd to betake themselves to their Arms to keep off the said Rabble and Rapparees; and saith, that they were great part of an whole Night firing against them; and saith, that they have received four Cobbs from the said Orpen in full payment for the hire of these two Deponents upon this Service; and fur∣ther saith, that if Mr. Orpen had not been extraordinary violent against the said Rabble and Rapparees, they would in all probability destroy the whole Ship and Cargo; and
further say, that neither the Master nor Men came to give any assistance while the Ship was thus in distress, but say, that som of the Seamen took away several quanti∣ties of Indigo and other Goods. Dan. Crage. Hugh Wilson. Jurat c ram me, 22 Die Martii, 1693. J. Blenerhassett. WIlliam Sanford of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day and made Oath, That on the 29th of January last, he this Deponent having judgment in Shipping, was employed by the Reverend Mr. Thomas Palmer, to go on board the Laurell, to lighten and bring her away from Cappanacossy to a safe Harbour; and this Deponent with several boats well mann'd, being a calm Moon-shine Night, with the rest of the people belonging to the boats, went on board; and saith, that as soon as the Master under∣stood that they came to bring off his Ship, he the Master immediately turn'd them all ashore in great Wrath, and would not upon any Account permit them to stay to bring off his Ship; and next Morning this Deponent came on board again with several English Men, the Wind then at South East; and the Deponent told the Master, that they would bring off his Ship; but the Master would not be perswaded to consent to it, but often wisht that she would split in a thousand pieces; and saith, that by and by there came one to the Ship with News, that Mr. Pal∣mers House was Burnt and Robb'd; and then the Master seemed less careful of the Ship than before; and saith, that a∣bout 12 a Clock that day, being the 30th of Jan. afore∣said, the Master bid every body to save what they could for themselves; and saith, that after he had delivered to the said people on board 9 Barrels of Indigo, he the Ma∣ster desired them o help out two Casks of Indigo for himself, to bear his Charges out of the Country, and bid
them take all the rest of what they could save to them∣selves. The two Barrels of Indigo being hoisted over the side into the Boat, the Master commanded every one to be gone out of the Ship; saying, that all would be lost that Tyde, and the Ship would split forthwith; where∣upon every body left the Ship and came ashore at Kil∣lowen; and saith, that afterwards this Deponent and the rest of the people belonging to the said boats, were con∣tented with some small part of the 9 Barrels of Indigo, which the Master was pleased to bestow upon them; and this Deponent saith, that he was present at the Tryal of Mr. Orpen on the 28th of March last upon an Indictment concerning the said Ship, where Mr. Orpen made appear, that the Master had more mind to destroy than to save the said Ship; and the Master being askt by my Lord Chief Justice Pyne, why he turn'd the people ashore that came to bring her away to a good Harbour, and why he did not suffer her to be brought off; the Master Answer'd, that 'twas a most dismal Night and so Dark, that a Man could not see his Hand; whereupon Mr. Orpen call'd for an Almanck. and thereby prov'd it to be near full Moon, and by Witnesses that 'twas a Calm glorious Night; and the Master did also give a further. Account, that there was but two Tyers of Sugar in the Ship at first, and that the lower of those Tyers was destroy'd by the Ships Leakiness before she came to Cappanacossy, but Mr. Orpen alleadg∣ing, that when he Tryed the Pump the Water stunk, which denotes a Tyght Ship; The Master replyed, that the Sugar made it stink. William Sanford. Jurat. coram me, un. Justiciar. Comitat. Krry 28 Die April. 1694. J. Blenerhassett.
January the 28th 1694. SIR, THis is ta acquaint you, That by Distress of Weather I was drove into this place, where I am altoge∣ther a Stranger, and want the Assistance of some good Gentleman, desiring the favour of you, not doubting your Assistance to one in a Strange Country, and in such Distress, and not having a Sail left, and our Ship Stran∣ded ashore, is what Serves from your Servant to Com∣mand, Christo. Lyell. From Mr. Sulivan at Cap∣panacossy, pray send by the bearer two or three Lines. To the Reverend Mr. Thomas Palmer. January the 30th 1693. I do hereby Certifie to all whom it may concern, That I have Impowered and Authorised Richard Clark, Samuel Aldwell, Bryen Kelly, Charles Carthy, Der∣mot Sulivan and Dermot Sulivan Junior, to go on Board she Ship Laurell, to possess and make use of all what they can find there, as also the Ship and Rigings there∣unto belonging, and do Promise and Oblige my self to give the said Parties the one Moity of the said Ship and Goods, as Salvage. Given under my hand, Christo. Lyell. Witness, Enoch Hoare. WHereas Christopher Lyell, Master of the Ship Laurell, has lately given us a Paper under his hand to go on board the said Ship, as she was in distresse in the River of Killmare, for which we were to have half of what could be Saved of the said Ship
and Goods on board her, According to the Tenor of the said Paper: We do for the Manifestation of Justice and Truth, hereby aver and declare to have been no other∣wise concern'd therein, then as friends of Mr. Richard Orpen, and Employd by him upon that service, to whom we attribute the true Right of Salvage of what was saved of the said Ship and Goods. Witness our hands this 23d day of February, 1693, Ri, Clark. Dermot Sulivan. Dermot Sulivan. Cha. Mac Carthy. Sa. Aldwel. Bryen O Kelly. By the Right Honourable Sir Richard Pyne, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of their Majesties Court of Common Pleas, and one of their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council of Ireland. WHereas I have received Informations of Fel∣lony against Williaw Sanford, Charles Mans∣field, Teige Donoghue, Daniel Tartaine, Cno∣ghor Turtaint, Charles Arthur, Chomly Parker, Tho. Gill, Junior, Robret Payne, Owen mac Daniel, Peter Hamston, John Bush, Teige Mac Cavn, John Reagh. These are there∣fore in their Majesties name strictly to Charge and Com∣mand you and Every of you, upon sight hereof, to make Diligent search for all and Every of the said persons, and them to apprehend & bring before me, to answer to all such matters and things as on their Majesties behalf shall be ob∣jected against them. And for your sodoing, this shall be your Sufficient Warrant. Given under my hand and Seal this 23d of March 1693 Ri. Pyen. To the High Sherif of the County of Kerry and all High and Petty Constables with∣in the same County.
2d April 1694 J Captain Charles Carthy, do hereby declare and aver' That Edward Herbert High Sheriff of Kerry, did a∣bout the first of March last desire one Mr. Bryen Kelly and my self, to go to Mr. Richard Orpen, and to advise him the said Orpen to give him the said Sheriff Twenty Guinnyes; And that he the said Sheriff would com∣pose all differences between Mr. Orpen and Christopher Lyell, the Master of the Laurell, and would be above threescore Guinnyes in Mr. Orpens way, and would Set∣tle matters with Mr. Lyell to Mr. Orpens content: And the Sherif did further promise Mr. Kelly and my self, That we should have share of what he could get from Mr. Orpen. And that the said Mr. Kelly and my self, did Accordingly speak to Mr. Orpen; whose answer was, That if the Sheriff would do him any Service, he would deal with him like a Gentleman; all which I will Justifie upon Oath, if need be. Cha. mac Carthy. LUke Parker of Glannerought in the County of Kerry, Gnt. came before us this day, and made Oath, that he was one of the English which were employd by Mr. Richard Orpen before the last War, to go along with him in Arms, to hunt Tories in the Counties of Cork and Kerry; And further saith, that he this Depon∣ent, with the rest of the People employd to go along with the said Orpen, took ten most notorious Robbers, who had been at the Robbing of a parcell of French Hugonots, which by stress of Weather were forced into the West of Ireland, and three of those who murder'd and Robbd some English near Killarny, in the County of Kerry, And seve∣rall of Captain Poor's company, who after Poor was hang'd, came down from Waterford County to the Coun∣tyes of Cork and Kerry, And murdered Jeromy Carthye's Brother, And comitted several other murders and Rob∣beryes; And several of the County of Cork Toryes, who had Robbd Mr. Wells, and other Bandon Gentlemen, of
great Sums of Mony, And of Kerry Toryes, who had once Surprized Mr. Orpen, when he had only one Friend a∣long with him; But unsuccessfull, for Mr. Orpen and his friend wounded several of them; And were closely pursu'd by Mr. Orpen, this Deponent, and others, to the taking of three. And great Numbers of other Toryes, Robbers, Murderers and Thieves, amounting in all to the Number of fourscore and two, wounded, taken and brought to the Goals by the said Orpen, and his English friends, in the years 1685. and 1686. to the great terror of Malefactors, and the general quiet of that part of the Kingdom, there being not a Tory left thereabouts, untill the troubles be∣gan; And then the friends of the Tories came in revenge∣fully upon the said Orpen, and Robb'd him of about a thousand head of Black Cattle, And took away from him three Ship load of Iron Mine, and a great stock of Char∣coal, and several quantities of Bar Iron, and Robb'd him of all his Substance, and so they did to this Deponent, and the Rest of the said Orpen's English friends, who had been Serviceable in bringing in the said Toryes; And saith, that Since April 1698, about which time the said Orpen Re∣turned from the War, he hath brought in the Number of ten most bloody Murderers, Toryes. and Robbers, taken in the Countyes of Cork and Kerry, Vouchers for which, are now produceable. Luke Parker Taken and Sworn before us the 29th May 1694 Ed. Denny, J. Blennerhasset. I Dermot Fallvey of Fahagh in the County of Kerry Gent. do hereby aver and declare, that I was call'd a∣bout the eighth man to be upon the Petty Jury em∣pannell'd at Tralee, at the last Comission of Oyer and Ter∣miner, held there on the 26th day of March last, to try Richard Orpen and Thomas Crump, and other Traversers; And that I answer'd to my name, but was not put upon
the said Jury, though not excepted against by any per∣son; yet several others were call'd after me; and put upon the said Jury; But how I came to be left out after I was call'd and answer'd, I know not. All which I am ready to depose, when thereto required, as Witness my hand this first of April, 1694 Der. Falvey WIlliam Sanford of Killowen in the County Kerry Gent. came before me this day, and made Oath, that on the 11th of February last, in the morning, Captain George Gregory, being at Roghty Bridge in Glan∣nerought, in the said County, had intelligence that the Toryes, to the Number of about twenty five, (among whome was Dermot Leary and Cnehor Boy) were making themselves merry at the house of one William Bush, near a mile and half from Roghty Bridge, whereupon the Captain went out after them with a Party of about twen∣ty Soldiers, And severall of the English inhabitants went also along with him, making in all Six and twenty armed men; But the Toryes having an account that a party was coming after them, hastned away towards the Glinns; And the Captain and the twenty Six men Marcht after them with all Speed, and in less then three miles March, being upon the top of a hill, they got sight of the Toryes, And they were but a Mile, or thereabouts, from them; And having discovered them plainly by their Number and their Arms, the Captain would not let his men go any further; and this Deponent, and one Mr. Benjamin Taylor, did much importune the Captain to let the party be Guided by them two; and that they would shew them a by∣way, and bring them upon the Toryes before they could be aware of them; But the Captain refused; And said that he had no mind to follow the Toryes any further. Then they begg'd the Captain to let the party go directly with them, and try to overtake them, which the Captain allow'd of in the manner following, Viz. he call'd to the Corporal
and bid him go with the party to the Toryes who were then before their faces, and if the Toryes should not stay for them, to go no further, but to return back again; whereupon this Deponent, with the other English and the Soldiers, left the Captain upon the hill to behold their Suc∣cess, and went towards the Toryes, who had refresht themselves (while the Captain and the party were con∣sidering) and made all the hast they could away; and this Deponent and the rest of the party soon came to the Ground where the Toryes had been, And found that they had gained half a mile in that miles pursuit; but when they came there, the Corporal, according to the Captains orders would not suffer the Soldiers to pursue any further; And saith, that with much ado. he this Depo∣nent, Mr. Benjamin Taylor, and one Nicholas Rouse, pre∣vailed with three of the Soldiers to keep on with them still after the Toryes; And saith, that these Six men came up near the Toryes in less then a Miles pursuit, and fired se∣veral shots in among them; But saith, that considering that they were but Six to this great Number of Toryes, and that the rest of the Soldiers stay'd behind; they did not think it prudent to pursue them any longer, but returned again to the rest of the Soldiers, where they had left them; And as soon as they came to them, the Cor∣poral beat the three Soldiers for going beyond their or∣ders, And this Deponent saith that he verily believes that if Cap. Gregory had suffer'd his men to go on with this Depo∣nent and the English of the Country, They had in all pro, bability kill'd and taken the greatest part of these Toryes, It being in the Morning in an open Country and a very fine clear day. William Sanford. Jurat coram me, 18 die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset.
HUgh Hutchinson Gent. being duely sworne on the Holy Evangelists of God, and examined, saith, That on or about the eighth day of February last past, he this Examinant was in Glanerough, where one Mr. Richard Orpen of that place, gave notice to one Captain George Gregory and the Soldiers under his Command, (who were then at a Village called Killowen) That the Tories were then in a small Cops, or Wood, about a quarter of a mile distant from the said Village; where∣upon the said Cap. Gregory and his men, in company of the said Orpen did beat up and search the said Cops or Wood, but not finding the Tories, they returned back; this Examinant farther saith, that after the Soldiers a∣forementioned were return'd, the said Orpen continued beating and searching the said Cops, and at length disco∣ver'd the Tories, and by the Noise and Shouting which he made, gave Notice to the aforesaid Soldiers, who return'd to the said Orpen without their Captain, and then the said Orpen brought the Soldiers aforesaid close upon the Tories, but the said Soldiers did not engage them, but return'd again without giving the Tories any farther Trouble. The next day this Deponent askt one Corporal Mills, who Commanded the Soldiers, why they did not fall upon the Tories? The said Mills Replyed, That they had no Order to Fight, and had they lost a man, they should all have been question'd for it; and farther this Deponent saith not. Hu. Hutchinson. Sworn before me Ja. Burrowes Soveraign of Kinsale in the County of Cork, this 18th of June 1694. TEige Donoghue of Glanflesk, Gent. being du∣ly Examined and Sworn upon the Holy Evan∣gelist, saith and Deposeth, that about the 17th day of O tober last, he apprehended one Cnoher Boy (a
Spy) in Glanflesk, and carried him prisoner to the Gar∣rison of Ross, where he the said Boy remained, until the 28th of October aforesaid at Night; he made his escape, and carried away with him his Bolts, and the Cen∣tinels Musquet (as he this Deponent was credibly assu∣red by the Soldiers of Ross) and this Deponent further saith, that on the 2d or 3d day of November following, he went forth with a party of Soldiers, by the Command of Capt. Michael Cunningham (who was vexed at the Escape) to hunt for the said Cnohor Boy; and saith, that he Ranged several Glinns and Mountains, but could not find him; and saith, that he went forth at several times afterwards with the Soldiers, in quest of the said Boy, by Order of the said Captain, who was still very intent to have the said Boy brought in and taken; and saith, that at length the said Boy did set up a Company of Tories for himself, and became a very great Robber; and further saith not, &c. Teige Donoghuc. Jurat coram me, 4 Die Jan. 1694. J. Blenerhasset. Glannerought 20th Octob. 93. Dr. Brother, I am certainly enformed, That one Cnohor Boy, a little pretty black yaung fellow is brought into Rosse, upon Account of Try business by one Teige Donoghue; if so, I conceive it a very great imposture; for this Cnohor Boy is the Man who brought me upon the Tories which set upon you and me, when I took four and had them hang'd, except one that died of his Wounds in Goal in Cork, and this very fellew I have lately employed to set the Tories for us, that I might come upon them with this Party: and so suspitious were the Tories of it, that they took
him and half hang'd him; yet finding him Railing so ve∣hemently against me, they thought it cordial, and set him at Liberty; and I still hop'd for my design, if he has not acquainted any of you wish this matter; it's for fear of having it take Air, for should it be given out, he would certainly be cut in pieces by many hundreds, that are not known to be Tories; this I earnestly desire may be seriously weighed by the Captain, so as Cnohor Boy may be suffer'd to have his Liberty by Escape or other∣wise; unless some good man makes some Hainous thing against him; and now since they have exasperated him, let him come to me, and I will engage he will not spare his Life to pursue the greatest Rogues of them all: You may acquaint the Captain, that I have settled all things between the Country and the Soldiers to the content of both sides: I troubled him laely with a Letter about O Sulivan, but I doubt he received it not. Pray desire Tom Dunn to come as soon as he can with Leather and Nails to cover the 2 Trunks he saw, Your Affectionate Brother. Ri. Orpen. To Mr. Thomas Crump at Killarny, Ross, October the 29th 93. SIR, I Have perused your Brothers to you, and do not in the least doubt but what he Writes may be much the Truth, but no doubt this fellow is a very great Rogue, and has been guilty of many Villanies; I am credibly informed, That he is one of the very greatest Rogues that was in the whole Mountains; and let O Donohue be the greatest Rogue in Christendom, it was good Service done by him to take this fellow; and I cannot nor will not on slight Terms part with him; as for that Letter Mr. Orpen says, he sent me when O Sulivan More came over; I do not re∣member
I received any such, which with my hearty Service is the needful, SIR, Your Humble Servant. Micha. Cuningham. To Mr. Tho. Crump at Killarny. Comit. Kerry. John Sughrue Aged 30 Years, or thereabouts, being Sworn on the Holy Evangelist before me, saith as followeth. THis Deponent saith, That on the 19th of Febr. 1693. he this Deponent was Apprehended and made Prisoner, by one Serjeant Thomas Fullerton of Captain Gregory's Company at Killowen in the said County, by the Order of the said Captain in his Letter to the said Serjeant, and Corporal John Mills pretending this Deponent had bought Goods belonging to a Ship then in Glanerough; that on the 20th of February afore∣said, this Deponent in his Confinement under a Guard of six Armed Men, was carried over the Mangarton to Killarney, and from thence to Ross; and that the said Capt. Ordered, That none of the Soldiers that could Ac∣cuse this Deponent, should be brought with him; this Deponent being in his Confinement at Ross, was brought before the said Cap. and Examined on the said matter; and required to give back the Goods bought from the Soldiers, to which this Deponent Answered, that he had none, nor never bought any from them; upon which the Capt. Swore he would transmit him this Deponent Prisoner, by the way of Kinsale and Cork to Dublin, which struck a great Terror in this Deponent, tho' Inno¦cent; on the 21th of February aforesaid, the Soldiers were
sent for, in regard this Deponent would not Confess, and Examined on the said matter, who upon their Examina∣tion declared upon Oath, That this Deponent never Tra∣ded or Dealt with them for the Value of a Farthing; that after the said Declaration the Captain sent for this Depo∣nent, and confessed to him he was clear from the mat∣ter of buying Goods, but said he would not part with him, that he had other matters which in a long time af∣terwards, he said it was for Harbouring of Tories, to which matter this Deponent offer'd to appear, and begg'd to be brought before a Magistrate to give Bail, or to be committed to the County Goal, all which was refused him; but still kept in hard Confinement, until this De∣ponent made a Composition in favour of himself, and one Walter Nagle then in Confinement, to pay Six Guineas to the said Captain for this Deponent's and Mr. Nagles Liberty; and the Captain to be assistant to Na∣gle in concealing the Goods bought as aforesaid, and to put back all the Informations that thereupon was made; upon which Composition this Deponent and Mr. Nagle were Enlarged, and a Letter given Nagle to the Sar∣jeant and Corporal, to forbear searching; and if any Goods of Nagles were discovered, to lay them aside for him, and that they had compounded one with another, That notwithstanding they took a Barrel of Indigo, two Large Bags of Cotton, and some Sugar from Mr. Nagle, as also took a Large Barrel of Indigo that Mr. Richard Orpen Lodged with this Deponent to keep, which was in the Collectors Account, in the Master of the Ships Ac∣count, and in all other Officers Accounts. That in their way to the place where the said Goods lay, they pressed Men and Horses, and Bags, some of which they never since returned, and comitted several other Insolen∣ces in Mr. Mahony's House, and further saith not. J. Sughru Jurat coram me, 2 Die May, 1694 J. Blenerhasset.
ON the 28th of January 1693. in the Morning a∣bout 7 or 8 a Clock, the Ship Laurell of London drove up to Cappanacossy, and came on shore there about 2 or 3 Miles from my House, and about Noon, the Master writ to me that she was in distress, and had not a Sail left, and desired my Aid, whereupon I went to him and found him and all his Men ashore, at the House of Mr. Dermot Sulivan of Cappanacossy, making themselves and some of the Country people merry with Rum and Sugar and that the Master, Passengers and Company had forsaken the Ship at Black-Water-Mouth, about two Miles below Cappanacossy, without leaving any Soul on board her; when I saw how the Ship was, I ad∣vised the Master, Passengers, &c. to betake themselves to their Ship again, she being past danger, and promised him all the Assistance I could; but the Master seem'd to have no mind to go on board her any more, or to have any regard to her Preservation, until I understanding that they had some Bags of Money and Treasure with them ashore, I told them that the Country abounded with Tories and ill people, and desired them to carry their Money on Board, and stick to their Ship, and with∣al told them, that she was the best Garison in the Coun∣try; upon which Apprehensions of the Tories, they hastned on board again with their Money; I took leave of them that Evening, and sent them about half a Do∣zen Soldiers to Guard them, and sent likewise several Boats and Men to bring her away to a good Harbour; but some of them returned again, and told me, that the Master and Men on board minded norhing but drinking, and none of them took any manner of care for the Ship; next Morning about 10 a Clock, the Mate, one Mr. Myars a Jew, Peter Row, and one Mr. Spyers, with several of the Ships company came ashore to my House, and brought with them 2 or 3 Sea Chests, wherein I concluded were some Changes of Cloaths to refresh themselves ashore; not in the least thinking they had
brought their Money in these Chests, having before told them, that their Ship was the best Garison in the Coun∣try; and after they had Eaten and Drank, I rid down to the Ship along with Mr. Myars, and took along with me my Son-in-Law Mr. Orpen, who had judgment in Shipping, to advise with the Master to get the Ship into a Harbour, who went on Board with the said Myars, leaving me on shore, where he stay'd about 2 hours, and returned back again in the Evening with Mr. Myars, and among other Discourses at my House, the said Peter Row gave me a Note of some Goods which he had on board, and desired me to employ some persons to save them; whereupon I employ'd my Son Orpen to do it; That Night being the 29th about midnight, the Tories came and set my House on fire in several places, and fired se∣veral Shots in at the Doors and Windows, and we fired at them again; but the fierceness of the Fire increased, and the Key being lost, we were forced to break open the Door, and submit our selves to the Tories, who forth∣with entred the House, and Mr. Myars shew'd them the Chest which had the Treasure, and they dragg'd it out and brake it open, and carried away what they found in it; all this while Mr. Myars, or any other Body, never told me that they had brought this Treasure to my House, until after my House was Burnt and Robb'd; the next day being the 80th, I was told the Master quit∣ted the Ship, and left her to the Country; all this in Verbo Sacerdotis, I aver to be true, as Witness my Hand June the 8th 1694. Tho. Palmer.
The Collectors Letter. Tralee the 20th of February, 1694. SIR, I Had sooner Answer'd yours of the 10th, but that I was then from home, at one of the Remotest Places in my District, occasioned by the coming of the London-Guinycoast Frigot homeward bound at Ventry near Dingle, which having very narrowly escaped the Seas, had well nigh Perished in the Harbour; for com∣ing into the Bay, she ran up towards Castlemain, not knowing the Land; but our Boat going out timely, gave her a Waft and brought her into safe Anchoring: I suppose you have sufficiently heard of the Privateers coming into the River of Killmare, and taking the Ships thence; they had likewise Intelligence and Design to carry off this; but my going, and sending Express after Express, partly prevented it; the Captain of her, tho' his Chance such, is a Rugged, Resolute, Stout Fellow; that will stand to and defend her to the last, so that I reckon her in no great Danger, unless he be very much over marcht, while the few Soldiers and the En∣glish that are there, and he cotten so well together. During my being there, I received by 2 Expresses No∣tice of another homeward bound Ship the Laurel, also of London, stranded within the River of Kilmare, which being very unusual, hastned me from the utmost corner over the Mountain to her Relief; but alas, I came too lat to prevent the mischiefs done her, or to save any considerable part of her Cargo, tho' I have done all that was possible in me to serve the Merchants by preserving what could be found by the strictest searches
and Examination; yet it may perhaps be difficul for me to Escape free from Censure and Calumny, that came not to the place not till eight days after the Rumage, or Scramble, and none hath yet tender'd himself to be examin'd only the Ship Carpenter, whose Examination I here en∣closed send; and if you will accept of the rest upon com∣mon fame, as well touching your friend Mr. Orpen, as the Captain and Crew's behavior, It appears to me that the latter, upon what reason, or without they had a mind to forsake the Ship, and consequently to ruin Her and the Cargo, for they caryed their money ashore on the 28 past, and left her to take her chance, when she came ashore presently near the upper end of the River, but fleeted now and then, when they went aboard again, having made several holes in her bottom they forsook her out right, and then Mr. Orpen went to save what he could, but too late; who I understand used all means possible to preserve her and the goods. The latter were in a manner destroy'd before he went aboard by the Rable, and water, which was got into her, especially the Sugar. When I came there, I found he had taken much pains and care therein and appeared ready to give me an account of what was saved, and how he had laid the goods with the best safety he could into the most convenient houses for that purpose; and the Master and Passengers promised he should have a reasonable salvage; as for the money which they were Robbed of, 'twas car∣ryed ashore privatly by themselves; So that he had no hand in saving of that; if he had, it had been better for them, for he would undoubtedly have managed with more prudence. But that Reverend worthy man Mr. Palmer, is ruined by it; having his house (where the money lay) and all his Substance burnt by the Toryes. Next morning after I came there, I got the Master to go aboard, who I must say, in the condition the Ship was then in, had but little regard of the whole; for he stayed but some few hours on board; so that I had somwhat to do to perswade him to go to her again till about the 12th I did again importune him
to look after her, the Crew was gone before I came there. He shewed me an imperfect Envoyce but not the former Masters Pocket Book; for you must conceive that this man was not Shipt as Master, but the Master dying at Sea, he appointed this Man to conduct the Ship home. Pray let me hear from you as oft as any thing occurs, and Oblige SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant Cha. Monk. For Mr. Thomas Dance, Dublin. FINIS.
