P2241 551.a.32[128] 551.a.32[139] 551.a.32[141] R232616 99888987 196132
PILULAE ANTISCORBUTICAE. PIlls against that Epidemick Disease the Scurvy, with all its Symp∣toms, (which for the Instruction of the ignorant, are) the putrefaction of the Gums, rotten, black, and loose Teeth: stinking breath, laziness and dulness of the Limbs, and the whole body; giddiness in the head; sudden Flushings, heat and redness in the Face; some have risings on their body as if stung with Bugs; spots in the Legs and Thighs; of a red, black, purple, or blew colour; others have an itching in some or all parts of the body; a shortness of breath, red Gravel in the Urine like Brick-dust; strange pains and Aches in several parts of the Bo∣dy; Fluxes of the Belly, Dysenteries, swellings and breakings out in the body, which these pills certainly cure, by purging away those Tar∣tareous humours which occasion this Disease. They likewise open the Obstructions of the Womb, Liver, Spleen and Stomach, and there∣fore an admirable remedy for such as have the Green-sickness; and such as want their Monthly Terms. The black or yellow Jaundice, Hypocondriack Vapours, and all Diseases of the Head, viz. Vertigo, or Swimming of the Head, Palsie, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy; they are a Sovereign remedy for the Dropsie. They cleanse the Sto∣mach, Meseraick Veins, and passages of the Chyle and Nutriment. In fine, consult the paper of Directions for the use of these Medicines to those Diseases for which they are recommended; and I dare be bold to assure you of a good success; for I recommend them for nothing but what my daily experience approves. Those that drink the Spaw, Tunbridge, Epsom, Barnet, Astrop, Dulledge, Isling∣ton, or any other Medicinal Waters, cannot use a better Remedy, and in all cases where purging is required. The Box containing 18 Pills, 1 s. 6 d. SOLAMEN MISERIS. WHich causes Expectoration, and is an admirable Medicine for the Asthma, Ptisick, Catarrhs, and Rheums; In a short time it takes off the tickling Defluxion that falls from the Head upon the Lungs; it opens and takes away all Stoppages and Pains of the Stomach, Lungs, and Chest, therefore an extraor∣dinary Remedy for the Consumptive. It cures a new Cough, or Cold, though never so violent, in three or four times taking, and old ones it removes in a small time. It takes off all looseness, and Vo∣mitings, and Surfeits, especially after hard drinking. The Measels and Small-Pox it brings out to admiration. It is an infallible Re∣medy for all windy Stomachs, and for all windy Distempers, as
, Griping in the Guts in Men, Women, and Children; it is admirably comfortable to the Sciatical, and those that have Aches or pains in their Limbs whatsoever. B for the Tooth-ach, I be∣lieve there is not the like Remedy; for in an hour or less it gives ease, whether the pain be in a sound or roten Tooth, in one or all the Teeth, not by stopping the Tooth, but by taking it inwardly it dis∣pels the Rheum that causes the pain, as yet it never fail'd me. The first dose takes off the violent pain, the next perfectly cures it. Price 1 s. 6 d. the Pot. FEBRIFƲGA: OR an excellent Remedy for all sorts of Fevers and Agues, that in two or three Fits infallibly cures the most violent Tertian or Quartan. Price 5 s. EXUKIANO: Or the only Vene∣real Antidote without MERCURY. BEing an easie course of Physick, of that admirable Vertue, as to expel all Venereal Malignities gotten by foul Men or Women: Never failing to remove all sharpness, or heat of Urine, in twice or thrice taking. It cures all Ulcers and Fistula's in the Throat, Womb, or any part of the body; if timely used, it flings off the Venom, and prevents a Pox. It never fails to cure the Whites and Weakness of the back. And whereas all pretenders in this manner offer you a single Medicine, as a Box of Pills, or the like, which they sell you for a small matter, to invite you to buy, tho o no purpose: I desire all people to ask at their leisure, the most able and learned Practitio∣ners, whether the Physick wherewith this Distemper must be cured, can be afrded for twice those rates they set upon them? And whereas others use Mercury in all their Physical Courses, which proves of dreadful consequence to their Patients; lest it should be thought, that while I rail against it, I se it my sel I here affirm, That if any Artist can make it appear I have the least of it in my Composition, I will be bound to give him 500 l. The whole Packet or parcel contains two Doses of purging Powders, a Glass of Elixir, and a pot of Balsom, price 3 s. Many have been cured with one Packet, but two never fail. All these Remedies hold good several years, therefore convenient for such as go to Sea o Foreign Plantations. They that live at a distance, may have them sent by the Penny-Post, sending Directions. They are to be sold at the Whitehall Coffee-house in Buckingham-Court near Whitehall. Mrs. More's a Salter next dote to the White-Hart Inn in Southwark. Mr. James Neale's near Redriff-Stairs. Mr. Hen. Barbers in Ship-Ally in Well-Close. And at my House at the Carv'd Posts in Stonecutter-street, between Shoe-lane and Fleet-ditch, where I am to be spoken with from Eight to Eleven every Morning, and from Four to Six every Evening. The Poor may have Advice for nothing.
