R1914a [ocm]09007857 204352
A Reproof to those Church Men or Ministers that Refused to Rea the KINGS most Gracious Declaration. By Elizabeth Rne, a Sweet Singer of Israel. IS this the Honour that you give the KING, That you should Dirt upon His Mercy fling, By doing contrary to his Command, And thereby make Divisions in His Land? Should not you be Ensamples to the Flock? But you are apter at the Truth to mock: And then hand Papers to excuse your selves, Which yet has render'd you seditious Elves; But you would fain draw the Dissenters in, To be partakers of your stubborn Sin; Thô formerly you did them stubborn call, And in your Pulpits at them loud did baul; Nay more than that, you Robbed many a one; And under your oppressions made them groan, Because they could not in their Conscience find That they could be obedient to your mind Or will, in doing things you did require, And so past through your persecuting Fire; Being Counted Fools and Mad-men for that thing, And set down by you Rebels to the KING: And now in Equitie I do allow, That they may Laugh, and say, Who's the Fool now? Or who's the Rebel, that would not obey His Majesty, in such a Blessed VVay, In making Peace amongst his Subjects all, And setting every Conscience out of thrall? Go to, O all ye blind, and be more wise; For you are both too peevish and precise: For to deny your duty in that thing, VVhereby to anger such a gracious KING: For where his Word is, there should be true Power; And Subjects ought not on his Laws to lowre; Especially when they are Just and Good, They ought by no man then to be withstood. VVhat is your own Coat rent? Are you divided? That some of you will not by Him be guided VVhom you do say, in the next place to God, Should bear the Sword, and next to Christ the Rod. Look for severe Rebukes; for you have done Despight to him that is next to God's Son: If you lose nothing but your Place, it's well, That dare unto so good a King to tell His Actions are Illegal; though 'tis plain His Justice is the Glory of His Reign. Him God Exalted hath for this great VVork: His Light shall shine before both Jew and Turk: VVhen your late disobedient Act shall stink; And what you Brew, you shall be sure to Drink. Your Brethren that Obeyed, be commended; And for the future, shall be much befriended: VVhen all shall see, to your encrease of pain, That with true Love you cannot Live nor Reign. This I do write, that cannot lye nor faine: I know your borrowed Lights are in the Wane. Vale. Printed for Elizabeth Rone. 1688. With Allowance
