S2780 E.277[8] 3850[5] R200006 99883193 186847
Severall LETTERS TO THE HONOURABLE William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons; And to the Committee of both Kingdoms, concerning the State of Sir Tho. Fairfax Army. Shewing the obedience of the Souldiers, which were Mutiniers to the Commands of the Parliament, and their readinesse to serve the State, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. Together with Sergeant-Major▪ Generall Skippons SPEECH, to all the Officers and Souldiers, and their concurrence thereunto. With a Letter of Serjeant-Major Skippons, shewing the readinesse of the Souldiers, to go on in this expedition. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that these Letters be forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands. 1645.
To the Right Worshipfull, Sir John Evelyn, Sir Henry Vane▪ junior; Master Sollicitor, or either of them. Honoured Sir, VVE being desired to further the service of the State; And having seen very much of Gods over-ruling-Providence upon the Spirits both of Commanders, and Souldiers, in our entrance upon that great work at Reading, where our presence and assistance was de∣sired by the Major▪ Generall; who on Friday night, so soon as ever we came into the Garrison, gave order to draw out the five Regiments, formerly under the Command of his Excellencie, the Earl of Essex▪ and five Companies of my Lord Roberts, into the field on the next morning: We thought it our duty to acquaint you with the proceedings at that meeting. The Regiments and Companies aforesaid, being drawn up according to Order; The Mjor Generall marched in the head of all the Regiments, being accompa∣nied with us, and the Commissioners in the Army, who were received with a generall shout and acclamation of the souldiers: The complement of the field being over, each Regiment was drawn apat; And then the Major-Generall applied himself, First, to his Excellencies regiment, & there commanded all the Officers to draw together to the head of the Regiment, and thee exprest himself with much gra∣vity, and sweetnesse of spirit, to the Officers and Souldiers of that Regiment, to this effect: (I think we may say ver∣batim) as is expressed in the inclosed: The like to all the rest with some little variations: Upon the close of his Speech to each Regiment, both the Officers to be coti∣nued,
and those that were to be dismissed, did witnesse much readinesse to obey the Commands of Parliament; and likewise very much civility to the Major▪ Generall: And the Souldiers they generally exprest their joy at the close of every Speech, without any reluctancie in any of them; declaring, that now they hoped (ere long) they should be in action. And farther, Whereas divers Inferi∣our Officers went off upon the Reducement, they have li∣sted themselves as common Souldiers: So that we trust, you will have such an account of this businesse, as that you could not desire a better. The inhabitants of this▪ Garri∣son, who have been witnesses of their former mutinous dispositions, do very much wonder at so great a change in the same; and truly, the mighty hand of God was very vi∣sible in the work. We are sorry that we have troubled you with so long a Scrible, the rather because we have an inti∣mation, that the Commissioners here have written to Ma∣ster Speaker, touching these Affairs: however, lest they should omit what to our apprehensions was most remarka∣ble, we have taken the boldnesse to give you this trouble: From, Reading, this 6. of April. 1645. Sir, Your most humble Servants, Francis Allein. John Dethick.
The inclosed Speech of Serjeant-Maior-Generall Skippon. Gentlemen, and fellow Souldiers all, I am now to acquaint you with the Commands of Parliament; to which in conscience to God, and love to our Country, we are bound to give all ready and cheerfull obedience. There is a neces∣sity lies upon us (since three Armies are to be reduced into one) that some Commanders and Officers must go out of their Imployments, wherein they now are. It is not out of any personall dis-respect to any of you that shall now go off; Therefore I hope you will behave your selves accordingly. I have received Order from the House of Commons, to take notice what the comportment shll be of those who must now go off; and to certifie it unto them. I know you will behave your selves like men of Honour and honesty (as indeed you are) and that I shall have no cause, but to make a good report of you; which I shall do, according to your carriage in this Re∣ducement, both to the Speaker of the Honourable House of Com∣mons, and to the Committee of both Kingdoms, and that particular Committee which are appointed to take you into consideration, and to take in your Accompts, and pay you part of your Arreares at pre∣sent, and for the rest, you are to have a Debenter upon the Publique-Faith of the Kingdom. But if there shall be any among you, who out of any personall respect, or private discontent, shall make any disturbance in this Reducement; so as to obstruct or hinder a work of so Publique concernment; I shall not fail to give him his true Character to the State, without personall respect to any. And there∣fore let no man deceive himself; for although he may perhaps occa∣sion some trouble in the present businesse, yet in the Issue, the great∣est mischief will fall upon himself: But I hope I shall finde none such here. There is (at present) a fortnights pay to be paid to such Officers as shall go off; which they shall presently have upon their Muster: And as for the Officers, nd Souldiers that are continued, (as soon as they shall be Mustered and Listed) they also shall hve a fortnights pay; and there are Clothes come down for the Souldi∣ers already in part; and I assure you, That upon my Life and Ho∣nour, there are more providing, and you shall be all furnished with Coats, Breeches, Shirts, Stockins, Shooes, and such Armes as you shall stand in need of; with all good usage and constant pay. And
that as I have been with you hitherto, so upon all occasions of service to my God and Country, I shall by the help of God, be willing to live, and dye with you. To the Honourable William Lenthall Esquire, Spea∣ker of the Commons House of Parliament, Assembled at Westminster. Right Worthily Honoured Sir, YEsterday by Gods epeciall blssing upon my poor endeavours, the work of Reducement here, is quietly, and (I hope) through∣ly settled, both Officers and Souldiers demeaning themselves with all ready obedince to the Commands of Parliament. As soon as I can ge an exact list of the officers that are gone off, I shal (God willing) wih all humblenss, send the sme to this Honourable House; that (as shall seem best unto you) they may be taken into your further consideration. I inend (by Gods assistance) to prosecue this bu∣sinesse of Reducing the rest in other places, with all possible dili∣gence and faithfulnesse; hoping by Gods further favour, in a short time to bring the same to a wished ssue; whereof I shall (by Gods help) from time to time give you a true accompt. Onely I most hum∣bly beseech you, that Cloathes and Armes may be suddenly sent to Windsor, for their further supply and encouragement: as also for the spedier fiting them for the publique service, the advancement whereof we heartily long afer; and I hope in the strength of the Almighty shall with the uttermost hazard of our lives endeavour: may it please you (if it be not done already) to take some speedy▪ and certain course for money to pay those Horse that were of His Excellencies and Sir William Balfores Regiments, equall with the rest of the Horse that were of His Excellencies Army, that the Re∣ducing of them may not be hindered or prejudiced. Mr. Allein. and Mr. Detick, now the present Treasurers of the Army here; as also th Commissioners appointed by Parliament, have with all love, care and industry, furthered this great work: which let it please you to take notice of, being a very good and seasonable service to the State. I humbly crave pardon for my great boldnesse, and ever remain, Reading, the 6. of Aprill, 1645. 11. at Night. Honoured Sir, Your Obliged Faith∣full Servant,Ph: Skippon.
To the Honourable, William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the House of Commons. Honourable Sir, HAving lately prest upon the distemperatures of this Garrison (occasioned principally from the tottering condition of such Officers as were to be reduced, whence undoubtedly grew their discontents, and by whose influ∣ence, the Mutinies of the Souldier took rise, as appeared to us from more then common observation, which accor∣ding to our duty (though to our hazard) we have both la∣boured to suppresse, to qualifie at least, and to present you the Intelligence:) We proceed to acquint you; Tht upon the happy coming down of Serjeant Major Generall Skip∣pon, the work we so long so earnestly desired, and so much feared, was yesterday by the great blessing of God happi∣ly accomplished. Upon Friday, towards night, Major-Generall was welcomed here, with acclamations of joy, serving as a good Omen, and incouragement, to the next dayes businesse. That night the Officers coming to wel∣come him, received much satisfaction, b understanding from him the providentiall care the Parliament had of them, by ordering a Committee to receive the Major-Ge∣neralls Character, touching the merit, or demerit, of such as were designed to be laid aside, til some other opportu∣nity for imployment; as also, to order the auditing their Debenters▪ promoting some part of their Arrers, and pro∣mising Publique-Faith for the rest. This not only calmed them for that night, brought them in due time next day to observe their Orders for drawing the five Regiments into the Forebury, but won them (after his publique significa∣tion in the head of every Regiment, touching the Parlia∣ments respects to the reduc'd Officers, as also their extra∣ordinary provisions of Pay and Apparell for the Private Souldiers, who had liberty offered to chuse their Com∣manders,
after the four standing Captains of his Excellen∣lencies Regiment were recruited) to deliver up their men to such as stood, in such a method, and with such discretion and obedience to your Commands, that not a dissenting souldier, nor discontented countenance, could well be dis∣covered; so as they orderly marcht thence in three reduc'd Regiments, cheerfully into three Churches, where we forthwith inrolled every Officer and souldier, as they en∣tred the new List, closed the Books that evening, and with like diligence see the Private Souldier paid, and most of the reduc'd Officers. In this action (though the work speak it, yet) cannot we passe by the Major-Generals great pains, and excellent way of invitation, without a deserved Em∣phasis, and Commemoration. To morrow (by Gods assi∣stance) we shall finish the rest: That done, proceed to the Reducement elsewhere, and what other Rules the Major-Generall shall give us to walk by▪ Neverthelesse, clothing, and compleat arming, requires speedy accomplishment, the season inviting, and Major-Generall having by promise in∣gaged himself to them, unto that purpose. In these Affairs (if with modesty we may speak it) we have exprest what might with advantage conduce to make the work prospe∣rous, and go on with such alacrity, and caution, as may worthily render us serviceable, and answerable to the trust reposed in us: which especially adds the interest of being Reading 6. A∣pril. 1645. Sir, Your Honours most faithfull and obedient Servants, Martin Pyndar. H. Leighton. Tho. Herbert. Jo. Potter. FINIS.
