T2240 R37899 [ocm]17151079 173121
A TRYAL OF WITCHES, AT THE ASSIZES HELD AT Bury St. Edmonds for the County of SUFFOLK; on the Tenth day of March, 1664. BEFORE Sir MATTHEW HALE Kt. THEN Lord Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of EXCHEQUER. Taken by a Person then Attending the Court LONDON, Printed for William Shrewsbery at the Bible in Duck-Lane. 1682.
TO THE READER. THis Tryal of Witches hath lain a long time in a pri∣vate Gentleman's hands in the Country, it being given to him by the Person that took it in the Court for his own satisfaction; but it came lately to my hands, and having perused it, I found it a very remarkable thing, and fit to be Publish'd; especially in these times, wherein things of this na∣ture are so much controverted, and that by persons of much Learning on both sides. I thought that so exact a Rela∣tion of this Tryal would probably give more satisfaction to a great many per∣sons, by reason that it is pure Matter of Fact, and that evidently Demon∣strated; than the Arguments and
Reasons of other very Learned Men, that probably may not be so Intelligi∣ble to all Readers; especially, this be∣ing held before a Judge, whom for his Integrity, Learning, and Law, hardly any Age, either before or since could parallel; who not only took a great deal of paines, and spent much time in this Tryal himself; but had the Assistance and Opinion of several other very Eminent and Learned Persons: So that this being the most perfect Narrative of any thing of this Na∣ture hitherto Extant, made me un∣willing to deprive the World of the Benefit of it; which is the sole Mo∣tive that induced me to Publish it. Farewel.
A Tryal of Witches. At the Assizes and General Gaol-delivery, held at Bury St. Edmonds for the County of Suf∣folk, the Tenth day of March, in the Sixteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles II. before Matthew Hale Knight, Lord Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of Exchequer; Rose Cullender and Amy Duny, Widows, both of Leystoff in the County aforesaid, were severally indicted for Bewitching Elizabeth and Ann Durent. Jane Bocking, Susan Chandler, William Durent, Elizabeth and Deborah Pacey: And the said Cullender and Duny, being arraigned upon the said Indictments, pleaded Not Guilty: And afterwards, upon a long Evidence, were found Guilty, and thereupon had Judgment to dye for the same. The Evidence whereupon these Persons were convicted of Witchcraft, stands upon divers particular Circumstances. I. THree of the Parties above-named, viz. Anne Durent, Susan
Chandler, and Elizabeth Pacy were brought to Bury to the Assizes and were in a reasonable good condi∣tion: But that Morning they came into the Hall to give In∣structions for the drawing of their Bills of Indictments, the Three Persons fell into strange and vio∣lent fits, screeking out in a most sad manner, so that they could not in any wise give any Instructions in the Court who were the Cause of their Distemper. And although they did after some certain space recover out of their fits, yet they were every one of them struck Dumb, so that none of them could speak neither at that time, nor during the Assizes until the Conviction of the supposed Witches. As concerning William Durent, being an Infant, his Mother Do∣rothy
Durent sworn and examined deposed in open Court, That about the Tenth of March, None Caroli Secundi, she having a special occasion to go from home, and having none in her House to take care of her said Child (it then sucking) desired Amy Duny her Neighbour, to look to her Child during her absence, for which she promised her to give her a Penny: but the said Dorothy Du∣rent desired the said Amy not to Suckle her Child, and laid a great charge upon her not to do it. Up∣on which it was asked by the Court, why she did give that di∣rection, she being an old Woman and not capable of giving Suck? It was answered by the said Do∣rothy Durent, that she very well knew that she did not give Suck, but that for some years before,
she had gone under the Reputa∣tion of a Witch, which was one cause made her give her the cau∣tion: Another was, That it was customary with old Women, that if they did look after a sucking Child, and nothing would please it but the Breast, they did use to please the Child to give it the Breast, and it did please the Child, but it sucked nothing but Wind, which did the Child hurt. Ne∣vertheless after the departure of this Deponent, the said Amy did Suckle the Child: And after the return of the said Dorothy, the said Amy did acquaint her, That she had given Suck to the Child con∣trary to her command. Where∣upon the Deponent was very an∣gry with the said Amy for the same; at which the said Amy was much discontented, and used ma∣ny
high Expressions and Threat∣ning Speeches towards her; tel∣ling her, That she had as good to have done otherwise than to have found fault with her, and so departed out of her House: And that very Night her Son fell into strange fits of swounding, and was held in such terrible manner, that she was much affrighted therewith, and so continued for divers weeks. And the said Examinant farther said, that she being exceedingly troubled at her Childs Distem∣per, did go to a certain Person named Doctor Jacob, who lived at Yarmouth, who had the repu∣tation in the Country, to help children that were Bewitch'd; who advis'd her to hang up the Childs Blanket in the Chimney∣corner all day, and at night when she put the Child to Bed, to put
it into the said blanket, and if she found any thing in it, she should not be afraid, but to throw it in∣to the Fire. And this Deponent did according to his direction; and at night when she took down the Blanket with an intent to put her Child therein, there fell out of the same a great Toad, which ran up and down the hearth, and she having a young youth only with her in the House, desired him to catch the Toad, and throw it into the Fire, which the youth did accordingly, and held it there with the Tongs; and as soon as it was in the Fire it made a great and horrible Noise, and af∣ter a space there was a flashing in the Fire like Gun-powder, making a noise like the discharge of a Pistol, and thereupon the Toad was no more seen nor
heard. It was asked by the Court, if that after the noise and flashing, there was not the Substance of the Toad to be seen to consume in the fire? And it was answered by the said Dorothy Durent, that af∣ter the flashing and noise, there was no more seen than if there had been none there. The next day there came a young Woman a Kinswoman of the said Amy, and a neighbour of this Deponent, and told this Deponent, that her Aunt (meaning the said Amy) was in a most lamentable condition ha∣ving her face all scorched with fire, and that she was sitting alone in her House, in her smock with∣out any fire. And thereupon this Deponent went into the House of the said Amy Duny to see her, and found her in the same condition as was related to her;
for her Face, her Leggs, and Thighs, which this Deponent saw, seemed very much scorched and burnt with Fire, at which this Deponent seemed much to wonder. And asked the said Amy how she came into that sad condition? and the said Amy re∣plied, she might thank her for it, for that she this Deponent was the cause thereof, but that she should live to see some of her Children dead, and she upon Crutches. And this Deponent farther saith, that after the burning of the said Toad, her Child recover'd, and was well again, and was living at the time of the Assizes. And this Deponent farther saith, That about the 6th. of March, 11o. Car. 2. her Daughter Elizabeth Durent, be∣ing about the Age of Ten Years, was taken in like manner as her
first Child was, and in her fits complained much of Amy Duny, and said, That she did appear to her, and Afflict her in such man∣ner as the former. And she this Deponent going to the Apothe∣caries for some thing for her said Child, when she did return to her own House, she found the said Amy Duny there, and asked her what she did do there? and her answer was, That she came to see her Child, and to give it some water. But she this Deponent was very angry with her, and thrust her forth of her doors, and when she was out of doors, she said, You need not be so angry, for your Child will not live long: and this was on a Saturday, and the Child dyed on the Monday fol∣lowing. The cause of whose Death this Deponent verily be∣lieveth
was occasion'd by the Witchcraft of the said Amy Duny: for that the said Amy hath been long reputed to be a Witch, and a person of very evil behaviour, whose Kindred and Relations have been many of them accused for Witchcraft, and some of them have been Condemned. The said Deponent further saith, that not long after the death of her Daughter Elizabeth Du∣rent, she this Deponent was taken with a Lameness in both her Leggs, from the knees down∣ward, that she was fain to go up∣on Cruches, and that she had no other use of them but only to bear a little upon them till she did remove her Crutches, and so continued till the time of the Assi∣zes, that the Witch came to be Try∣ed, and was there upon her
Crutches; the Court asked her, That at the time she was taken with this Lameness, if it were with her according to the Custom of Women? Her Answer was, that it was so, and that she never had any stop∣pages of those things, but when she was with Child. This is the Substance of her Evidence to this Indictment. There was one thing very re∣markable, that after she had gone upon Crutches for upwards of Three Years, and went upon them at the time of the Assizes in the Court when she gave her Evidence, and upon the Juries bringing in their Verdict, by which the said Amy Duny was found Guilty, to the great admi∣ration of all Persons, the said Do∣rothy Durent was restored to the use of her Limbs, and went home
without making use of her Crut∣ches. II. As concerning Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy, the first of the Age of Eleven Years, the other of the age of Nine Years or there∣abouts: as to the Elder, she was brought into the Court at the time of the Instructions given to draw up the Indictments, and afterwards at the time of Tryal of the said Prisoners, but could not speak one Word all the time, and for the most part she remained as one wholly senseless as one in a deep Sleep, and could move no part of her body, and all the Mo∣tion of Life that appeared in her was, that as she lay upon Cushi∣ons in the Court upon her back, her stomack and belly by the drawing of her breath, would
arise to a great height: and af∣ter the said Elizabeth had lain a long time on the Table in the Court, she came a little to her self and sate up, but could neither see nor speak, but was sensible of what was said to her, and after a while she laid her Head on the Bar of the Court with a Cushi∣on under it, and her hand and her Apron upon that, and there she lay a good space of time: and by the direction of the Judg, Amy Duny was privately brought to Elizabeth Pacy, and she touch∣ed her hand; whereupon the Child without so much as seeing her, for her Eyes were closed all the while, suddenly leaped up, and catched Amy Duny by the hand, and afterwards by the face; and with her Nails scratched her till Blood came, and would by
no means leave her till she was taken from her, and afterwards the Child would still be pres∣sing towards her, and ma∣king signs of Anger conceived against her. Deborah the younger Daugh∣ter was held in such extream manner, that her Parents wholly despaired of her life, and there∣fore could not bring her to the Assizes.
The Evidence which was given concerning these Two Children was to this Effect. SAmuel Pacy a Merchant of Ley∣stoff aforesaid, (a man who carried himself with much sober∣ness during the Tryal, from whom proceeded no words ei∣ther of Passion or Malice, though his Children were so greatly Afflicted,) Sworn and Examined, Deposeth, That his younger Daughter Deborah, upon Thursday the Tenth of October last, was suddenly taken with a Lameness in her Leggs, so that she could not stand, neither had she any strength in her Limbs to support her, and so she continued until the Seventeenth day of the same
Month, which day being fair and Sunshiny, the Child desired to be carryed on the East part of the House, to be set upon the Bank which looketh upon the Sea; and whil'st she was sitting there, Amy Duny came to this Deponents House to buy some Herrings, but being denyed she went away discontented, and presently re∣turned again, and was denyed, and likwise the third time and was denyed as at first; and at her last going away, she went away grumbling; but what she said was not perfectly under∣stood. But at the very same in∣stant of time, the said Child was taken with most violent fits, feeling most extream pain in her Stomach, like the pricking of Pins, and Shreeking out in a most dreadful manner like unto a
Whelp, and not like unto a sensi∣ble Creature. And in this extre∣mity the Child continued to the great grief of the Parents until the Thirtieth of the same Month. During this time this Deponent sent for one Dr. Feavor, a Doctor of Physick, to take his advice con∣cerning his Childs Distemper; the Doctor being come, he saw the Child in those fits, but could not conjecture (as he then told this Deponent, and afterwards affirm∣ed in open Court, at this Tryal) what might be the cause of the Childs Affliction. And this De∣ponent farther saith, That by rea∣son of the circumstances aforesaid, and in regard Amy Duny is a Wo∣man of an ill Fame, & commonly reported to be a Witch & Sorceress, and for that the said Child in her fits would cry out of Amy Duny as
the cause of her Malady, and that she did affright her with Appari∣tions of her Person (as the Child in the intervals of her fits related) he this Deponent did suspect the said Amy Duny for a Witch, and charged her with the injury and wrong to his Child, and caused her to be set in the Stocks on the Twenty eighth of the same Octo∣ber: and during the time of her continuance there, one Alice Let∣teridge and Jane Buxton demand∣ing of her (as they also affirmed in Court upon their Oathes) what should be the reason of Mr. Pa∣cy's Childs Distemper? telling her, That she was suspected to be the cause thereof; she replyed, Mr. Pacy keeps a great stir about his Child, but let him stay until he hath done as much by his Children, as I have done by mine. And being
further examined, what she had done to her Children? She an∣swered, That she had been fain to open her Child's Mouth with a Tap to give it Victuals. And the said Deponent further deposeth, That within two days after speaking of the said words being the Thirtieth of October, the eldest Daughter Elizabeth, fell into extream fits, insomuch, that they could not open her Mouth to give her breath, to preserve her Life without the help of a Tap which they were enforced to use; and the younger Child was in the like manner Afflicted, so that they used the same also for her Re∣lief. And further the said Children being grievously afflicted would severally complain in their ex∣tremity, and also in the intervals,
That Amy Duny (together with one other Woman whose person and Cloathes they described) did thus Afflict them, their Appariti∣ons appearing before them, to their great terrour and affright∣ment: And sometimes they would cry out, saying, There stands Amy Duny, and there Rose Cul∣lender; the other Person trou∣bling them. Their fits were various, some∣times they would be lame on one side of their Bodies, sometimes on the other: sometimes a sore∣ness over their whole Bodies, so as they could endure none to touch them: at other times they would be restored to the perfect use of their Limbs, and deprived of their Hearing; at other times of their Sight, at other times of their Speech; sometimes by the
space of one day, sometimes for two; and once they were whol∣ly deprived of their Speech for Eight days together, and then re∣stored to their Speech again. At other times they would fall into Swounings, and upon the reco∣very to their Speech they would Cough extreamly, and bring up much Flegme, and with the same crooked Pins, and one time a Two-penny Nail with a very broad head, which Pins (amount∣ing to Forty or more) together with the Two penny Nail were produced in Court, with the affirmation of the said Deponent, that he was present when the said Nail was Vomited up, and also most of the Pins. Commonly at the end of every fit they would cast up a Pin, and sometimes they would have four or five fits in one day.
In this manner the said Chil∣dren continued with this Depo∣nent for the space of two Months, during which time in their Inter∣vals this Deponent would cause them to Read some Chapters in the New Testament. Whereupon this Deponent several times ob∣served, that they would read till they came to the Name of Lord, or Jesus, or Christ; and then be∣fore they could pronounce either of the said Words they would suddenly fall into their fits. But when they came to the Name of Satan, or Devil, they would clap their Fingers upon the Book, cry∣ing out, This bites, but makes me speak right well. At such time as they be reco∣vered out of their fits (occasion'd as this Deponent conceives upon their naming of Lord, or Jesus, or
Christ,) this Deponent hath de∣manded of them, what is the cause they cannot pronounce those words, They reply and say, That Amy Duny saith, I must not use that name. And farther, the said Children after their fits were past, would tell, how that Amy Duny, and Rose Cullender would appear be∣fore them, holding their Fists at them, threatning, That if they re∣lated either what they saw or heard, that they would Torment them Ten times more than ever they did be∣fore. In their fits they would cry out, There stands Amy Duny, or Rose Cullender; and sometimes in one place and sometimes in another, running with great violence to the place where they fancied them to stand, striking at them as
if they were present; they would appear to them sometimes spin∣ning, and sometimes reeling, or in other postures, deriding or threatning them. And this Deponent farther saith, That his Children being thus Tormented by all the space aforesaid, and finding no hopes of amendment, he sent them to his Sisters House, one Margaret Arnold, who lived at Yarmouth, to make tryal, whether the change of the Air might do them any good. And how, and in what manner they were afterwards held, he this Deponent refers himself to the Testimony of his said Sister. Margaret Arnold, Sworn and Examined, saith, That the said Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy came to her House about the Thirti∣eth
of November last, her Brother acquainted her, that he thought they were Bewitch'd, for that they vomited Pins; and farther Informed her of the several passa∣ges which occurred at his own House. This Deponent said, that she gave no credit to that which was related to her, con∣ceiving possibly the Children might use some deceit in putting Pins in their mouths themselves. Wherefore this Deponent unpin∣ned all their Cloathes, and left not so much as one Pin upon them, but sewed all the Clothes they wore, instead of pinning of them. But this Deponent saith, that notwithstanding all this care and circumspection of hers, the Children afterwards raised at se∣veral times at least Thirty Pins in her presence, and had most fierce
and violent Fitts upon them. The Children would in their Fitts cry out against Rose Cullen∣der and Amy Duny, affirming that they saw them; and they threat∣ned to Torment them Ten times more, if they complained of them. At some times the Children (only) would see things run up and down the House in the ap∣pearance of Mice; and one of them suddainly snapt one with the Tongs, and threw it into the fire, and it screeched out like a Rat. At another time, the younger Child being out of her Fitts went out of Doors to take a little fresh Air, and presently a little thing like a Bee flew upon her Face, and would have gone into her Mouth, whereupon the Child ran in all haste to the door to get
into the House again, screeking out in a most terrible manner; whereupon, this Deponent made haste to come to her, but before she could get to her, the Child fell into her swooning Fitt, and at last with much pain straining herself, she vomited up a Two-penny Nail with a broad Head; and after that the Child had rai∣sed up the Nail she came to her understanding; and being de∣manded by this Deponent, how she came by this Nail? she An∣swered, That the Bee brought this Nail and forced it into her Mouth. And at other times, the Elder Child declared unto this Depo∣nent, that during the time of her Fitts, she saw Flies come unto her, and bring with them in their Mouthes crooked Pins; and af∣ter the Child had thus declared
the same, she fell again into vio∣lent Fits, and afterwards raised several Pins. At another time, the said Elder Child declared unto this Depo∣nent, and sitting by the Fire sud∣dainly started up and said, she saw a Mouse, and she crept under the Table looking after it, and at length, she put something in her Apron, saying, she had caught it; and immediatly she ran to the Fire and threw it in, and there did appear upon it to this Depo∣nent, like the flashing of Gun∣powder, though she confessed she saw nothing in the Childs Hand. At another time the said Child being speechless, but otherwise, of perfect understanding, ran round about the House holding her Apron, crying hush, hush, as
if there had been some Poultrey in the House; but this Deponent could perceive nothing: but at last she saw the Child stoop as if she had catch't at something, and put it into her Apron, and afterwards made as if she had thrown it into the Fire: but this Deponent could not discover any thing: but the Child afterwards being restored to her speech, she this Deponent demanded of her what she saw at the time she used such a posture? who answered, That she saw a Duck. At another time, the Younger daughter being recovered out of her Fitts, declared, That Amy Duny had been with her, and that she tempted her to Drown her self, and to cut her Throat, or otherwise to Destroy her self. At another time in their Fitts
they both of them cryed out up∣on Rose Cullender and Amy Duny, complaining against them; Why do not you come your selves, but send your Imps to Torment us? These several passages as most remarkable, the said Deponent did particularly set down as they daily happen'd, and for the rea∣sons aforesaid, she doth verily be∣lieve in her conscience, that the Children were bewitched, and by the said Amy Duny, and Rose Cullender; though at first she could hardly be induced to believe it. As concerning Ann Durent, one other of the Parties, supposed to be bewitched, present in Court. Edmund Durent her Father Sworn and Examined; said, That he also lived in the said, Town of Leystoff, and that the said Rose Cullender, about the latter
end of November last, came into this Deponents House to buy some Herrings of his Wife, but being denyed by her, the said Rose returned in a discontented manner; and upon the first of December after, his Daughter Ann Durent was very sorely Afflicted in her Stomach, and felt great pain, like the pricking of Pins, and then fell into swooning fitts, and after the Recovery from her Fitts, she declared, That she had seen the Apparition of the said Rose, who threatned to Torment her. In this manner she continued from the first of December, until this present time of Tryal; having likewise vomited up divers Pins (produced here in Court.) This Maid was present in Court, but could not speak to declare her knowledge, but fell into most
violent fits when she was brought before Rose Cullender. Ann Baldwin Sworn and Ex∣amined, Deposeth the same thing as touching the Bewitching of the said Ann Durent. As concerning Jane Bocking who was so weak, she could not be brought to the Assizes. Diana Bocking Sworn and Ex∣amined, Deposed, That she lived in the same Town of Leystoff, and that her said Daughter ha∣ving been formerly Afflicted with swooning fitts recovered well of them, and so continued for a cer∣tain time; and upon the First of February last, she was taken also with great pain in her Stomach, like pricking with Pins; and af∣terwards fell into swooning fitts and so continued till the Depo∣nents coming to the Assizes, ha∣ving
during the same time taken little or no food, but daily vo∣miting crooked Pins; and upon Sunday last raised Seven Pins. And whilst her fits were upon her she would spread forth her Arms with her hands open, and use po∣stures as if she catched at some∣thing, and would instantly close her hands again; which being im∣mediatly forced open, they found several Pins diversly crooked, but could neither see nor perceive how or in what manner they were conveyed thither. At ano∣ther time, the same Jane being in another of her fitts, talked as if she were discoursing with some persons in the Room, (though she would give no answer nor seem to take notice of any per∣son then present) and would in like manner cast abroad her
Arms, saying, I will not have it, I will not have it; and at last she said, Then I will have it, and so waving her Arm with her hand open, she would presently close the same, which instantly forced open, they found in it a Lath-Nail. In her fitts she would fre∣quently complain of Rose Cullen∣der and Amy Duny, saying, That now she saw Rose Cullender stand∣ing at the Beds feet, and another time at the Beds-head, and so in other places. At last she was stricken Dumb and could not speak one Word, though her fitts were not upon her, and so she continued for some days, and at last her speech came to her again, and she desired her Mother to get her some Meat; and being deman∣ded the reason why she could not speak in so long time? She
answered, That Amy Duny would not suffer her to speak. This Lath-Nail, and divers of the Pins were produced in Court. As concerning Susan Chandler, one other of the Parties suppo∣sed to be Bewitched and pre∣sent in Court. Mary Chandler Mother of the said Susan, Sworn and Examined, Deposed and said, That about the beginning of February last past, the said Rose Cullender and Amy Duny were Charged by Mr. Sa∣muel Pacy for Bewitching of his Daughters. And a Warrant be∣ing granted at the request of the said Mr. Pacy, by Sir Edmund Bacon Baronet, one of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Suffolk to bring them before him, and they being brought before him were Examined, and Confessed
nothing. He gave order that they should be searched; whereupon this Deponent with five others were appointed to do the same: and coming to the House of Rose Cullender, they did acquaint her with what they were come a∣bout, and asked whether she was contented that they should search her? she did not oppose it, where∣upon they began at her Head, and so stript her naked, and in the lower part of her Belly they found a thing like a Teat of an Inch long, they questioned her about it, and she said, That she had got a strain by carrying of wa∣ter which caused that Excrescence. But upon narrower search, they found in her Privy Parts three more Excrescencies or Teats, but smaller than the former: This Deponent farther saith, That in
the long Teat at the end thereof there was a little hole, and it ap∣peared unto them as if it had been lately sucked, and upon the strain∣ing of it there issued out white milkie Matter. And this Deponent farther saith, That her said Daughter (being of the Age of Eighteen Years) was then in Service in the said Town of Leystoff, and ri∣sing up early the next Morning to Wash, this Rose Cullender ap∣peared to her, and took her by the hand, whereat she was much affrighted, and went forthwith to her Mother, (being in the same town) and acquainted her with what she had seen; but being extreamly terrified, she fell ex∣tream sick, much grieved at her Stomach; and that Night after being in Bed with another young
Woman, she suddenly scrieked out, and fell into such extream fits as if she were distracted, cry∣ing against Rose Cullender; saying, she would come to bed to her. She continued in this manner beating and wearing her self, insomuch, that this Deponent was glad to get help to attend her. In her Intervals she would declare, That some time she saw Rose Cullender, at another time with a great Dog with her: She also vomited up divers crooked Pins; and some∣times she was stricken with blindness, and at another time she was Dumb, and so she ap∣peared to be in Court when the Tryal of the Prisoners was; for she was not able to speak her knowledge; but being brought into the Court at the Tryal, she suddenly fell into her fits, and be∣ing
carryed out of the Court again, within the space of half an hour she came to her self and recovered her speech, and there∣upon was immediatly brought into the Court, and asked by the Court, whether she was in con∣dition to take an Oath, and to give Evidence, she said she could. But when she was Sworn, and asked what she could say against either of the Prisoners? before she could make any answer, she fell into her fits, screeking out in a mi∣serable manner, crying Burn ber, burn her, which were all the Words she could speak. Robert Chandler father of the said Susan gave in the same Evi∣dence, that his Wife Mary Chand∣ler had given; only as to the searching of Rose Cullender as aforesaid.
This was the sum and Sub∣stance of the Evidence which was given against the Prisoners con∣cerning the Bewitching of the Children before mentioned. At the hearing this Evidence there were divers known persons, as Mr. Scrjeant Keeling, Mr. Serjeant Earl, and Mr. Serjeant Barnard, present. Mr. Serjeant Keeling seemed much unsatisfied with it, and thought it not sufficient to Convict the Prisoners: for ad∣mitting that the Children were in Truth Bewitched, yet said he, it can never be applyed to the Prisoners, upon the Imagination only of the Parties Afflicted; For if that might be allowed, no per∣son whatsoever can be in safety, for perhaps they might fancy another person, who might alto∣gether be innocent in such mat∣ters.
There was also Dr. Brown of Norwich, a Person of great know∣ledge; who after this Evidence given, and upon view of the three persons in Court, was desired to give his Opinion, what he did conceive of them: and he was clearly of Opinion, that the per∣sons were Bewitched; and said, That in Denmark there had been lately a great Discovery of Witches, who used the very same way of Afflicting Persons, by con∣veying Pins into them, and crooked as these Pins were, with Needles and Nails. And his Opinion was, That the Devil in such cases did work upon the Bodies of Men and Women, up∣on a Natural Foundation, (that is) to stir up, and excite such hu∣mours super-abounding in their Bodies to a great excess, where∣by
he did in an extraordinary manner Afflict them with such Distempers as their Bodies were most subject to, as particularly appeared in these Children; for he conceived, that these swoun∣ing Fits were Natural, and no∣thing else but that they call the Mother, but only heightned to a great excess by the subtilty of the Devil, co-operating with the Ma∣lice of these which we term Witches, at whose Instance he doth these Villanies. Besides the particulars above∣mention'd touching the said per∣sons Bewitched, there were many other things Objected against them for a further proof and ma∣nifestation that the said Children were Bewitched. As First, during the time of the Tryal, there were some ex∣periments
made with the Persons Afflicted, by bringing the Persons to touch them; and it was ob∣served, that when they were in the midst of their Fitts, to all Mens apprehension wholly de∣prived of all sense and under∣standing, closing their Fists in such manner, as that the strongest Man in the Court could not force them open; yet by the least touch of one of these supposed Witches, Rose Cullender by Name, they would suddenly shriek out open∣ing their hands, which accident would not happen by the touch of any other person. And least they might privatly see when they were touched, by the said Rose Cullender, they were blinded with their own Aprons, and the touching took the same Effect as before.
There was an ingenious per∣son that objected, there might be a great fallacy in this experiment, and there ought not to be any stress put upon this to Convict the Parties, for the Children might counterfeit this their Distemper, and perceiving what was done to them, they might in such man∣ner suddenly alter the motion and gesture of their Bodies, on pur∣pose to induce persons to believe that they were not natural, but wrought strangely by the touch of the Prisoners. Wherefore to avoid this scruple it was privatly desired by the Judge, that the Lord Cornwallis, Sir Edmund Bacon, and Mr. Serje∣ant Keeling, and some other Gen∣tlemen there in Court, would at∣tend one of the Distempered per∣sons in the farther part of the
Hall, whilst she was in her fits, and then to send for one of the Witches, to try what would then happen, which they did accor∣dingly: and Amy Duny was con∣veyed from the Bar and brought to the Maid: they put an Apron before her Eyes, and then one other person touched her hand, which produced the same effect as the touch of the Witch did in the Court. Whereupon the Gen∣tlemen returned, openly pro∣testing, that they did believe the whole transaction of this business was a meer Imposture. This put the Court and all persons into a stand. But at length Mr. Pacy did declare, That possi∣bly the Maid might be deceived by a suspition that the Witch touched her when she did not. For he had observed divers times,
that although they could not speak, but were deprived of the use of their Tongues and Limbs, that their understandings were perfect, for that they have rela∣ted divers things which have been when they were in their fits, after they were recovered out of them. This saying of Mr. Pacy was found to be true afterwards, when his Daughter was fully recovered (as she afterwards was) as shall in due time be related: For she was asked, whither she did hear and understand any thing that was done and acted in the Court, during the time that she lay as one deprived of her understan∣ding? and she said, she did: and by the Opinions of some, this ex∣periment, (which others would have a Fallacy) was rather a con∣firmation that the Parties were
really Bewitched, than other∣wise: for say they, it is not possi∣ble that any should counterfeit such Distempers, being accompa∣nied with such various Circum∣stances, much less Children; and for so long time, and yet undis∣covered by their Parents and Re∣lations: For no man can suppose that they should all Conspire to∣gether, (being out of several fa∣milies, and, as they Affirm, no way related one to the other, and scarce of familiar acquaintance) to do an Act of this nature where∣by no benefit or advantage could redound to any of the Parties, but a guilty Conscience for Perjuring themselves in taking the Lives of two poor simple Women away, and there appears no Malice in the Case. For the Prisoners them∣selves did scarce so much as Ob∣ject
it. Wherefore, say they, it is very evident that the Par∣ties were Bewitched, and that when they apprehend or under∣stand by any means, that the per∣sons who have done them this wrong are near, or touch them; then their spirits being more than ordinarily moved with rage and anger at them being present, they do use more violent gestures of their Bodies, and extend forth their hands, as desirous to lay hold upon them; which at other times not having the same occasion, the instance there falls not out the same. 2ly. One John Soam of Leystoff aforesaid, Yeoman, a sufficient Person, Deposeth, That not long since, in harvest time he had three Carts which brought home his Harvest, and as they were going
into the Field to load, one of the Carts wrenched the Window of Rose Cullenders House, whereup∣on she came out in a great rage and threatned this Deponent for doing that wrong, and so they passed along into the Fields and loaded all the Three Carts, the other two Carts returned safe home, and back again, twice load∣ed that day afterwards; but as to this Cart which touched Rose Cullenders House, after it was loaded, it was overturned twice or thrice that day; and after that they had loaded it again the se∣cond or third time, as they brought it through the Gate which leadeth out of the Field into the Town, the Cart stuck so fast in the Gates-head, that they could not possibly get it through, but were inforced to cut down
the Post of the Gate to make the Cart pass through, although they could not perceive that the Cart did of either side touch the Gate∣posts. And this Deponent fur∣ther saith, That after they had got it through the Gate-way, they did with much difficulty get it home into the Yard; but for all that they could do, they could not get the Cart near unto the place where they should unload the Corn, but were fain to unload it at a great distance from the place, and when they began to unload they found much difficul∣ty therein, it being so hard a la∣bour that they were tired that first came; and when others came to assist them, their Noses burst forth a bleeding: so they were fain to desist and leave it until the next Morning, and the
they unloaded it without any difficulty at all. Robert Sherringham also De∣poseth against Rose Cullender, That about Two Years since, passing along the Street with his Cart and Horses, the Axletree of his Cart touched her House, and broke down some part of it, at which, she was very much dis∣pleased, threatning him, that his Horses should suffer for it; and so it happen'd, for all those Hor∣ses, being Four in Number, died within a short time after: since that time he hath had great Losses by the suddain dying of his other Cattle; so soon as his Sows pig∣ged, the Pigs would leap and ca∣per, and immediately fall down and dye. Also, not long after, he was taken with a Lameness in his Limbs that he could neither go
nor stand for some days. After all this, he was very much vexed with great Number of Lice of an extraordinary bigness, and al∣though he many times shifted himself, yet he was not any thing the better, but would swarm again with them; so that in the Conclusion he was forc'd to burn all his Clothes, being two suits of Apparel, and then was clean from them. As concerning Amy Duny, one Richard Spencer Deposeth, That about the first of September last, he heard her say at his House, That the Devil would not let her rest until she were Revenged on one Cor∣nelius Sandeswell's Wife. Ann Sandeswel Wife unto the above-said Cornelius, Deposed, That about Seven or Eight Years since, she having bought a certain
number of Geese, meeting with Amy Duny, she told her, If she did not fetch her Geese home they would all be Destroyed: which in a few days after came to pass. Afterwards the said Amy be∣came Tenant to this Deponents Husband for a House, who told her, That if she looked not well to such a Chimney in her House, that the same would fall: Whereupon this Deponent replyed, That it was a new one; but not mind∣ing much her Words, at that time they parted. But in a short time the Chimney fell down accor∣ding as the said Amy had said. Also this Deponent farther saith, That her Brother being a Fisherman, and using to go into the Northern Seas, she desired him to send her a Firkin of Fish, which he did accordingly; and she ha∣ving
notice that the said Firkin was brought into Leystoff-Road, she desired a Boatman to bring it ashore with the other Goods they were to bring; and she go∣ing down to meet the Boat-man to receive her Fish, desired the said Amy to go along with her to help her home with it; Amy Re∣plyed, She would go when she had it. And thereupon this Depo∣nent went to the Shoar without her, and demanded of the Boat∣man the Firkin, they told her, That they could not keep it in the Boat from falling into the Sea, and they thought it was gone to the Divel, for they never saw the like before. And being de∣manded by this Deponent, whe∣ther any other Goods in the Boat were likewise lost as well as hers? They answered, Not any.
This was the substance of the whole Evidence given against the Prisoners at the Bar; who being demanded, what they had to say for themselves? They replyed, Nothing material to any thing that was proved against them. Where∣upon, the Judge in giving his di∣rection to the Jury, told them, That he would not repeat the Evidencce unto them, least by so doing he should wrong the Evi∣dence on the one side or on the other. Only this acquainted them, That they had Two things to en∣quire after. First, Whether or no these Children were Bewitch∣ed? Secondly, Whether the Pri∣soners at the Bar were Guilty of it? That there were such Crea∣tures as Witches he made no doubt at all; For First, the Scriptures
had affirmed so much. Secondly, The wisdom of all Nations had provided Laws against such Per∣sons, which is an Argument of their confidence of such a Crime. And such hath been the judg∣ment of this Kingdom, as ap∣pears by that Act of Parliament which hath provided Punish∣ments proportionable to the qua∣lity of the Offence. And desired them, strictly to observe their Evidence; and desired the great God of Heaven to direct their Hearts in this weighty thing they had in hand: For to Condemn the In∣nocent, and to let the Guilty go free, were both an Abomination to the Lord. With this short Direction the Jury departed from the Bar, and within the space of half an hour returned, and brought them in both Guilty upon the several In∣dictments,
which were Thirteen in Number, whereupon they stood Indicted. This was upon Thursday in the Afternoon, March 13. 1662. The next Morning, the Three Children with their Parents came to the Lord Chief Baron Hales's Lodging, who all of them spake perfectly, and were as in good Health as ever they were; only Susan Chandler, by reason of her very much Affliction, did look very thin and wan. And their friends were asked, At what time they were restored thus to their Speech and Health? And Mr. Pa∣cy did Affirm, That within less than half an hour after the Witches were Convicted, they were all of them Restored, and slept well
that Night, feeling no pain; on∣ly Susan Chandler felt a pain like pricking of Pins in her Sto∣mach. After, they were all of them brought down to the Court, but Ann Durent was so fearful to be∣hold them, that she desired she might not see them. The other Two continued in the Court, and they Affirmed in the face of the Country, and before the Witches themselves, what before hath been Deposed by their Friends and Relations; the Pri∣soners not much contradicting them. In Conclusion, the Judge and all the Court were fully satisfied with the Verdict, and thereupon gave Judgment a∣gainst the Witches that they should be Hanged.
They were much urged to confess, but would not. That Morning we departed for Cambridge, but no Reprieve was granted: And they were Executed on Monday, the Seven∣teenth of March following, but they Confessed nothing. FINIS.
