R22b [ocn]489263247 208687
AN ACCOUNT Of the State of LONDON-DERRY and ENNESKELLING, Given by a Captain lately come to Leverpool from the FLEET in DERRY-River, and from thence sent to a Citizen of Dublin now in London. LICENSED, July 12th. 1689. J. F. Brother Norman, I Doubt not but that at the Exchange there may be various Reports concerning Major General Kirk and Derry, occasion'd by a Man of War which came into High-Lake on Sunday Night last; the name of it is the Antelope, Captain Henry Wickham Commander, carrying 230 Men and 44 Guns; she came from the Fleet on Friday last, which lies within three Miles or thereabouts of Derry. The Account that is given of the Condition of the Fleet and Derry, &c. is this, as I had it from one Captain Henry Jones, who went along with the Major General, and has got his Pass for coming back with this Frigat, by reason of his illness, but is to return again with it: He says that the men are very bearty, and that the Tues∣day before they came away there came into that Place two Ships of Force from Milford, one of 21 Guns and the other of 14. with all sorts of Provision, and that Derry holds out bravely; for the Friday before they lft the place the Derry People made a Sally out upon the Besiegers, and they killed, as it is very modestly computed, about 1200 men, and that those of Enneskelling had sent out a considerable Party to fetch in Cattle, &c. and in their way they met with a Convoy of K. James which were going with Plate and Money to the Army, to the value of 20000. l. Sterl. and took it: and he says further, that they are resolved, with Gods Assistance, to venture clear to Der∣ry; and he does believe that they are at this time upon their march, for their Resolutions were to begin their march in Eleven Days, some of them being expired before he left the Fleet. This further
Account is given of the Besiegers, who leaves no Villany unattempted to get Derry: They have for seventeen Miles round, nearest to Der∣ry, drove all the Protestants, Men, Women and Children before them (which are reckoned to be 7000 at the least) to Derry Walls, either to force the Besieged to take them in or let them starve: One of these People so served, had the good hap to get off, as thus, (his Name is Bonbury a Cheshire Man, and I do be∣lieve is either Father or Uncle to Bonbury of St. John's Dublin) he having four pounds left, gave it all to a Corporal to convey him and his Wife from the Army, which the Corporal very honestly did seven miles, and then left them, bidding them hide themselves in the Rocks; but he making towards the Lough found this Frigat, was ordered to sail on board, where he was taken, and a great many more, as well Women as Children, the Captain himself going into the Water to setch them; and allows every one of them a Seamans Allowance, and takes not a penny for their Passage, but gives Money to some, and takes care for those who are greater Objects of Charity, not to set them ashore till this Town takes some care for them; some of the Men being eighty years old, some Women with Child, one of which was delivered on Board on Sunday last. This Gentleman says, That as they were driving along, they were put into Rapho Church, and other Churches, as full as ever they could stand: then came three fresh Companies, or Regiments, with their Half-pikes and Skeans to prick them along; and when they came near the Walls, the Besieged sired over the poor People, and did some execution on the Besiegers; for he saw a man's Head shot off, which made the Enemy say, You see they will nor hurt you, what need you be troubled for coming hither, &c? Kirk will not land his Men without he has more Assistance, Horse especially, which God grant he may soon have, and that the rest of the Army designed for Ireland, may, when ready, light of a very fair Wind; and then I hope, with God's Blessing upon their Endeavours, they may be a means of saving our poor Relations which we have left behind; for whom (since this damnable Strata∣gem of Major General Mac Carty) we, and all good Christians have reason to pray for them; and that God of his infinite Mercy would be pleased to save them from the Hands of their Enemies, is, and shall be the daily Prayer of Your Loving Brother, J. R. LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCLXXXIX.
