11304 99841357 5934
A LETTER VVRITTEN BY THOSE of the Assembly in ROCHELL: To Monsieur le Duc de LES DIGVIERES. Containing an admonition vnto him, to leaue the Enemie, and to ayde them. As also an exhortation and a warning vnto those that forsake the trueth, and cleaue vnto the Enemies thereof, to shun that vengeance which God will send downe vpon them for the same. Printed in Rochell the 12. of Iuly. 1621.
A LETTER VVRIT∣TEN BY THOSE OF the Assemblie in Rochell: To Monsieur le Duc de LES DIGVIERES. MONSIEVR. IN the pittifull estate whereinto our Enemies haue reduced the Chur∣ches of this Realme, it would be a great comfort and consolation vn∣to vs, if wee were but to fight and contend against false accusations, and to defend our selues against the violent Counsels and courses of those, who openly adhearing vnto Antichristian Ti∣rannie, esteeming it a title of Honour to be call'd our Enemies, for hauing sufficiently satisfied the first by our most humble Supplications and attestations to his Maiestie, and by our declaration newly published, wee hope that God will blesse and prosper our iust defence, and preserue his Churches from the vtter ruine, where∣with they are threatned. But wee cannot sufficiently
expresse, with what griefe of heart wee feele and per∣ceiue our selues bound to maintaine our Innocencie against those, who as well as wee, haue part in the pub∣lick interests of our Churches: specially vnto your selfe my Lord, whose age, experience, and offices, make your proceedings more dangerous and hurtfull vnto those against whom you employ them. We haue heretofore laboured therein, by the Letters that haue beene deli∣uered vnto you, from vs, and perceiuing the small be∣nefit that wee haue thereby receiued, wee had resolued with our selues to rest silent, if our consciences did not binde and pricke forward vs, to stirre vp and quicken yours, by setting before your eyes the great hurt and detriment that you bring to the Church of God, at such a time, wherein it hath most neede of your ayde and assistance. It was not without good reason, and expe∣rience it selfe sheweth vs, that the last assembly at Lou∣dun, doubted of the accomplishment of the promises that were made vnto vs, at the Court: But your word interposing it selfe, with that of Monsieur de Chastillion, together with the consideration of the state wherein you were, made vs resolue vpon a new proofe, assisting our selues, that the effect of the words giuen vnto vs, failing, you would make yours effectuall, for the subsist∣ing of the assēbly, which in that case was to re-assemble, and cause them to obtaine that iust proceeding that had beene promised vnto them. With what displeasure our Churches that sent vs hether, haue beene tormented, when they perceiue that you disapproue it, that you blame it, and that by your Letters, you preferre the co∣lours and pretences of the persecution, at this day raised against faithfull Innocents, before the preiudice of our
cause? The state wherein you were in, the precedent voyage that you made to the Court, made honest men apprehend, that if after you withdrew your selfe from the Court, you returned thether againe, you should be bound to effect some preiudiciall action, against the Church of God, and therefore they desired you, to stand still in your gouernment during the subsistance of this assembly. But without any respect or regard co the requests and intreaties of so many Churches, you left your Prouince, made another voyage to the Court, and for the contentment of our Enemies, and the dis∣pleasure of those of our profession, by your presence you authorise those that incessantly labour to worke our ruine and destruction. Your protestation to con∣tinue in the same profession, the refusall of the dignity, that was offered vnto you, vpon condition to change your Religion, and your reconciliation not long since made vnto the Church at Charenton, put vs in good comfort, and made vs hope of some good effect for the good and benefit of our affaires, and some happy suc∣cesse of the paines that you should take therein. But our Enemies haue gotten this aduantage, that your ex∣ample hauing been made more considerable, the blame which you impose vpon this assembly, is more notori∣ous, and your disunion with our assembly, which re∣presenteth all the Churches of this Realme, is more do∣mageable, seruing for a pretence vnto those, (who vn∣der hope by that meanes to keepe themselues close du∣ring the time of this publike calamity,) to seperate themselues from our Vnion, from the which; those that haue designed our destruction, seeke to disunite the Prouinces, Churches, and persons of greatest quality,
therein vsing your name and authority, for the execu∣tion of so pernicious a designe; pernicious certainely we may well say: for to what end thinke you, my Lord, such proceedings may tend but onely to weaken vs, and make our destruction more easie, and lesse hazard vnto those that vndertake it? Monsieur de Plessis, who with∣out any respect of that, that had happened to Nauarreux, and after throughout all the Country of Bearn, being carried away by your Counsell, and abused by the par∣ticular promises that were made vnto him, at this day feeleth the effects of this proceeding. In your presence beholding the Towne of Saumur taken from him, and put into anothers mans hands. The Inhabitants there∣of making profession of the same Religion, subiected to a Papisticall Garrison: The Vniuersitie which he with so much paines and great care had there erected, de∣stroyed. The Church in the same place made destitute of her first liberty, and all those of this Realme depriued of the safety and security that they had in that place. Hath not the like dealing beene vsed vnto the rest of the Gouernours of the places that wee had for security in Poictow, seeing that in stead of commaund in them, as they did for the security of our Churches, they are now commaunded by Garrisons of a contrary Religion, to the ruine and subuersion of the Flockes of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ? Doe these proceedings, that followed the sedition in Towers, and were accompanied with the taking of Iargeau, and the violent disarmings of those of the Religion in diuers places, and seconded with the besieging of Saint Iohn Angely, at this time furiously battered, beare any shew of any good intent that is meant towards vs to doe vs iustice? But are they not ra∣ther
directly contrary to the declarations not long since published, and to the particular promises made in fa∣uour of those that would addict themselues vnto that which the Court desireth of them? and doc they not make euery man manifestly and plainely see, that the obedience whereof they so highly cry out, and which is required of vs, by demaunding pardon and absolution, and that wee should seperate our assemblie, before wee haue iustice done vnto vs, or any security for our Chur∣ches, tendeth onely, to bind vs to lay our throats open vnto those, that haue an intent and desire to our them? What faults are we culpable of, being assembled vpon the permission that had beene graunted and giuen vnto vs, by those words that to vs should be as good an assu∣rance as Letters Patents, yea and vpon yours also? What fault haue we committed, that being assembled, haue sought by all submissiue meanes possible vnto his Maiestie, to obtaine that iustice that had beene promi∣sed vnto vs, when wee remitted the pursuite thereof to our generall Deputies, and desired those that are of the greatest quality and degrees, and make profession of the Religion in this Realme, to ioyne their intercessions with them? And seeing that in stead of finding the effect of the performance of the promises made vnto vs, vpon your iust and most humble supplications presented vn∣to his Maiestie: we haue beene proclaimed Rebels, and declared to be criminals; and that as such, our processe hath beene made, some of vs haue beene executed by pictures, seeing in Viuards they haue risen vp in Armes, besieged, battered, and taken those place's that we held, and in them, contrary to the agreements made, murthe∣red some, and vsed great violences vnto vs, that at this
present they besiege, and furiously batter the Towne of S. Iohn D'angely: can men iustly blame vs, if against such violences wee oppose our defence, which nature teacheth euery man, and the law of God neuer reproo∣ueth? In the meane time, God forbid, that this extremitie whereinto we are reduced by constraint, should in our hearts deface that most humble obedience, and most faithfull seruice that wee owe vnto our King, wherein wee protest inuiolably to continue, desiring nothing more, nor so much then, that in the iustice and security required by vs for our Churches, wee may attaine the meanes of a good and an assured peace in this state, which as much as in vs lyeth we haue, & to our powers doe seek for: beseeching God with all our hearts, to de∣fend and preserue the King, from those dangers which the Enemies of his state, expose his person vnto, in the perils of warre. In the meane time, my Lord, the iust∣nesse of our cause, which so manifestly appeareth, and which God will alwayes make to shine, as bright as the Sunne at noone time, doth not hinder you, by your presence, from approuing the proceedings, that are ta∣ken against vs; and which is more, blotting out the re∣membrance of the griefes that our Churches receiue, you promise and procure fauour vnto those, who lea∣uing vs, will ioyne themselues vnto our Enemies, as you solicite them, by that meanes putting into the mouth of the Church at this day, the cōplaint that the Prophet Ieremie made, saying, That his neerest friends, behaued themselues disloyally towards him, & were become his Enemies. The Sauiour of the world teacheth vs, that a house deuided in it selfe cannot stand. Iudge then my
Lord, if it please you, what punishment they incurre that shall haue beene a meanes to stirre vp deuision in the house of God, and whether God will not reuenge the destruction thereof, not only vpon those that open∣ly procure it, but also on those that in any manner or by any meanes shall haue contributed vnto the same. But after we had seene what hath beene done in Bearn, Viuarez, and against the assembly, after that by your presence you haue fauoured a puissant Armie against the Churches of this Realme, and the losse of many places, that had beene giuen vs to hold for our securi∣ties; In a time, wherein the violence of our Enemies could not be restrained by any authority, after you had conducted, or accompanied the Armie that is incam∣ped against our brethren before the Towne of S. Iohn D'angely: if (as wee haue beene assured) you your selfe in person went to view the place, and vsed all the expe∣rience & dexterity that God hath giuen you in Armes, to make the siege, and the meanes to take it more easie; what subiect haue not wee to complaine against you, who in stead of being sicke for Iosephes affliction, feare not to be the greatest instrument of his murthering: Is it possible, that you cannot apprehend the ruine of so flourishing a Church, that God hath here gathered to∣gether, and that you are not moued at the destruction that men seeke to bring vpon Monsieur De Sobize, and vpon so many braue Gentlemen, that haue beene the first that presented themselues in the mouth of the breach, that is made in the Citie of Dauid? that coura∣giously labour to repaire the same, at this day in a man∣ner wholly hindering that course of the destruction al∣ready begun in our Churches, and proiected against all
of them. The knowledge that God hath giuen you of his holy name, bindeth you to employ that authority, whereunto hee hath aduanced you, and all the graces that hee hath imparted vnto you, and bestowed vpon you, to the maintainance of his Church; and will you imploy them in the destruction thereof? Piety requi∣reth that you should procure all good, and liberty vnto those that make profession of Religion, and will you ap∣proue and allow of their desolation? Christian charity can hardly endure without watry eyes, that wee should see one man onely put to death: and can you with a smooth and smiling countenance, behold and see the butcherie and cruell slaughter of so many of our bre∣thren? What reputation can they get or procure vnto themselues that fight against that Gospell, whereof they make profession? What fidelity may our Prince expect from them, that being not faithfull vnto God, abandon the maintainance of his cause? And from whence pro∣ceedes this great distaste of vs at this day, but only from this, that there are some men, (and those of greatest qualities) that giue themselues to affect the Religion, as long, and no longer, then that it serueth their turnes to aduance them vnto dignities, and to encrease their riches? Is it not easie to be iudged, that if couetous∣nesse and ambition, be a meanes to make them disloyall vnto God, and to dispise and neglect their owne salua∣tion, that the same vices will easily draw them on to in∣fidelity towards their Prince, and to the dispising of their owne honours? Was it a small matter in your sight, to see diuers Ministers driuen away from their dwelling places, the exercise of Religion banished out of thos places, where it was established, and the inhu∣manities,
which haue bin impiously vsed, within these few yeares vpon the dead bodies of the faithfull, al∣most in all places of this Realme, The burnings and de∣stroying of diuers of our Churches, the many seditions, and specially that, last made in the Citie of Touers, be∣sides the entier desolation of those of Bearn, haue they not touched nor mooued your soule with a Christian compassion, and a iust apprehension, in short time to behold and see those horrible cruelties executed vpon vs and our children, that after the like proceedings were at other times executed vpon our fathers, and that after (as at this day) they had bin deceiued, by words of peace and quietnesse? Certainely, my Lord, if you ac∣knowledge that you hold that honor which you at this present enioy, from the blessings that God hath giuen vnto your armes, then when you employed them for the defence of his Church, you ought also to belieue, that if now, when you draw neere vnto the end of your dayes, it is time to crowne your workes, with most iust and Christian actions, you become an enemie vnto, and procure the ruine of those that with you make pro∣fession of the truth of the Gospell, he will be angry a∣gainst you, and will couer your face with shame and ig∣nomie, you shall expose your selfe to be dispised of all men, and made a laughter vnto those namely that haue made vse of you, to execute their wicked intents, and bring that curse vpon your head, which he pronoun∣ceth against those that curse his people, and those most fearefull iudgements, which in his wrath, he sheweth vpon those, that rise vp against, and withstand the Kingdome of his Sonne Iesus Christ: all maner of the deaths of those whom God loueth, are precious in his
sight; but he will require their blood at the hands of those, that shall vniustly shed the same, he that toucheth them, toucheth the apple of his eye, and you are not ig∣norant thereof: With what conscience then can you continue and remaine among our enemies, that abuse the affections and conscience of the King, for ours and the states vtter ruine, giue counsell for the destruction of Townes, wherein the holy name of God is purely in∣uoaked, and participate in the forcible action that are done against them? would you thrust your sword into the brests of your owne brethren, and bath your hands in the blood of those whom God hath redeemed by the blood of his deare Sonne Iesus Christ? No my Lord, rather in the name of God, if there be any care of his Church, yet resting in you, if there be any charity in your heart towards those that are his members, and which is more, if you desire not to bring vpon you and yours, the wrath and vengance of God (for we are bound by the duty of our Offices and the discharge of our consciences to speake in this maner vnto you) be mooued to compassion vpon the pittifull dealing which at this day is vsed against the faithfull, acknow∣ledge the deceits and impostures of our enemies, note the violent courses they vse against your brethren, and with a prudent foresight apprehending future mis∣chiefes, come out from the middle of them, least you be enueloped among the plagues, that God will powre downe vpon the vessels of his wrath, when he shall haue ceased the vsing of them, for the punishment of his chil∣dren. Aide not them, that haue no other intent then to destroy vs, by making a deuision among vs: forsake not the members of our Lord Iesus Christ, but rather
ioyning with vs, bring the rest of our brethren with you; who by your example, you haue withdrawne from vs; and vse the meanes, to cause them also to come with you, who as yet are asleepe, and rest vnder the deceitfull assurances that are giuen them of some quietnesse: to the end that being all, (according to our duties) most stricktly vnited together by the sacred bands of pietie, peace, and charitie; we may effectually labour toge∣ther for the publique Tranquility and quietnesse of Gods house: And seeing that there is no other meanes left vnto vs, we employ a iust and couragious defence, which being blessed by God, stayeth the violent courses of those that persecute vs, deliuereth the Towne of S. Iohn D'Angely from their hands, and preserueth all the rest: shall not so many persons of good quality who acknowledging the vnfaithfulnesse and the intents of our enemies, consecrate their blood, to empeach the destruction of the faithfull, prouoake you, to a holy iea∣lousie, by their example? You haue heretofore bin a pu∣issant instrument in the hand of God, to defend his Church from oppression: be the same againe, my Lord, at this day, and that the rather and stronglie, because God hath giuen you many blessings in aboundance. And if you dispising these exhortations, that we giue you, by the compassion of Christ, be still in this time, and faile in the succours which you owe vnto all good men, God will not cease to raise vp, peace and deliue∣rance by other meanes, vnto his children. But it is to be seared, that he will reuenge, the dissipation that you shall make of your brethren, vpon you and yours. We beseech Almighty God, with all our hearts, to touch your heart by his holy Spirit, to inspire you with God
and godly connsell, to doe that which we require of you according to his will, and that receiuing you into his protection, he will take pitty vpon his Church, send peace vnto this State, and tranquility and security to those troupes that he hath assembled therein. We rest, my Lord, Your most humble and most affectioned seruants, the Deputies of the reformed Churches of France, and the Soueraignety of Bearn assembled in Rochell: Bessay. President. Rossell. Lieutenant. Guerin. Secretarie. de la Pore. Secretarie. In Rochell the 12. of Iune. 1621.
