11627 99841430 6011
THE IOYFVLL Receyuing of the Queenes most excellent Maiestie into hir Highnesse Citie of NORVVICH: The thing done in the time of hir abode there: and the ∣lor of the Citie at hir departure. Wherein are set downe diuers Ora∣tions in Latine, pronounced to hir Highnesse by Sir ROBERT WOOD Knight, now Maior of the same Ci∣tie, and others: and certaine also de∣liuered to hir Maiestie in vvriting: arry of thē turned into English. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henrie Bynneman.
¶ To the right vvorshipfull Sir Owen Hopton Knight, the Queenes Maiesties Lieutenante of hir highnes Tower of London, Ber. Gar. Citizen of London wisheth health and increase of VVorship. SIthens at my returne from Nor∣wich (Right worshipfull) you vouchsa∣fed to imparte vnto me your earnest de∣sire to vnderstand the order and manner how hir Maiestie was receyued into that worthy Citie: I am bold likewise to de∣cipher vnto your worship what occasion offered themselues to me vpon the same your request. First appeared to me the Maiestie of my Prince, which beautifieth her kingdome, as the bright shining beames of beautiful Phoebus decketh forth the earth: which gladded the hartes of the people there, as they no lesse laboured to trauayle forth to view the excellency of their soueraigne, than the true labouring Bee enforceth hir self in the Spring tyme (whē dame Flora first decketh the soile) to seeke their delights, and our pro∣fit, amongst the sweete smelling floures. Then the aboundant clemencie of hir highnes, receyuing the loyall hartes of hir lo∣uing people in parte, as good as their meaning deserued, so en∣flamed their former desires, as euery sparke kindled a bonfire. The Nobilitie delighting this Harmony, so endeuoured to hold in tune euery string of this heauenly Musike, as there semed but one hart in Queene, Counsaile, and Communaltie. The Mayor, Magistrates, and good Citizens employed their study and sub∣staunce
to holde on this happy beginning, the Prince had hir pleasure, the Nobilitie their desire, the whole traine such inter∣tainment: As for the tyme of hir continuance there, Norwich seemed (if any such there be) a terrestriall Paradise. But when the frowning Friday folowed, which called hir Maiestie thence, I leaue (because I am loth to tel) the dolour that was, to the re∣port of them that did see it. These all, right Worshipfull, vpon your demaund, presented themselues vnto me to be vttred, and these (I thinke) are the thinges which you desired to heare. And because I doubt not but that there are a great number of your vertuous mynd herein: to satisfie both thē and you, I haue here set forth what my final capacitie could collect (touching the pre∣misses) during the whole tyme of hir abode there. Accept my rude and rashe dealing in this my doyng, I beseech you, for that your Worshipfull request carieth me to my vttermost limite: wherein, though the sodaine chop of an vnskilfull Carer perhaps disquareth the strong tymber of this beautifull  yet let the skilfull eye of your worship and o∣ther learned Readers (to whome I submitte me) place the same to the best purpose, and holde my good will as recompence of my fault, and bynde me to them, and you for euer. Vale. Your VVorships to com∣maund. B. G.
¶ The receyuing of the Queenes Maiestie into hir highnesse Citie of Norvvich. ON Saturday being the. xvj. of August. 1578. and in the twentith yéere of the raigne of our most gratious soueraign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Quéen of England, Frāce, and Irelande, Defendor of the Faith. &c. The same our moste dread and soueraigne Lady (con∣tinuing hir Progresse in Norf∣folke) immediately after dinner set forward from Brakenashe, where she had dyned with the Ladye Style, béeyng fiue myles distant from Norwich, towardes the same hir most dutifull Ci∣tie: Sir Robert Wood, then Esquire, and nowe Knight, Maior of the same Citie, at one of the Clock the same happy day, sette forwarde to méete with hir Maiestie in this order: First there roade before him wel and séemly mounted, thréescore of the most comelie yong men of the Citie as Bachelers, apparelled all in blacke Sattyn doublets, blacke Hose, blacke Taffata Hattes and yeallowe Bandes, and their vniuersall liuerie was a Man∣dylion of purple Taffata, layde about with siluer Lace: and so apparelled, marched forwardes two and two in a ranke. Then one which represented King GVRGVNT, sometime King of Englande, which builded the Castle of Norwich, called Blanch Floure, and layde the foundation of the Citie. He was mounted vppon a braue Courser, and was thus furnished: His body Ar∣med:
his Bases of gréen and white silke: on his head a black vel∣uet Hat, with a plume of white Feathers. There attended vpon him thrée Henchmen in white and gréene: one of them did beare his Helmet, the seconde his Tergat, the third his Staffe. After him a noble companye of Gentlemen, and wealthie Citizens in veluet Coates, and other costly furniture, brauely mounted. Then followed the Officers of the Citie euery one in his place. Then Maister Sword bearer, with the Sworde and Hatte of Maintainaunce. Then Maister Maior, and foure and twentye Aldermen, and Maister Recorder, al in Scarlet gownes, wher∣of, so many as had bin Maiors of the Citie, and were Iustices, did weare their scarlet cloakes. Then followed so many as had bin Sherifs, and were no Aldermen, in violet Gowns, & satten tippets. Then followed diuers other, to kéepe the people from disturbing the array aforesaide. Ths euery thing in due and comely order, they al (except GVRGVNT which stayed hir ma∣iesties cōming within a flight shot or two of the city, where the Castle of Blaunche Flowre was in moste beautifull prospect) marched forwardes to a bridge, called Hartforde Bridge, the vttermoste lymit that way, distaunt from the Citie two miles or thereaboutes, to méete with hir Maiestie: who, within one houre or little more after their attendaunce, came in such gra∣tious and Princely wife, as rauished the harts of all hir louing subiects, and might haue terrifyed the stoutest heart of any eni∣my to beholde. Whether the Maiestie of the Prince, whiche is incomparable, or ioy of hir subiectes, which excéeded measure, were the greater, I thinke woulde haue appalled the iudgement of Apollo to define. The acclamations and cries of the people to the Almighty God for the preseruation of hir Maiesty, ratled so loude, as hardly for a great time coulde any thing be hearde: But at laste, as euery thing hath an ende, the noise appeased: & Maister Maior saluted hir highnesse with the Oration follo∣wing, and yéelded to hir Maiestie there with the sworde of the Citie, and a faire standing cup of siluer and guilt, with a ouer, and in the Cup one hundreth pounds in golde. The Orati∣on was in these wordes:
The Mayors Oration. SI nobis ab Optimo Maxi∣mo concederetur optio quid rerum humanarum nunc potissimum vellemus: nihil duceremus antiquius (Au∣gustissima Princeps) quàm vt tuus ille, qui ita nos recreat, castissimi ocelliradius pos∣set in abditissimos cordium nostrorum an∣gulos se conferre. Cerneres profecto quanta sint hilaritate perfusa, quàm in ipsis arte∣rijs & venulis spiritus & sanguis gestiant: dum intuemur te huius Regni lumen (vt Dauid olim fuit Israelitici) in hijs tandem finibus post longam spem, & ardentissima vota exoriri. Equidem vt pro me, qui tua ex autoritate & clementia (quod humilli∣mis gratijs profiteor) celeberrimae huic Ci∣uitati praesum, & pro hijs meis fratribus, at{que} omni hoc populo quem tuis auspicijs re∣gimus, ex illorum sensu loquar, quod & ip∣se
sentio: sic nos demum supplicibus votis exposcimus, vt Maiestatem tuam beneuo∣lam nobis, & propitiam experiamur: vt nunquam cuiquam populo aduenisti gratior quàm nobis. In illius rei luculentissimum in∣dicium, insignia haec honoris, & officij no∣stri, quae nobis clemētissimus Princeps Hē∣ricus Quartus quinto sui Regni anno cum Praetore, Senatoribus, & Vicecomitibus concessit: (cùm antea Balliuis (vt vocant) vltra annalium nostrorum memoriam re∣geremur) perpetuis deinde Regum priui∣legijs, & corroborata nobis, & aucta mag∣nificè, Maiestati tuae omnia exhibemus, quae per tuam vnius clemētiam (quam cum immortalibus gratijs praedicare nunquam cessabimus) vicesimo iam anno tenuimus. At{que} vnâ cum illis, hunc Thesaurum, quasi pignus nostrarū & voluntatum, & facul∣tatum, quas omnes, quantae, quantulaeue sint, ad tuum arbitrium deuouimus: vt si
quid omni hoc foelicissimi tui tēporis decursu admisimus, quod amantissimos, obsequētis∣simos, amplitudinis tuae saluti, Coronae, emo∣lumento deuotissimos non deceat: statuas de nobis, & nostris omnibus, pro tua clementis∣sima voluntate. Sin ita clauum huius Ciui∣tatis (Deo duce) reximus: vt eam in portu saluam Maiestati tuae conseruauerimus, & populum primum gloriae Dei, & verae religionis, deinde salutis, honoris, & volun∣tatis tuae studiosissimum, quantum in nobis est, effecerimus: tum non libet nobis id à te petere, quod insita tibi singularis clemen∣tia facillimè à te ipsa impetrabit. Tan∣tùm obsecramus, vt Amplitudinem tu∣am Deus omnibus & animi, & corporis bonis cumulatissimè beare velit.
The Mayors Oration Englished. IF our vvishe should be graunted vnto vs by the Almighty, vvhat humaine thing vve vvould chiefly desire: vve vvould account nothing more preti∣ous (most Royall Prince) than that the bright beame of your most chast eye, vvhich doth so chere vs, might penetrate the secret strait corners of our hartes: then surely should you see hovv great ioyes are dispeised there, and hovve the spirite and liuely bloud tickle in our arteries and small veynes, in beholding thee the light of this Realme (as Dauid vvas of Israell) novv at length, after long hope and earnest petitions, to appeare in these coastes. Truely on mine ovvne part, vvhich by your highnesse authoritie and cle∣mencie (vvith humble thankes be it spoken) do gouerne this famous Citie, and on the parte of these my brethren and all these people vvhich by your authoritie vve rule (speaking as they meane, and as I my selfe doe thinke) this onely vvith all our hartes and humble praiers vve desire, that vve may so finde your Maiestie gracious and fauoura∣ble vnto vs, as you for your part neuer came to a∣ny subiects better vvelcome thā to vs your poore subiectes here. For most manifest token vvherof, vve present vnto your Maiestie here, these signes
of honour and office, vvhiche vvee receiued of the most mighty Prince Henry the fourth, in the fift yere of his raigne, then to vs granted in the name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Shirifs, vvhere as before tyme out of minde or mention, vve vvere gouer∣ned by Bayliffes (as they terme them) vvhich e∣uer since haue bene both established and encrea∣sed vvith continuall priuiledges of Kinges: And vvhich by your only clemencie (vvhich vvith im∣mortall thankes vve shall neuer cease to declare) vve haue novv these. xx. yeres enioyed: and toge∣ther vvith those signes, this treasure is a pledge of our good vvils and habilitie: vvhich all hovv great or little so euer they be, vve poure dovvn at your pleasure, that if vve haue neglected any thing in all this course of your most happy raigne, vvhich becommeth most louing, obedient, and vvell vvil∣ling subiectes to performe, for the preseruation of your Crovvn, and aduancement of your highnes, you may then determine of vs and al ours, at your most gracious pleasure. But if vve haue (God be∣ing our guide) so ordered the gouernance of this citie, that vve haue kept the same in safetie to your Maiesties vse, and made the people therein (as much as in vs lieth) first, most studious of Gods glory and true religion, and next of your Maie∣sties health, honour, and pleasure, then aske vve
nothing of you, for that the singular clemencie in∣graffed in your highnes, vvil easily of it self graunt that vvhich is requisite for vs to obtaine. We only therefore desire, that God vvould aboundantly blesse your highnesse vvith al good gifts of minde and body. Whiche Oration ended, hir Maiestie accepting in good part euery thing deliuered by the Maior, did thankefully aunswere him in these wordes, or verie like in effect. We hartily thanke you, Maister Maior, and all the reste, for these tokens of good∣will, neuerthelesse Princes haue no néede of money: God hathe endowed vs abundantly, we come not therefore, but for that whiche in right is our owne, the heartes and true allegeaunce of our Subiects, whiche are the greatest riches of a Kingdome: whereof as we assure our selues in you, so do you assure youre selues in vs of a louyng and gratious soueraigne: wherewyth was deliuered to Maister Maior, a Mace or Scepter, which hée carryed before hir to hir lodging, whiche was in the Bishop of Norwich his Pallaice, two myles distant from that place. The Cup and money was deliuered to a Gentleman, one of hir Ma∣iesties footemen to carry: Maister Maior saide to hir, Sunt hic Centum librae puri auri, the couer of the Cup lifted vp, hir Ma∣iestie saide to the footman, looke to it, there is a hundreth pound. With that hir highnesse, with the whole companye, marched towardes Norwich, till they came to a place called the Towne Close, distant from the Citie a good flightshot, where the partie, which represented Gurgunt, came foorth, as in maner is expres∣sed, and was readye to haue declared to hir Maiestie thys spéech following: but by reason of a showre of raine whiche came, hir Maiestie hasted away, the spéech not vttered: But thus it was. LEaue of to muse most gracious Prince of English soile, What sodaine wight in Martiall wise approcheth neare:
King Gurgunt I am hight, King Belins eldest sonne, Whose syre Dunwallo first, the Brittish crowne did weare. Whom truthlesse Gutlack forste to passe the surging seas, His falshode to reuenge, and Denmarke land to spoile. And finding in returne, this place a gallant vente, This Castle faire I built, a forte from foraine soile: To winne a Conquest, gets renowne and glorious name, To keepe and vse it well, deserues eternall fame. Whē brute through cities, townes, the woods and dales did soūd ELIZABETH this country peerelesse Queene drew neare: I was found out, my selfe in person noble Queene Did hast, before thy face in presence to appeare. Two thousand yeares welnye in silence lurking still: Heare, why to thee alone this seruice I do yelde. Besides that, at my Cities sute, their founder first Should gratulate most this ioyfull sight in open field. Foure speciall pointes and rare concurring in vs both This speciall seruice haue reseru'd to thee alone: The glory though of eche in thee doth farre surmount, Yet great with small comparde, will like appeare anone. When doubtfull warres the British princes long had wroong, My grandsire first vniting all did weare the Crowne. Of Yorke and Lancaster, who did conclude the broiles? Thy grandsire Henry seuenth, a king of great renowne. Myne vncle Brennus eke, my father ioyning handes, Olde Rome did raze, and sacke, and halfe consume with fire: Thy puissant father so, new Rome that purple whore Did sacke, and spoile hir neare of all hir glittering tire. Lo Cambridge scholes by myne assignment founded first, By thee my Cambridge scholes are famous through the world, I thirtie wandring ships of banisht men relieued. The thronges of banisht soules that in this Citie dwell, Do weepe for ioy, and pray for thee with teares vntold. In all these thinges thou noble Queene doest farre excell. But loe to thee I yeld as duety doth me binde In open field my selfe, my Citie, Castle, Key,
Most happy fathers Kinges in such a daughter Queene, Most happy England were, if thou shouldest neuer die. Go on most noble Prince, for I must hast away, My Citie gates do long, their Soueraigne to receyue: More true thou neuer couldst, nor loyall subiects finde, VVhose hartes ful fast with perfect loue to thee do cleaue. THen hir Maiestie, drewe neare the Gates of the Citie cal∣led Sainct Stephens gates, which with the walles there were both gallauntly and stronglye repayred. The gate it selfe was thus enriched and beautified. First y• Portcullice was new made both tymber and yron, then the outwarde side of the gate was thus beautified: The Queenes Armes were moste richely and beautifully set forth in the chiefe fronte of the gate, on the oneside thereof, but somewhat lower, was placed the scut∣chion of S. George, or Saincte George his crosse: on the other side, the armes of the Cittie: and directlye vnder the Quéenes Maiesties armes was placed ye Falcon, hir hyghnesse Badge in due forme, & vnder the same were writtē these words, God and the Queen we serue. The Inner side of the gate was thus beau∣tified: on the right side was gorgeously set forth the redde Rose, signifying the house of Yorke, on ye left ye side whyte Rose, repre∣senting the house of Lancaster: in the middest was the whyte & red Rose vnited, expressing ye Vnion, vnder ye which was placed by discent the armes of the Quéene, and vnder that were writ∣ten these two verses: DIVISION kindled strife, Blist VNION quenchte the flame: Thence sprang our noble PHAENIX deare, the pearlesse prince of FAME. And besides that, at this gate, the Waites of the Citie were placed with loude Musicke, who chéerefully and melodiouslye welcomed hyr Maiestie into the Citie: and then passed she for∣ward, through Saint Stephens stréete, where the first Pageant was placed in forme following.
¶The first Pageante was in Saint Stephens Parish in this manner. IT was buylded somewhat like the manner of a stage, of xl. foote long, and in breadth eight foote. From the standing place vpwarde, was a bancke framed in the manner of a frée stone wall, in verye decent and beautiful sorte: and in the hight therof were written these Sentences. Viz. The causes of this common wealth are, God truely preached. Iustice duely executed. Idlenesse expelled. The people obedient. Labour cherished. Vniuersall concorde preserued. FRom the standing place downward, it was beautified with Painters worke artificially, expressing to sight the portra∣ture of these seueral Loombes, and the Weauers in them (as it were working) and ouer euery Loombe the name therof, Viz. Ouer the first Loombe was writtē the weauing of Worsted: o∣uer the seconde, the weauing of Russels: ouer the thirde, the weauing of Darnix: ouer the fourth, the weauing of Tuft Mockado: the fifth the weauing of lace: the sixte the weauyng of Caffa: the seauenth the weauing of Friudge. And then was there the portrature of a Matrone, and two or thrée children, & ouer hyr head was written these wordes, Good nurture chaun∣geth qualities. Vpon the stage there stoode knitting at the one ende eyght small women children spinning Worsted yarne, and at the other ende as many knitting of Worsted yarne hose: & in the myddest of the sayde stage stood a prettie Boy richly appa∣relled, which represented the Common welth of the Citie. And all the reste of the stage was furnished with men, which made the sayde seuerall workes, and before euerye man the worke in déede: and euerye thing thus in readinesse, stayed hir maiesties comming and when she did come, the childe which represented, Common welth, did speake to hir highnesse these wordes. Viz.
Most gracious prince, vndoubted soueraigne Queene, Our only ioy next God, and chiefe defence: In this small shewe, our whole estate is seene. The welth we haue, we finde proceede from thence, The idle hande hath here no place to feede, The painefull wight hath still to serue his neede. Againe, our seate denyes our traffique heere, The Sea too neare decydes vs from the rest, So weake we were within this dozen yeare, As care did quench the courage of the best: But good aduise, hath taught these little handes To rende in twayne the force of pining bandes. 1. Pointing to the spinners.2. Pointing to the Loombes3. Pointing to the vvorkes.From Combed wool we drawe this slender threede, From thence the Loombes haue dealing with the same, And thence againe in order do proceede, These seueral workes, which skilful art doth frame: And all to driue Dame neede into hir caue, Our heades and hands togither labourde haue. VVe bought before the things that now we sel, These slender ympes, their workes do passe the waues, Gods peace and thine we holde and prosper well, Of euery mouth the hands the charges saues. Thus through thy helpe and ayde of power deuine, Doth NORVVICH liue, whose harts and goods are thine. B. G. FINIS. THis shewe pleased hir Maiestie so greatlye, as she particu∣larlye viewed the knitting and spinning of the children, pervsed the Loombes, and noted the seuerall workes and com∣modities which were made by these meanes: and then after great thankes by hir giuen to the people, marched towardes the market place, where was made a seconde deuise as followeth.
The second Pageant. THe seconde Pageant thwarted the stréete at the entrance of the Market, betwéene Maister Skinner and maister Quashe, being in breadth two and fiftie foote of assise, and was diuided into thrée gates, viz. in the middest a maine gate, and on either side a posterne: the maine gate in breadth fourtéene foote, eche posterne eight foote, their heights equall to their pro∣portion: ouer eche posterne was as it were a Chamber, whiche Chambers were replenished with Musicke. And ouer all the gates, passed a stage of eight foote broade, made in the maner of a Pageant, both curious, rich, and delightfull, the whole worke from the Pageant downeward, séemed to be Iasper and Mar∣ble. In the forefront towardes hir Maiestie, was the Armes of Englande on the one side the gate, and on the other side the Fal∣con with Crowne and Scepter, whiche is hir owne badge. The other side was beautified with the armes of Englande on the one side the gate, and with the creste of Englande on the other side. The Stage or Pageant was replenished with fiue persona∣ges appareled like women. The first was, the City of Norwich: the seconde Debora: the third Iudeth: the fourth Esther: the fifthe Martia, sometime Quéene of Englande. At the first sight of the Prince, and till hir Maiesties comming to the Pageaunte, the Musitians, whiche were close in the Chambers of the saide Pa∣geant, vsed their loude Musicke, and then ceassed: wherewith hir highnesse stayed, to whome the personage representing the Cittie of Norwich, did speake in these wordes. viz. WHom Fame resounds with thundring Trump, which rends the ratling skeis, And pierceth to the hautie heauens, and thence descending flies Through flickering ayre: and so conioines the Sea and shoare togither, In admiration of thy grace, good Queene thart welcome hither, More welcome than Terpsicore, was to the town of Troy. Sea-faring men by Gemini conceiue not halfe my ioy: Strong Hercules to Theseus was neuer such delight Nor Nisus to Eurialus as I haue in this sight, Penelope did neuer thirst Vlisses more to see Than I poore Norwich hungred haue to gaine the sight of thee.
And now that these my happy eyes beholde thy heauenly face, The Lord of Lordes I humbly pray, to blisse thy noble grace VVith Nastors life, with Sibilles helth, with Craesus stock and store, VVith all good giftes of Salomon, and twice as many more. VVhat should I say? thou art my ioy next God, I haue none other, My princesse and my peerlesse Queene, my louing nurse and mother. My goods and lands, my hands and hart, my limbes and life are thine, VVhat is mine owne in right or thought, to thee I do resigne. Graunt then (oh gracious soueraigne Queene) this only my request, That that which shal be done in me, be construed to the best. And take in part my slender shewes, wherin my whole pretence Is for to please you Maiestie, and end without offence. So shall I clap my hands for ioy, and hold my selfe as rich As if I had the golde of Iude, and double twice as much. B. G. FINIS. Then Spake Debora WHere princes sitting in their thrones set god before their sight And liue according to his lawe, and guide their people right, There doth his blessed giftes abounde, there kingdomes firmely stand There force of foes cannot preuayle, nor furie fret the lande. My selfe (oh peerlesse Prince) do speake by proofe of matter past, VVhich proofe by practise I perfourmde, and foylde his foes at last. For Iabin king of Canaan, poore Israel did spight, And ment by force of furious rage to ouerrun vs quite. Nyne hundred Iron Chariots, he brought into the field. VVith cruell captaine Sisera by force to make vs yeelde. His force was great, his fraude was more, he fought, we did defende, And twenty winters long did last this warre without an end. But he that neyther sleepes nor slackes such furies to correct, Appointed me Debora for the iudge of his elect: And did deliuer Sisera into a womans hande. I slewe them all, and so in rest his people helde the lande. So mightie prince, that puisaunt Lord, hath plaste thee here to be, The rule of this triumphant Realme alone belongth to thee.
Continue as thou hast begon, weede out the wicked route, Vpholde the simple, meeke and good, pull downe the proud & stoute. Thus shalt thou liue and raigne in rest, and mightie God shalt please. Thy state be sure, thy subiectes safe, thy common welth at ease. Thy God shal graunt thee length of life, to glorify his name, Thy deedes shall be recorded, in the booke of lasting fame. B. G. FINIS. Then spake Iudeth. OH floure of Grace, oh prime of Gods elect, Oh mighty Queene and finger of the Lord, Did God sometime by me poore wight correct. The Champion stoute that him and his abhord? Then be thou sure thou art his mighty hand, To conquere those which him and thee withstand. The rage of foes Betbulia did besiege, The people faint were redy for to yeeld: God ayded me poore widow nerethelesse, To enter into Holofernes field, And with this sword by his directing hand, To slay his foe, and quiet so the land. If this his grace were giuen to me poore wight, If widowes hand could vanquish such a foe: Then to a Prince of thy surpassing might. VVhat Tirant liues but thou mayest ouerthrow. Perseuer then his seruant as thou art, And hold for aye a noble victors part. B. G. Finis. Then Hester spake. The fretting heads of furious foes haue skill, As well by fraude as force to finde their pray: In smiling lookes doth lurke a lot as ill, As where both sterne and sturdy streames do sway, Thy selfe oh Queene, a proofe hath seene of this, So well as I poore Esther haue iwis.
As Iabins force did Israel perplex, And Holofernes fierce Betbuliel besiege, So Hamons slights sought me and mine to vex, Yet shewde a face a subiect to his liege. But Force nor Fraude, nor Tyrant strong can trap, Those whiche the Lorde in his defence doth wrap. The proofes I speake by vs haue erst bin seene, The proofes I speake, to thee are not vnknowen. Thy God thou knowest most dread and soueraigne Queen, A world of foes of thine hath ouerthrowen, And hither nowe triumphantly doth call Thy noble Grace, the comforte of vs al. Doste thou not see the ioy of all this flocke? Vouchsafe to viewe their passing gladsome cheare, Be still (good Queene) their refuge and their rocke, As they are thine to serue in loue and feare: So Fraude, nor Force, nor foraine Foe may stand Againste the strength of thy moste puyssaunt hand. B. G. FINIS. Then spake Martia. WIth long discourse (oh puissant Prince) some tract of time we spend, Vouchesafe yet nowe a little more, and then we make an ende. The thundring blaste of Fame, whereof Dame Norwich first did speake, Not only shooke the aire and skies, but all the earth did breake, It rend vp graues, and bodies raisde, eche spirite tooke his place, And this alonely worde was hearde: Here comth the pearle of Grace, Here commes the Iewell of the worlde, hir peoples whole delight, The Paragon of present time, and Prince of Earthly Might. The voice was strange, the wonder more: For when we viewde the Earth Eche Prince that erst had raigned here, receyvde againe his breath, And with his breath, a libertie to holde againe his place, If any one amongest vs all exceede your noble Grace. Some comforte euery one conceyued to catche againe his owne, His vtmost skill was trimly vsde, to haue his vertues knowne. The playes surpasse my skill to tell, but when eche one had sayde,
Apollo did himselfe appeare and made vs all dismayed. VVil you contende with hir (quoth he,) within whose sacred breast Dame Pallas and my selfe haue framde our soueraigne seate of rest? VVhose skill directs the Muses nine, whose grace doth Venus staine: Hir eloquence like Mercurie: Like Iuno in hir traine? VVhose God is that eternall loue which holds vs al in awe? Beleeue me, you exceede the bounds of equitie and lawe. Therewith they shronk themselues aside, not one I coulde espie, They coutcht them in their caues agayne and there ful quiet lye, Yet I that Martia hight, whiche sometime rulde this land, As Queene for thirtie three yeares space, gate licence at his hande, And so Gurguntius did, my husbands father deare, VVhiche built this Towne and Castle both, to make oure homage here, VVhiche homage mightie Queene accept: The Realme and right is thine: The Crowne, the Scepter, and the sworde to thee we do resigne. And wishe to God, that thou mayste raigne, twice Nestors yeares in peace, Triumphing ouer all thy foes, to all our Ioyes encreace. Amen. B. G. FINIS. Herewith she passed vnder the gate, with suche thanks, as plainely expressed hir noble nature: and the Musitions within the gate vpon their softe instruments vsed broken Musicke, and one of them did sing this Dittie. FRom slumber softe I fell a sleepe, From slepe to dreame, from dreame to depe delight, Eche Iem the Gods had giuen the world to keepe In Princely wise came present to my sight: Suche solace then did sincke into my minde, As mortall man on molde coulde neuer finde. The Gods did striue, and yet their striues were sweete, Ech one woulde haue a Vertue of hir own, Dame Iuno thought the highest place moste meete For hir, bicause of riches was hir throne. Dame Venus thought by reason of hir loue That she might claime the highest place aboue.
The Virgins state DIANA still did prayse, And CERES praysde the fruite of fertile soyle: And PRVDENCE did dame PALLAS chiefly rayse. MINERVA all for eloquence did striue, They smylde to see their quarelling estate▪ And IOVE himselfe decided their debate. My sweetes ({quod} he) leaue of your sugred strife, In equall place I haue assignde you all: A soueraigne wight there is that heareth life, In whose sweete hart I haue inclosde you all. Of ENGLAND soyle she is the soueraigne Queene, Your vigors there do florish fresh and greene. They skipt for ioy and gaue their franke consent, The noyse resounded to the hawtie skie: With one lowd voyce they cryed al, content, They clapt their handes, and therewith waked I. The world and they concluded with a breath, And wisht long raigne to Queene ELIZABETH. B. G. Finis HErewith she passed thorough the market place, which was goodly garnished, & thence through the other streetes which were trimly decked, directly to the Cathedral church, where Te Deum was song, and after seruice she went to the Bishops pa∣lace, where hir Maiestie kept ye time she cōtinued in Norwich. All this was vpon Saturday the xvj. of August. 1578. Vpon the Monday following, M. Churchyard brought Mer∣curie in a gallāt coatch strāgely apparelled, into the grene yard vnder the priuy or bedchamber window, out of the which, the Quéenes Maiestie looked: which Mercurie, in verse made for ye purpose, vttred to hir highnesse, that if it were hir pleasure at any tyme to take the ayre abrode, there were deuises to be séene to pleasure hir Maiestie, & according to that promise, on Tews∣day following (for before that day by meanes of the wether she went not abrode) he performed a very prety pleasant shew be∣fore hir highnes without S. Benels gtes as she went towards
Cossie Parke to hunt. In which day the Minister of the Dutch church pronouncing to hir Maiestie the Oration folowing, pre∣sented the cup therein mentioned, which I estéeme to be worth fiftie poundes, very curiously wrought. Oratio ad Serenissimam Angliae Re∣ginam habita. 19. Augusti. 1578. à Ministro eccle∣siae Belgogermanicae Nordouici in loco publico. MAgna oratoribus qui percelebratrum aetate vixerunt fuit laus, Serenissima Regina, quod Iudicum animos par∣tim suauiloquentia, partim posita rei personae{que} ante ip∣sorum oculos calamitate, in quemcunque vellent animi habitum transformarent: Prius membrum non vulga∣rem nobis ob oculos ponit hominum facilitatem, quod adeo sequaces di∣cto{que} audientes fuerint, vt se linguis duci paterentur: Posterius magnam vbique apud gentes, quarum Respublica optabili ordine fuit constituta obtinuit gratiam: longè autem maiorem apud cos qui Christo nomen de∣derunt: omnium verò maximam apud te ô Serenissima Regina, ecclesiae Christi matrix, cuius animum verbo Dei obsequentem instruxit, non fucatus hic ermo, sed Christi spiritus, pietatis{que} zelus: ipsissima piorum calamitas afflictorum{que} lachrymae, lachrymae inquam Christifidelium te commouerunt, misera dispersa{que} Christi membra quibusuis iniurijs ob∣iecta, mille iam mortibus territa, in tutelam salutem{que} animi iuxta ac corporis recipere at{que} protegere: Ob haec singularia tua in nos pietatis be∣neficia, & quod tutore optimo Magistratus in hac tua Nordouicensi vr∣be (quam Maiestas tua nobis ob Christi religionem exulantibus domici∣lij loco clemeter concessit) viuimus, adde quod populi in nos animum fa∣uorabilem experimur, inprimis Deo patri, & Domino vnico seruatori nostro Iesu Christo, deinde & tibi Serenissimae Reginae immortales non quas debemus sed quas possimus agimus gratias: Porrò humile quidem & vnicum tamen nostrum est votum, animi nostri gratitudinem Maie∣stati tuae ostendere: Ecce igitur nullum munus, sed animum nostrum: nullum regium splendorem, sed pietatis posteritatis{que} monumentum Sere∣nissimae tuae Maiestati consecratum, hoc autem co gratius maiestati tua
ore confidimus, quod inculpati pijssimi{que} Iosephi historia Dei erga Maie∣statem tuam bonitas, ad vinum sit delineata, quem nulla astutia, nullum robur, nulla deni{que} regnandi libido, sed fides constans, Christiani pectoris pietas, coelestis{que} virtus, singulari Dei fauore ex sanguinaria fratrum con∣spiratione, mortis{que} metu, ad summam dignitatem, regni{que} decus euexe∣runt: In huius fratres non liena videtur prouerbialis illa apud Habrae∣os sententia, Inuidia malarum rerum appetitus, & studium variae glo∣riae hominibus saepissime occasio sunt sui interitus, tamen quod Iosephi a∣nimum attinet, ea fuit praeditus & temperantia, & fortitudine, vt ni∣mis iniquus simul & pranus censeri posset, qui eum vel minimo vindi∣candi affectu accusare velit, adco Dei prouidentiae & se, & omne vitae suae studium, vitae inquam in alieno regno discrimen commisit, vt non aliunde quàm à solo Dei nutu pendere visus sit: sed quorsum ista? In te ne haet ipsa alia{que} consimilia ô Serenissima Regina, & regni tui ratione omnium oculis conspicua sunt? Haec inquam esse ecclesiae Christi foelicis∣simum gaudium, spirituale diadema, & summum decus, huius vero re∣gni verè Regium splendorem, atque perennem gloriam, quis nisi mente captus inficias ire potest? Pijssime tu quidem singulari Dei bonitate a∣nimum Iosephi tum in regni tui conseruatione, tum in regno Christi am∣plificando imitata es ô nutrix ecclesiae Dei fidelissima, solius enim Dei est nunc per res (prout hominum culis sunt subiectae) secundasdisperdere, illum autem per quaeuis tentationum genera rerum{que} discrimina extolle∣re: quos vt vasa suae misericordiae agnoscit, ita etiam & bonita∣te & spiritus sui tum consolatione, tum fortitudine ad aeterna vitae foelicitatem prosequitur: Quod nostrum votum ra∣tum esse, Maiestatem tuam regni{que} ordinem spiri∣tuali prudentia ac sapientia stabilire, cam{que} in longam aetatem seruare, tuae item Ma∣iestatis subditos vera sui cognitio∣ne magis ac magis imbuere, di∣gnetur bonus ille & clemens Deus, per merita filij sui Domini nostri Ie∣su Christi. Amen.
REgiae Maiestati post orationem oblati est monumentum aliquod, in cuius superficie artificiose sculpta erat historia Iosephi; e Genesi. In circumferentia verò hoc carmen. Innocuum pietas ad regia sceptra Iosephum, Ex manibus fratrum, carnificis{que}, rapit: Carcere & insidijs sic te Regina tuorum Ereptam duxit culmina ad ista Deus. Inscriptio eras in ipsius capacitate scripta in orbem, hoc modo. Serenissimae Angliae Reginae Elizabethae, ecclesiae Belgicae Nordouici ob religionem exulantes, hoc monumentum & pietatis & posteritatis ergô consecrabant. 1578. In interiore ipsus parte erat insigne serpentis in gyrum conuoti, cui me∣dia insidebat columba, cum hoc Christi Elogio: Prudens vt serpens, simplex vt columba. ¶The minister of the Duch Church his Oration in Englishe. THE Oratours (most gratious Queene) which liued in the age of them that won greatest renowme; were highly commended, for that they could transforme the Iudges mindes partly, by eloquence, and partly by setting downe before their eyes the calamitie of the thing and person they spake of, into what dispo∣sition them listed: the first part declareth vnto vs no common facilitie of men, in that they were so willing in folowing, and attentiue in hea∣ring, as they would suffer themselues to be lead by eloquence: the last, obteined great fauour amongest all nations, whose common weale was gouerned in good order, and far greater amongest the Christians: but greatest of all with thee O most excellent Queene, the nourse of Christ his church, whose minde obedient to Gods worde, the spirite of Christ, and zeale of Godlinesse, and not this profane kinde of speech hath instructed: the verie calamitie of Godly men, and teares of the afflicted, the teares, I say, of faithfull Christians haue throughly mo∣ued thee to defende and protect the miserable and dispersed members of Christ obiecte to euerie kinde of iniurie, before beaten in peeces by
a thousand deathes with the safetie and preseruation as well of minde as bodie: for these thy singuler benefits of Godlinesse towards vs, and that wee liue vnder so good a tutor beeing magistrate in this the Citie of Norwich, which thy maiestie hath of elemencie granted vnto vs for a mansion place, which were banished for Christ his religion, & more∣ouer that we finde the mindes of the people fauourable towards vs, first we geue immortall thanks, not suche as we ought, but such as we are able vnto God the father, and the Lorde our only sauiour Iesus Christ, and then vnto thee most mercifull Queene. Moreouer it is our hum∣ble and yet our only petition to shewe vnto your maiestie the thank∣fulnesse of our minde: behold therfore dedicated to your most excel∣lent maiestie not any gifte but our minde, no princely iewell but a monument of godlinesse and posteritie, the which we hope will be so much the more acceptable to your maiestie, for because the goodnesse of God towardes your maiestie is liuely drawen out of the historie of the innocent & most godly Iosephus, whom neither pollicie, strength nor desire of bearing rule, but constant faith, godlinesse of a Christian heart, and heauenly vertue by Gods singular mercie, deliuered from the bloudie conspiracie of his brethren & feare of death, and brought vnto high dignitie and royal kingdome: to whose brethren that pro∣uerbiall sentence of the Hebrewes is verie fitly alluded. Enuie being the desire of euill things, and couetousnesse of transitorie renowne, is often times the occasion of mans destruction: but touching the minde of Iosephus, the same was endued with suche temperance and forti∣tude, that he might be thought no lesse vniust then wicked, that would accuse him so much as with the least affection of reuengement: so wholly did he commit him self and all the gouernement of his life, his life, I say, put in hazard in a strange kingdom vnto the proui∣dence of God, that he seemed to hang of no other thing then the one∣ly will of God. But to what ende speake I this? Are not these selfe same things, and others their like (ô most excellent Queene) by the eyes of all men cleerely beholden in thee, and the order of thy king∣dome? What man (I say) hauing his wittes, can deny these thinges to be the most happie ioy, spirituall crowne, and cheefest ornament of Christes churche, and truely of this kingdome the princely beautie and perpetuall renowne? Thou surely doest followe moste hollily, the minde of Iosephus, by the singular goodnes of God, aswell in pre∣seruing thy kingdome, as in amplifying the kingdome of Christe (ô thou most faithfull nourse of the churche of God:) for it is in God onely to destroy this man by prosperitie (as it seemeth vnto man) and aduaunce another by all kindes of aduersitie and humaine daunger: whome he acknowledgeth as the vessels of his mercie: and so by his goodnesse, together with the consolation and strength of his spirite, doth bring them to the happinesse of eternall life, which our petition
that good and mercifull God graunt may be ratified in establishing your maiestie and gouernance of your kingdom with spirituall wise∣dome and vnderstanding, in preseruing the same for many yeres, and in induing your maiesties subiectes more and more with true know∣ledge of him, for his sonnes sake our Lorde Iesus Christ. Amen. The Oration ended, there was a certeine monu∣ment presented to her princely Maiestie, in the vpper parte whereof, was artificially grauen the historie of Iosephus out of Genesis. In the compasse thereof was this verse. To royall scepters, godlinesse, Iosephus innocent, Doth take, from brothers bloudie hands, and murtherers intent. So thee, O Queene, the Lord hath ledd from prison and deceite Of thine, vnto these highest toppes of your princely estate. In the inner parte of the same, there was the figure of a serpent, enterfolding it selfe: In the middest whereof did sit a doue with this sentence of Christ, Mat. 10.16. Wise as the Serpent, and meeke as the Doue. The Wednesday towards euening, master Church-yard was likewise readie vpon the water with another de¦uise, when her maiestie was without the gates towardes mount Surrey, but weather hindered it so, as nothing was then done by him. But as shée returned homeward, within Bishops gate at the Hospitall dore, master Ste∣phan Limbert, master of the Grammer schoole in Norwich stoode readie to render her an Oration: her maiestie drew neare vnto him, and thinking him fearefull, saide graci∣ously vnto him: Bee not afeard. He answered her againe in English: I thanke your maiestie, for your good encou∣ragement: and then with good courage entred into this Oration.
¶ Ad illustrissimam Principem Elizabetham Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae reginam &c. Ante fores  Nordouicensis, Oratio Stephani Limberti Ludimagistri publici. AEgyptum fama est inundante Nilo (serenissi∣ma Regina,) & aureo Pactoli flumine quo∣tannis Lidiam irrigari, quaeres in ijs agris maxima faecunditatis causa putatur: In nos autem at{que} adeo vniuersam Angliam, qua late patet, non è Tmolo aut alijs nescio qui∣bus montibus, sed ex illo perenni & vberrimo fonte bonitatis tuae, multi maximi{que} pietatis, iusliciae, mansuetu∣dinis, aliorum{que} innumerabilium bonorum, prae quibus iam viluit aurum & obsoleuit, coptosssimi riui profluxerunt. At{que} vt ex infinitis vel vnum leutter attingam, propterca quòd de pluri∣bus dicere nec est huius loci & temporis, nec facultatis meae. Insig∣nem illam misericordiam celsitudinis tuae, Nobilissima Regina, & ad leuandum pauperrimorum hominum inopiam incredibilem propensionem (qua de plurimis virtutibus nulla deo gratior,  vt canit Homerus, in summa principe nulla mortalibus admitabilior esse potest) quibus tan∣dem laudibus efferemus? quàm honorificis verbis prosequemur? , hoc est, hospitium pauperū celeberrimū est apud omnes posteros regiae virtutis at{que} beneficentiae monumentum fu∣turum, institutum quidem ab illustrissimo Henrico, patre celsi∣tudinis tuae, a nobilissimo Edouardo fratre maximis tabulis con∣signatum, à tua verò maiestate, quod non minorem laudem me∣retur, Cringlefordiensibus fundis & possessionibus egregiè nuper auctū at{que} amplificatū, vt non tam alients iam ornamentis quàm proprijs virtutibus meritò laetari possis. Recordata quippe es pro tua singulari prudentia at{que} eruditione, diuinam illam sapientissi∣mi Platonis legem, quam vnde cimo de legibus libro scriptam re∣liquit,
. tantamigitur benignitatem, tam eximiam, & incredibilem misericordiam tuā, (illustrissima Princeps) quibus complectemur studijs? quibus offi∣cijs, aut qua voce grati animi voluntatem testificabimur? Cùm enim omnes referendae gratiae studio & labore, vel accuratissimas rationes exquisiuerimus, ne vni us quidem huius beneficij, quo nos augustissimae maiestati tuae obstrictos esse & deuinctos agnos∣cimus, magnitudinem assequi poterimus. Superabimur vel ab hoc vno & singulari merito, nedum sperandum est, vt immenso reli∣quorum meritorum pelago, quod tum in omnes tibi subditos pub∣licè, & generatim, tum in hanc ciuitatē proprie ac particulatim exundauit, pares esse queamus. Verè nos iam  incoli∣mus, & in beatis illis insulis de quibus meminit Hesiodus  aetatem agimus, qui non modo frugibus, la∣na, pecore, alijs{que} subsidijs humanae vitae, sed multo magis verae religionis verbi{que} diuini, in quibus animi solis acquiescunt precio∣sissimis opibus abundamus. Sunt qui Britanniam alterum orbem appellauerunt, quod hac aetate nostra dici rectissime posse arbi∣tror, Cùm enivi omnes vndi{que} terrae grauissimis bellis affligantur, & discordiarum iactentur fluctibus, soli nos, celsitudine tua cla∣num moderante, in pacatissimo portu nauigamus, & ab orbe ma∣lorum disiuncti, in caelū quodammodo foelicitatis sublati videmur. Quod est ergo officij nostri, primū deo Opt. Max. gratias agimus, cuius vnius bonitati omnem hanc, quantacun{que} est, be atitudinem acceptam referimus, precamur{que} vt cam nobis propriam & per∣petuam esse velit: deinde celsitudini tuae, serenissima Regina, cu∣ius opera, cura, solicitudine, & partam hanc nobis foelicitatem & tot annos conseruatam agnoscimus. Laetamur hoc aspectu tuo, & gratulamur incredibili studio, quod tum ex meo ipsius sensu lo∣quor, tum omnes qui iam vndi{que} confluxerunt Nordouicenses tui à me dici postulant. At{que} vtinam in haec pectora posses ocu∣los inserere, & occultos animorū nostrorum sinus perlustrare, vi∣deres profectò inclusam intus, quae tantis angustijs erumpere non potest, infinitam molem voluntatis. Fidem omnem, studium, obser∣uantiam, quae tantae Principi debentur, vt hactenus promptissi∣mè detulimus, ita studiosissimè semper deferemus, & si quando
casus aliquis inciderit (quod Deus omen auertat) vt sacrosanctae maiestatis tuae, aut istius florentissimi regni vel salus in discri∣men veniat, vel dignitas periclitetur, non solum bonorum omniū ac facultatum effusionem, sed laterum nostrorum oppositus & cor∣porum pollicemur. Rogamus deinde & obsecramus excellentiam tuam, illustrissima Regina, vt & hoc nostrum qualecun{que} offi∣cium a summa beneuolentia animo{que} quàm gratissimo profectū boni consulas, & de nobis Nordouicensibus sic existimes, ad lauti∣ores te fortasse subditos venisse saepe, ad laetiores nunquam. The Oration of Stephan Limbert, publike Scholemaster, to the most magnificent Prince, Elizabeth of England, Fraunce, and Irelande Queene, &c. before the gates of the Hospitall of Norwiche. IT is reported (moste gracious Queene,) that Ae∣gypt is watered with the yearely ouerflowing of Ni∣lus, and Lidia with the golden streame of Pactolus, which thing is thought to bee the cause of the greate fertilitie of these countries: but vpon vs, & farther, o∣uer all Englande, euen in the vttermost borders many and maine riuers of godlinesse, iustice, humilitie, and other innumera∣ble good things, in comparison of the which, golde is vile & nought worth, do most plentifully gush out, and those not from Tmolus, or other hilles I knowe not which, but from that continuall and moste aboundant welspring of your goodnesse. And that of those infinite goodnesses I may lightly touch one, for that neither place, time, nor my facultie doth permit to speake of many: with what praises shall wee extoll: with what magnificent wordes shall wee expresse that
notable mercie of your highnesse, most renowmed Queene, & vncre∣dible readinesse to releeue the neede of poore men, then the which of many vertues none can be more acceptable vnto God, as Homer wri∣teth, neither any vertue in a mightie Prince more wondered at amon∣gest men. This hospitall of poore men is moste famous, whiche will be a monument of princely vertue and beneficence amongest all po∣steritie, instituted by the moste mightie King Henry your highnesse father, confirmed with the great seale, by the moste noble King Ed∣ward your brother, but by your maiestie whiche deserueth no lesse praise, of late notably encreased and amplified by the landes & pos∣sessions of Cringleforde, that you may not nowe worthily reioyce so much in others ornamentes, as your owne vertues. For you are saide for your singular wisedome and learning, to haue studied that diuine lawe of the moste wise Plato, which he left written in the ele∣uenth booke of lawes. Such your great bountie therefore, so excee∣ding, and incredible mercie (O most vertuous Prince) in what books shall wee comprehende? with what dueties, or with what voice shall wee testifie the good will of a thankfull minde? For when wee dili∣gently seeke all the moste exquisite and curious meanes of thankes∣giuing: wee cannot so much as attaine vnto the greatnesse of this one benefite, by the which we acknowledge our selues bounde & streight∣ly holden to your moste royall maiestie. We shalbe ouercome, euen with this one and singular benefite, so muche the lesse hope haue wee then in any point to counteruaile the huge Sea of the rest of thy be∣nefites which ouerfloweth on euery side aswell publikely and gene∣rally ouer all thy Subiectes, as properly and particularly vppon this Citie. We certeinly nowe inhabite, and lead our liues in those most happie Ilands of the which Hesiodus maketh mention, which not on∣ly abounde with all manner of graine, woll, cattell, and other aydes of mans life, but much more with the moste precious treasure of true religion and the worde of God, in the which onely the mindes of men haue rest and peace. There be that call Englande another worlde, which I thinke may bee moste true in this our age: For whereas all landes on euery side of vs are afflicted with most greuous warres, & tossed with the floudes of dissention, we onely, your highnesse gouer∣ning our sterne, do saile in a moste peaceable hauen, and seuered from the worlde of mischiefes, do seeme after a sorte to bee taken vp into a heauen of happinesse. We therefore, according to our bounden due∣tie, first giue thankes vnto God Almightie, vnto whose goodnesse on∣ly with thankes wee referre all this our happinesse, howe great soe∣uer it be, and pray that he woulde vouchesafe to make the same pro∣per and perpetuall vnto vs. And afterwards, vnto your highnesse, (O most gratious Queene) by whose studie, care and diligence wee con∣fesse this blessednes to be gotten, & so many yeares preserued vnto vs.
We are glad in this beholding you, and we reioyce with desire more than may be beleeued, which as I speake of mine owne thought, so also all these subiectes of Norwich desire me to say the same in their be∣halfe. And I would to God you coulde pearce these our breasts with your eyes, and throughly viewe the hidden and couered creekes of our mindes: then vndoubtedly shoulde you beholde an infinite heape of good will closely shutt vpp within, which cannot breake out of so nar∣rowe straights. All the faith, studie, and obedience, which are due to so greate a Prince, as hitherto we haue most willingly imployed, so will we alwayes most diligently perfourme the same: and if at any time a∣nie chaunce shall happen (which fortune God turne from vs) that the state of thy blessed maiestie or of this florishing realme shoulde come in daunger, or the worthinesse thereof be in hazarde, we doe not onely protest the effusion of all our goods and substaunce, but also the put∣ting foorth and brunt of our strengthes and bodies therein. Finally we desire and beseech thy excellencie (most renowmed Queene) well to accepte of this our duetie, howe soeuer it be, pro∣ceeding from a singular good will, and a moste thankfull minde, and so to think of vs Ci∣tizens of Norwich, that perhaps you haue many times com to peo∣ple more wealthie, but to more ioyfull neuer.
Immediatly after the beginning of the Oration, hir Maiesty called to hir the Frenche Embassadors, wherof there were iij. and diuers English Lords, & willed them to harken, and she hir∣selfe was very attentiue, euen vntill the end therof. And the O∣ration ended, after she had giuen great thanks therfore to Mai∣ster Lymbert, she saide to him: It is the best that euer I heard, you shal haue my hande, and pulled off hir gloue, and gaue him hir hand to kisse, which before knéeling on his knée, he arose and kissed, & then she departed to the Court, without any other shew that night, but that she sente backe to know his name. The nexte night being Thursdaye, there was an excellent Princely Maske brought before hir after Supper, by Maister Goldingham in the Priuie Chāber, it was of Gods & Goddes∣ses, both strangely and richly apparelled. The first that entred was MERCVRIE. Then entred two Torch-bearers in Purple Taffata Man∣dilions laid with siluer lace, as all other the Torchberers wer. Then entred a consort of Musicke, viz sixe Musitions, all in long vestures of white Sarcenet gyrded aboute them, and gar∣lands on their heades playing very cunningly. Then two Torch-bearers more. The IVPITER and IVNO. Then two Torch bearers more. Then MARS and VENVS. Then two Torch bearers more. Then APOLLO and PALLAS. Then two Torch-bearers. Then NEPTVNE & DIANA: And last cōmeth CVPIDO & concludeth y• matter. Thus whē they had once marched about the chamber, MERCVRIE dischargeth his message in these words to the Quéene. The good meaning Maior, and al his brethren, with the reste, haue not rested from praying vnto the Gods to prosper thy comming hither, and the Gods themselues moued by their vnfained prayers, are ready in person to bid thee wor∣thily welcome, and I MERCVRIE the God of Merchantes and Merchandize, and therefore a fauourer of these Citizens, being thoughte meetest and chosen fittest to signifie the same.
Gods there be also which cannot come, being tyed by the tyme of the yeare, as CERES in Haruest, BACCHVS in Wines, PO∣MENA in Orchardes. Onely HIMINEVS denyeth his good wil, eyther in presence, or in person: notwithstanding, DIANA hath so countrechecked him therefore, as he shall euer hereafter be at your commaundement. For my part, as I am a reioycer at your comming, so am I a furtherer of your welcome hither, and for this tyme I bid you farewell. Then marched they aboute agayne, and that done, Iupiter spake to the Quéene in this sorte, and then gaue her a ryding Wande of Whales n curiously wrought. FEare not oh Queene, thou arte beloued so, As Subiectes true, will truely thee defende: Feare not my power to ouerthrow thy wo, I am the God that can eche misse amende. Thou doest know, great IVPITER am I, That gaue thee fyrst thy happy Soueraigntie. I giue thee still, as euer thou haste had, A peerelesse power, vnto thy dying daye: I giue thee rule to ouercome the bad, And loue, to loue thy louing Subiectes aye. I giue thee heere this small and slender wande, To shew, thou shalt in quyet rule the Lande. Then Iuno spake, whose gift was a Purse curyously wrought. IS IVNO rich? no sure she is not so She wantes that wealth, that is not wanting heere, Thy good gets thee friendes, my welth wins many a foe, My riches rustes, thyne shyne passing cleere. Thou art beloued of Subiectes farre and nye, Which is such wealth as money cannot bye. Farewell fayre Queene, I cannot giue thee aught, Nor take away thy good that is so bound: Thou canst not giue, that I so long haue sought, Ne can I hold the riches thou hast found.
Yet take this gifte, though poore I seeme to be, That thou thy selfe shalt neuer poorer be. Then after they had marched agayne about, Mars gaue his gift, which was a fayre payre of Knyues, and sayd. VVHere force doth fiercely seeke to foster wrong, There MARS doth make him make a quick recoyle, Nor can indure that he should harbour long, Where naughty wights manure in goodly soyle, This is the vse that aydes the force of Warre, That MARS doth mend, that force doth seeke to marre. And though oh Queene thou beest a Prince of peace, Yet shalt thou haue me fastly sure at neede: The stormes of stryfe, and blustering broyles to cease, Which forraigne foes, or faythlesse friendes may breede. To conquer, kill, to vanquish and subdue, Such fayned folke, as loues to liue vntrue. These wordes were grauen on those Knyues. To hurt your foe, and helpe your friend, These Knyues are made vnto that end. Both blunt and sharpe you shall vs fynde, As pleaseth best your Princely mynde. Then spake Venus, whose gift was a whyte Doue. IN vayne (fayre Queene) from Heauen my comming was, To seeke tamend that is no way amis: For now I see thy fauour so doth passe, That none but thou, thou onely she it is, Whose bewty bids ech wight to looke on thee, By view they may an other VENVS see. Where bewty boastes, and fauour doth not fayle, What may I giue to thee O worthy wight? This is my gift, there shall no woe preuayle, That seekes thy will, agaynst thy willes delight,
Not where they will, but where it likes thy minde, Accept that friend, if loyall thou him finde. The Doue being caste off, ranne directly to the Quéene, and being taken vppe and set vppon the Table before hir Maiestie, fate so quietly, as if it had bin tied. Then after they had marched again about APOLLO presē∣ted his gift, which was, an Instrument called a Bandonet, and did sing to the saide Instrument this Dittie, as he played. IT seemeth straunge to see such strangers here, Yet not so straunge, but straungers knows you well: Your vertuous thoughts to Gods do plaine appeare, Your acts on earth bewraies how you excell: You cannot die, Loue here hath made your lease, Whiche Gods haue sent, and God sayeth shal not cease. Vertuous desire desired me to sing, No Subiects sute, thoughe suters they were all, APOLLOS gifts are subiects to no King, Rare are thy gifts, that did APOLLO call, Then still reioyce, sithens God and Man say so, This is my gift, thou neuer shalt haue woe. PALLAS then speaketh, and presenteth hir gifte, whiche was a Booke of Wisedome. MOst worthy wight, what wouldste thou haue of me? Thou haste so muche, thou canste enioy no more: I cannot giue, that once I gaue to thee, Nor take away thy good I gaue before. I robbed was by Natures good consent Againste my will, and yet I was content. A PALLAS thou, a Princesse I will be: I Queene of losse, thou Goddesse whiche haste got: I sometime was, thou onely now arte she, I take, thou gauest that lucke that was my lot,
I giue not thee this Booke to learne thee aught, For that I knowe already thou arte taught. Then after they had marched againe about, NEPTVNE did speake: his gifte was, a great Artificiall Fishe, and in the belly thereof a noble Pike, which he threwe out before hir Maiestie. WHat arte thou (Queene) that Gods do loue thee so? Who woon their willes to be so at thy will? How can the worlde become thy cruell foe? How can DISDAINE or MALLICE seeke to kill? Can Sea or Earth deuise to hurte thy hap, Since thou by Gods doest sit in Fortunes lap. As Heauen and Earth haue vowed to be thine, So NEPTVNES Seas haue sworne to drench thy foes, As I am God, and all the waters mine, Still shalte thou get, but neuer shalt thou lose: And since on Earth my wealth is nought at all, Accept good will, the gifte is verye small. DIANA presented a Bowe and Arrowes nocked and headed with siluer. Hir speache was thys. WHo euer found on Earth a constant friend, That may compare wyth this my Virgin Queene? Who euer found a body and a mynde So free from staine, so perfect to be seene, Oh Heauenly hewe, that aptest is to soile, And yet doste liue from blot of any foyle Rare is thy gifte▪ and giuen to fewe or none, Malist therefore of some that dare not saye, More shines thy light, for that I know but one, That any suche shew, to followe on their way. Thou thou arte shee, take thou the onely praise, For chastest Dame in these oure happy daies: Accept my Bowe, since beste thou dost deserue, Thoughe well I knowe thy mynde can thee preserue.
Cupido his spéeche, his gift an Arrow of Golde. AH ha, I see my mother out of sight, Then let the boy nowe play the wag a while, I seeme but weake, yet weake is not my might, My boyishe wit can oldest folke beguile. Who so doth thinke, I speake this but in iest, Let me but shoote, and I shall quench his reste, Marke here my shafts: This all is made of woodde, Whiche is but softe, and breedes but softe goodwill. Nowe this is guilte, yet seemes it golde full good, And doth deceiue blinde louing people still. But here is one is seldome felte or seene: This is of Golde, meete for the noblest Queene. Wherefore Dame faire, take thou this gifte of me, Thoughe some deserue, yet none deserue like you, Shoote but this shafte at King or Caesar: He, And he is thine, and if thou wilte allowe. It is a gifte, that many here woulde craue, Yet none, but thou, this golden Shafte maye haue. There was written vppon the shafte. My Coulour Ioy, my Substaunce Pure, My Vertue suche as shall endure. Goldingham. FINIS. SIr Maiestie receiued these gifts very thankfully, the Gods and Goddesses with the reste of the maske marched about the Chamber againe, and then departed in like maner as they came in. Then the Quéen called to hir Maister Robert Wood, the Mayor of Norwich, whome first the hartily thanked: and toke by the hande, and vsed secret conference, but what, I know not. And thus this delightfull night passed, to the ioy of all whi∣che sawe hir Grace in so pleasant plight. The nexte daye being Friday in whiche day the Course re∣moued, the Stréetes towards Saint Benets gates, were han∣ged,
from the one side to the other, with cordes made of hearbes and floures, with Garlands, Coronets, Pictures, rich clo∣thes, and a thousand deuices. At the gates themselues, there was a stage made, very richly apparelled with cloth of Golde, & crimsen veluet, wherevppon in a close place made thereon for the purpose, was placed very swéete Musicke: and one ready to tender hir this speache following. The dolefull houre of hir de∣parture came, she passed from the Courte, to those gates, wyth suche countenaunces, both of hir Maiesties parte, and hir Sub∣iects, now dolorous, nowe chéerefull, as plainly shewed the lo∣uing harts of both sides: when she came there, the speach was thus vttered vnto hir. TErrestriall Ioyes are tied with sclender ile, Eche happy hap full hastily doth slyde, As Sommer season lasteth but a while, So Winter stormes do longer time abide: Alas what blisse can any time endure? Our Sunshine day is dashte with sodaine shoure. Coulde tongue expresse our secreate ioyes of hart, (Oh mighty Prince) when thou didst come in place? No no God wot, nor can expresse the smarte Thy Subiectes feele in this departing case. But gratious Queene, let here thy Grace remaine In gratious wise, till thy returne againe. In lieu' whereof, receiue thy Subiects heartes, In fixed Faith continually thine owne: Who ready rest to lose their vitall parts In thy defence, when any blaste is blowne. Thou arte oure Queene, oure rocke and onely stay, We are thine owne to serue by night and day. Farewell oh Queene, farewell oh Mother deere, Let IACOBS God thy sacred body guarde: All is thine owne that is possessed here, And all in all is but a small rewarde
For thy greate grace, God length thy life like NOE, To gouerne vs, and eke thy Realme in Ioy. AMEN. B. G. and spoken by himselfe, to whome hir Maiestie saide: VVe thanke you hartily. FINIS. Then with the Musicke in the same place was song this shorte Dittie following, in a very swéete voice. WHat vayleth life, where sorrowe soakes the harte? Who feareth Death that is in deepe distresse? Release of life doth best abate the smarte Of him, whose woes are quite without redresse. Lend me your teares, resigne your sighes to me, Helpe all to waile the dolor whych you see. What haue wee done, shee will no longer stay? What may we do to holde hir with vs still? Shee is oure Queene, wee subiectes muste obey. Graunt, though with griefe to hir departing will. Conclude wee then, and sing with sobbing breath, God length thy life, (oh Queene ELIZABETH.) B. G. FINIS. THen departed hir Maiestie out of the gates, within a flight shot or little more whereof, Maister Churchyarde had an∣other shewe, which I leaue to himselfe to vtter: bycause my hope is, he will manifest that amongest the reste shortely. This finished, hir Maiestie in Princely manner marched to∣wardes the confines of the liberties of the Citie of Norwich, whiche I suppose almost twoo miles: before she came there, Maister Maior brake to my Lorde Chamberlaine, that he was to vtter to hir Maiestie an other Oration, wherof my Lord sée∣med to haue good liking: but before they came to the saide con∣fines,
Maister Maior was willed to forbeare the vtteraunce of the same his Oration, bicause it was about vij. of the clock, and hir Maiestie had then fyue myles to ride. Neuerthelesse he gaue to hir Maiestie both his Orations in writing, whiche she than∣ked him for. She also thanked the Maior, euery Alderman, and the Commoners, not onely for the great cheare they hadde made hir, but also for the open housholds they kept to hir high∣nesse seruaunts, and al other. Then she called Maister Maior & made him Knight: & so departing, sayd: I haue laid vp in my breast such good wil, as I shall neuer forget Norwich, and procée∣ding onward did shake hir riding rod and said: Farewel Norwich, wyth the water stāding in hir eies: In which great good wil to∣wards vs all, I beséech God to continue hir Maiestie with long and triumphant raigne ouer vs all. AMEN. The Maiors Oration at hir departure, deliuered in writing. QVae veniētia lata sunt, ea cū recedunt solent esse tristiora. Quid enim (Summe Deus) potuit hic Sol vsquàm conspicere beatius, quam nos videbamur nobis, vel cum hic primum (Serenissima Princeps) Maiestatis tuae splendor illuxerit: vel reliquo hoc perex∣iguo sanè tempore quo in tua praesentia, tanquam in omnium rerum falicissima vbertat conquteuimus: Sed vae illi rerum humanarum vicissitudini, quae nihil illibatum, nihil aeter∣num patitur: ita voluptas tristitiam trahit, & letitiam nostram dolor nō excipit solum: sed acerbissime intercipit: Ita vt, qui nuper accidentem te lautitijs omnibus excepimus: abeuntem nunc, si id pateretur Amplitudinis tuae & tanti comitaetus celebritas, pullatis vestibus prosequeremur. Tāti dloris causam si postules, nescio quid suae Maiestatis personae tuae Deus indidit, quod summā tui Reuerentiā aamirabilis cuisdam amoris plenā ecitat, quo fit vt agre pattamur nos à te diuells. Accedit quòd vtcun{que} Amplitudini tuae visi sum (quae tua est clementiae) omne gratitudinis officio satisfecisse: nobis tamen ipsis nondum sa∣tisfecimus, nec vnquam sanè satisfacturi sums. Longioris tamen temperis vsuram optare∣mus, si id cōmodum esset, vt si nō maius, at certe diuturnius specimen vel obedienciae, vela∣moris nostri exhiberemus. Sed & voluntati tuae & vtilitati public cedendum est: quam te & velle semper, & in omnibus spectare satis nobis magno cum emclumento nostro est compertum. I nunc igitur, i pede farsto, quo tua te virtus vocat. Nes autem vel hoc ipsum abunde consolabitur, (qud & immortales gratias, & perpetuā rei memoriam meretur) Te principem post omnium memoriam praestātissimam dignatam nostres lares tam huma∣niter inuisisse. Postremum hoc eri, nos hic coram te, quam Dominus vnxie, at{que} omni hac celebritate Deum nunc intuentem testari in aimas nostra, nos fidem & obedientiā in illo, nostram tibi vns inperpetuum reseruaturos. Tu Religionis nutrix, Reipublicae mater, Principum decu, Subditorum solacium, falicissimè (nellem dicere) Vale.
The Mayors last Oration Englished. THose thinges which at their comming are ioyfull, when they depart are the more sorowful. For what (ô mighty God) could this Sunne at any tyme be∣hold more happy, than we did seeme to our selues, either whē first (ô most merciful Prince) the bright∣nesse of thy Maiestie did here shine out, or els in all the tyme we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of all thinges. But woe to that chaungeable course of hu∣maine thinges, which suffreth nothing vncorrupt, nor any thing eter∣nall▪ so pleasure bringeth after it sadnesse, and griefe doth not onely sòdainly take away our delightes, but most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately receyued thee approching with all ioyes: should follow thee departing (if the renowne of your highnesse and trayne would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demaund the cause of so great sorow, I know not what part of his Maiestie God hath in∣dued your person withall, which doth stirre vp great reuerence of thee, but full of a certaine wonderfull loue, wherby it comes to passe that we hardely suffer our selues to be seuered from your presence. Adde moreouer, that we seeme after a sort vnto your highnesse (such is your clemencie) to haue satisfied euery pointe of gratefulnes: yet haue we not, nor euer shall we satisfie our selues in that behalfe. VVe would wishe a longer vse of tyme (if it were profitable) that we might expresse, if not a greater, yet a more continuall shew of our loue and obedience. But we must both yelde to your pleasure, and to the com∣mon wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular ad∣uuncement, you neuer cease to seeke out and afoord the same to all your subiectes. Go now therefore, go with luckie steppe thether, whe∣ther thy vertue calleth thee. And for vs, this shall comfort vs aboun∣dantly (which deserueth both immortall thankes and perpetuall me∣mory) that thou so renowmed a Prince, hast vouchsafed so curteously to visite our dwellinges. And finally, we here before thee, whom God hath annointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now beholdeth vs) to our witnesse, that we will keepe our faith and o∣bedience in him to thee onely for euer. Thou Nurce of religion, Mo∣ther of the Common VVealth, Beautie of Princes, Solace of thy Sub∣iecte, most happily (oh how I rue to speake it) Farewell.
Oratio St. Limberti quae discessura Principe reci∣tata fuisset, nisi quod sero iter ingressa est. SCribit Gellius in noctibus Atticis, Eminentissima Prin∣ceps, Phauorinum Philosophum dixisse, nunc matrem es∣se diem, nunc esse neuer cam, & hunc versum longo ho∣minum aeuo probatū sermonibus suis vsurpasse, . Quem ip∣se Gellius ita interpretatur, dolorum ac voluptatum esse vicissitudines, non omni dic bene esse posse, sed isto bene, atque alio malè. Nihil autem nec venustius vnquam nec verius dictum fuisse, tum perpetua rerum huma∣narum volubilit as, & crebrae mutationes indicant, tum hodiernus dies fi∣dem fcit amplissimam. Non enim tam recreauit nos è diuturno me rore atque desyderio laetissimus ille aduentus celsitudinis tuae, quàm isto quem vndi{que}iam parari videmus discessu exanimamur, vt{que} mnium aetatum atque ordinum infiniti plausus & gratulationes venientem exceperunt: ita nemo est qui non discedentem etiam luctu & achrymis prosequatur. Equidem vt de me ipso loquar, quoniam meus mihi notissimus est animus, nunquam me duriorem prouinciam sustinuisse profiteor, quàm est haec imposita mihi hoc tempore, nō solum vt affarar cruditissimam principem, quod tamen per se arduum est & difficile, sed multo magis vt hoc tristi & acerbo valedicendi munere defungerer. Quis enim non vchementer indolueris breuissimo tempore ac veluti  vidisse se quod maxi∣me concupierat, ereptum ante quam eo penitus perfrui liceret? Quam lu∣ctuosum est, lactentes infantulos ab vberibus matrum & charissimis am∣plexibus diuelli? A patribus filios quibus vnicè diliguntur grauioi ali∣quo casu separari? Nullis tamen mortalibus arbitror naturam tantos a∣mores tantam beneuolentiam, aut in cos quos procrearunt ingenerasse, aut ā quibus sunt procreati, quanta est ea qua nos omnes celsitudinem tuam cōmunem, videlicet parentem patriae, suspicimus, colimus, venera∣mur. Magna vis est amicitiae & necessitudinis, quae saepe facit, vt qui vel societate aliqua, vitae{que} consuetudine aliquandiu coniuncti fuerint, ita cohaereant animis & quasi coalescant: vt a se inuicem distrahi atque dis∣iungi molestissime serant. Hinc Theseasides omnium ore ac literis cele∣brata, aliorum{que} innumerabilium arctissima necessitudo, quos nulla peris cula, nulli terra mari{que} labores, ab eorum quibus conuixissent suauissim
Comitatu depellere potuerunt. Quae autem tanta studia, tanti ardores ani∣moum vsquam reperti sunt, qui nostris erga te praestantissima Princeps synceris minime{que} fucatis voluntatibus conferantur? Non satis ostendunt ista fidem & beneuolentiam nostram, maior est quàm vel cuiusquam e∣ruditissimi copia, nedum huius ingenij mei mediocritate possit illustrari. Nullas vnquam res arctiori nexu & maiori concordia, quàm animum & corpus natura colligauit, quod & in vita declarat incredibilis illorū conspiratio, sibi{que} mutu subueniendi cura, & in morte grauissima distra∣ctio. Nos autem qui Christianam religionem ac pietate profitemur, multo magis quàm illi Decij, Scaeuolae, Curtij, qui se pro Repub. Romana de∣nouisse dicuntur, & patriam, & cam qua patriae salus continetur etiam vita nostra chariorem habere didicimus. Quis enim est qui pro ea dubi∣tet mortem oppetere, quae si non esset, grauiorem morte seruitutem perpeti cogeretur? Neque verò est haec pietas tuorum animis leuiter infixa, & quasi summo fundata solo, Illustrissima Regina, sed altis nixa radicibus qua nullis fortunae procellis ac tempestatibus concuti, nullis subuerti ma∣chinis, nullo impetu expugnari potest. Quantum enim facit ad amoris & fidei stabilitatem, quod sciamus celsitudinem tuam non arbitrio vacillan∣tis fortunae, sediure haereditario, hoc est  dominati∣onem & imperium obtinuisse, nec Homericum tibi Iouem , sed verum illum rerum omnium opificem & fabricatorem in manu tradidisse? ac propterea summam esse nobis parendi necessitatem etiam diuinitus impositam, ne Gyganteo more , vt est in fabulis, ipfi{que} Deo sceleratissimè bellum indicere vi∣deamur. Quid cùm perspiciamus quantis quam{que} diuinis rempub meritis affcerit celsitudo tua vtiam ex innumerabilibus terris ac gentibus quae soli subiectae sunt, nulla, non dicam, anteferrinobis, sed e comparari qui∣dem possit. Non ad illam parendlegem & necessitatem summam etiam oporter voluntatem accedere? Quid enim referam vigintiiam totos annos in tanta nos pace, tanta tranquillirate vixisse, quantam non solum haec ae∣tas nunquam vidit, sed ne omnium quidem seculorum ac gentium anna∣les vetustatis{que} monumenta memoriae prodiderunt? Quid commemorem longè velut è specula prospectas tempestates, praeuisa simul & anticipata censilio grauissima pericula, clandestinas insidias non tam vi quàm arte obrutas, omnes deni{que} nefaris conatus maximo cum applausis extinctos, nullo aut sane perexiguo moum populari? Facerent ista quidem vt qua∣liscun{que}
esses, omnem tamen fidem & beneuolentiam maiestati tuae liben∣tissimis animis praestaremus. I am vero cùm mitissimam te & clementis∣simam principem habeamus, quae in summa potestate constitut ne tantil∣lum quidem ab aequitate modo{que} recedis, quis est tam ferus ac ferreus, quem non ad omnem obseruantiam tantae virtutis inuitarent? Quare si firmissima sit custodia principum fides, subditorum, quemadmodum pru∣dentissimos sensisse viros accepimus, quid potest tutius esse & securius ex∣cellentia tua, quàm tanta tuorum studia muniuerunt? Extraxi longius orationem meam, Nobilissima Regina, vt paulo diutius frueremur vsurae incundissimi conspectus tui, quem non fine maxima molestia grauissimo{que} dolore amissuri sumus. Sed quia ferenda sors est quae vitari non potest, ne profectionem tuā plus aequo remorari videar dum obsequi studeo cupidi∣tati nostrae, finem dicendifaciā. Tuam vero Maiestatē quam ex oculis no∣stris hodiernus dies eripiet animis tamē & voluntatibus prosequemur, absentem semper intuebimur, legibus & mandatis studiosissime obtemperabimus, salutem deni{que} & incolumitatem tuam quae nostra etiam salus continetur, Deo Opt. Max. assiduis precibus quàm diutissimè tuendam & conser∣uandam commendabimus.
Mr Limberts Oration, vvhich had bin rehearsed at hir Graces departing, but that she set late forward in hir Progresse. GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (moste excellente Princesse) doth write, that it was the saying of Phae∣uorinus the Philosopher, that the daye was one while a mother, another while a stepdame: and that hee vsed this verse, long time allowed, a∣mong men, in hys accustomed communication, . VVhich verse Gellius in this man∣ner expoundeth: That of sorrows & pleasures there be changes, that it cannot be well euery daye with vs, but this day well, and that day yl. And surely, that nothing hath bin at any time more gallauntly or truely spoken, both the continuall course of mans vncertaine estate, and the often alterations wherto he is subiect, manifestly declare, beside that, this present day giueth euident proofe thereof. For, the most ioyfull comming of your high∣nesse, did not so muche recreate and comforte vs in our daylye desire and longing, as we are discouraged by this your depar∣ting, whereto we see preparation made on al hands. And as all ages and degrees receyued your Maiestie, with ioy and gladnes at your comming: so there is not one but lamenteth and mour∣neth at your graces going. And doubtlesse for my part, bycause myne owne hart is best knowne to my selfe, I protest that I ne∣uer tooke vppon me a greater charge, then that, wherewyth at this present I am burthened: not onely to speake face to face with a most learned lady and princesse, which notwithstanding is, of it self, a harde and a busie matter: but, which is much more, that to me is befallē the sad and sorowful office of leaue taking. For, who woulde not be exceedingly greeued, to see the thing which he principallye desired, in a verye shorte time, and as it were , at an instant taken away, before he might haue therof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it, to pul away sucking babes from the breastes and bosomes of their most lo∣uing
mothers? That sonnes and fathers, through some miserable misfortune, shoulde be sundered? Yet I notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature hath not ingendered in any mā, such large loue, and so great good will, no not towarde them whom they haue begotten, or of whom they themselues haue bene begot∣ten, as is the loue and good will wherewith we aduaunce, obey, and reuerence your Maiestie, being the mother and nurse of this whole Common welth, and Countrie. Great is the force of friendshippe and familiaritie, which oftentimes bringeth to passe, that they, which eyther by some kinde of fellowshippe, or by an accustomed condition of life, in tracte of time haue bin closely knitte, and so become both of one minde, and as it were growne togither, that hard and scant they may be seperated, & set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulnesse of Theseus, commē∣ded by the mouth and monumentes of all men: and the entier friendshippe of innumerable more, whō no daungers, nor la∣bours, eyther by sea or land, coulde sequester from their sweete society & comfortable company, with whom they long had li∣ued. And what desires, or what delightes haue any where bin founde, that may be compared with the sincere affection, and vnfayned good wil, which we beare to your Highnesse, moste excellent Princesse? These are not sufficiente shewes of our fayth and beneuolence, which is much greater, than that the e∣loquence of any learned man, or that the slendernesse of my witte and capacitie maye make it manifest. Nature at no tyme tyed any thyng with a straighter knotte, or set seueral things at greater agreement, than the soule and the bodie: a declaration wherof is, the incredible consent and concorde of thē both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in thē both: and the grieuous departing, at the houre of death, the one frō the other remayning in them both. But we whiche professe Christian religion and godlynesse, haue learned this lesson, not only to loue our countrye, but also hir highnesse, in whom the health and safetie of our countrey consisteth, farre aboue the valiaunt Decij, the Scaeuolae the Curtij, which ventured their liues for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to loue hir grace much
better than our owne liues. For, what is he that woulde doubt to dye for hir sake, who if she were not, he should be constrey∣ned to abide a bondage much more bitter than death? Neyther is this faithfull loue of vs your subiectes (most excellente Queene) lightly layde vp in our heartes, and scarcely couered as it were in the ground, but deepely rooted, so that by no stormes nor tempestes of Fortune it can be shaken, by no engines ouer∣throwen, by no force or violence vndertroden. For how muche maketh it for the establishmente of faith and loue, in that we know your Maiestie hath obteyned regimente and rule, not at the pleasure and appoyntmente of wauering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, : nor that the Homericall Iuppiter , but that the maker and Creator of all things delyuered it into your Highnesse handes? And therefore a singular neces∣sitie of obedience is layde vpon vs, euen by God himselfe, least in Giant guise as it is feygned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with him most wickedly, bidde him battell. When we beholde those excellent and diuine benefites, whiche youre grace hathe bestowed vpon the common wealthe, in so much that among manye, yea innumerable Countreys, and nations vnder the Sunne, none (I will not saye maye bee pre∣ferred before vs) but not so much as one may be compared with vs. Ought not then a singulare loue and good will to be linc∣ked with that lawe, and necessitie of obediēce? For what should I make rehearsall of full twenty yeares, wherein we haue liued in such peace and tranquilitie, as not only this our age hath ne∣uer seene the like, but as in olde recordes and aunciente Chro∣nicles of all ages and people, is no where mentioned? What shoulde I call to memorie hurlyburlies foreseene a farre off, as from an espyall: exceeding great daungers, not only perceyued by wisedome, but also preuented by counsell: secrete snares, and priuie practises disappoynted, not to muche by violence, as by policie: finally, all Treacherous attemptes, and Rebellious en∣terprises, with great gladnesse and reioicing extinguished, with∣out any tumult at all, or very little (doúbtlesse) insuing among
the people? These things might make vs (although your Grace were otherwise than you are) performe all dutie of fayth and loue, with most willing mindes to your Maiestie. Nowe, for so muche as we haue your highnesse, our mercifull and bountifull Soueraigne, who possessing principalitie and royall regimente, doest not swarue an heares breadth from iustice and equitie, what is he for a man so sauage and obstinate, whome these so singulare and rare vertues may not allure to all loue and allegi∣ance? Wherefore, if the surest safetie of Princes is the faith of their subiectes (as we haue heard very wise men holde opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excel∣lencie, which the studies and endeauoures of your people, being so great, haue fenced and fortifyed? I haue made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queene) to the intent we might the lon∣ger enioy your comfortable presence, from the whiche, to oure great griefe and sorow, we shall depart. But bycause lucke must be borne, which can not be auoyded, least I might seeme more than is meete to delay youre Graces progresse, whiles I am in hand to please mine owne humour, I will make an ende. Con∣cerning your Maiestie, whose presence this day will shutte from our sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reuerence, we will loue youre Highnesse with all oure heartes, mindes, and endeauoures: we will most dutyfully obey youre Graces Lawes and Commaundementes. Finally, your Maie∣sties good estate (wherevpon likewise our safetie depen∣deth) we will commende to Almightie God in oure dayly Prayers, that the same a long tyme may bee continued, and also pre∣serued. Amen.
¶ Ad Solem nubibus obductum die Lunae. 18. Augusti. 1578. SPlendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis? Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi. Hasta minax procul est, non Gorgonis or a videbis, Pallas inermis adest, splendide Phoebe redi. Scilicet à tanto metuis tibi lumine forsan: Ne superet radios foemina Phoebe tuos. Pulcher Apollo tibi ne sit Regina rulori: Ipse decore tuo vincis, & illa suo. Euge redux reducem quia pulsa nocte reducis Phoebe diem: toto est gratius orbe nihil. Haec pepulit tetri tenebras noctem{que} papismi, Et liquidum retulit relligione diem. Euge nigras nebulas radijs quia saepe repellis Phoebe tuis: paene est gratius orbe nihil. Texuerant remoras discrimina mille Papistae: Ne ceptum Princeps continuaret iter: Nec tamen hunc nebulae potuerunt condere Solem: Quanuis tu nebulis cedis Apollo tuis. Ergo iubar nostrum repulisse obstacula cernis: Sic age, Sol nebulas lumine pelle tuo. Splendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis? Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi. Eiusdem. SVstinet, ornat, habet, regnum, literaria, formam, Prouida, docta, decens, Iuno, Minerua, Venus. Singula dona trium simul ELIZABETHA Dearum Prouida, docta, decens, sustinet, ornat, habet. Esse Deas lusi: Diuinam dicimus istam: Quamuis nec liceat nec libet esse Deam.
¶ To the Sunne couered with cloudes, vpon Monday, being the. 18. of August. 1578. IN shadowing cloudes why art thou closd? ò Phoebus bright retire: Vnspoused Pallas present is, ô Phoebus bright retire. The threatning speare is floong farre off, doubt not grim Gorgons ire: Vnarmed Pallas present is, ô Phoebus bright retire. Perhaps thou art afrayd: And why? at this so large a light: Least that a VVoman should excell, thy beames (ô Phoebus) bright. Let not a Queene, a Virgine pure, which is, and euer was, O faire Apollo, make thee blush: you both in beautie passe. O Phoebus safe and sound returne, which, banishing the nigh, Bringst backe the day: in all the world nothing of like delight. She, only she, the darkenesse draue of Poprye quite away: And, by Religion, hath restord the bright and lightsome day. O Phoebus, with thy beames, which foylst the cloudes both blinde and blacke, The world, in manner all, a thing of like delight doth lacke. A thousand daungers and delayes, the Papistes had deuisde, To thende our Princesse should abridge, hir progresse entreprisde: Yet this our bright and shining sunne, cast light through euery cloud: Although in cloudes thou art content, Apollo, oft to shroude. Thou seest our Sunne in comely course, cuttes off eache stop & stay: Do thou the like, and by thy light driue euery cloude away. In shadowing cloudes why art thou closd? ô Phoebus bright retyre: Vnspoused Pallas present is: ô Phoebus bright retyre. By the same. HIr kingdome all by prouidence, Queene Iuno doth vphold: And of Minerua Lady learnd, is learned lore extold: And Venus fayre of countenance, hath beautie vncontrold. These sundry giftes of Goddesses three, Elizabeth possesseth: By prouidence hir peoples peace, and comfort she increaseth: Hir learning, learning amplifies: hir beautie neuer ceasseth. I did but ieast, of Goddesses to giue them three the name: This Lady mayst thou Goddesse call, for she deserues the same: Although she will not vndertake, a title of such fame.
Gloria Ciuilis an bellica Maior. Dialogus. . POE. GRaecia Alexandrum, praeclaros Roma triumphos Caesatis eximij, fortem Britannia Brennum Arthurum{que} canit, Permulos Anglia reges Edidit inuictos summo quos aequat Olympo. POLI. Ergò nihil maius? superant haec omnia laude Virgineae, semper mirabitur Anglia nomen ELIZABETHA tuum, famam{que} ad sydera tollet Donec brumali concrescet frigore tellus. Donec & aestiuis candescet solibus aether Tempora nulla tuae capient obliuia laudis. POLE. Innumeras Macedo gentes sua sub iuga misit Et totum quà terra patet fortissimus orbem Imperio parere suo, virtute subegit Et doluit quod non alius superesset & orbis Quem bello peteret, rigidis & sterneret armis. Quis referat, tua quanta fuit celeberrime Caesar Gloria, cuitoties deuictis hostibus vrbem Ingresso, proceres clars statuere triumphos? Aurato quoties, curru deuectus in arcem Romanae genti spectacula laeta dedisti? Roma recens Brenni funestis ignibus arsit Nobilis Arthurus Pictos dare terga coegit Saxoneas{que} manus, fcit iam regia virtus Anglorum nomen quàm formidabile Gallis? O memoranda mihi bello quae fama paratur. POLI. Vera quidem narras, nec enim mihi carpere laudes Tantorum procerum magno discrimine partas Nec vafrè tenebras inducere fortibus ausis Est animus, Per me constet sua fama cui{que}. Sed qui iustitia firmant & legibus aequis Imperium, Spaertam{que} suam conamine toto Exornare student tutis & finibus vti Quantò maiores illi meruêre triumphos? Iura celebrantur plusquam Minōia bell
Quis non praeponet Solomonia regna paternis? Praetulit ipse Deus, qui non sua templa Dauidem Belligerum voluit manibus fabricare cruentis. Pacificus sacras extruxit filius aedes Qui iusto sancto{que} sui moderamine regni Clarus, in aeternum memori celebrabitur aeu. Quis non ante Numae foelicia tempora ponet Romuleis bello rigidis? Quae denique possunt Singula si lustres conferri secula nostris? O memoranda mihi quae gloria pace paratur. POLE. Sed me laurea delectat. POLI. Me mitis oliua, POLE. At pulchrū multis dominari gētibus. POLI. Esto . POLE. Fortis memorabile nomē Magnanimi{que} ducis toto clarescit in orbe. POLI. Exiguas quantum stellas radiantia Phoebi Lumina, sublustres tenebras lux alma diei: Ciuilis tantum superat prudentia Martem. POLE. Vis dirimat nostram Critici sententia litem? Non etenim lingua tecum contendere pergam Cui pugnae est assueta manus. POLI. Placet, ergo loquatur Et statuat finem Criticus certaminis huius Ambiguas doctè nouit componere lites. CRITI. Quis{que} suo trahitur studio, non omnibus idem Est animus, iuuat hunc tranquillae pacis, at illum Martis & horrifici delectat gloria belli, Sed mea iam breuiter quae sit sententia dicam. Foelix quilongo cruciatus membra dolore Post multos noctu gemitus, suspicia luce Amissas tandem vires animum{que} recepit. Sed tamen hic quanto foelicior esset habendus Languida si nunquam sensissent corpora morbum? Cur geritur bellum laetae nisi pacis amore? Quaesi consilio poterit, fatis{que} benignis seruari, bella facessant Perpetuae maior pacis quàm gloria Martis Si modo labe caret maculis nec spargitur vllis. Stephani Limberti Carmen.
. , . . W. G.
¶ Ad Ciuitatem Norwicensem de Aduentu Serenissimae Reginae ELIZABETHAE. ERgo tibi antiquae laudes, & auita resurget Gloria Norwice, & veteris spe reddita famae est: Nam{que} tuos Regina lares faelicibus intrat Auspicijs, clarum{que} tuae Iubar intulit vrbi. Magnum numen habes, quo nil augustius vsquam Sol videt, aut ingens maius complectitur orbis. Illa suis magnum verae pietatis amorem. Restituit, sanctam{que} fidem sine fraude dolosa Reddidit aeternis è fontibus: illa tumentem Aequantem{que} Deo semet Regum{que} Tyrannum Fregit, & Inferno damnatum carcere mersit. Perge pijs Animis dignas{que} euoluito grates, Aduentum{que} sacrum Diuinae Principis altis udibus illustra, voces{que} in sidera mitte. Nempe facis: video motus vultus{que} tuorum Feruores{que} auidos, plausus{que} & anhela flagrantum Pectora, sinceras{que} praeces, at{que} vndi{que} vulgi Laetitiam ingentem: ne{que} enim haec sacra frequentant Soli primates vrbis, lectus{que} Senatus, Quin etiam populus, pueri, innuptae{que} puellae Exultant Animis: adeo vox omnibus vna est Aduentasse decus Regi, at{que} hac vrbe coruscum Illuxisse Iubar, magnam{que} in secula famam Norwico partam, nullus quam carpere liuor Aut violare potest, nostris non eximet aetas Mentibus, aut nigra condet sub nube vetustas. Macte animis, ntat ista deus, meritum{que} laborem Laudat, & obsequijs vestris studio{que} fideli Attribuet longos, optatae Principis Annos. Gul. Goldingham, Mag. Artis.
