121 22667831 25651
THE HAPPINES of the Church. OR, A Description of those Spirituall Prerogatiues vvherewith Christ hath endowed her. Considered in some contemplations vpon part of the 12. Chapter to the Hebrewes. Together with certain other Meditations and Discour∣ses vpon other portions of holy Scriptures: the titles wherof immediatly precede the Booke. Being the Summe of diuerse Sermons preached in S. Gregories London: By Thomas Adams, Preacher there. 2. Corin. 12. 15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for your soules. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Iohn Grismand, and are to be sold at his shop neere vnto the little North dore of Saint Pauls, at the signe of the Gun. 1619.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE SIR HENRIE MOVNTAGVE, the Lord Chiefe Iustice of ENGLAND, my very good Lord. RIght Honourable, my allegiance to the Almighty King necessitates my endeuours to glorify his Great Name. My Profession hath im∣posed on me all ministeriall seruices. My filiall dutie to our blessed Mother the Church, hath taught me to help forward her cause, both with tongue and penne. My thankfulnes to your Lo. tyes me to seeke your honourable authori∣sing of all these labours. They run to you first, as if they waited your manumission of them to the world. If bookes be our children, and the masculine issue of our braines; then it is fit that your Lo. who haue the patronage of the father, should also vouchsafe a blessing to the childrē. Nor is this all: there is yet a weightier reason
why they should refuge themselues vnder your Los. protection. The world is quickly offended, if it be told of the offences: men study courses, & practise them; and if the Clergie find fault, yea if we doe not iustify and make good what they magnifie, & make common, they will be an∣gry. It is the most thanklesse seruice to tell men of their misdeeds. Now a busines so distastfull requires a worthy Patron: & whose Patronage should I desire but your Los. whose I am, and to whom I owe all duty & seruice? whose but your Los. who are in place to reforme vice, and to encourage goodnes: to make that practicall and exemplary, which is here onely theoricall and preceptory? God hath intrusted to your hands his Sword of Iustice: draw it in his defence a∣gainst the enemies of his Grace & Gospel. You sit at the common sterne, and therfore are not so much your owne as your Countreys. Helpe vs with your hands, we will helpe you with our prayers. The God of maiestie & mercy, sancti∣fie your heart, rectifie your hand, iustifie your soule, and lastly crowne your head with eter∣nall glory. Your Lordships obseruant Chaplain, Tho. Adams.
To the worthy Citizens of Saint Gregories Parish, syncere louers of the Gospell, present happinesse, and euerlasting Peace. I Owe you a treble debt, of loue, of seruice, of thankfulnesse. The former, the more I pay, the more still I owe. The second I will be ready to pay to the vttermost of my power; though short both of your deserts, and my owne desires. Of the last I will striue to giue full payment; and in that (if it be possible) to come out of your debts. Of all I haue in this volume giuen you the earnest: as ther∣fore you vse to doe with bad debters, take this till more comes. You see I haue venturously traffic∣ked with my poore talent in publike, whilest I be∣hold richer graces kept close at home, and buried in silence: liking it better to husband a little to the common good, then to hoord vp much wealth in a sullen niggardice. I censure none: if all were writers, who should bee readers? if none, idle Pamphlets would take vp the generall eye, be read and applauded, onely through want of better ob∣iects.
If the graine be good, it doth better in the market, then in the Garner. All I can say for my selfe is, I desire to doe good; whereof if I should faile, yet euen that I did desire it, and endeuor it, shall content my conscience. I am not affrighted with that common obiection of a dead letter: I know that God can effectuate his owne ends, and neuer required man to appoint him the meanes. If it were profitable being spoken, sure it cannot be vnnecessary being written. It is not vnknowne to you, that an infirmity did put me to silence ma∣ny weekes: whilest my tongue was so suspended from preaching, my hand tooke opportunity of writing. To vindicate my life from the least sus∣pition of idlenesse, or any such aspersions of vn∣charitable tongues, I haue set forth this reall wit∣nesse, which shall giue iust confutation to such slanders. If it be now condemned, I am sure it is onely for doing well. I very well know the bur∣den of preaching in this Citie: wee may say of it in another sense, what Christ said of Ierusalem, O thou that killest the Prophets. Many a Minister comes to a Parish with his veines full of bloud, his bones of marrow; but how soone doth he ex∣haust his spirits, waste his vigor! And albeit there are many good soules, for whose sake hee is con∣tent to make himselfe a sacrifice: yet there are some so vnmercifull, that after all his labor would send him a begger to his graue. I tell you but the fault of some, quitting your particular selues: I speake not to diminish the credit of your bounty,
which I haue found, and heere with a thankefull profession acknowledge it. In testimony whereof I haue set to my hand, and sent it you a token of the gratitude of my heart. Receiue it from him that is vnfainedly desirous of your saluation: and if he knew by what other means soeuer he might bring you to euerlasting peace; would studie it, practise it, continue it; whilst his Organ of speech hath breath enough to mooue it. Your vnworthy Preacher, Thomas Adams.
The Contents. The Happinesse of the Church. Hebr. 12. 22. But ye are come vnto Mount Sion. The rage of Oppression. Psal. 66. 12. Thou hast caused men to ride ouer our heads. The victory of Patience. Psal. 66. 12. We went through fire and through water. Gods house. Psal. 66. 13. I will goe into thy House. Mans Seed-time and Haruest. Gala. 6. 7. Whatsoeuer a man sowes, he shall reape. Heauen-Gate. Reue. 22. 14. And may enter in through the gates. The Spirituall Eye-salue. Ephe. 1. 18. That the eyes of your vnderstanding. The Cosmopolite. Luke 12. 20. But God said vnto him, Thou foole. The bad Leauen. Gala. 5. 9. A little leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe. Faiths Encouragement. Luke 17. 19. And he said vnto him, Arise. The Saints meeting. Ephe. 4. 13. Till we all meet in the vnity of the faith. Presumption running into despaire. Reue. 6. 16. They said to the Mountaines. Maiestie in misery. Math. 27. 51. And behold, the vaile of the Temple.
The Foole and his sport. Prou. 14. 9. Fooles make a mocke at sin. The fire of contention. Luke 12. 49. I come to send fire on the earth. The Christians walke. Ephe. 5. 2. Walke in loue. Loues Copy. Ephe. 5. 2. As Christ loued vs. A Crucifixe. Ephe. 5. 2. He hath giuen himselfe for vs an offering. The good Politician directed. Math. 10. 16. Be wise as Serpents. The way home. Math. 2. 12. And being warned of God in a dreame. Semper Idem. Hebr. 13. 8. Iesus Christ the same yesterday. Gods bounty. Prou. 3. 16. Length of dayes is in her right hand. The lost are found. Luke 19. 10. For the Sonne of man is come to seeke. A Generation of Serpents. Psal. 58. 4. Their poyson is like the poyson of Serpents. Heauen made sure. Psal. 35. 3. Say vnto my soule, I am thy saluation. The Soules refuge. 1. Pet. 4. 19. Let them that suffer according. The end of the Contents.
THE HAPPINES OF THE CHVRCH. HEBR. 12. Ver. 22. But ye are come vnto Mount Sion, and to the Citie of the liuing GOD, the heauenly Ierusalem; and to an innumerable company of Angels: 23. To the generall assembly, and Church of the first borne which are written in heauen, and to God the Iudge of all, and to the spirits of iust men made perfect: 24. And to Iesus the Mediator of the new Couenant, and to the bloud of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then that of Abel. THEY that make comparisons, alte∣ram partem deprimunt, vt res alterius emineant; debase the one part, that they may aduance the honour of the other. Our Apostle abates the glory of the Law, that he may giue more glory (where it is more deserued) to the Gospell. 2 Cor. 3. 9. For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousnesse exceede in glory. The summe of the comparison
is spent in these three generalls. 1. There were, Omnia ter∣rena, et externa: all things outward and sauouring of earth: ver. 18. A Mount that might still be touched, &c. Here, all In∣terna et coelestia, spirituall and heauenly. 2. There are all Ob∣scura et caliginosa, darke and difficult: Blacknesse & darknes, &c. Here, all Clara et illustria, cleare and conspicuous: ther∣fore the Prophet called Christ Solem Iustitiae, Mal. 4. 2. The Sun of Righteousnesse: and Iohn Baptist stiled him Iohn. 1. 8. That light, which lightens euery one comming into the world. 3. There, all were Terribilia, fearefull and amazing: not onely to the people, ver. 19. who intreated that the Word should not bee spoken to them any more. But euen to Moses, ver. 21. So terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly feare and quake. Here, all Amabilia et laeta, louely as Rachel, delightfull as Musike: the Gospel is called the Message of peace. Our Apostle therefore preacheth a double quantity in the Gospell; Magnitudinem Gloriae, multitudinem gratiae: the greatnes of Glory, to worke in vs reuerence: the multitude of Grace, to worke in vs loue & obedience. Ioh. 1. 17. The Law was giuen by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Christ Iesus. The excellency of Christ aboue Moses, is exemplified in the third Chapter of this Epistle, Heb. 3. 6. Moses verily was faithfull in all Gods house as a seruant: But Christ as a Sonne ouer his owne house, &c. To the words; the parts are generally two, the Accesse, and the Obiect. First, for the Accesse, Yee are come. What, on your own feet without a Guide? No; Paraeus. Accessistis, hoc est, fide Euangelica perducti estis. Yee are come, that is, yee are brought by the faith of the Gospel. There is one that brings you; God: euery person in the blessed Trinity. It is Opus Patris; Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come except the Father draw him. Opus Filij, Can. 1. 4. Draw me, we will runne after thee. Opus spiritus sancti, Psal. 143. 10. Let thy good spirit lead me into the Land of righteousnes Man is by nature in Zedechias case, 2. Kin. 25. 7. blind and lame: Blind, Non inuenisset viam, nisi via inuenisset eum: vnlesse the vvay had found him, he could neuer haue found the way. Lame, he may know that the Temple of heauen hath a Acts 3. 2. beautiful gate;
Grace: but cannot come thither till God brings him, loo sen his stupified ioynts, and put into his hand the Almes of mercy. This done, he may enter into the Temple, walk∣ing, and leaping, and praising GOD. Thus first he giues the Soule eyes, vnderstanding; then feet, gracious affections: and now expects that he should come. God hath not so done all for thee, that thou shoul∣dest doe nothing for thy selfe. A Deo sine te factus, à te fine Deo infectus, A Christo sine te refectus, non à te fine Christo, nec à Christo sine te perfectus: God did create thee without thy selfe, thou didst lose thy selfe without God: without thy selfe Christ did redeeme thee; but neither thy selfe without Christ, nor Christ without thy selfe shall perfect thee. Potest Dominus inueniri, adueniri, non praeueniri: There may be a finding of God, a comming to God, but Ber. no preuenting of God. Haue faith. Heb. 11. 6. Hee that commeth to God, must belieue: and that of thine owne, for there is no comming on anothers foote. Thus that we might come to Christ, Christ came to vs. Non de coelo merita nostra, sed peccata traxerunt: Not our merits, but our maladies drew that great Physician from heauen to vs. Yee are (not comming, but) come: it is rather a time perfectly past, then expectantly future. Which plainely demonstrates, that this is a description of the Church in her militant estate, so well as triumphant. Indeed either hath a relation to other, a communion to other; and the inestimable priuiledges of them both are wrapped vp to∣gether. The connexion of Glory to Grace is so infallible, that they often change names: Heauen is called the king∣dome of Holinesse, and Holinesse is called the kingdome of Heauen. Rom. 8. 24. Yee are saued by hope: and Iohn 5. 24. Hee that belie∣ueth, hath euerlasting life, and is passed from death to life. So sure, as if they were already in Heauen. So Paul, Phil. 3. 20. Our con∣uersation is in heauen, from vvhence wee looke for our Saui∣our Iesus Christ. The obiect or place of our arriual is described by many
excellent and honourable titles. First, it is called a Mount: but is there so much happinesse in that? Feriunt summos 1 fulgura montes: the highest Mountaines are most dan∣ger'd to the violences of Heauen. ver. 18. There was a Mount burning with fire. This is no Mountaine of dan∣ger, or terror, but Sion: safe, pleasant, delightfull Sion; the ioy of the whole earth, the beloued of GOD: the Iohn that leaned on the bosome of Christ. Psal. 87. 2. The Lord loues the gates of Sion better then all the dwellings of Iacob. But though a Mount, though Mount Sion, yet it might be a solitary and vnfrecuented Hill: like that whereunto Math. 4. 8. the Diuell tooke Christ, and shewed him the kingdomes of the world: vvhere a man can onely see glory, not enioy it. Or like that mount Deu. 34. 4. Nebo, or top of Pisgah, whereon Moses might onely stand, and behold the Land of Canaan. Not so, but on this Mount there stands a City: a popu∣lous 2 Citie, and full of buildings: like that, wherein Christ sayes Ioh. 14. 2. there are many mansions. But now whose Citie is this? For it may be some poore decayed thing, that hath onely some ruines of remaining monuments: No, it is the Citie of GOD. They are superlatiue things, that haue attributed to them the Name of God. Sauls sleepe vvas called Spor Domini, a sleepe of God. Gen. 30. 8. Rachel said, With great wrastlings haue I wrastled: Hebr. the wrastlings of God. Psal. 36. 6. Thy righteousnesse is like the great Mountaines: Hebr. the Mountaines of God. Ion. 3. 3. Niniueh was an excee∣ding great Citie: Hebr. a Citie of God. This Hebrew dia∣lect our Apostle followes to the Hebrewes, and calls this excellent Citie, the Citie of God Not that it is onely Gods y way of asription, but euen by foundation, and euer∣lasting possession: but to vindicate it from any obscure∣nese, it is the Citie of God. But there were many concei∣ed gods; it may be this belonged to some Idol, as Peor id to Pal, and Ekron to Baalzebub: No, these were all ead gods; this is the Liuing GOD. The Psalmist calls hem : Psal. 106. 28. They did eate the sacrifices of the dead:
but this God is called Uiuens, Heb. 9. 14. the Liuing: and Deus vi∣uentium, Mat. 22. 32. the GOD of the liuing. Well, yet what is the name of this Citie? Is it a Citie, a Citie on a Mount, a Citie of God, and doth it want a name? Not a great man but if he build a faire house, hee will giue it some name: Perhaps Psal. 49. 11. call it after his owne name. The name is Ierusa∣lem, famous, blessed Ierusalem; a Citie of Peace. But there was a Ierusalem on earth, wherof we may onely say, Fuit, It was. That was fulfilled on it, which Christ foretold a∣gainst it; Mat. 24. 2. There shall not be left one store vpon another. But this Citie is built with no other stones then Iaspers, Sa∣phirs, Emeralds, and Amathysts. Reue. 21. 19. It is here distinguished from that terrene, by the name of Heauen∣ly; aboue the wheele of changeable mortalitie, it is not subiect to mutation. The celestiall Ierusalem. But yet, though it be a Citie on a Mount, though Ie∣rusalem, 3 though heauenly; yet the perfection of all may be empaired through the want, either of Inhabitants, or of good Inhabitants. There be Cities eminent for situ∣ation, glorious for building, commodious for traffique: yet haue all these benefits poisoned by euill Citizens. When Alcibiades would sell a house, among other con∣ueniences for which he praised it, he especially commends it for this; that it hath a good neighbour. Who bee the neighbours in this Citie? Angels, glorious & excellent creatures, the great Kings Courtiers; heere, our Guardi∣ans, there, our companions. Yes, you will say, one or two Angels: yea a company; not like Dauids at Adullam, nor Absolons in Hebron; but innumerable, Myriads of Angels. Are there none in this Citie but Angels? what habita∣tion 4 is there then for men? Yes, there is an Assembly of men: not some particular Synode, nor Prouinciall Con∣uocation, nor nationall Councell; but a Generall assem∣bly. What doe you call it? The Church. Of whom con∣sts it? Ex Primogenitis, Of the first borne. But then it may seeme that younger brothers are excluded: No, the
first borne of the world may bee a younger brother in Christ, and the first borne in Christ may bee a younger brother in the world. Be they younger or elder, all that are written in heauen, if their names bee in the Booke of life, their soules are in the bundle of life: All they, & none but they. Reu. 21. 27. Then shall enter into it no vncleane thing: but onely they which are written in the Lambes Booke of life. But now is it a Citie, so pleasant, and peopled vvith such inhabitants, and hath it no Gouernours? Yes, God, 5. Iudex vniuersorum  Iudge of all. But here is more mat∣ter of feare then comfort: wee may quickly offend this Iudge, & so be quite cast out of this Citie: the very name of a Iudge implies terror. No, for it is the part of a iust Iudge, Parcere subiectis, & debellare superbos: to punish obstinate Rebels, and to protect peaceable and obedient subiects. Somewhat was said of adopted Citizens, such as were strangers borne, and by grace naturalized. What manner 6. of creatures are they, that GOD hath admitted to dwell there? Spirits. Why, Diuels are spirits: No, spirits of Men. But many men haue wicked spirits, and shall such dwell there? No, the spirits of Iust men. Why, Solon, A∣ristides, Phocion, Scipio, were iust men: they were moral∣ly iust, but not truely iustified, not perfected. These are iust spirits made perfect. How came they to be thus perfect? By Iesus, Rom. 4. 25. vvho was deliuered for our offences, and was raised againe for our 7. iustification. What is this Iesus? A Mediator. Man was guilty, God was angry: how should they be reconciled? A Mediator must doe it. For this purpose Apparuit inter mortales peceatores, & immortalem iustum, mortalis cum ho∣minibus, iustus cum Deo. Hee appeared betweene mortall Aug. sinners, and the immortall Iudge, mortall with men, iust with God: so was a perfect Mediator. Whereof? Noui foederis, of the new Couenant. The old was forfeited, a new one comes by him that renues all. Not Doe this and liue:
but Iohn 3. 16. belieue on him that hath done it for thee, & liue for euer. How is this Couenant confirmed? It is sealed with Bloud. How is this bloud applyed? Aspergendo, by sprinkling: as the dore-posts sprinkled with the bloud of the Paschall Lambe, caused the destroying Angel to passe ouer the Israelites: So the aspersion of this immaculate Lambes bloud vpon the conscience, shall free vs from the eternall vengeance. But what's the vertue of this bloud? It speaketh better things then that of Abel. That bloud cried for vengeance; this cryes for forgiuenesse. The voice of that was, Lord, see and iudge: the voice of this is, Father, forgiue them, they know not what they doe. Thus briefely haue I paraphrased the Text. Now for methods sake, in the tractation wee may consider ge∣nerally these fiue points. 1. There is a Citie; Ierusalem, the Citie of the liuing God. 2. The situation whereon it is built, Mount Sion. 3. The Citizens, who are Angels and men: an innumerable company of Angels, and spirits of iust men. 4. The King that gouernes it; GOD the Iudge of all. 5. The Purchaser that bought it, and gaue it vs, Iesus, the Mediator of the new Couenant. But now the situation hath the first place in the words, therfore challengeth the same in my discourse. And indeed on good cause should the foundation goe before the building: we first seek out a fit ground, and then proceed to edifie on it. Mount Sion. Not literally that Mount Sion whereon Salomon built the Temple, and Dauid his Palace. That locall Sion be∣came like Shiloh: first, exceedingly and superlatiuely Psal. 87. 2. lo∣ued, afterwards Psa. 78. 60. abhorred and forsaken, like the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent that he pitched among men. This was threatned to that sacred place, as a iust punishment of their rebellious profanenesse. Therefore will I doe vnto this house, that is called by my Name, as I haue done to Shiloh. It lies in the power of sinne, to make the most blessed places
accursed. Psal. 107. 34. God turnes a fruitfull land into barrennesse, for the wickednesse of the inhabitants that dwell therein. Ciui∣tatis euersio morum, non murorum casus. The ruine of a Citie is not the breach of the walls, but the apostacie of manners. Were our Fences stronger then the se∣uen-folde walls of Babylon, the sinnes within would hurle downe the Bulwarkes without. If there be Pra∣uilegium among vs, there is no Priuilegium for vs. This Sion then stands not on earthly foundations; for at the generall dissolution, 2. Pet. 3. 10. the earth with all the workes in it, Cities, Castles, Townes, Towres, shall be burnt vp. If it were built on a Mat. 7. 27. sady foundation, when the raine, the flouds, and windes shall conspire against it, it would fall, and the fall of it would be great. But Sion is built on Christ: 1. Pet. 2. 6. Behold, I say, in Sion a chiefe corner stone, elect and precious, he that beleeueth on him, shall not be confounded. This is conspicuous by the Antithesis of Mount Sion with the Gospell, to Mount Sinai with the Law. The Apostlecals that montem , a mount that might be touched: if this had beene vpon earth, it had also beene contrecta∣bilis, touchable: but it is onely spirituall. Hee alludes to Gods Prophesies and Promises, Euangelium proditurum de monte Sion, that the Gospel should come out of Mount Sion. This is manifest to those that will consider and conferre these places, Obad. vers. 21. Esa. 2. 3. Mie. 4. 2. Come, let vs goe vp to the Mount of the Lord; for out of Sion shall goe forth the Law, and the word of God from Ierusalem, Esa. 59. 20. with Rom. 11. 26. There shall come out of Sion the Deliuerer, and shall turne away vngodlinesse from Iacob. Sinai gaue thraldome by Moses, Sion giues freedome and saluation by Iesus. These two words giue vs two comforts of grace. For∣titudinem quia mons, Beatitudinem quia mons Sion. Secu∣ritie, because it is a mountaine; Felicity, because it is Mount Sion. 1. Heere is considerable, the validity and strength of
grace that comes by Christ: we are not built in a valley, but on a mount. A mountaine hath euer beene held the place of safety. Psal. 30. 8. I said in my prosperity, I shall neuer be mo∣ued. What is his reason? Lord, thou of thy fauour hast made my mountaine so strong. But alas, what are all the mountaines of the earth to mount Sion? Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that trust in the mountaines of Samaria. The prophane Edo∣mite stands on his Esa. 21. 11. mountain, and derides the iudgement of God. The Syrians thought God only Deum montium, 1. King. 20. 23. a God of the mountaines. It was vpon Ierem. 3. 6. the high mountaine that Israel played the harlot. Many sit on their mountains, and giue defiance to heauen. The couetous mans moun∣taine is his riches, there he thinkes himselfe safe; Luk. 12. 19. Soule rest, thou hast much goods layd vp for many yeares. The am∣bitious mans mountaine is his honour, and who dares finde fault with so promontorious a celsitude? yes, Esay 40. 4. Eue∣ry mountaine shall be brought low. Sensualitie is the volup∣tuous mans mountaine, there he refugeth himselfe against all reproofes. But when the iudgements of God shall come vpon the earth, in vaine they shal cry Luk. 23. 30. to the moun∣taines, Fallon vs, and to the hills, Couer vs. As neyther a∣gainst the waters in the former Deluge, so nor against the fire in the latter dissolution, shall the mountaines defend; onely this Mount Sion shall saue vs. The mountaine of worldly confidence hath not more strength of defending against the assaults of men, then danger of exposing to the violences of heauen. Heere is the difference betwixt the worldlings building, and the Christians. 1. They thinke themselues onely to build high, aspi∣ring to an equality with mountaines: and as low buil∣ders, poore, deiected, and reiected creatures. But indeed they build low, for all sublunary things are low buildings, onely he that builds on this Mount Sion, builds high and sure; when all oppositions, and aduersary forces haue done their worst, he stands firme Psal. 125. 1. like Mount Sion, which
cannot be remoued, but abideth fast for euer. The Sen. Wise mans mind is euer aboue the Moone, yea, a∣boue the Sun. What turbulencies soeuer be in the world, all is peace there. Iohn 14. 2. In my Fathers house there are many man∣sions. In domo, it is a house, not a Tabernacle: Of my Fa∣ther, for if he hath afforded such a house for his enemies, how glorious is that he hath reserued for himselfe, and his friends! Patris mei, saith Christ, My Father: your Fa∣ther is able to giue you a cottage for your short life: My Father giues a house for euer. There are Mansions, à ma∣nendo; not moueable tents, but mansions. Many, enow for all, none shall be troubled for want of elbow-roome. Therefore let all Mountaines stoope to this. Esay 2. 2. The moun∣taine of the Lord shall be established in the top of mountaines, and shall be exalted aboue the hills, and all Nations shal flowe vnto it. This is Gods Mountaine, who hath chosen of all Nations, Israel; of all Tribes, Iuda; of all Cities, Ierusa∣lem; of all Temples, that of Salomon; of all Mountaines, Mount Sion. 2. The worldlings thinke this Mountaine is but a dreame, because they cannot see it, nor touch it. But our Apostle sayes, it is intrectabilis: it cannot be touched with earthly fingers; no profane feet must tread in those holy Courts. Naturall mens vnderstandings are led by their senses; Plus oculo quàm oraculo: they will belieue no fur∣ther then they see. Giue mee good cheare, sayes the Epi∣cure, this I can see and taste: and tell not me of your spi∣rituall banket in heauen. Giue me good liquour, sayes the Drunkard, the bloud of the grape: this giues colorem, sa∣porem, odorem; colour to the eye, sauour to the palate, o∣dour to the sent: heauen hath no Nectar like this. Giue me honour, saith the Ambitious, which may aduaunce me: that from this Mountaine of preferment I may ouer∣looke the inferiour world, and behold vassals prostrate to my Celsitude; this I can feele and see: tel not me of your inuisible kingdome, and Psal. 149. 9. Such honour haue all his Saints.
Giue mee gorgeous apparell, sayes the proud: this vvill make me admir'd, & giue me admission among the great ones: tell not me of our Robe of Glory. Giue me gold, saies the Couetous, this I can see; it is my Sunne by day, and my Moone by night. I can spend my time delightfully in telling, feeling, treasuring this: neuer tell me of your trea∣sure in heauen. Well, if there be no remedy, but Sense must be your Religion, and this world your God; take your choise; these grosse & palpable things; trust you in these Mountaines: but Lord giue vs this Mount Sion, which our Lord Iesus Christ hath established for vs. Now, sith we are built vpon a Mountaine, let vs know that we are conspicuous; all the world takes notice of vs. The faithfull are not ordained to liue in corners, vnob∣serued: but are set on a Mountaine, as examples of good∣nesse to all. Mat. 5. 14. A Citie that is set on a hill cannot be hid. God meant you notable, take heed you become not notorious. As Mount Sion Psal. 48. 2. is the ioy of the whole earth, so it is the light of the whole earth. If that light become darknesse, how great, & how greatly to be condemned is that dark∣nesse? This was that great exception God tooke against Israel, that Rom. 2. 24. through them his Name (which should haue beene honoured) was blasphemed among the Gentiles. You are founded on a Mountaine, therefore 1. Pet. 2. 12. haue your conuer∣sation honest among men, that by your good works which they behold, they may glorifie God in the day of visitation. 2. The felicitie that comes by Christ, insinuated by Sion, which was a place of blessednes. This is either Prae∣missa, or Promissa: already sent into our hearts, or cer∣tainely obiected by promise to our faiths. It is either as∣sumed, or assured. Inre, or in spe: either that we haue, or that we shall haue. The happinesse wee haue already by this Mount Sion, consists in three priuiledges: the Fauour of God; Ioy of the holy Ghost; and peace of Consci∣ence. 1. In the Fauour of GOD, which is to Sion, as the
Exod. 10. 23. light was once to Goshen: shining there, and no vvhere else. Or as to Gedeon, the Iud. 6. 37. Fleece on the Mountaine is wet with the dew of Heauen, when all the earth is dry besides: This Lux vultus tui, Psal. 4. 6. the light of thy Counte∣nance, which puts more gladnes into our hearts, then the a∣boundance of earthly fruites reioyce the couetous: The wicked shall neuer see it, vnlesse so much as may encrease their anguish, when they must depart from it for euer. 2. In the ioy of the Spirit, which is (hilaris cum pon∣dere virtus) a gladnes that can neither be suppressed, nor expressed. Sentire est cordis, dicere non est oris: The heart doth feele it, the tongue cannot tell it. It is that Reu. 2. 17. Stone with the new Name written in it, which no man knoweth, sa∣uing be that receiueth it. There is much reioycing in the world, but the matter of it is mutable. These lower de∣lights are more sensitiue, but more fluid. They sooner cloy vs; Magna foelicitas est à foelicitate non vinci. It is a great happinesse not to be ouercome of happinesse. Cor∣porall Sen. delights work in vs a great hunger till they are at∣tained. But Spirituall, Cùm non habentur sunt in fastidio: cùm habentur in desiderio: Whiles we haue them not, we Greg. care not for them, but when we haue them, wee more ea∣gerly desire them. There is no hunger of it, till we taste it. In illis appetitus generat saturitatem saturitas fastidium. In istis appetitus parat fruitione, fruitio parit appetitum. In carnall pleasures, appetite begets fulnesse; fulnesse, lo∣thing: in spirituall, desire prepares fruition, fruition be∣gets desiring. Voluptuous pleasure, is like a blister: it be∣ginnes first with an itching, but at last it swells, & breakes forth in anguish and putrid corruption. There are two obseruations able to keepe vs from ouer-affecting the ioyes of this world, and from vilipending the ioyes of Sion. 1. First, resolue euery carnall delight in the first mat∣ter and principle of it, and there will be more likelihood of despising, then danger of much desiring. The Coue∣tous
makes Iob. 31. 24. gold his hope, and sayes to the Wedge, Thou art my confidence: and what are those precious metals hee so worshippeth, but veines of the earth better coloured. T Ambitious builder, that erects a Dan. 4. 30. Babel for the honour of his owne Maiesty, thinkes all eyes standamazed at his mag∣nificence. And what are those sumptuous monuments wherein hee so glorieth, but monumentall witnesses of his folly, a little hewne tymber, some burnt and hardned earth? The Adulterer admires the beauty of his harlot, kneeles to a pledge of her memory, by wanton sonnets Idolises her, turnes his soule to an Elephant, and worships this Sun. Now what is that stately building of a humane lumpe, but the same earth his foote treads vpon, better tempered, because painted worse; when it wants the guest, the soule that quickens it worst of all? The proud dotes on his costly robes, centers his eye vpon himselfe, as if no second obiect was worth looking on; the Tailors hand hath made him a man, and his purse makes the Tay∣lor a Gentleman. And what are those curious ragges, but such are giuen of wormes; and consumed of mothes? Consider the materials of your lower ioyes, & if you will persist in their dotage, you shall doe it without our enuy. 2. Obserue their Conclusion; looke from their be∣ginning to their end. Delectatio vulnerat, & transit: in∣foelicem Ambr. reddidit, & reliquit. Pleasure, like an Irish man, wounds with her dart, and is sodainly gone: it makes a man miserable, and so leaues him. Mors in ollâ; behold laughter concluded in teares. The protasis delights, the apodosis wounds. The Conscience receiues a long vexa∣tion, for a transient delectation: for an vnperfect con∣tent, perfect torment. This is a hard penniworth, so little pleasure for so much repentance. He that for a little ioy, giues that Christ bought with so much paine, Stul∣tum Aug. Christum reputat mercatorem; thinkes Christ a foolish buyer; but the euent proues him a foolish seller. Esau bit∣terly repented this bargaine.
This for the world: but now the ioyes of Mount Sion are for matter spirituall, for substance reall, for vse vni∣uersall, for continuance eternall. 3. In the peace of Conscience. There is little outward peace in the world; wee haue eyther an Esau with his hand, or an Ismael with his tongue, bent against vs. Gal. 4. 29. As then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit, euen so it is now. So it is, and so it will be to the end of the world. This is the diffe∣rence betwixt Mount Sion militant, and Mount Sion tri∣umphant. In heauen are all comforts without any cros∣ses: in hell are all crosses without any comforts: on earth comforts and crosses, ioy and griefe, peace and trouble, misery and mercy are blended together. We may say of a Christian, as Lorinus the Iesuite writes of an Archbishop of Toledo, who weighing the much disputed cōtrouersie, whether Salomon was saued or damned, and not being satisfied with the arguments of eyther side, caused Salo∣mon to be painted on the walls of his Chappell, halfe in Heauen, and halfe in hell. So the Christian in respect of his outward calamities, seemes to be halfe in hell, but in respect of his inward comforts, he is the better halfe in heauen. Howsoeuer, Rom. 5. 1. Being iustified by Faith, wee haue peace with God. And wheresoeuer wee are dispersed, or howsoeuer distressed, the Peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, and surpasseth all commending, preserueth our hearts in Iesus Christ euermore. But all this in Possesso, we haue already: there is some∣thing more in Promisso, which we shall haue: 1. Iohn 3. 2. Wee are now the sonnes of God, but it appeares not yet what we shall be. Hast thou heere much peace? there is more: here wee haue desiderium pacis, there pacem desiderij: Heere a desire of peace, there the peace of our desires. Hast thou heere some ioy? there is more: now ioy with sorrow, checker∣worke, white and blacke; roses, but thornes with them: then ioy with safety, safety with eternity; such ioy Ioh 16. 22. as
shall neuer be taken from vs. There Rex veritas, Lex cha∣ritas, Aug. pax foelicitas, vita aeternitas. If Psal. 84. 10. one day in lower Sion be better then a thousand daies in the tents of wicked∣nesse, then one day in vpper Sion, is better then a thou∣sand yeeres in this valley of teares. If Peter was so raui∣shed with Mat. 17. 2. Mount Tabor, where onely Christ was trans∣figured, what is he with this Mount Sion where all are glorified? Psal. 84. 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! If Gods Tabernacles be so louely, what is his mansion? If there bee such ioy in the remission of sinne, what is there in the abolition of sinne? If there bee now such sweet peace in thy heart, such musicke in thy conscience, what mayst thou thinke there is in heauen? But because non capimus illa, illa capiant nos: we cannot comprehend those pleasures, let those pleasures comprehend vs. Good seruant, (the ioy is too great to enter into thee, therfore) Mat. 25. 23. enter thou into the ioy of thy Lord. This Mount Sion did God giue to Christ, and Christ to vs. God to his Sonne, Psal. 2. 6. Yet haue I set my King vpon my holy hill of Sion. The Sonne to vs; Reu. 14. 1. A Lambe stood on Mount Sion, and with him 144. thousand, &c. A Lambe in figure, slaine from the foundation of the world. A Lambe in fact, Acts 8. 32. led like a Lambe to the slaughter, stan∣deth, sits not idle, nor lies asleepe: Psal. 121. 4. hee that kepeth Israel, neyther slumbers nor sleepes: whereon? not as the two beasts his opposites, that rise out of the earth and Sea, but on a Mount. What Mount? not Sinai, but Sion. Other mountaines quake at his presence. Psal. 97. 5, 8. The hils melted like waxe at the presence of the Lord. But Sion heard and was glad, and the daughters of Iuda reioyced. Other mountains in homage to this, haue skipped and danced about it. Psal. 114. 4. The mountaines skipped like Rams, and the little hils like Lambes. He stands, therefore is willing to defend; on a Mount, therefore able to defend; on Mount Sion, there∣fore ready to defend, because hee is in the middest of his owne, and sees his Church round about him. So that
though all the red Dragons on earth, and blacke Deuils in hell, rage against vs, yet the Lambe on Mount Sion will defend vs. There now hee stands, calling vs by grace, there we shall one day behold him calling vs to glory, vn∣till hee giue this glory to vs; yea, then and euer, let vs giue all glory to the Lambe that stands on Mount Sion. This is the place which the Lord chose and loues. He refused the Tabernacle of Ioseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, Psal 78. 68. But chose the Tribe of Iudah, the Mount Sion which he loued. This praise did inherit and inhabite Sion: Psal. 132. 13. The Lord hath chosen Sion, he hath desired it for his habi∣tation. This is my rest for euer; heere will I dwell, for I haue desired it. Let the precedent of Gods affection worke in all our hearts a zeale to Sion. The Lord that chose Sion, chuse vs to Sion; he that desired it his habitation, make it the habitation of our desires. It is his rest, let it be ours, that we may rest with him: Here will I dwell, saith he; let vs all pray to dwell there. Though it bee a hill, a high hill; though paines and toyle in getting vp, yet let vs ascend, for aboue there is eternall ioy. The City of the liuing God, the heauenly Ierusalem. I come from the Situation, to the Citie: you heare where it is, heare now what it is. A City in a Mountaine. Psal. 48. 4. &c Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the Mountaine of his holinesse. Beautifull for situation, the ioy of the whole earth is Mount Sion, on the sides of the North, the City of the great King. God is knowne in her Palaces for a sure refuge. Heere be foure circumstances. 1. Quae sit, not a Village, but a City. 2. Cuius, not mans, but Gods, not a faigned, but the liuing Gods. 3. Qualis, not earthly, but heauenly. 4. Quo no∣mine, not Sodome or Samaria, but the City of peace, Ie∣rusalem. The Citie. The Church may be compared to a Citie for three re∣semblances; of Safety, Vnitie, Paucity.
1. For safety: Cities haue euer bene held the securest places. So Lot said of little Zoar; Gene. 19. 20. Let me escape thither, & my soul shall liue. Cain fearing the execution of his curse, built him a Gen. 4. 17. Citie for refuge, and called it Enoch. The motiue that caused those wicked to build a City, was secu∣rity, Gene. 11. 4. lest we be scattered abroad vpon the face of the whole earth. The Israelites had their Cities of refuge, and a Law of their protection. Num. 35. 27. But there is no Citie of sure refuge, but this Citie of the liuing God. It is ordi∣nary with men, to put too much trust, like Israel, in their walled Cities. Psal. 127. 1. Except the Lord keep the Citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine. Iere. 22. 15. Shalt thou raigne because thou closest thy selfe in Cedar? Thou thinkest thy selfe secure, because an inhabitant of this famous London. No, thou liuest in an Iland, therefore in danger of the Sea: in a Christian I∣land, therefore in danger of the Turke: in a Protestant I∣land, therefore in danger of the Pope: in a chiefe City of this Iland, therefore in danger of the diuell. The Citie is perilous for pride: the more spectators, the more accla∣mations: the larger the Theater, the lowder the applause. The solemne assembly in Cesaria, puffed vp ambitious Herod to his owne destruction. The people showted Acts 12. 23 Vox Dei, but the wormes confuted their flattery, & his folly. Simon Magus ventured that flight in a Citie, to which in an obscure Village he had neither been tempted, nor would haue attempted. And whether quicke com∣mings in of money, make not this Citie vnsafe to many soules, miserable experience hath euinced. Praeceps locum, princeps damnum: suddaine profit is capitall losse. But sup∣pose men care not so much for the safety of their soules, are their bodies secure? Thieues, homicides, fires deny it. But if they scape all these fires, yet not the last fire. Your buckets may quench other fires, not this: no milke nor vineger can extinguish that wild fire. As in the dayes of Noah, a Doue could not set downe her foote for water, so nor at this day for fire. Let this meditation like a fortu∣nate
storme driue you to harbour: the weakenesse of all Cities in the world to the safety of the Citie of God. 2. For vnitie; Familiarity hath the name, Quasi eius∣dem familiae, as it were of the same familie. Concord and agreement is taught by the Corporation of one Citie. Psal. 122. 3. Ierusalem is built as a Citie well compacted together. Here is no need of Lawyers, all are at peace. Not a tell-tale, not an Incendiary in it. Inferiour Cities haue good orders for vnitie, but all will not embrace the vnity of order. Saepe in∣ter ciues turbauerit amnia diues. It must be as the rich will haue it, or there is no rule. These Citizens are not Urbani, but Turbani. It was Dauids care to Psal. 101. 8. cut off such vvicked doers from the Citie of GOD. Here they Mat. 10. 23. persecute vs from Citie to Citie, going ouer the Cities of Israel: not leaue vs till wee are driuen to this Citie, then shall wee rest in peace: euery one louing another, and the Lord Iesus lo∣uing vs all. 3. For Paucitie: indeed a Citie is great compared with a Village, but what is it in respect of the earth? Luk. 13. 23. Are there fewe that shall be saued? No, there are many: Rom. 8. 29. Christ is the first borne among many brethren. Rom. 7. 9. Loe, a great multi∣tude which no man could number, of all Nations, and langua∣ges, stoode before the Throne. Are there many that shal be saued? No, few: Mat 10. 16. Many are called, but few are chosen. Christs is a Luke 12. 32 little flocke. The best courses haue the fewest followers: Numerus paucior, numerus melior. Gods reser∣uation is Esay 1. 9. a very small remnant: a very Tenth. Esay 6. 13. In it shall be a Tenth, many leaues, the sappe is but a Tythe. Esay 17. 6. As the shaking of an Oliue tree, two or three berries in the top of the vppermost bough; foure or fiue in the outmost fruitfull bran∣ches. They are compared to the Esay 24. 13. Gleaning of the Grapes after the Vintage. It was the Churches complaint; Mich. 7. 1. Woe is mee, for I am as the gleanings. This was Gods collecti∣on, Iere. 3. 14. I will take you one of a Citie, and two of a familie. God is a Shepheard that saues some from the Lyon; Amos 3. 12 taking out of his mouth two legges, or the peece of an eare: rescues a
few from that vniuersall Apostasie. Of the 600. thou∣sand that came out of Egypt, but two entred into Cana∣an, Caleb and Ioshua. Euen the best is but Titio ereptus ab igne, a brand snatched out of the fire. Gene. 6. 12. All flesh had cor∣rupted their way, onely Noah escaped. Not one righteous in Sodome, but Lot. Foure hundred and fifty Prophets for Baal, but one for the Lord: foure hundred flatterers for Ahab, one Michaiah for the truth. Esay 8. 18. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath giuen me, are for signes and for wonders in Israel. So few and rare, that they are gazed on for Monsters. When they sate in councell against Christ, none spake for him but Ioh. 7. 51. Nicodemus. Paul answering before Nero, 2 Tim. 4. 16 no man stood with him, but all men for sooke him. But to the Idol all consent, Exod. 32. From young to old giuen to Sodomie, Gen. 19. Pilate asking what shall be done with Iesus, All cry, Crucifie him. There was a generall shoute for Diana two houres together, Act. 19. 34. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Reu. 13. 16. All, both small and great, rich & poore, free & bond, receiued the marke of the Beast in their foreheads. 1. Kin. 20. 27. The children of Israel are like to little flocks of Kids; but the wicked like the Syrians fill the Country. But those few Innocents speed best. Rom. 9. 27. Though the number of Israel be as the sand, a remnant shall be saued. Among vs many rob the Church, few adde to the dition of it: there are many Vsurers, few restorers. Lord, Reue. 3. 1. thou hast but a few names in Sardi. That of Esdras concerning Israel, is true of this my∣sticall Citie. 2. Esdr. 5. 23. Of all the trees thou hast chosen thee onely one Vine: of all the Lands of the whole world, thou hast chosen thee one pit: of all the flowers, one Lilly: of all the depths of the Sea, thou hast filled thee one Riuer: of all builded Cities, thou hast hallowed Sion vnto thy selfe. Of all the fowles created, thou hast named thee one Doue: of all the cattell, thou hast prouided thee one sheep: Among all the multitudes of peoples, thou hast gotten thee one people. If wee should diuide the world into thirty parts,
scarce fiue of them are Christian. Of those fiue, the Pope challengeth (at the least) halfe. Hee sayes, I haue one Church in Italie, one in Germanie, one in Spaine, one in France, one in England. One in England? Now the Lord one day conuince him, and grant vs he may haue none in England. Now it is a quarrell betwixt vs and Antichrist whether they or we belong to this Citie, we cannot agree about it. One day it will be a quarrell betwixt Antichrist and the Deuill, and they shall agree about it. Now subdi∣uide all these fiue parts of the world, whether theirs or ours, and scarce one is truely sincere. Hypocrisie hath one part, Heresie another part, Profanenesse a third part, Luke-warmenesse a fourth, God hath least that owes all. O the small number sealed vp by the Spirit of the liuing God! Let this teach euery one to suspect himselfe: when Christ said, One of you shall betray mee, they presently all cry, Master, is it I? when he was asked, whether onely few should be saued, hee tells them of neyther many nor few, but charged them to looke to themselues, that they might be of the number; Luk. 13. 14. Striue to enter in at the streight gate. 2. Esd. 7. 6. There is a City built in a broad field, full of all good things, but the entrance thereof is narrow, besides the dan∣gerous passage betweene a violent fire, and a deepe water. Study, striue, pray, that thou maist passe through the nar∣row way, by the sweet-guiding hand of Christ. Of God. God is the Proprietary of this City. Est vna ciuitas, & vna ciuitas: vnus populus, & vnus populus: vnu Rex, & Aug. vnus Rex: vna Lex, & vna Lex. There are two Cities, two peoples, two Kings, and two Lawes. For the Cities, there is Reu. 18. 2. Babylon the great, and Gal. 4. 26. Ierusalem the Mother of vs all. For the peoples, there is the seed of the woman, and of the Serpent, Corne and Tares, Sheepe and Goates, vessels of honour, and vessels of dishonour, Iacob and Esau, Christ and Belial. Nec est tertius, nec ad tertium: there is no third person, nor designement to a third place.
For the Kings, there is Christ, Psal. 2 6. Yet haue I set my King vpon Sion the mountaine of my holinesse: and Satan Ephes. 2. 2. the Prince of the power of the Ayre. The Prince indeed, not Mundi; sed tenebrarum mundi; not of the world, but of the darke∣nesse of the world, 2. Cor. 4. 4. you haue both these Kings together; The god of this world had blinded the mindes of vnbeleeuers, that the light of Christ might not shine vnto them. For the Lawes, Gods Law is, 2. Tim. 2. 19. Let euery oxe that nameth the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Satans Law is, 1. Ich. 2. 16. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Gods Law is, Thou shalt not sweare: Satans, thou shalt forsweare. Gods Law, Couet not; Satans, couet all. Nihil praecipit Deus nisi charitatem, nihil Diabolus nisi cu∣piditatem. God commands nothing but loue, the Deuill nothing but lust. Now these two Cities were begun in Cain and Abel: Cain a Citizen of the world, Abel a Citizen of God. Their names signifie their natures: Cain signifies a pro∣fession, and he built a Citie: for the children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. Iniqui mentem in amore praesentis vita figunt. Wicked men set Greg. their whole delight in this present world. What moued Cain to this? Not to be defended against wilde beasts, which Plato sayes first moued men to build Cities; for then Abel would haue builded so well as Cain. nor be∣cause man is animal sociale, a sociable creature; which Aristotle makes a special motiue hereof: for then the righ∣teous would also haue builded. But because Cain was a fugitiue, he builded for a protection against Gods curse; especially because he had no expectation of a better City. Vnlike to Abraham, who Hebr. 11. 10. looked for a City that hath a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. The Greekes say, that Cecropolis built by Cecrops, the Aegyptians that Thebes, the Argiues that Argos, was the first City. But it is manifest, that this City built by Cain was the first. Hee called the name of this City Enoch, but Henoch in the
righteous line is the seuenth; Iud. ver. 14. Enoch the seuenth from Adam. So the wicked dedicate worldly possessions in the first place, the righteous in the last. Cain and Henoch had their possession and dedication here. But Abel sig∣nifies mourning, and he built no Citie. Our possession is in heauen, this City of God, inuisible to the eye, incredi∣ble to the faith of the world, but infallible to all be∣leeuers. And for Cain, it is not properly translated, Aedifica∣uit, but Erat aedificator, as Iunius: erat aedificans, as the Septuagint; he began to build, but he finished not: hee was still a runnagate. So all worldlings are but aedificantes; like the Babel-erecters, they but began to reare the tower, but neuer could come to roofe it. This man began to build, saith Christ, but could not make an end. They are perswa∣ded, yea, Psal. 49. 13. their inward thought is, that they build houses to all ensuing generations; but this their way is their folly. Aedi∣ficat mortalis, mors diruit aedificantem: Mortall man builds, and death puls downe both builder and edifice. You haue heard it talked of Castles built by day, and still (no man knowes how) pul'd downe againe by night. That fabulous report is mystically true of the worldlings hope: what euer he erecteth in the day of his prosperity, the night of his ruine shall ouerthrow. Here are the two Cities: Omnis homo vel in coelis regna∣turus cum Christo, vel in infernis cruciandus cum Diabolo. Aug. Euery one shall eyther reigne with Christ in Heauen, or be tormented with the Deuill in hell. But how then is it said, that 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to him∣selfe? therefore the whole world is reconciled. But Saint Iohn contradicts it, Mundus positus in maligno, 1. Iohn 5. 29. the whole world lieth in wickednesse: therefore the world is not recon∣ciled to this Citie. Heere qui bene distinguit, bene doeet; a proper distinction doth cleare this difficulty. The world is sometimes taken for good, then Denominatio sequitur meliorem partem: often for euill, then Denominatio sequi∣tur
maiorem partem. In a word, saith Augustine, Amor Dei constituit Ierusalem, amor mundi Babylonem. The loue of God intitles vs to Ierusalem, the loue of the world to Babylon. Thus may wee distinguish the Citizens: for Bonos vel malos mores faciunt boni vel mali amores: Our good or bad loues, make our good or bad liues. There is no man which belongs not to one of these two Cities: No? To which of them belongs the Hypocrite? to Ba∣bylon? his face is toward Ierusalem. To Ierusalem? his heart is with Babylon. His misery is great: because hee weares Gods outside, the world will not be his mother: because he weares the worlds inside, God will not be his Father. Hee hath lost eart for Heauens sake, and Hea∣uen for earths sake. We haue some such rushers into au∣thority vncalled, vicious correctors of vice, that vnder∣take to cleanse the Augean stables, perhaps somewhat the sweeter till themselues came in: officious Scauengers of iniquitie. If with this lome they dawbe ouer their owne debauchednesse, they are like dung, which is rotten and stinking of it selfe, yet compasseth the ground, & makes it fruitfull. Or like the shepheards dogge, that hunts the stragling sheepe to the fold, yet is a dogge still, and hath his teeth beaten out, lest hee should worry them. Will you heare to what City hypocrites belong? The wicked seruant shall haue Mat. 24. 51. his portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. So then the Hypocrites home is the city of weeping and gnashing of teeth. But in this blessed City God is King, Christ his Hebr. 1. 6. eldest Sonne, the elect are his younger Rom. 8. 29. brethren, his Viceroyes are Kings, Angels his Nobles, Rom. 13. 4. Iust Iudges his Magi∣strates, 2. Cor. 5. 20. good Preachers his Ministers, 1. Thes. 4. 3. holines his Law, the godly his Subiects, Mat. 6. 32. Prouidence his gouernement, Mat. 5. 34. Heauen his Court, and Rom. 6. 23. saluation his recompence. Further obserue, that if this City be Gods, then so are all things in it. Whence I inferre, that all sacred things in this City beeing Gods, must not bee violated. For the
things in heaun they are safe enough, out of the Incro∣chers reach: but the holy things of this militant City are vniuersally abused. Sacrilegium, quasi sacrilaedium, a pro∣faning that is holy. Now holinesse is ascribed to Persons, Places, or Things. Sacriledge may be committed, saith Aquinas, 1. Uel in Personam, against a person, vvhen one Ecclesiasticall man is abused. Luk. 10. 16. Hee that despiseth you, despi∣seth me. 2. Vel in locum, against a place, when the Tem∣ple is profaned. Mark 11. 17. My house is called the house of prayer, but yee haue made it a den of thieues. 3. Vel in Rem, when things dedicated to holy vses are peruerted. Mala. 3. 8. You haue robbed me in tithes and offerings. Simon Magus would haue bought a Act. 8. 19. power to giue the holy Ghost  imposition of hands. Hee would haue giuen money for it, no doubt to haue gotten money by it. No Spirituall things are to bee barterd for money. Now Spirituall things are of foure sorts. 1. Essentialiter, the gifts of Gods Spirit, iustification, sanctification, Gala. 5. 22. loue, peace, patience, goodnesse, faith: Charismata salutis: which make those that haue them spi∣rituall. 2. Causaliter, The Word and Sacraments, which are the conduct-pipes to conuey our soules those graces, from the fountaine of all grace, Iesus Christ: Ioh. 6. 63. The words that I speake vnto you, they are spirit, and they are life. 3. Effectualiter, as power to heale, to worke miracles, to excommunicate, to absolue: gifts not imparted to se∣cular hands, but committed with the keyes to the Church. 4. Per annectionem, such are spirituall Liuings and endowments: these are not to be profaned in buying and selling. Selling is like the sinne of Gehesi; buying, like the sinne of Simon Magus. Anathema danti, anathema ac∣cipinti. There is a curse to the giuer, and a curse to the re∣ceiuer. Now Sacriledge to these holy things of God is committed three waies. 1. Quando ausertur sacrum de sacro: when a holy thing
is taken from a holy place: as the consecrated vessels out of the Temple. Foelix seeing the costly Chalices Constan∣tinus and Constantius had bestowed on the Church, ma∣liciously scoffed, What stately plate is there for the Car∣penters Theodoret. Son? But he that had so base a conceit of Christs bloud, did himselfe nothing night and day but vomit bloud, till his vnhappy soule was fetched from his wret∣ched carkase. Wee haue too many of those, that like Bel∣shazzar, with the riches of the Church haue furnished their cup-bords of Plate. 2. Quando non sacrum de sacro, when a common thing is stolne from a sacred place. As if a thiefe breakes open a Church to steale some priuate treasure hid in it. So the Church-wardens may defraud the poore of the money in the boxe. It is the poores, not sacred to the Church, yet is it sacriledge to embezzel it. 3. Quando sacrum de non sacro, when a holy thing is taken out of a common place: as when the Church is rob∣bed of her possessions and endowments. O the mercie of God, what shall become of England for thus robbing Gods Citie! Our Patrons are like those Christ whipped out of the Temple; yea worse: for they bought and sold in the Church, these buy and sell the Church it selfe. Prou. 20. 25. It is a snare to the man that deuoureth that which is holy. A snare hath three properties. 1. It catcheth suddenly: Vz∣za did but touch the Arke, and presently fell down dead. 2. It holds surely, 2. Chr. 26. 19. Vzziah will offer Incense, but the Leprosie (which was his plague) held him to his dying day. 3. It destroyes certainely, the earth swallowed Co∣rah and his confederates, when the rest escaped. The Prophet bestowes a whole Psalme against this sinne, Psalme 83. The Center of it, vpon whom all the lines and proiections of his inuectiues meet, are those ver. 12. that say, Let vs take to our selues the houses of God in possession. He calls them Gods enemies, tumultuous, proud, God-haters, ver. 2. Crafty enemies, with their plots,
tricks, subtilties; much like our Impropriators legall▪ iu∣stifyings. ver. 3. Confederate enemies, combining them∣selues to annihilate a Church; Come, let vs cut thē off from being a Nation. ver. 4. endeuouring to extinguish the ve∣ry Name of Israel; breaking downe the pale, that the Psal. 80. 13. Bore the depopulator, and the wild beast the corrupt Pa∣tron, may waste and deuoure it. They would plow vp the Vniuersities, and sowe them with the seed of Barbarisme. Now marke how hee prayes for them. ver. 9. Doe vnto them, as vnto the Medianites: Iudg. 7. 22. who were by the trumpets and lampes so terrified, that they drew their swords one vpon another: so that these by the trumpets of the Law, and lampes of the Gospel, might be awaked. As to Sise∣ra & to Iabin at the brooke of Kison: Iudg. 4. 9. that great Captaine, whom God deliuered into the hands of a woman. ver. 11. Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea all their Princes as Zebah, and Zalmunna. All Princes, yet died vi∣olent and ignominious deaths, and became like dung for the earth. Doth he stay here? No, ver. 13. O my GOD, make them like a wheele, and as the stubble before the vvind: Infatuate all their plots, turne their braines, and disperse their stratagems. Is he yet satisfied? No. ver. 14. As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth on fire the moun∣taines; so persecute them with thy tempest. Hee vseth impre∣cations to open the floud-gates of Gods wrath; that like fire it might consume them, either naturally as fire burnes the wood, or miraculously, as it enflameth the Moun∣taines. ver. 16. Fill their faces with shame. If this be to take Gods houses in possession, who dares lay sacrilegious hands vpon them? Yet for all this, those men did not what they desired. Let vs take, ver. 12. they said it, they did it not. Perhaps no thanks to thē, they would if they could. We haue done it, taken, inhabited, inherited: as Elias said to Ahab; 1. King. 21. 19 We haue killed, & also taken possession. His tithes, his offerings, all his holy rites, yea his very Churches: we haue gotten them, and led them captiue away, bound in
chaines of yron, conueyed by deedes, grants, seales, fines, as if you would make sure, they should neuer returne to the owner; God is robbed of them for euer. Ier. 5. 29. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? shall not my soule be auenged on such a Nation? What familie, that hath had but a finger in these sacriledges, hath not beene ruinated by them? They haue beene more infortunate to the Gentry of England, then was the gold of Tholossa to the followers of Scipio. Remember the Prouerbe; Hee that eates the Kings goose, shall haue the fethers sticke in his throate seuen yeeres after. Iustinian said; Proximum sacrilegio crimen est quod maiestatis dicitur. Treason is a petty sinne in respect of sacriledge. Augustine seemes to giue the reason: Tantò grauius est peccatum, quantò com∣mitti non potest nisi in Deum. It is so much the more hay∣nous, because it cannot be committed, but immediately against God himselfe. Well then, as the Philistines made haste to send home the Arke; and the Aegyptians to rid 1 Sam. 5. 11. Exod. 12. 31. themselues of Gods people; so let vs restore to God his dues with all speed. Otherwise, as hee smote the Phili∣stines with Emrods secretly, and the Aegyptians with plagues publikely: so onely himselfe knowes what he hath determined against vs. With what face canst thou expect an Inheritance from Christ in heauen, that detai∣nest from Aug. Christ his Inheritance here on earth? Let vs not so Iewishly with the spoyles of Christ, purchase fields of bloud. It is much, if at all this any guilty soule tremble: but howsoeuer, like Pharaoh, when the thunder and light∣ning are done, they are where they were. O this is a dif∣ficult Deuill to be cast out. Mark. 12. 17. Aug. Render vnto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods. Reddite Deo sua, vt Deus restituat vobis vestra. Returne vnto God that which is his, that God may allow you that which is yours. Wee pay to the King Impost, Subsidies, and Fifteenes; so giue
we all these in a resemblance to God. The Lords impost for all his blessings, is our gratitude. Psal. 116. 12. What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of saluation, and blesse the Name of the Lord. If wee forget to pay this Impost, the commodity is forfeit; God will take it backe. Our Subsidies are according to our parts. The subsidies of our eyes are our teares: he that payes not this tribute of raine, shall want the sun-shine of mercy. The subsidies of our mouthes are our praises. Tibi omne os confitebitur. Psal. 51. 15. Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. The subsidies of our eares are atten∣tion to his word. Luk. 10. 39. Mary sate at Iesus feete, and heard his word. The subsidies of our heads are meditations of his power, iustice, mercy, truth. Gal. 1. 2. The blessed man doth medi∣tate in the Law of the Lord day and night. This reduceth Christianity to practice: a rare habite; and yet it is as pos∣sible to be good without it, as to swallow and neuer chew the cudde. A Sermon without consequent meditation may come to be remembred againe in hell. The subsidies of our knees are geniculations. Eph. 3. 14. I bow my knees to the Fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ. Act. 7. 60. Steuen kneeled downe & pray∣ed, &c. If our knees be too stout to pay this tribute, hea∣uen gate will be too low for our entrance. The subsidies of our hands are almes to the poore: the due paiment of this interest shall blesse and increase the principall. Luk. 6. 38. Giue, and it shall bee giuen you. To the King wee pay Fifteenes, to God Tenths: these he hath separated to himselfe. The honest Pharise could say, Tyth and be rich: the dishonest Christian sayes, Tyth and bee poore. But what men get by this detinie, shall be their fatall destiny: they shall leaue the gold behind them, but carry the guilt with them to euerlasting fire. Robbe not this Citie militant, lest God turne you from the City triumphant. Of the liuing God. This hath beene an ancient attribute to God; liuing:
and it is added heere partly for distinction, partly for de∣monstration. First, it distinguisheth the owner of this Citie from other titular gods. For 1. Cor. 8. 5. there bee gods many, and lords many. The name of gods hath beene giuen to men, to Idols, to lusts. Homines Dij mortales, Idola dij mor∣tui, Libidines dij mortiferi. Men are gods dying, Idols dead, lusts deadly. There are 1. Dij deputati; reputed and deputed gods: such are Magistrates and Princes. Psal. 82 6. I haue said, Yee are gods: but these are mortall gods; ye shall die like men. You haue your life from this liuing GOD: both the life of nature common with others, and the life of power superiour to others. Rom. 13. 1. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Pilate re∣ceiued that power from God, whereby hee vniustly condemned the Sonne of God. Ioh. 19. 11. Thou couldest haue no power against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. Wee must giue to those gods obedience, eyther actiue or pas∣siue: actiue when they command well, passiue though they command ill. Otherwise we incurre Rom. 13. 2. damnation for obstinate disobeying, as themselues haue damnation for vniust commanding. These are momentany gods, as men are Kings on the stage, till the play is done. 2. Dij fictitij, fayned gods, as Mars the god of warre, Neptune the god of the sea, &c. They were strange gods, that ran a whoring after women, made way to their lusts, if not by flattery, by bloud. Scarce ranker villany in the Deuils, then was found in those gods. This the Philoso∣phers obiected against Paul, that he was Acts 17. 18. a setter forth of strange gods. The superstitious Lystrians tooke Paul and Barnabas for such gods; Dij descenderunt: Acts 14. 11. the gods are come downe to vs in the likenesse of men. But Paul, vers. 15. points them to the liuing GOD that made heauen and earth. Those fayned gods are confounded by this liuing GOD. 3. Dij manufacti, gods made with mens hands; Idols, but these are Psal. 106. 28. dead gods. Yea, not onely dead, but no∣thing.
1. Cor. 8. 4. An Idol is nothing in the world. It is true that they haue matter and forme: the gold, brasse, wood, or stone whereof they are made, be substances: they haue some∣thing in esse naturae, nothing in esse vitae: they haue stuffe, but no life in them. Psal. 135. 17. They haue eyes and see not, there is no breath in their mouthes. S. Paul commends in the Thessa∣lonians this happy conuersion, 1. Thes. 1. 9. from dead idols to the li∣uing God. O that it were as easie to confute Idolaters, as it is to confound Idols. Res hominis conculcat talem Deum. No Idol is so great a god, but the foote of man can kicke it downe. 4. Dij vsurpantes, vsurping gods, deuils. So Paul calls Satan 2. Cor. 4. 4. the god of this world. Of the whole world? What is then left for God? Not so, he is Deus improborum, not elementorum: God of the wicked, not of the frame, of the world. Iohn 16. 11. The Prince of this world is already iudged. A goodly god that is already iudged! Rom. 16. 20. The God of peace shall tread Satan vnder your feet. Not you, but God shall tread him down (to your comfort) vnder your feet. There∣fore Eph. 4. 27. give no place to the Deuill: for there is no place for the Deuill, but where it is giuen him. 5. Dij sensuales, sensuall gods. Some make their belly their god, and delicate cheare his sacrifices. . Cor. 6. 13. Meates for the belly, and the belly for meates, but God shall destroy both it and them. Others make gold and siluer their gods: worse then Pagan Idolatrie: they had gods of corne, and of wine, But Esa. 2. 20. These idols of siluer, and of gold, which they made for themselues to worship, they shall one day castaway with malediction. Some make their wife a goddesse, dote vpon her with the extremest Idolatry: a faire coloured peece of clay hath more worship then the Lord of hea∣uen. To some their Patron is a god: they more quake at his frowne, then at all the curses in the Bible. These are not onely dead, but deadly gods. For demonstration, the owner of this City is the liuing God: both formaliter in himselfe, and effectiuè to others,
1. Tim 6. 16. who onely hath immortality. Onely? Are not Angels and mens soules immortall? But God giues to them this im∣mortality; onely he hath it in himselfe. Therefore hee is called the liuing God, and the God of life: there be three degrees of life, all giuen by this liuing God. 1. Vniuersall, which consists of sense and motion: of this the beasts par∣ticipate. Psal 104. 3. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they are created. 2. Rationall, a life proper to man, not to other earthly creatures. 3. Supernaturall, which belongs onely to the faithfull. Christ himselfe is this life in vs. Gal. 2. 20. Now liue not I, but Christ liueth in mee. Haec vita reponitur, deponitur nunquam. This life is laid vp, but neuer lost. The world sees it not, because Col. 3. 3. it is hid with Christ in God. We now feele it, liue by it. Ver. 4. But when Christ, who is our life, shall ap∣peare, then shall we appeare with him in glory. Behold here with comfort the master wee serue, the liuing God. Riches is a flying Master; it hasts away Prou. 23. 5. with the wings of an Eagle. Honour is a dying master, it brings a man to the sepulcher, and then goes backe with the He∣ralds. Pleasure is a spilling Master; Luk. 6. 25. Wo to them that laugh, for they shall weepe. Satan is a killing master, his wages is hell fire. But all in grace is liuing and enliuing. Idols are dead, and neuer were aliue: men are aliue, but shall bee dead: pleasures are neyther aliue nor dead: Deuils are both aliue and dead; for they shall liue a dying life, and dye a liuing death. Onely the liuing God giues euerla∣sting life. Ierusalem. This is the appellation of the Citie. As Canaan was a figure of heauen; either of them called the Land of Pro∣mise: so locall Ierusalem is a type of this mysticall Citie. There are many conceits concerning the denomination of Ierusalem. Hierom thinks that the former part of the word comes from the Greeke , Holy: because Ierusa∣lem is called Mat. 27. 53. the holy Citie: But then there should bee a
mixture of two seuerall languages, Greek and Hebrew, to the making vp of the word. The Hebrewes deriue it bet∣ter: they say, Sem called it Salem, Peace: and Abraham Iireh. The place where he attempted the sacrifice of his sonne, he called Gene. 22. 14. Iehouah-Iireh: The Lord will see. Thus put together it is Ierusalem, visiopacis. This is more pro∣bable, then from the Greek , as Ierom: or from Ie∣bus, as Pererius. This is euident from the 76. Psalme. ver. 2. In Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. So that Salem & Sion were both in one place. The Iewes haue a Tradition; that in one and the same place Cain and Abel offred, in the same place Noah comming out of the Arke sacrificed, in the same place Abraham offered Isaac, in the same place stood Areunah's threshing floore which Dauid bought, in the same place Melchisedek the Priest dwelt, in the same place Salomon built the Temple, and our Lord Iesus Christ was crucified. But to let goe ambiguities, Ierusalem is a City of Peace. This is plaine, Heb. 7. 2. Melchisedek was King of Salem, that is, King of Peace. Gods Church is a Church of peace. That of Plato ouer his dore, is worth our remembrance. Nemo nisi veritatis et pacis studiosus trabit. Let none enter, but such as loue peace and truth. Saint Paul is bold to his Ga∣lathians; Gala. 5. 12. I would to God they were euen cut off that trou∣ble you. Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus sen∣serit. No sober man speakes against reason, no Chri∣stian against the Scriptures, no peaceable man against the Church. Hee that is not a man of peace, is not a man of GOD. Peace is the effect of patience: if men would beare iniuries, and offer none, all would be peace. It is the greatest honour for a man to suffer himselfe conquered in that, wherin he should yeeld. 2. Cor. 13. 11. Be of one mind, liue in peace, and the God of loue and peace be with you. A iust reward; if we haue one mind, and liue in loue and peace, the God of loue and peace shall be with vs.
Heauenly. This Citie is on earth, but not of earth. This is not ter∣restriall Ierusalem: Gala. 4. 25. She is in bondage with her children. She was not onely then vnder the Romane seruitude literally: but according to Pauls meaning allegorically, shee could not attaine the liberty of the Spirit, but abideth vnder the wrath of God, and horrour of conscience. But this Ieru∣salem is heauenly. Reu. 21. 2. I saw the holy City, new Ierusalem com∣ming downe from God out of heauen, prepared as a Bride a∣dorned for her husband. Now it is called Heauenly in three respects; Of Birth, of Conuersation, of Inheritance. Ortus coelestis quoad ori∣ginem: progressus coelestis quoad conuersationem; finis coele∣stis quoad translationem. Here is all heauenly. Gala. 4. 26 Hugo Card. Ierusalem that is aboue is free, the mother of vs all. In hoc quòd dicitur sursum, originis altitudo: quòd Ierusalem, pacis multitudo: quòd libera, libertatis magnitudo: quòd mater, faecunditatis amplitudo: quòd nostrum omnium, charitatis latitudo. The Church in the Creede hath three properties; Holy, Catholike, knit in a communion. The word Aboue inti∣mates, she is Holy: the word Mother, that shee is knit in a communion: the word Of all, that she is Catholike. Ierusalem is a type of the Catholike Church, in Elec∣tion, Collection, Dilection. First for Election, Psal. 132. 13. The Lord hath chosen Sion. That out of all Cities, this out of all Nations. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people: enclosed from the Commons of this world, Gods owne appropriation. 2. For Collection; that was walled with stone, this hedged in with grace. Esay 5. 2. God planted a vineyard in a very fruitfull hill: and he fenced it. It is well mounded, and the Citizens of it linked together with the Eph. 4. 3. Bond of peace. 3. For dilection; Beautifull for situation, the Palace of the great King: the Sanctuary of his holy worship, his Presence-chamber: 1. Tim. 3. 15. the pillar and ground of the truth. There Psal. 122. 5. was the seate of Dauid: here the Throne of the
Reue. 3. 7. Sonne of Dauid, that openeth and no man shutteth, that shutteth and no man openeth. A heauenly Citie. 1. In respect of her Birth and beginning heauenly. For the Lord of heauen hath Iam. 1. 18. begate her of immortall seed by the word of truth. Art thou a Christian? behold thy honourable birth and beginning. Was it an honourable stile, Troianus origine Caesar? Then much more, Coelestis origine sanctus: Euery Saint is by his originall heauenly. Beare thy selfe nobly, thou hast a celestiall generati∣on. 2. In respect of growth and continuance heauenly. Our conuersation is in heauen: Wee liue on earth, yet saith the Phil. 3. 20. Apostle, our conuersation is expresly in heauen. Our af∣fections are so set on it, that wee scarce looke vpon this world: wee so runne to our treasure there, that wee for∣get to be rich here: but like the Saints cast our money at our feet. Act. 4. Corpore ambulantes in terris, corde habitan∣tes in coelis. Our bodies walke on earth, our hearts dwell in heauen. To the hating and despising world vvee an∣swere; Nil nobis cum Mundo, nil vobis cum Coelo. Wee haue small share in this world, you haue lesse in the world to come. 3. In respect of the End. Ideo dicitur coelestis, quia coe∣lum sedes eius. Our soules are neuer quiet, till they come Ambr. to their wished home. Ephe. 1. 3. Thus hath GOD blessed vs with all spirituall blessings in heauenly places. The Church in her worst part is below, in her best aboue. Earth is Patria loci, but heauen Patria iuris. As Irishmen are dwellers in Ireland, but Denisons of England. We Iob 4. 19. dwell in houses of clay, vvhose foundation is in the dust, but are ruled by the Lawes of that supernall Citie. Iohn 17. 24. Father, my will is that those thou hast giuen mee, may be with mee where I am. A∣mator mortuus est in corpore proprio, vius in alieno. A Louer is dead in his owne body, aliue in anothers. Animus velut Plato. pondere, amore fertur, quocunque fertur; saith August. Loue waighes and swayes the soule, whither soeuer it be car∣ried.
Exi de terra tua, said God to Abraham; Gen. 12. 1. Get thee out of thy Country: yea rather de terra non tua, from a Coun∣try that is none of thine, vnto a Land that I will shew thee; thy owne Land, the kingdome of Heauen. Though man be called Iere. 22. 29. Earth, Earth, Earth; thrice with one breath: (earth by procreation, earth by sustentation, earth by cor∣ruption, saith Bernard) yet the Christian is not Habitator, sed accolaterrae; not a dweller, but a passenger on the earth. Hebr. 13. 14 For here we haue no continuing City, but we seek one to come. An Englishman that traffiques in Turkie, and gets wealth in Turkie, yet plants not in Turkie, but transports for England. A Christian what euer hee gets on earth, trea∣sures vp in heauen. Socrates being asked what Country∣man he was, answered, Sum ciues mundi, I am a Citizen of the world. But a Christian must answere, Sum ciues coeli, I am a Citizen of heauen. Forsake wee this home-stall with a ready mind, when GOD calls vs. And the Lord grant vs so to liue in this Citie of Grace, that wee may all liue for euer in the City of Glory, through Iesus Christ. To an innumerable company of Angels. Behold one speciall dignity the Gospel brings vs, Con∣sociari Angelis; to be made companions with the Angels. The incorporeall spirits are of two sorts; Celestiall & In∣fernall. If we weigh the malignancie of the one with the benignitie of the other, we shall truly meditate this bene∣fite. Infernall spirits are tempters to euill, and tormentors for euill. Homines seducunt, seductos damnant, damnatos torquent. They seduce mortalls, seduced they damne thē, damned they torment them. Because they lost being like God, they striue to make men like themselues. The diuell enhanceth his owne damnation, to procure others. Hee knowes himselfe irrecouerably lost, therefore is despe∣rate. These are wretched companions; Lord grant vs to know no more of them then by hearesay. But the good Angels striue by all meanes to vphold vs in our integritie,
to keepe vs in the feare of that God they know and wor∣ship: to preserue vs from dangers whilst we liue, and bee∣ing dead to transport vs to euerlasting ioy. Blesse vs O Lord with the society of these Angels for euer. Here we must consider two circumstances; Quales and Quoti: the Persons what they are, Angels: the number, how many they are, An innumerable company. First what they are, Angels. An Angel is an intellectuall and incorpo∣reall substance, free of will, a seruant to God, & by his grace Damasc. immortall in blessednes. Cuius substantiae speciem et termi∣num solus qui creauit, nouit. We cannot sufficiently know them whiles we are on earth; O may wee one day see and know them in heauen. That we may receiue comfort by this consorting with Angels, and vnderstand what good they doe vnto vs, let vs consider in them these sixe parti∣culars. Their nature, their knowledge, their power, their dignitie, their distinction, their ministery. 1. Their nature; they are not qualities and motions, but spirituall substances, really subsisting. This their ac∣tions testifie, running on Gods commands; executing his hests, &c. They are not flesh and bone, yet sometimes haue taken visible formes. Abraham intertaining three Angels, set meate before them, Gene. 18. 8. and they did eate. Theo∣doret sayes, they did take the meate simulatis manibus, and did put it into simulatum os: they seemed to eate, not in truth. But they had palpable and tractable bodies for the time, as appeares plainely, verse. 4. by washing their feete. Thomas, thinkes they assumed a true body, but non fuit ve∣ra comestura, it was not a true eating. But this is an idle opinion, for there may be a true eating, though the meat be not conuerted into the substance of the body. So our Sauiour did eate after his rising from death, yet no man thinkes his meate was turned into his substance. It is safe to say with the Text, they did eate, and performe other offices of a body truly. Now this was by diuine dispen∣sation for a time, the bettter to accomplish their enioyned
duties. Yet were these bodies no part of their natures, but onely as garments are to vs. But whence had they these bodies? They were eyther immediately created of God, or conflate of some presubsistent matter. What Caluin. became of these induments deposed? Eyther as they were made of nothing, so resolued into nothing: or else tur∣ned into the first matter whereof they were composed: and so was also the meate they did eate. Thus they haue beene called men: Gen. 18. 2. Three men came to Abraham: The women that came to Christs Sepulcher, found Luk. 24. 4. two men standing by them in shining garments. This is their nature, which in it selfe, saith Isodore, is mutable: for some of them Iude. ver. 6. fell from that blessed estate, and left their owne habita∣tion. But now for the rest, Seruauit eos incorruptos chari∣tas aeterna: the eternall loue of God hath made them vn∣changeable. For Christ Col. 1. 20. hath reconciled all things to him∣selfe, whether they bee things in earth, or things in heauen. This is their excellent nature, inferiour to God, superior to man. In the Prophets vision, Esa. 6. 2. each of the Seraphins had sixe wings: with twaine he couered his face, and with twaine be couered his feete, and with twa hee did flie. They haue two wings to couer their faces, as not able to behold the glory of God; and two to couer their feet, because wee are not able to behold them in their excellency. 2. Their knowledge. Austin sayes, They are taught of God, in the eternal contemplation of whose truth, they are most blessed. Quomodo quae scienda sunt nesciant, qui scientem omnia sciunt? How should they bee ignorant of such Greg. things as are fit to be known, that know him that knowes all? Their knowledge is three-fold; Naturall, Experimen∣tall, and Reuealed. 1. Naturall, receiued of God in their creation, endued with an extraordinary light aboue man. 2. Reuealed, as God according to processe of time hath manifested to them. God reuealed things to the Angels, they to the Prophets. 3. Experimentall, which they haue acquired by obseruation: they marke Gods doings. For
it is certaine, the Angels did not know all things from the beginning, which they know now. They knew not perfectly the manner of mans redemption. That myste∣ry from the beginning of the world hath beene hidde in God: and is Eph. 3. 10. Now made knowne to the principalities and powers in heauenly places. Great is the mystery of godli∣nesse; God is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spi∣rit, 1. Tim. 3. 16. seene of Angels. Res mira Angelis, quanta hominibus! A matter worthy the wonder of Angels, much more of men. There be things which yet the Angels do not know. 1. not the day of iudgement. Mat. 24. 36. Of that day & houre know∣eth no man, no not the Angels of heauen. 2. not mans heart. Acts 1. 24. Thou Lord onely knowest the hearts of all men. If Angels knew mens hearts, they were Gods. 3. Neyther doe I thinke with Saint Augustine, that they know Quanti nu∣meri supplementum de genere humano integritas illus ciuita∣tis expectat; what definite number of mankind must con∣curre to the perfection of that heauenly Citie. Man is circumscribed in place, knowledge, and mortality. An∣gels are circumscribed in place and knowledge, not in mortality. God is not circumscribed in eyther place, knowledge, or mortality. Man knoweth much, Angels know more, onely God knoweth all. 3. Their Power. Christ suffering himselfe to be ap∣prehended, said hee could command more then twelue Legions of Angels. Whereupon one notes the mighti∣nesse of his rescue: for euery Angell is stronger then a Le∣gion of men. They are said to excell in strength. Psal. 103. 20. Blesse the Lord, e his Angels that excest in strength. Mighty Angels. 2. Thes. 1. 7. The Lord Iesus shall be reuealed from heauen with his migh∣ty Angels. Mighty, but His: the originall hath it, the An∣gels of his mighty power. Innumerable, first borne of Ae∣gypt were slaine by one Angell. An hundred eighty fiue thousand Assyrians smitten by one Angell, 2. Sam. 24. 2. Kings. 19. 35. Seuenty thousand killed by one Angell. Therefore they
are called Potestates, Powers. Powerfull in themselues, but how mighty, when they are strengthened by the Almighty! This is wonderfull comfort to vs; they are not weake that fight for vs. Reu. 12. 8. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his angels; but pre∣uailed not. The Deuill hath a raging malice, but no pre∣uailing power. One Angell is too hard for many deuils. But against the power of Angels it is obiected, that a man preuailed against an Angell. Hos. 12. 9. Iacob had power ouer the Angoll, and preuailed. Some had a sottish opinion, that this Angell was the Deuill in Esau's likenesse, and that by the power of a good Angell Iacob ouercame. Now lest hee should ascribe the victory to himselfe and his owne strength, the Angell smote him on the thigh, so that hee halted. But there is no mention made saue of one Angel: he that wrastled with him, was the same that blessed him: he that blessed him, was the same that touched him: a good Angell, for an euill would neuer haue blessed him. But indeed this Angell was the Sonne of God. 1. Because he blessed him, God blesseth, not Angels. 2. It is said, Gen. 32. 28. that he preuayled with GOD; and verse 30. that hee saw God face to face: therefore it was God, not an Angell. Whether it were God or an Angell, you may see the power of faith, that it can preuail with migh∣ty Angels, with almighty God. Hee that wrastled with Iacob, gaue him power to ouercome. Seipso fortior est, so God is stronger then himselfe. Hee could not preuaile be∣cause he would not: he disposeth his power according to his will, not his will according to his power. Gen. 19. 22. Haste thee to Zoar, for I cannot doe any thing till thou bee come thither. Exod. 32. 10. Let mee alone, that I may consume them. As if Lot and Moses could hinder God. Faith & Prayer are manicles to his hands, vvhereunto he giues victorie against himselfe. 4. Their dignity consists in two things; In respect of their Place, and of their Grace. 1. For their abode, it is in
heauen. Euill Angels dwell belowe, 2. Pet. 2. 4. they are cast downe into hell: good aboue, Mat. 18. 10. The Angels doe behold the face of my Father in heauen. They are heauenly Courtiers, and heauenly Quiristers, eternally singing Ichouahs praise. 2. In respect of their Grace, so that they are called the An∣gels of GOD: and are farre more excellent then man. It is true that the Sonne of God dignified mans nature more then theirs: Heb. 2. 16. For he tooke not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Greg. Timet Angelus adorari ab hu∣mana natura, quam videt in Deo sublimaam: The Angels refuse to be worshipped of mans nature, which they see GOD himselfe hath accepted. But though he tooke not their nature, yet he dignified their office: for he is often called by the name of Angel. Gene. 48. 16. The Angel that redeemed mee, sayes aged Israel: the onely redeeming Angel is Christ. Exo. 14. 19. The Angel that went with the Campe of Israel, is called, ver. 24. The Lord. Paul sayes expresly, it was Christ. 1. Cor. 10. 4. 9. He is called Angelus foederis, the Mal. 3. 1. Angel of the Couenant. Reue. 20. 1. I saw an Angel hauing the key of the bottomlesse pit: and he bound Satan: but onely Christ can bind Satan, and Reue. 1. 18. hath the keyes of death and hell. Thus Christ hath accepted the name of Angels, yet hee tooke not on him the nature of Angels, but of man: no more then the Angels tooke on them the nature of man, vvhen they appeared in an humane shape. 5. Their distinction. Gregory collects from the Scrip∣tures Nouem Angelorum ordines, nine seuerall orders of Angels. Angels, Archangels, Vertues, Powers, Principa∣lities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim and Seraphim. We grant indeed that there be certaine distinctions & degrees in the Quire of Heauen: but whether distinguished by nature, gifts, or offices, none can determine. The Papists plead much for the Princedome of Michael aboue all o∣ther Angels. Their ground is Reuel. 12. 7. Michael & his Angels fought &c. Bellarmine affirmes, that euer since the fall of Lucifer, Michael is head of the glorious Angels:
and the Rhemists collect from that place the reason, why Michael is ordinarily painted fighting with a Dragon. But the foolish Painter so well as wise Bellarmine, can tell vs how Michael came to be chose in Lucifers roome. Iude saith, the wicked Angels that left their habitation, are re∣serued in chaines of darknesse: but hee tells vs not, that such as did not fall are preferred to higher places, but rather cō∣tinue still in their first estate and dignitie. Indeed Iude calls Michael an Archangel, and Daniel Vnum de principibus, one of the principall Angels: but it can neuer be proued, that he was, is, or shall be Monarch, or head of all Angels. Themselues say, that the greatest Angel is vsed in the grea∣test Embassage: but Gabriel, not Michael, was sent for the contracting of that sacred match betweene the GOD of Luke 1. Heauen and the blessed Virgin. Therefore Gabriel, not Michael, should be supreme both in naturall graces, and supernaturall prerogatiues. Indeed Christ is the Michael there mentioned: for the blessed Angels cannot be said to be any other Michaels Angels, then Christ. So August. Bulling. Marlor. Perhaps in the vision Michael & an host of Angels appeared to Iohn, but they represented Christ and his members. Christus est Ecclesiae suae Promachus, An∣geli eius Symachi: It is against the principles of holy be∣liefe, Aretius. to ascribe this victory to Michael or any other An∣gel whatsoeuer. Reu. 12. 11. They ouercame Satan by the bloud of the Lambe, not by Michael, or any Angel. 6. Their ministerie: from hence, some of the Fathers say, the Angels tooke their names. So Gregor. Angeli vo∣cabulum nomen est officij, non naturae: Angel is a name of office, not of nature. The Inhabitants of that celestiall Country are alwaies Spirits, but cannot alwaies be called Angels. Tunc solùm sunt Angeli, quando per eos aliqua nun∣tiantur: they are then onely Angels, or (it is all one) mes∣sengers, when they are sent on some message. Therefore he concludes; Hi qui minima nuntiant Angeli, qui summa nuntiant Archangeli vocantur: They that are sent on busi∣nesse
of lesse moment are called Angels, of greater impor∣tance Archangels. August. Ex eo quod est, Spiritus est: ex eo quod agit, Angelus est. They are Spirits in regard of their Being, Angels in regard of their Dooing. Good An∣gels, saith Isidor, are deputed for the ministery of mans salua∣tion. God hath giuen man three helps: Sense to see dan∣ger neere, Reason to suspect danger far off, Angels to pre∣uent that he neither sees nor suspects. Now the ministery of Angels is three-fold; to God, to his Church, to his E∣nemies. 1. To God, which consists principally in two things. 1. In adoring, and ascribing glory to him. So the Sera∣phims cryed Esay 6. 3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts. An Army sung, Luk. 2. 14. Glory to God on high. The whole Quire of heauen, Reue. 4. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receiue honour and power. 2. In standing in his presence, ready at his command. Psa. 103. 20. They do his commandements, harkning to the voice of his Word. For this promptnes of obedience wee pray, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Quod oramus, agamus. Thus An∣gels were messengers, that Christ should bee conceiued. Luke 1. 31. that he was conceiued. Mat. 1. 20. that he was borne. Luke 2. 11. that he was risen. Luke 24. 4. that hee vvas ascended. Act. 1. 11. These were great myste∣ries, therefore were confirmed vvith the testimonie of Angels. 2. To the Church. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heires of saluation? And by this their ordination to seruice the Apostle shewes, how infinitely farre the preeminence of Christ transcends theirs. But did not Christ put Phil. 2. 7. vpon him the forme of a seruant? Doth not himselfe professe, that Mat. 20. 28. hee came not to be ministred vnto, but to minister? The answer is easy; Non esse hoc naturae, sed voluntariae exinanitionis: This was not a natural or enforced, but a willing abasement of himself. Humilitatem non habitam induit, celsitatem habitam non exuit. Hee put on an humiliation that he had not, hee
did not put off the glory that he had: But the Angels were created to this end, that they should serue; Totamque con∣ditionem sub ministerio contineri. Istis naturale, illi aduentiti∣um. Caluin. To them it was necessary, to Christ voluntary. Now then ministery to the Church is three wayes considera∣ble. 1. In this life, and that to our Bodies, and to our Soules. 1. To our Bodies: for they necessarily tend to the preseruation of our temporall estates, euen from our Cradles to our Graues. This is true in Doctrine, and in Example. In Doctrine: Psa. 91. 10. There shall no euill befall thee, nor any plague come nigh thy dwelling. Why, how shall wee be protected? ver. 11. Angelis mandabit; For hee shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies. They shall beare thee vp in their hands, lest thou dash thy foote against a stone. In example: an Angel comforts, directs, feedes Elias. Angels plucke Lot out of Sodome. An An∣gel aduiseth Ioseph to fly into Egypt with Iesus. Abraham so encouraged his seruant, Gen 24. 7. The Lord will send his Angell before thee. Gene. 32. 1. Iacob went on his way, and the Angels of God et him. Peter was in prison, and Acts 12. 7. the Angel of the Lord freed him. 2. To our Soules, furthering the meanes of our salua∣tion. The Law was giuen by them, sayth Steuen. Acts 7. 53. Yee receiued the Law by the disposition of Angels. GOD makes them instruments to conuey knowledge to his Church. It was Gods charge; Dan. 8 16. Gabriel, make this man to vnderstand the Uision: it was the Angels performance; Dan. 9. 22. Daniel, I am come forth to giue thee skil and vnderstanding. Saint Iohn ac∣knowledgeth in his Reuelations, that Reu. 22. 8. an Angel shewed him those things. They preserue vs in the true worship of God, and cannot endure any attribution of his glory to a creature, no not to themselues. When Iohn fell downe at the Angels feete to worshippe him, he preuented him; Reue. 19. 10. See thou doe it not. They reioyce in our conuersion; Luke 15. 10. There is ioy in the presence of the Angels of God, ouer one sinner that
repenteth. They ioy in this for two causes. 1. To behold the glorious fruite of their labours: for it delights a man to see the works of his hands prosper. GOD hath sent them to guide vs to good, to gard vs from euill: when we follow their guidance, they reioyce. Let vs hate to sinne, as we would not wish to bring griefe to the thresholds of heauen. 2. That their number might be made vp againe. They lost a number of Spirits, they are glad to haue it made vp with Soules. The Angels ioyned company with men, praysing God on earth: so they delight to haue men made their fellow-Choristers in heauen. Luke 2. 2. At the end of this life to carry our soules to hea∣uen. Luk. 16. 22. When the begger died, hee was carried by the Angels into Abrahams bosome. He that in life was scorned of men, and had no companions but the dogges, is so regarded of God, that he is garded by Angels. Hee that could neither goe, nor sit, nor stand, is now carried: not on the shoul∣ders of men, as the Pope the proudest on earth, but hee rides on the wings of Angels. He is carried to a glorious Port, by gracious Porters. 3. At the last day, Math. 24. 31 Christ shall send his Angels vvith a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the Elect from the foure winds, from one end of heauen to the other. These are those Mat. 13. 30. Reapers, that in the time of haruest must gather the tares to the fire, and the Wheat to Gods barne. This is their ministerie to vs. But it is the Lord, Psal. 37. 23. that ordereth all our steppes: hee spreads the gracious wings of his prouidence ouer vs: and the Lord Iesus Christ is all in all vnto vs. Now the rule is, Non multiplicanda En∣tie sine necessitate; and Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. It seemes then the helpe of Angels is more then needes. For 2 Psal. 121. 4. hee that keepeth Israel neither slumbers nor sleepes. I answere, that Angelicall custody doth not extenuate, but extoll Gods goodnesse and Greatnesse to∣wards vs: for this is but the execution of his high & holy
Prouidence. It is the wisedome of the King, that gouerns all the Cities and Castels in his Dominions: yet he leaues not these vnfurnished of men and munition, to withstand the enemies inuasion. The diuels range and rage against vs in euery corner, therefore God hath ordained for our gard an Host of Angels. Psal. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encam∣peth round about them that feare him, and deliuereth them. True it is that God is able to defend vs himselfe by him∣selfe, through that immediate concourse that hee hath in all things. But to shew that the Almighty God being tied to no meanes, doth yet worke by meanes, to vphold the weakenesse of our natures. A Prince sees his little children besieged, and sends his stronger sonnes, able souldiers to relieue them. Their helpe to vs is certaine, though not visible: we cannot describe it, nor prescribe it, but vvee feele it in the successe: they preserue vs. Against the Sy∣rian band, . King. 6. 17. the mountaine was full of horses, and charets of fire, to defend Elisha. Neither is this all, but to manifest his abundant goodnesse to mankind. Psal. 8. 4. What is man, O Lord, or the sonne of man, that thou so (gardest and) regar∣dest him? They are dust and vanity, and rottennesse, yet the Lord sends his glorious Angels, his Pages of honour, and Princes of his Court, for their messengers and mini∣sters. As if a King should not onely giue his subiect a char∣ter and Patent of safe conduct, but also sends his own gard to attend him. So the Lord honors vs with his own gard royall through Iesus Christ. 3. To enemies; not for their safety, but for the execu∣tion of Gods iudgements on them. The huge Armie of Senacherib was ouerthrowne by an Angel. Indeed they will not the destruction of any man, further then the Iu∣stice of God ordaines it. But sometimes they are sent out for the protection of the very wicked: so Daniel speakes of the Grecians Angel, and of the Persians Angel. The Daniel 10. Romists allot a particular tutelar Angel to euery Colledge and Corporation: yea to the generation of flies, fleas, and
ants: yea to euery Infidell kingdome such an Angel: yea to Antichrist; lastly, euen to hell it selfe. Sure then they vvill not pinch themselues: they appoynt to the Pope two principall Seraphims, Michael and Gabriel, euer at∣tending his Person. For that Michael is the chiefest, Vic∣torellus produceth two very equall witnesses: the Roman Liturgie, and Tasso's Ierusalem: as a worthy Diuine ob∣serued. To the Conclaue they assigne one speciall assi∣stant Angel. But mee thinks, as they Ideate their Hierar∣chy, this Angel should desire the roome, and become a suter to the holy Ghost to name him Pope in the next Conclaue. For by this meanes hee doth wonderfully en∣large his Diocesse, hauing all the lower world vnder him; all particular Angels of speciall Societies subiect to him: yea all the Archangels and Principalities officed to seueral Estates, must concurre to his gard and assistance. The truth is, God sometimes allowes the help of An∣gels to the very reprobates: but to this scope & purpose, Populs sui promouere salutem, to further the welfare of his owne people. For all the atchieuements and victories, which come to the heathen by helpe of Angels, are in∣tended not for their good, but the good of the Saints. It is for the Sonne of Gods sake they minister to vs: and to none do they performe these comfortable seruices, but to the Elect in Iesus Christ. Thus you see what these Angels are; now let vs con∣sider how many. An innumerable company. The originall is Myriades. Myrias is tenne thousand; innumerable: a finite number is put for an indefinite. Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thou∣sands ministred vnto him, and tenne thousand times ten thou∣sand stoode before him. Reue. 5. 11. I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throue, and the number of them vvas tenne thousand times tenne thousand, and thousands of thou∣sands. Hom. 34. in Euang. Gregory thinks there are so many Angels, as there are Elect. Supera illa ciuitas ex Angelis et hominibus con∣stat: ad quam tantum credimus humanum genus ascendere,
quantos illi contigit electos Angelos remansisse. Vt scriptum est; statuit terminos Gentium iuxta numerum Angelorum Dei. So many Angels, saith hee, as fell from heauen, so many soules shall goe vp to heauen. It is a question much disputed, whether besides the protection of Angels in common, euery particular man haue one particular Angel for his Guardian. I find many of the Fathers allotting euery one a particular Angel. Isi∣dor. Singulae Gentes praepositos Angelos habere creduntur: imo omnes homines Angelos suos. Origen, Basil, Hierome, Chrysostome, Theophylact, Gregory Nyssen, Primasius, Iustin Martyr, Augustin, most of the Schoolemen, and some Protestant Diuines: all conclude that euery man from his birth, or especially from his Baptisme, hath a particular Angel. I will not dispute it, yet I must doubt it; because I see no cleare ground in the Scriptures to proue it. The two chiefe places cited are these, Math. 18. 10. Despise not these little ones, for their Angels behold the face of my Father in heauen. This place Caietan and others expound, not that euery little one hath a peculiar guardant Angel, but Om∣nes omnibus; that all the Angels take care of all Gods little ones. As the Scriptures construe it selfe; Luke 15. 10. All the An∣gels reioyce at the conuersion of one sinner. The other place is, Acts 12. 15. Peter being vnexpectedly deliuered out of prison, came to Maries house where the Saints were gathered together. Rhoda hearing his voice, ranne in, and told them how Peter stood at the gate. They said to her, Thou art mad: but when shee constantly affirmed it, they said, It is his Angel. I answere that the Disciples a∣mazed at the strange report, spake they knew not vvhat. On the like reason, because Peter transported in behold∣ing Christ transfigured, said, Math. 17. 4. Let vs build here three Ta∣bernacles: some might inferre that Saints departed dwell in Tabernacles. Because the two sonnes of Zebede desired to Mat. 20. 21. sit one at Christs right hand, the other on his left in his kingdome; they might haue concluded that Christ
was to be a temporall King. Or because the Disciples see∣ing Iesus walking on the Sea, in their troubled minds, said Math. 14. 26. It was a spirit; others might proue that spirits walke. Omne dictum sancti non est dictum sanctum. All are not Christian truths, that true Christians haue spoken. Di∣cunt errores non Christiani, sed homines: they erre not as they are Christians, but as they are men. But it is obiected, that they spake after the common o∣pinion of men in that age. Wee reply, that in that age it was a common opinion that dead men walked: so it ap∣peares by Herod hearing the fame of Iesus; Math. 14. 2. This is Iohn the Baptist, he is risen from the dead. Uox populi is not euer vox Dei: common errors are no rules of truth. And if the place were so manifest, as they could wish it, why might it not rather be vnderstood thus? It is his Angel, that is, some Angel that God hath sent for his deliuerance. Some∣times many men haue but one Angel, other times one man hath many Angels. Exod. 14. 10. There was but one An∣gel for many people. 2. King. 6. 17. There were many An∣gels for one man. Let vs now make some vses concerning this discourse of Angels. These may be two-fold; some for imitation, others for application. First for imitation; there are three things specially to be obserued in Angels: Purenesse of substance, Readines of obedience, Feruour of Charitie. These are couertly im∣plied from Psal. 104. He maketh his Angels spirits, his mi∣nisters Psalme 104. 4. a flaming fire. Spirits, there is the Puritie of their substance: ministers, there's the Readinesse of their obe∣dience: Flame of fire, there's the heate of their Charitie. Thus were the Cherubims of the Tabernacle made, figu∣ring these three vertues in the Angels. Exod. 25. First, they were made of Pure gold. ver. 18. This shewes the ex∣cellencie of their substance, for gold is the purest and best of mettals. To this Gods owne Word is compared: Cant. 1. 11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studdes of siluer. Second∣ly, they had two wings stretched out, to witnesse Promp∣titudinem
obedientiae; Dan. 9. 21. Gabriel did fly swiftly. Of all crea∣tures the winged are the swiftest. Psal. 55. 6. O that I had wings like a Doue, then would I fly away, and be at rest. The most sud∣denly transient thing, riches is compared to a winged crea∣ture: Prou. 23. 5. Riches makes it selfe wings like an Eagle. Thirdly, they were made with their faces one towards another, to manifest the truth of their loue; not like proud men tur∣ning away their countenance from their brethren. Lastly, though one were toward another, yet both toward the Mercie-seate: beholding him in sight, to whō they were beholden in dutie. Thus we see, 1. that their nature is pure; and this their mansion declares, which is heauen: for into it shall enter no vncleane thing. They are shining and singing starres: Iob 38. 7. When the morning starres sang together, and all the sonnes of God shouted for ioy. Heauen like fire, Similem sibi reddit in∣gredientem, makes that it receiues like it selfe. 2. That their obedience is ready and swift, their very name imports, Angels. Aquo dominatio, ab eo denominatio: for a name is giuen from some supereminent qualitie. Psal. 18. 10. Hee rode vpon a Cherub, and did fly. 3. That their Charity is great, ap∣peares by their busie protecting vs, grieuing at our falls, reioycing at our perseuerance in good, & helping vs for∣ward to saluation. Let vs imitate them in foure things. 1. In Puritie: nothing is more pleasing to God. It hath the blessing of this life, & of the life to come. Of this life; Psal. 73. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, euen to such as are of a pure heart. God is good to the whole vvorld with his com∣mon benefites, better to Israel with extraordinary bles∣sings, but best of all to the Pure in heart with his sauing Graces. Of the life to come: Psal 24. 4. Who shall stand in Gods ho∣ly place? he that hath cleane hands, and a pure heart. Mat. 5. 8. Bles∣sed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Thereis no ioy like to this beatificall vision, to see God is the height of happinesse. But so shall the wicked; Reue. 1. 7. they shal see him whom they haue pierced. Diuines vsually distinguish of that
sight: Luk. 11. 27. They shall see the Sonne of man comming in a cloud; they shall see him as man, not as God; as their iust Iudge, not mercifull Sauiour. 2. In Pietie and obedience, wherein the Angels are ready and speedy, resolute and absolute. As they helpe vs to commaund the creature, so let them teach vs to obey the Creator. They fly when God sends them: true obe∣dience hath no lead at the heeles. Paul herein was like an Angel; hauing his Commission, hee stood not to Gala. 1. 16. con∣ferre with flesh and bloud. Quantum morae addis, tantum o∣bedientiae detrahis. So much as a man addes to delay, hee takes away from obedience. The truely obedient man doth not procrastinate: Sed statim parat aures auditui, lin∣guam voci, pedem itineri, manum operi, cor praecipienti. He Bern. instantly prepareth his eare for the message: 1. Sam. 3. 10. Speak Lord, for thy seruant heareth. His tongue giueth a ready answer to the question: Ioh. 21. 16. Simon, louest thou me? Lord, thou know∣est that I loue thee. His foote is shod for the iourney; Eph. 6. 15. his feete be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. His hand is fit for the worke, Gene. 22. 10. Abraham stretched forth his hand to slay his sonne. His heart is pliable to the Comman∣der: Paratum cor: O Lord, my heart is ready. 3. In Charitie: Angels looke vpon and loue one ano∣ther, and all loue vs: Let this teach vs to loue them & our selues. Doe they seeke our peace, and shall wee vncharita∣bly warre? It was the Angels song, Luke 2. Pax in terris, Peace vpon earth: warre with none but with Antichrist & the diuell. The Angels haue no need of our loue, vve of theirs. Loue we that on earth, which shall dwell vvith vs for euer in heauen, Charitie. 4. In humility: those glorious spirits stoope to do vs seruice, let vs not thinke it bad or base to serue one ano∣ther in loue. No one man can so farre exceede ano∣ther, as the Angels excell the best men: doe they abase themselues to our succour, and shall we in a foolish pride soorne our brethren? The haughty peece lookes on the
poore betwixt scorne and anger; Touch mee not, I am of purer mould: yet Mors dominos seruis; blended toge∣ther in the forgotten graue, none makes the finer dust: we cannot say, such a Ladies rottennesse smells sweeter then such a beggers. Come downe thou proud spirit, deny not succour to thy distressed brother, lest God deny his high Angels to succour thee. Thus for imitation, now for application, learne we other vses. 1. This is terror to the vvicked, who contemne and condemne the righteous. Math. 18. 10 Despise not these little ones, for their Angels are with my Father in heauen. Beware you that scoffe at poore Innocents, their Angels may plague you. They for their parts may be content to put vp abu∣ses, and to forgiue iniuries: but their Angels may take vengeance. Acts 12. 1. Herod vexed certaine of the Church, killed Iames with the sword, and seeing it please the Iewes, hee tooke Peter also. They could not helpe this; but their Angels did: for verse 23. an Angel of the Lord smote him that he died. Thou maiest haue euasion from the executioners of men, but no protection against the Officers of GOD. When they are bidden to strike, they will lay on sure strokes. Gene. 19. 13. Wee will destroy this place, for the Lord hath sent vs to destroy it. 2. They teach vs deuout reuerence, so to behaue our selues as in the sight and presence of holy Angels. The consideration of so blessed a company, doth not onely Conferre fiduciam, and afferre deuotionem, but inferre reue∣rentiam; saith Bernard. When to Iacob in his dreame was presented that Ladder, and the Angels ascending and de∣scending on it: wakening hee saies; How fearefull is this place! Gen. 28. 17. This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heauen. Seneca said, that the conceit of Cato and Plato, & such graue men in our company would restraine vs from euill: but what are these to the holy Angels of heauen? 1. Cor. 4. 9. Wee are a spectacle to the Angels: they are ob∣seruers and witnesses of all our actions. 1. Cor. 11. 10. For this cause the
vvoman ought to haue power on her head, because of the Angels. This is not to be vnderstood of offence onely gi∣uen to the Ministers of the Church: but to signifie that a woman throwing off the vaile of modestie, and token of subiection to her husband, doth make euen the Angels of heauen witnesses of her dissolute contumacie. The An∣gels are present with thee when all men on the earth are absent from thee. I aske thee, when thou pollutest the marriage bed, attemptest an homicide, plottest a treason, forgest a vvriting, wouldest thou then haue the Angels present with thee, or absent from thee? If thou desirest them present, why dost thou offend them by thy turpi∣tudes? If absent, thy protectors are gone, and the diuels would easily confound thee. Nonfacias coram Angelis Dei, yea coram Deo Angelorum: Do not that thing before the Angels of God; yea before the GOD of Angels; vvhich thou wouldest shame to doe in the sight and pre∣sence of an earthly man. Yet let vs marke here by the way, that albeit the An∣gels deserue our reuerence, yet they desire not our adora∣tion. Indeed the euill Angels request it: it was a speciall boone which the Diuell begd of Christ, Math. 4. 9. to fall downe & worship him. But the good refuse it; Reue. 19. 10. See thou doe it not, for I am thy fellow seruant; saith the Angell to kneeling Iohn. As we vsually come too short in our due reuerence to the Angels; so the Papists goe too farre in vndue ado∣ration. They haue a set prayer for it: Angele Dei, Custos mei me tibi commissum lege supera, semper rege, custodi gu∣berna. This sacrilegious honour those holy spirits refuse: they take no charge of such superstitious soules. Accipi∣unt commissum, non arripint inconcessum. Honorandi, non a∣dorandi sunt Angeli. Let them be honored, but not ado∣red. Loue and reuerence the Angels, onely worship God and Iesus Christ. 3. This declares to vs the excellent company that is in heauen. Were the place lesse noble and maiesticall, yet the
company it affords is able to make the soule right blessed. We are loth to leaue this earth for the societie of some friends, in whom we delight; yet wee are all subiect to mutuall dislikes. Besides the meeting of those good friends againe in heauen, there be also glorious Angels. There is nothing in them but is amiable, admirable: no∣thing in possibilitie of changing our pleasures. There thou shalt see and conuerse with those ancient Worthies, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Fa∣thers of the Primitiue times, all of them out-shining the starres: where our loue shall be as eternall, as is our glory. There wee shall liue familiarly in the sight of those An∣gels, whom now we receiue good from, and see not. Yea there is the fountaine of all felicity, that Sauiour of ours, whose grace onely brings vs to the blessed vision of the whole Trinitie. Neither can there be a higher happinesse, then the eternall fruition of Iesus Christ. Let this teach vs all to blesse our God that hath thus aduanced vs. Man is corporeall dust; O that this clay of ours should come to dwel with those incorporeal spirits! Math. 22. 30. We shalbe as the An∣gels of God in heauen. Sicut, non ipsi; like Angels, though not Angels in nature. Communicatione spei, non speciei: we haue now a communion of hope with them, hereafter of glory. To this place, O thou Creator of men & Angels bring vs through Iesus Christ. To the generall assembly, and Church of the first borne which are written in Heauen. Our Apostle hath spoken of the Churches glory typi∣cally, and topically: now he describes it materially. First, the Essence of it, what it is; The Church. Secondly, the Propertie of it, what kind of Church it is; Generall or Catholike. Thirdly, what are the parts of it, & of whom it consists; Of the first borne written in Heauen. The Church. This word is taken in diuerse significati∣ons.
For the materiall Temple. 1. Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together in the Church, I heare there are diuisions a∣mong you. For the faithfull domestikes of one Familie. 1. Cor. 16. 19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you, vvith the Church that is in their house. For the professors of one Prouince; The Church of Corinth, of Ephesus, &c. For some famous company of Beleeuers gathered together in one place. 1. Cor. 14. 4. He that prophecieth, edifies the Church. For an Ecclesiasticall Senate or Synode. Mat. 18. 17. If he shall neglect to heare them, Dic Ecclesiae, tell it vnto the Church. For the whole number of the Elect. Mat. 16. 18. Vpon this Rocke I will build my Church. Acts 5. 11. Great feare came vpon all the Church. 1. Tim. 3. 15. Which is the Church of the liuing GOD, the pillar and ground of truth. Here first let me premise three circumstances con∣cerning the Church. 1. Though it be a Generall Assembly, yet it is but one. Cant. 6. 8. There be threescore Queenes, and fourescore Concu∣bines, and Virgins without number: but my Doue, my vndefiled is but one: shee is the onely one of her Mother. In∣deed there be two parts of this One Church: Trium∣phant in Heauen, and Militant on Earth. The Trium∣phant part is a company of Iustified spirits, triumphing ouer the flesh, vvorld, and diuell: spirits, I say, for Except our Sauiours, and the bodyes of Enoch and Eli∣as, and of those Saints that rose at Christs Resurrection, of which yet many Diuines doubt. bodies are not yet ascended. They haue two hap∣py priuiledges. 1. To reioyce in the conquest ouer sinne and death: the most righteous man liuing is in praelio, in a continuall warfare. But so are the other: for Saint Iohn saith, Reue. 12. 7. There was warre in Heauen. This must be vnderstood of heauen on earth; vvhere there is no truce with Satan; Pax cum Deo, bellum cum diabolo: We haue peace with God, but (on this condition, that) warre with the diuell. Therefore so runne the promises, Uincenti dabitur: To him that ouercomes, shall be giuen Reue. 7. 9. Palmes: to shew that they had been warriours, are now conquerours, 1. To praise God continually, and to sing
Amen: Blessing and glory, thankesgiuing and honour be vn∣to God for euer and euer. The militant part is a company of men liuing vnder the crosse, and desiring to be with Christ. They suffer, and this is their way to glory; Act. 14 22. through much tribulation entring into the kingdome of God. They desire dissolution, being 2. Cor. 5. 8. willing rather to be absent from the body, and to bee present with the Lord, not simply and absolutely desiring death: but first that they might leaue sinning, and so cease to displease God: and then to come neerer to their blessed Sauiour, whose loue hath rauished their hearts. Now this militant Church may haue many parts: as the Ocean sea is but one, yet distinguished according to the Regions vpon which it lies. So there is the Spanish Ocean, the English Ocean, the German Ocean. There is a Church in England, a Church in France, a Church in Germany: yet there is but one militant Church. Multa Ecclesiae, vna Ecclesia; saith S. Augustine. One Sunne, many beames; one Kingdome, many shires; one tree, many branches. 2. We must note, that Christ is the alone head of his Church, and can haue no other partner to share with him in this dignity. Ephes. 2. 21. Iesus Christ is the corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together, growes vnto an holy Tem∣ple in the Lord. Hee doth not onely by his authority go∣uerne it, but also by his grace quicken it: so that wee liue not, but Christ liueth in vs. Col. 2. 19. Let vs hold the head, from which all the body by ioynts and bands hauing nourishment ministred, increaseth with the increase of God. He requires no deputy, he needs none. For Mat. 18. 20. wheresoeuer you are ga∣thered together in my name, I am in the middest of you. Now euery Commission ceaseth in the presence of him that giues it. It is therefore as great arrogancy in the Pope to call himselfe Caput Ecclesiae, Head of the Church; as for a subiect to keepe himselfe in commission in the presence
of the King. But they distinguish of heads; there is a Principall, and a Ministeriall Head. Christ is not so weake in himselfe, or so respectlesse of vs, as to need any Mini∣steriall head. Indeed there be Heads Materialiter, who are no other then principall members. So Saul was cal∣led Head of the Tribes, Psal. 18. 43. Thou hast made me the head of the heathen, 2. Sam. 23. 8. The Tachmonite head of the Captaines. Nehem. 11. 16. Iozabad head of the Leuites. The eldest was called head of the familie, Exod. 6. 14. These bee the heads of their fathers houses. But there is a Head Formaliter, to giue sense, motion, vertue, gouer∣nance: this none but onely Christ. 3. Wee must know, that there is no saluation out of this Church; such as neuer become members of it, must eternally perish: they that are true members, shall be sa∣ued. 1. Ioh. 2. 19. If they had beene of vs, they would haue continued with vs: but they went out from vs, that it might be manifest they were not of vs. Reu. 22. 15. Without are dogs and scorners, &c. All out of the Arke perished in the waters. Act. 2. 47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should bee saued. First, because there is no meanes of saluation out of it; no word to teach, no Sacraments to confirm. And especially because out of the Church there is no Christ, and out of Christ no sal∣uation. Who haue not the Church their Mother, cannot haue God their Father. This teacheth vs to honour our Mother, and like little children to hang at her brests for our sustenance. Esa. 66. 11. Sucke and bee satisfied with the brests of her consolations, milke out and bee delighted with the abun∣dance of her glory. Run not to strange nurses for poyson, when you may haue pure milke of your owne mother. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Desire like babes, that sincere milke of the Gospell, that yee may grow by it. Qualis nutritio, talis complexio. The com∣plexion of your manners, the disposition of your liues, will witnesse whose children they are. The generall assembly: this is the property of the Church; Generall. It is Catholike in three respects; of
Time, of Persons, of Place. 1. Of Time, because the Church had a beeing in all ages, euer since the Promise was giuen to our first Parents in Paradise. If there had beene a time when no Church had beene on earth, the world should haue then perished: for it stands for the E∣lects sake. 2. Of persons; for it consists of all degrees and sorts of men; rich and poore, Princes and subiects, bond and free. There is no order nor state excluded, if they exclude not themselues. 1. Iohn 2. 1. Christ is the Propitiation for our sinnes. He may be so indeed for the sinnes of Iohn, and the Disciples, but how appeares it for mine? yes; Vers. 2. not for our sinnes onely, but for the sinnes of the wholeworld; euery condition of beleeuers. 3. Of Place, it is gathered from all parts of the earth; especially vnder the new Testament. Mat. 26. 13. Wheresoeuer this Gospell shall bee preached in the whole world. When Christ gaue his Apostles their Commissi∣on, hee gaue also the whole world for their Parish. Goe teach all nations, and baptize, &c. Mat. 28. 19. Thus we see the property of this Church, Catholike or Generall. It is one, but not tyed to one time, nor one place, nor one person: it is Catholike to all times, to all places, to all persons. Augustine sayes that the Dona∣tists in his dayes would haue tyed the Church to Carten∣na in Africa: as the Papists in our dayes to Rome in Italy. How is it then a Generall assembly? Thus that Antichri∣stian rabble, which haue almost nothing in their mouthes but the Church, the Church; yet doe mostly infringe the liberties of the Church, and hedge it in. All of them haue made the Catholike Church, to be nothing else but the Ro∣mane Church; and some of them the Romane Church to be nothing else but the Pope. So in effect Papa virtualiter est ota Ecclesia; say they. The Anabaptists imagined a Church like the Ticke, all body and no head: the Papists haue made a Church like the Toadstoole, all head and no body. What a monster is their Pope, that will bee all in all; eye and tongue, body and head, & taile too? As Cali∣gula
tooke off the head of Iupiter, and set on another of his owne: so they haue smitten off Christs head, and set on the Pope. Let them take their imaginary head: say we onely to Christ: Whom haue we in heauen but thee? and on earth none besides thee. Our dependance be for euer on our Head the Lord Iesus. Before I leaue this point, I desire to expresse two things: one for distinction, the other for instruction. First for distinction betwixt this Generall assembly, and parti∣cular Churches: then for instruction, to shew who bee true members of this Catholike Church. 1. The maine difference betweene them consists in this: that the Catholike Church is alwaies inuisible, the members thereof only knowne to God: particular Chur∣ches are sometimes inuisible, and lying hid; other times manifest in the open profession of Christs name. As the Moone is eft-soones ecclipsed or clouded, and often shineth in the full. 1. It lies hid through want of the word preached, and publike administration of the Sacraments. So it was in the dayes of Elias, when hee wished to die; 1. King. 19. 14. I onely am left. Strange Apostacie, when so notable a Prophet could not discerne the Church! yet; vers. 18. I haue left seuen thou∣sand, that neuer bowed their knees to Baal. So it was in the raigne of Asa; 2. Chro. 15. 3. For a long season Israel hath bene without the true God without a teaching Priest, and without the Law. The Papists demand where our Church was before the daies of Luther: we answer, that an vniuersall Apostacie was ouer the face of the world, the true Church was not then visible: but the graine of trueth lay hid vnder a great heape of popish chaffe. But this inuisibility doth not proue a nullitie. They cannot impugne the antiquity of our Church, vnlesse they conuince themselues. For the Church of England holds no other doctrin then that the Church of Rome primarily did hold, and that which S. Paul deliuered to them in sacred writing; Iustification
onely by the bloud of Christ. If they be falne from this, who can blame vs for falling from them? It was high time to leaue them, when they left the Lord Iesus. So long as we preserue the truths antiquity, wee must smile at their fond obiection of nouelty. The Church of God is Ca∣tholike, not Romane Catholike: thats iust as foolish a phrase, as the by-word of Kent and Christendome. Par∣ticular and vniuersall are contradictories. If we haue any thing from them, that they had from God; it is our bles∣sing that we haue kept it, their woe that they haue lost it. Esau's blessing and birth-right is lost to himselfe, and gi∣uen vnto Iacob. They haue not so much reason to boast, as we to reioyce. Our Church had a substantiall being before, but hath gotten a better being by the repurgation of the Gospell: which is maintained by our Christian Princes, iustly sti∣led Defenders of the ancient Faith. It was Gods Floore be∣fore, though full of chaffe: but now since Mat. 3. 12. hee that hath his fanne in his hand hath purged it, it is clearer in shew and substance. It was before a wedge of pure gold, but vsurped by the hands of Impostors: that by their mix∣tures, and sophistications for gaine and sinister respects, augmented it into a huge body and masse. It had the tin∣cture of gold still, but mingled with the drosse of traditi∣ons, superstitions, will-worships. You ask where was the gold? shew vs the place. We answer, it was in that masse: now for extracting and purifying it from the drosse, God gaue vs the touchstone of his word, which made it sound, & manifests it to be sound. The Lord doth not then for∣sake his: the time was that the whole world seemed to groan, factum se videns Arrianum, beholding it selfe made Arrian; yet God had his nūber. Sardis is said to be dead, Reu. 3. 1. thou hast a name that thou liuest, but thou art dead: yet there be Vers. 4. a few names in Sardis, which haue not defiled their garments. When ordinary meanes faile, by extraordina∣ry the Lord gathers his elect. The Israelites in the wil∣dernesse
wanted both Circumcision and Passeouer, yet GOD made supply by Manna, and the Pillar of the cloud. 2. A Church is visible when it flourisheth: not that the faith and secret election of men is seene; but there are apparant signes by frequenting the Sanctuary, and submitting themselues to the Ministery of the Word. Now this visible Church is a mixt company of men pro∣fessing the faith. I call it mixt, for in it are both belee∣uers and hypocrites, corne and tares: it is a band of men, where be some valiant souldiers, and many cowards. It is called a Church from the better, not from the greater part. The vngodly, though they are in the Church, are not of the Church: as the superfluous humours in the veynes are not parts of the body, but rather the sicknesse of it. These professe veram fidem, sed non verè; the true faith, but not truly. Hence it appeares, that there be two sorts of members in the Church: members before God, such as beside the outward profession keepe a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith vnfained. Members before men, such as haue onely the colour and huske of Religion, in heart denying the power of godlinesse: yet these are by vs to be esteemed members, according to the rule of charity iudging the best. 2. Now for Instruction, what I haue to say consists in the examination of two points. First, whether the Church of England be a part of this Catholike Church: then next, whether the Church of Rome haue the same prerogatiue. For our selues; the most infallible marke of the true Church, is the right ministration of the Sacraments, and sincere Preaching the true Doctrine of the Gospell. That is the true Mother and Spouse of Christ, that brings forth children to him 1. Pet. 1. 23. of immortall seed, by the Word of GOD which abideth for euer: not of traditions, miracles, dreames; but of this incorruptible seed. And when they are borne
anew, feedes them with syncere Milke out of her tvvo brests, the two Testaments. This you know in your cō∣sciences to be true in our Mother: shee doth not giue vs pro lacte venenum, but milke; euen the same that Christ himselfe put into her brests. When we grow strong, shee giues vs meate, not bones: troubles vs not with the sub∣tilties of the Schooles; that haue Plus argutiarum quàm doctrinae, plus doctrinae quàm vsus: but Quod accepit a Do∣mino, what shee hath receiued of the Lord; neither more nor lesse, but iust weight. She doth not say, Haec dicit Pa∣pa, but Haec dicit Dominus: not thus saith the Pope in his Decretalls, but thus saith the Lord in his Scriptures. She doth Rom. 9. 1. say the truth in Christ, and lyeth not, her conscience bearing her witnesse in the holy Ghost. She doth not sophi∣sticate truth, not mingle wine with water, not dawbe the walls of Gods house with vntempered morter: not build vpon the foundation straw & stubble: not adulterate the Word; like a lustfull man, whose end is not to encrease mankind, but to satisfie concupiscence. O then let vs hang vpon her lips, that preserue this true knowledge: and say with Peter; Iohn 6. 68. Lord, to whom should we goe? Thou hast the words of eternall life. Thus wee haue prooued the truth of our Church by Scripture: but our aduersaries oppose the sufficiencie of this proofe, by disabling the Scriptures. They say wee cannot know Scripture to be Scripture, but by the testi∣mony of the Church. It is false, for the witnesse of man subiect to error, is nothing to the testimony of GOD that cannot erre. Therefore the Scripture is called the Esay 8 20. Testimonie, because it beares witnesse to it selfe. Besides, the Church hath her beginning from the Word, for there can be no Church without faith, no faith without the Word, no Word without the Scriptures. So the Church depēds on the Scripture, not the Scripture on the church. The Lawyer that hath only power to expound the Law, is vnder the Law. But they obiect, that Faith comes by Rom. 10. 17.
hearing, and hearing by the voice of the Church. Paul intends there not that generall faith whereby wee belieue Scripture to be Scripture: but that iustifying faith where∣by we attaine saluation. And this comes by the voice of the Church, not of it selfe, but as it is the ministerie of Gods Word. Iohn is but Uox clamantis, Christ is Verbum clamans. Particular Churches haue erred; therefore the best securitie from error is in the Scriptures. This is a Lesbian rule, able to decide all Controuer∣sies, and it is vitio hominum, by the fault of bad Interpre∣ters that it doth not. For whether Aliorum incuriâ that despise it, or Aliorum iniuriâ that peruert it, it suffers mar∣tyrdome, and may not be heard declare it selfe. The Pa∣pist in expounding Scripture after his owne fancie, makes himselfe Iudge, not the Scripture. But all their drift is with Gods losse to promoue the Popes gaine. He must be Iudge, yea he shall be an vnerring Iudge. Yet if the Pope haue this infallibility, I wonder what need there is of Councells. Here they fly to distinctions, as to familiar spirits. The Pope may erre Argumentatiuè, not Definitiuè: in his chamber, not in his chaire: Personaliter, non Forma∣liter: as man, not as Pope. How proue they such an expo∣sition of the Scripture? Here they fly to the Pope, hee so expounds it. How prooue they the Pope cannot erre? Here straight they fly back againe to Scripture; Peter, I haue prayed for thee that thy faith shal not faile. These hang gether like a sick mans dreame. Insequeris? fugio. Fugis? insequor. Yet thus they conclude against their own wills; whiles they only proue the Pope by the Scripture, spight of their teeth they preferre the Scripture aboue the Pope. If this be so, that the truth of the Gospell being profes∣sed, belieued, obeyed among vs, manifest vs against all aduersaries, to be true members of this Generall assembly: then two subordinate questions offer themselues collate∣rally here to be handled. First, whether corrupters of our Truth, and disturbers of our peace are to bee tolerated.
Secondly, whether for some corruptions of doctrine, or vices in manners, it be lawfull for any of vs, to make sepa∣ration from vs. 1. Seditious and pestilent seedsmen of heresies are to be restrained. If a little leuen sowre the whole lumpe, what will a little poison do? If Paul to his Gala. 5. 9. Galatians could not endure Christ and Moses together: how would he to his Corinthians, endure 2. Cor. 6. 14. Christ and Belial together? Hee sticks not to ingeminate Anathema's to them that prea∣ched another Gospel. The Papists cry out against vs for persecution: they that shame not to bely the Scriptures, will not blush to bely vs. Their prosperity, their riches, their numbers among vs, directly proue; that a man may be a Papist in England, and liue. But if their religion turne to treason, shall it scape vnpunished? A Papist may liue, a Traitor may not liue. To perswade that a Christian king at the Popes will may, yea must be decrowned or murde∣red: is this the voice of Religion, or Treason? If this be conscience, there is no villany: if such an act merite Hea∣uen, let no man feare Hell. I would aske a Papist, vvhe∣ther he be not bound by his religion to execute the Popes doctrinall will: whether if he bid him kill his King, hee may refraine from that sacred bloud, and not sinne. If he refuse treason, he is not constant to his Religion: if hee keepe his Religion, hee must not sticke at any act of trea∣son. So that who knowes whether this day a mere Pa∣pist, may not on the Popes command to morrow be a Traytor? But say they, this a supposition as likely as if Heauen should fall: the Pope will neuer command it. I answere, that Popes haue commanded it. But we hope his present Holinesse will not: we were in a pitious case, if our secu∣ritie was no better then your hope. God blesse our gra∣cious Soueraigne from euer standing at the Popes mercy. Why should such Seminaries of heresie, and Incendiaries of conspiracie be suffered? What atonement of affection
can there be in such disparitie of Religion? when some cry, God helpe vs: others, Baal heare vs. They to An∣gels and Saints, wee to the Lord that made Heauen and Earth. But the euent hath often prooued, which of these could best heare prayers. As in that memorable fight on the Leuant Seas, of fiue English ships against eleuen Spa∣nish; they crying for victory to our Lady, wee to our Lord: it seemes, the Sonne heard better then the Mother, for the victory was ours. The Common-vvealth that stands vpon legges, partly of yron, and partly of clay, is neuer sure. One wombe held Romulus & Remus in peace, one kingdome could not containe them. But euery mans mind is as free as the Emperors: Con∣science is a Castle, and there is nothing so voluntarie as re∣ligion: faith comes by perswasion, not by compulsion. Yield all this: and say with Tertullian; Nihil minus fidei est, quàm fidem cogere. And with Bernard; Suspendite ver∣bera, ostendite vbera. Make a man in error rather blush, then bleede. But if they breake the foundation, Non feren∣di, sed feriendi. First speake to the Conscience by good counsell: but if that eare be stopt, shake the whole house about it. Speake to the eares of the inheritance, of the li∣berty, of the body; by mulct, by prison, by exile. Let the Liberty say to the Conscience, For thy sake I am restrai∣ned: let the Inheritance say, For thy sake I am empoueri∣shed: let the Body say, For thy sake I am afflicted. But be∣cause heresie dies not with the particular person, but kills also others: and Centum inficit, dum vnum intersicit. And because it strikes at the life of a Christian, that is his Faith; For the iust shal liue by his faith. Therfore pereat vnus, potius quàm vnitas. Haretici corrigendi ne pereant, reprimendi ne perimant. Heretikes are to be corrected lest they damne themselues, to be restrained lest they damne others. Perse∣cutio facit Martyres, haeresis apostatas: plus nocuerunt ho∣rum Tertull. tog, quàm illorum galeae. Persecution made Martyrs, heresie makes Apostates: the Heretikes words haue done
more hurt then the tyrants swords. Apertè sauit persecu∣tor Aug. vt Leo: haereticus insidiatur vt draco. Ille negare Chri∣stum cogit, iste docet. Aduersus illum opus patientià, aduersus istum opus vigilantia. The persecutor rageth like a Lyon, the heretike insinuates himselfe like a serpent. To deny Christ he compels, this man instructs. Against the for∣mer wee haue need of patience, against the latter of vi∣gilance. Excommunication, bondage, exile haue bin thought fit punishments for heretikes: fire and fagot is not Gods Law, but the Popes Canon-shot. An heretike dying in his heresie cannot be saued: therefore Luther thinkes, hee that puts an heretike to death is a double murderer; de∣stroying his body with death temporall, his soule with death eternall. But saith Augustine, Diligite homines, in∣terficite errores: Loue the persons, kill the errors. Pre∣sume on the truth without pride, striue for it without rage. Seueritas, quasi sua veritas: but verity and seueri∣ty doe not agree. Fire and sword may put to death here∣tickes, but not heresies. See heere the difference betwixt the Papists proceedings against vs, and ours against them. They dye not among vs for refusing our faith: but vs they burned (not for denying any article of faith, but) for not beleeuing Transubstantiation. So strange an Article, that Bellarmine himselfe doubts whether it may bee pro∣ued from Scripture or no: but that the Church hath de∣clared it so to be. But though faith be aboue reason, yet it is not against reason. This is my body, saith Christ. Hoc, This bread: this Pronoune demonstratiue they will haue to demonstrate nothing. Hoc aliquid nihil est. How then? this nothing is my body: not this bread, but this nothing. Others will haue something demonstrated to the vnder∣standing, nothing to the senses. Some will haue a demon∣stration to the senses, nothing to the vnderstanding: some partly to both: others expound it, This body: then it is thus; This body is my body: others say it is indiuiduum va∣gum.
But Quod multipliciter exponitur, communiter igno∣ratur. That which is so variously expounded, is general∣ly vnknowne. The most iudicious among them cannot explicate it. Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est: Deque modo lis est non habitura modum. What damnable cruelty then was it in them to burne silly women, for not vnderstanding this their inexplicable mysterie? Those gunpowder diuines condemned others to the fire for not knowing that, which they neuer knew themselues. Wee teach such erring soules bee corrected, that they may bee conuerted: not bee confounded. Ex∣communicated 1. Cor. 5. 5. for the destruction of the flesh, that the spi∣rit may be saued in the day of the Lord Iesus. 2. Whether a separation may bee iustly made from our Church for some errors or corruptions of life. I know that diuers, who were once among vs, neuer of vs, haue put out their owne lights, indeed excommunicated themselues. What's their plea? that our assemblies are full of enormities. I answer, that the defects and corrup∣tions of a Church must be distinguished: they are eyther in doctrine or in manners. For doctrine, some errors are Citra fundamentum, some Circa fundamentum, others Con∣tra fundamentum. Errors beside the foundation trouble, errors about the foundation shake, errors against the foun∣dation ouerturne all. So long then as no foundation is harmed, it is not lawfull depart. vntill the Church se∣parates from Christ, we must not separate from it. In two cases there is warrant of separation. First, when the sub∣stance of Gods worship is quite corrupted. 2. Cor, 6. 16. What agree∣ment hath the Temple of God with Idols? when this is, ver. 17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, when Ieroboam had set vp Idols in Israel, 2. Chr. 11. 14. the Priests and the Leuites left their suburbs and possession, and came to Iudah and Ierusalem. Secondly, when the substance of
doctrine is quite corrupted. 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man consent not to the words of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlinesse, &c. From such, vers. 5. withdraw thy selfe. Paul in the Synagogue at Ephesus preached for the space of three moneths together. Acts 19. 9. But when diuers were hardned, and beleeued not, but spake euill of that way, he departed from them, and separated the Disciples. In these two cases lawfull, not else. For corruption in manners, they make not Nullam Ecclesiam, sed malam ecclesiam; not no Church, but a bad Church. Wicked Scribes sitting in Moses chaire, and teaching the things he wrote, must be heard. Mat. 23. 3. Whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and doe: but doe not after their workes. Separate from their priuate society, not from the publike assembly. But they charge vs, that we deny Christ. I answere, Deniall of Christ is double, ey∣ther in iudgement or in fact. Deniall of Christ in iudge∣ment, makes a Christian no Christian: denyall in fact, the iudgement being sound, makes him not no Christian, but an euill Christian. When the Iewes had crucified the Lord of life, they remained still a Church, if there were any on the face of the earth: and Ierusalem was still called the Mat. 27. 53. Holy City. To them belonged Acts 2. 39. the promise, and to their children. Rom. 9. 4. To them pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the couenants. I would to God this bloudy issue were stanched: but what age hath not complained it? This mischiefe is intestine. Amara persecutio in cruore martyrum, amarior in pugna haereticorum, amarissima in ma∣lis moribus domesticorum. The persecution of Tyrants was bitter, the poyson of heretikes more bitter, but the euill liues of Christians most bitter of all. Phil. 3. 18. Many walke, of whom I haue told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies of the crosse of Christ. Whereupon saith Augustine; How comes that great Champion to fall a weeping? Could he endure 2. Cor. 11. 24. stripes aboue measure, pri∣sons frequent, shipwrackes, perils by sea and land; among ene∣mies,
among false brethren; hunger, thirst, cold, wearinesse, painfulnesse: 1. Cor. 15. 32. Did he fight with beasts after the manner of men; was he rap'd vp among the Angels? Did hee beare all these miseries? was hee honoured with all these mercies? and now does he weepe? Yes, sinne and sensuality was crept into the Church; and this made that vndanted spi∣rit fall a weeping. Pax a Paganis, Pax ab Hreticis, nulla pax a falsis filijs. We haue quiet from the Pagans, quiet from heretikes, but no quiet from wicked and exorbitant professors. Our greatest enemies are they of our owne house. Lord Iesus heale this plague. Now wee haue proued and approued the truth of our owne Church at home; let vs examine whether the Church of Rome be also a true member of this Catholike Assembly. Errors that annihilate a Church, are of two sorts, some weakening, others destroying the foundation. Weakening error is the building of 1. Cor. 3. 12. hay and stubble on the foundation: the stubble burnt, their soules may be Ver. 15. saued. A man breakes downe the windowes of his house, the house stands though defaced: he puls downe the lead or tiles, the house stands though vncouered: he beats downe the wals, the house stands though deformed? he plucks vp the foundation, the house falls, and ceaseth to be an house. Those which destroy the foundation, are the ouerthrow∣ing errors; by them a Church ceaseth to bee a Church. Yet if an error be against the foundation, we are to consi∣der the persons; whether they erre of malice, or of weak∣nesse. If of malice, 2. Tim. 3. 8. like Iannes and Iambres that with∣stood Moses, resisting the truth; it is no longer a Church. But if of weakenesse, wee must not so peremptorily con∣clude: for Paul writes to the Galatians as a Church of God, though they were peruerted to another doctrine; embra∣cing a fundamentall error of Iustification by works. The Church of Rome doth wilfully & obstinately destroy the foundation, therfore may be concluded for no Church. If they wil be iustified by the works of the law, they are faln from Grace.
Let vs heare how they quit themselues. First, they would doe it by retorting all this backe vpon vs: they tell vs flatly, that we are no Church, and thus they prooue it. They say, we haue no Bishops, so no Ministers, so no Sa∣craments, therefore no Church. Here they clappe their wings, and crow, Victory, Victory. Esay 9. 21. As Manasseh a∣gainst Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both a∣gainst Iudah. So they haue set our brothers against vs, vs against our brothers, Papists against vs all. Behold the ex∣igent we are in: the Papists say we haue no Ministers, be∣cause they are not made by Bishops; the Puritans say we haue no Ministers, because they are made by Bishops. Which of these speake true? Neither. First to answer the Puritan; Bishops may make Ministers: Paul chargeth Timothy to 1. Tim. 5. 22. lay hands suddenly on no man: therfore he may lay hands on some. To Titus: Titus 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou shouldest ordaine Elders in euery City. Now we haue true Bishops, therefore in Gods name allow vs to haue true Ministers. For the Romanists, that tell vs vve haue none of these, how strangely do they bely vs, and themselues? Oportet mendacem esse memorem. Haue they forgot their obrayding vs, that we haue all our Episcopall rites from them? All our ministeriall orders from them? If we haue it from them, then we haue it. They are Bri∣sto's owne words in his Motiues: The Protestants are Apes of the Papists, the Communion-booke is made al∣together out of the Masse-booke. Why then do they not communicate with vs? It is not for conscience, but for malice. Let it be granted, that wee haue this from them: but then they must grant withall, that Iacob by Gods dis∣posing hath gotten Esau's Birthright. So the Israelites were faine to go to the Philistines to sharpen their sythes. We abhorre not Episcopall ordinations, but Papall. Our substance from them, their circumstances to themselues. Papales ordinationes sunt foedaenundinationes. We haue their gold, they haue left themselues nothing but Tinkers me∣tall.
Let them keepe their owne, giue vs ours. But further they obiect the continuance of their suc∣cession. We answere, the succession of Person is nothing worth without the succession of Doctrine; which they want. If it were by vs granted, what neuer shall be by them proued, that Peter is succeeded by the Pope: Yet as Matthias succeeding Iudas was neuer the worse, so the Pope succeeding Peter is neuer the better. Perijt dignitas Cathedrae, quando veritas Doctrinae. But they say that in the Romane Church, Baptisme is rightly for the sub∣stance of it administred; therefore it is a true Church. In∣deed they haue the outward washing, but quite ouer∣throwne the inward; which stands in iustification by the imputed righteousnesse of Christ. But the Samaritans had Circumcision, yet were they not a true Church. Baptisme seuered from the preaching of the Gospel, is of no more force, then a seale when it is plucked off from the Inden∣ture. Indeed truly, though they haue Baptisme, yet it be∣longs not to them, but to a hidden Church among them. For doubtlesse God hath his chosen and sealed number in the midst of those Apostates. As the light in the Lanthorn belongs not properly to the Lanthorne, but to the Passen∣ger. That Sacrament in the assembly of Rome, is like a true mans purse in a thiefes hand: it no more proues them a true Church, then that purse prooues the theefe a true man. The Lord of his goodnesse, that hath giuen them the signe of the Grace, giue them also the grace of the signe, true vvashing away of their sinnes in the bloud of Christ. Some haue obiected, and they seeme to be kind friends to Rome: that Antichrist must sit in the Temple, that is the Church: therefore this sitting of Antichrist in Rome, proues them to be a true Church. But I am sure by this argument what they get in the hundred, they lose in the Shire: they may put these gaines in their eye. I hope they will not confesse their Pope Antichrist, to haue vs grant
them a true Church. Therefore some of them haue affir∣med, Hominem non Christianum posse esse Romanum Ponti∣ficem. And would not hee be a strange Head of Christs Church, that is not a true member of Christs Body? But howsoeuer, their argument holds not: for it is one thing to be in the Church, another thing to be of the Church. Antichrist sits in that place, not as a mēber of the Church, but as an Vsurper. So the Pyrate sits in the Merchants ship, yet hath no right to it. All that can be prooued here∣by is, that among the Papists there is a hidden Church, in the midst whereof Antichrist dominereth, but hath no part of saluation in it. What cause then haue we to blesse our GOD, that hath brought vs from Babylon to Ierusa∣lem, out of darknesse into his maruelous light, from the Romish Synagogue to the Generall Assembly, and Church of the first borne vvhich are vvritten in Heauen? and the Lord of his mercie preserue vs in it for euer and euer. To conclude, there be diuerse Censures of the Romane Church. Some say it is no Church, but Aequiuocè; as the picture of a man is called a man: or a painted fire, a fire. It is no more a Church, then the carkase of a dead man, that hath on a liuing mans garments, is a liuing man, looke it neuer so like him. These looke vpon it Oculo ve∣ro, sed seuero: with a true, but a sharpe eye. Others say, It is non sanum membrum, sed membrum: It is not a sound member, but a member. It hath Scriptures, but corrup∣ted with Traditions: but indeed they haue nullified the natiue sense; and so are Lanthornes that shew light to o∣thers, none to themselues. They haue the Articles of the Creed, and make the same generall confession of faith: yet ouerthrow all this another way. Herein they are like a fond Father, that with much indulgence tenders the bo∣dy of his child, would not suffer the cold wind to blowe vpon him, yet by secret conueyances inwardly infects the heart, & destroyes him. Thus they say, it is still a member,
still a Church; as a braine-sick man is a man. The Romane Assembly is Verè Ecclesia, sed non vera Ecclesia: truely a Church, but not a true Church. A leprous man is a man: Adultera vxor, tamen vxor est: an adulterous wife is still a wife. So Duraus. In Papatu est Ecclesia, et Papatus non est Ecclesia. Vt Ecclesia Dei, vt Papalis Diaboli. In Pope∣rie is a Church, yet Popery is not the Church. As it is a Church, it is of God; as Popish, of the diuell. It is Incu∣rata Ecclesia, an incurable Church, that hates to be refor∣med: therefore no Church. Wee would haue cured Babel, but she would not be cured. She hath apostated into treason, clipped Regiam monetam, the great Kings coine, the Word of God: turned that pure gold into sophisticate Alchimy: prayer to Christ, into inuocation of Saints. These men conclude, that it is not a body diseased, & full of wounds, that hath the throat cut, yet with some life and breath re∣maining: but a rotten and dead carkase, void of spirituall life. It hath blended Iudaisme and Paganisme together with Christianitie, and so sweld vp a superstitious wor∣ship of God; therefore no Church. For my part I iudge not: GOD reserues to himselfe three things; The reuenge of iniuries, The glory of deeds, The iudgement of secrets. I will not iudge, but like a wit∣nesse giue in my testimony. And here Qui bene distinguit, bene docet. The best construction is that which enclines to charitie: that is, there is no probable saluation in the Zanch. Church of Rome. Infants dying before they come to these errors, I beleeue saued: for others, Nescio quid dicere; I know not what to say. They haue damnable he∣resies, as that of Free will, of Merites, &c. yet the persons that of weakenesse defend them, may be saued. God par∣dons euen wilfull errors, if they be truly repented. There∣fore I belieue that many of our forefathers went to Hea∣uen, though through blindnesse. Now indeede they are more inexcusable, because our sound is gone out among them. There are Seducentes and Seducti: the wilfull blind
lead the wofull blind, vntill both fall into the ditch. If they will not see, there is no helpe, no hope. If simple ig∣norance mislead, there is hope of return: but if affected, it is most wretched. Our office is to helpe them with our prayers: and let vs pray for them as Paul for his Ephesi∣ans; That the eyes of our vnderstanding beeing enlightened, Ephe. 1. 18. they may know what is the hope of Gods calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance is in the Saints. Many of them haue ready hearts, but they want eyes: wee haue o∣pen eyes, God grant vs ready hearts. The first borne which are written in heauen. This is a de∣scription of the persons, of whom the Church consists. The Church it selfe is a number of men, which God hath set apart by an eternall decree, and in time sanctified to become reall members of it. They are written in heauen, there's their eternall election; and they are the first borne, that is  borne, theres their Sanctification. For the two parts of the description, Their Primogeniture, and Regi∣string in Gods booke; are but borrowed speeches, where∣by God would ratifie the euerlasting Predestination and saluation of his Church. That as the First borne is not to bee defeated of his inheritance; and the Enrolled names are neuer to be obliterated: so certainly shall they inherite eternall life. The first borne. Some vnderstand by the first borne not all the Elect; but onely the Patriarchs, and such ancient Saints, the noble & primitiue parts of the Church. Cal∣uin. Then this should haue beene referred onely to the Church triumphant in heauen; but the Catholike Church is here expresly meant, which cōprehends also the Saints vpon earth: therefore they also are first borne. Besides, they are said to be written in heauen, which had beene a superfluous speech of those who are already in heauen: they that are there, need no writing. Unusquisque Elec∣test Pimogenitus. But this seemes to infringe the Primogeniture of
Christ, to whom that Name is by speciall title and right giuen. Primogenitus inter multos fratres, saith Paul: he is the Rom. 8. 29. First begotten among many brethren. Primogenitus vniuersae creaturae; the Col. 1. 15. first borne of euery creature. Pri∣mogenitus mortuorum; the Vers. 18. first borne from the dead. He is the first borne, as he is the Sonne of God, and as hee is man. As he is the Sonne of God, in respect of time, be∣fore all things, the beginning of all: in respect of dignity, because hee is the foundation of all good to his Church. Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fulnesse haue we all receiued, and grace for grace. As he is man, he is the first borne, not in respect of time, but of excellency and vertue. In respect of his miraculous conception; the first that euer was conceiued without sinne, and Luk. 1. 35. by the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost. In res∣pect of his birth, he was the first borue of Mary. Mat. 1. 25. Shee brought forth her first borne Sonne, and called his name Ie∣sus. In respect of his resurrection; when GOD raised him out of the graue, he is said to beget his Sonne. Psal. 2. 7. Thou art my Sonne, this day haue I begotten thee. And lest the in∣terpretation of birth onely should be deduced from that place, Saint Paul expressely applies it to his resurrection. Acts 13. 33. God raised vp Iesus againe, as it is written in the second Psalme; Thou art my Sonne, this day haue I be∣gotten thee. Lastly, in respect of his preeminence: Col. 1. 18. hee is the first borne from the dead, that in all things he might haue the preeminence. So the priuiledge of primogeniture is singularly and indiuidually his. How then are the faithfull heere called the first borne? To answer this, we must know that God hath sonnes by nature, and by grace. Christ by nature onely, all the elect by grace. Christ is a Sonne begotten, not made; we are sonnes made, not begotten in respect of nature. Christ as God is begotten, not borne: as man he is borne, not be∣gotten. We see the priuiledge of Christs primogeniture: from his let vs looke to ours, for from him wee haue it. The elect are called First-borne in three respects.
1. Because they are vnited to the first borne. Hebr. 2. 11. For both he that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Hee that is made vnus cum primogenito, may be well called pri∣mogenitus: one with the first borne is a first borne. 2. Because they are culled and called out of the world. Many wicked are created before them, but they are ele∣cted in Gods decree to life before the other; for the wic∣ked are not chosen at all. Esau was Isaaks first borne, but Iacob was Gods first borne. Many of the worlds first∣borne haue beene reiected. Gen. 48. 17. Israel laid his right hand vp∣on Ephraim the younger, and his left vpon Manasseh the elder. Gen. 49. 4. Reuben, thou art my first borne, but thou shalt not be excellent. Cain Adams first borne; Ismael, Abrahams first borne, were cast off. Exod. 4. 22. Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my sonne, euen my first borne. The Lord had first chosen that nation to be his people, yet afterward reiected them, and accepted the Gentiles: so that the elder serue the younger. But Gods first borne are neuer refused: whom hee hath predestinated to be sonnes, hee hath also called to bee heyres. So that this primogeniture is not in respect of generation, but of regeneration. Though they be not primò conditi, they are primò reconditi. Iohn 1. 13. Flesh and bloud hath no worke in this birth, nor the will of man; but the will of God. Iam. 1. 18. Of his owne will begate he vs, with the word of trueth, that wee should be a kinde of first fruits of his creatures. The Spirit begets of immortall seed, grace; in the wombe of the Church; the meanes of this Birth being the Word. Iohn. 3. 3. Ex∣cept a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Out of that vniuersall apostacie God sent his Sonne, to beget some first borne to himselfe. 3. Because the priuiledges of the first borne are theirs. These were many, as we may find in allusion to the Law. 1. The excellency of strength: Gen. 49. 3. Reuben my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dig∣nitie, and the excellencie of power. Man decayes, and the
children of age are not so strong as the children of youth: therefore the first borne are called the beginning of power, and the excellency of strength. True it is, that there's no decay in Gods Spirit that begets: yet because the faith∣full are first in Gods intention of fauour, and hee giues them that strength of grace to resist sinne, and to serue him, which the world hath not; therefore they are called his Firstborne, the excellency of his power. Though we be weake in our selues, yet his strength is glorified in our weakenes, his 2. Cor. 12. 9. Grace is sufficient for vs. 2. The name of the family was giuen to the first borne. 1. Sam. 9. 21. Is not my family the least of all the families of the Tribe of Beniamin, saith Saul? Iudg. 11. 1. Gilead made his whole family to be called Gileadites. For further exemplying of this priuiledge, read Numbers. chap. 26. ver. 23. to ver. 52. Is this dignity lost vnder the Gospell to the first borne in Christ? no, for euen the wicked dwelling a∣mong the righteous, are for their sakes vouchsafed the name of Christians. The name of the first borne hath christned all the familie. 3. Priesthood and the right to sacrifice. Exod. 24. 5. Moses sent twelue young men, according to the twelue tribes of Israel, to offer burnt offerings, and sacrifice peace offerings vnto the Lord. Those young men are thought to bee no other, but twelue of the first borne of the chiefe of the Tribes: to whom the right of sacrificing & Priesthood did belong, till the Leuites were separated for that end. Num. 3. 45. Take the Leuites in stead of all the first borne among the children of Is∣rael. Neither is this priuiledge lost by the Gospel: Reu. 1. 6. Christ hath made vs Kings and Priests vnto God his Father; to of∣fer vp spirituall sacrifice of thanksgiuing to him. Priests, but Priests to God; lest the Schismaticke should take ad∣uantage thereby to trouble the ciuill state. The Propitia∣tory sacrifice is offered for vs by our high Priest Iesus: the sacrifices of our Priesthood are onely gratulatory. 4. Double portion. Deut. 21. 17. If a man haue two wiues, one
beloued, and another hated, and children by them both: if the first borne sonne be hers that is hated, yet when he ma∣keth his sonnes to inherit, though perhaps hee would fa∣uour the sonne of the loued, yet hee shall acknowledge the sonne of the hated, by giuing him a double portion of all that he hath: for hee is the beginning of his strength, the right of the first borne is his. So the elect haue a double portion: not onely a share in the things of this life, but much more in heauen. 1. Tim. 4. 8. Godlinesse hath the promise both of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. It is a false imaginati∣on that God makes none of his children happy in this life. Abraham was rich, Dauid a King. But if he denies them opulencie, hee neuer denies them content. This is the cheefe riches; for we see others Esurientes in popina; as the by-word is, staruing in a Cookes shop, wretched in their highest fortunes. The godly haue so much share of this world, as may stand with their eternall blessednesse in the world to come. And such may bee content with a small portion here, that are sure of the inheritance heereafter. Iehoshaphat gaue great gifts of siluer and gold, and preci∣ous things, to all his children: 2. Chr. 21. 3. but the kingdome hee gaue to Iehoram, because he was the first borne. Our Law giues the first borne sonne the inheritance: God will not de∣priue his of it. Thus hath Christ promised a double por∣tion to the faithfull; Mark. 10. 30. He shall receiue an hundred fold now in this time, and in the world to come eternall life. And in∣deed the Birth-right with the Iewes was a type of euerla∣sting life. The consideration of this excellent priuiledge doth teach vs three lessons. 1. That we are dedicated to God. Exod. 13. 2. Numb. 3. 13. Sanctifie to me all the first borne. 1. Sam. 1. 28. So Hanah dedi∣cated her first borne Samuel to the Lord. Luk. 2. 22. Mary brought Christ to Ierusalem, to present him to the Lord; as it is writ∣ten in the Law; Euery male that openeth the wombe, shall be called holy to the Lord. To robbe God of his tythes is sa∣criledge; but to take away from him our soules, this is the
highest sacriledge. In this we haue a sequestration from common vse, we are no longer as we were. They are mine, saith the Lord: not onely by a common right, so al things are his. The earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse of it. nor onely for a gratefull acknowledgement, that the increase of all things comes from him. But as the Israelites were Gods by a speciall claime; because he preserued them in E∣gypt, when the first borne were slaine. For whose re∣demption he accepted the first borne of their beasts: when he might haue commanded all, lest this should seem grie∣uous to them, he required but the first part. Hee onely reserued what he preserued. So we were all by nature in as much danger of Gods wrath, as were the Israelites of the destroying Angell when the first borne of the Aegyp∣tians were smitten dead. But the Lord sprinkled the dores of our hearts with the bloud of his holy Lambe Iesus. Hath the Lord spared vs? then hee chalengeth vs. To take from man his owne is iniurious, from God sa∣crilegious. 1. Cor. 6. 20. Glorifie God in your body, and in your spirit. why? for they are Gods, ye are not your owne, saith the A∣postle. Thus hee confessed himselfe not his owne man: Acts 27. 23. There stood by me this night the Angell of God, whose I am, and whom I serue. Wee are Gods possession, the first borne which he hath redeemed by his owne First-borne, Christ. This wee acknowledge when wee present our children to God in Baptisme. Yet O strange and forget∣full inconstancy! when wee haue giuen them to God in baptisme, by a foolish indulgence wee take them away a∣gaine in education. A Prince abhorres to haue his eldest sonne marry with a harlot; this were to vilifie and igno∣ble that royall bloud. And shall God brooke his First borne to be contracted with that vgly strumpet, Sinne? This were to forfeit and make void the right of primo∣geniture. 2. Seeing we are Gods first borne, let vs offer our first and best things to him. The Lord hath deserued the pri∣ority
of our seruice: Mat. 6. 33. First seeke the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse thereof. Our first studies, our first labours must bee consecrated to God. The Law required three properties in the sacrifices offered to God. 1. They must be first borne: vt illi reddamus prima, qui nobis debil omnia: that vvee should vvillingly giue him the first, that had bountifully giuen vs all. So vve must giue the first houre of the day, the first vvorke of our hands, the first wordes of our lips to the Lord. 2. They must bee cleane beasts, for God abhorred the vncleane, maimed, or deformed. Mal. 1. 8. Ye offer polluted bread vpon mine Altar. If ye offer the blinde for sacrifice, is it not euill? if ye offer the lame & sicke, is it not euill? offer it now to the gouernor, will hee be pleased with it? So vvee must hold vp to God cleane hands, and send vp pure hearts: Hebr. 12. 13. making straight paths for our feete, lest that which is halting be turned out of the way. 3. The sacri∣fices must be Males, because the best and most perfect things are to be giuen to God. Multi homines, pauci viri. Let vs offer vp our masculine vertues, Eph. 4. 13. growing to a per∣fect man, to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. We must aime at this perfect sacrifice. Besides in the Law there were three other rules obser∣uable in the consecration of the first borne. 1. That they should be seuen daies with the damme, and the eight day be giuen to God. Exod. 22. 30. wherein there vvas not onely a respondence to the rule of circumcision, limited to the eight day, Gen. 17. 12. But to preuent their fraud in offering to God things of no seruice, being too soone taken from the damme. 2. In voluntary oblations they were forbidden to dedicate to the Lord any of the first borne. Leuit. 27. 26. The firstling of the beasts which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall sanctifie it. The reason is, because that vvas the Lords already. Wee haue such names highly re∣corded on our Hospitall-walls, painted on the windowes of our Churches, often engrauen in marble the memora∣ble tenent of worthy acts, for excellent benefactors. Yet
All their beneuolence to God, is not the Tenth of that they haue robbed God, & taken from his Church. Foole, giue of thine owne, if thou wilt haue reward in Heauen: first restore iustly what thou hast gathered vniustly. To giue of that is not Liberaliter dare, sed partialiter retribu∣ere: thou bestowest on God a Lambe of his owne Evve. Doost thou looke for thanks for such a gift? Alas, it was Gods owne before. 3. They were commanded neither to worke nor sheare the first borne. Deut. 15. 19. Thou shalt doe no worke with the firstling of thy Bullocke, nor sheare the first∣ling of thy Sheepe. To curbe their couetousnesse: though they would not deceiue the Lord of his first borne, yet they would take so much profit of it as they could. But they are restrained from diminution; they must not pre∣sent a worne Bullocke, nor a shorne Sheepe. Now if the Lord was so ielous of first borne beasts, how is hee ielous of first borne soules? Let vs not thinke our choisest and most excellent things too deare for God, that hath made vs his first borne in Iesus Christ. 3. Lastly, let vs vpon no condition part vvith our Birthright. Hath God aduanced vs to this honour? (Psal. 89. 27. I will make him my first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth) then let vs neuer sell it. Heb. 12. 16. Let there be no person pro∣fane as Esau, who for one morsell of meate sold his Birthright. Hath the elder brother Primariam potestatem? Gene. 27. 29. Be Lord ouer thy brethren, and let thy mothers sonnes bow downe vnto thee. Let no lust subiect vs seruire minori, to serue the younger. The enemies rage against them, but saith God to Pharaoh; Let my sonne goe that hee may serue me: if thou refuse to let him goe, behold I will slay thy sonne, euen thy first Exod. 4. 23. borne. Thus saith the Psalmist; God reproues euen Kings for their sakes. Now Omne beneficium petit officium: euery benefite is obligatory, and binds to some thankful duty Hath God dignified vs with a Priuiledge, he expects that our carefulnesse should neuer forfetit. Naboth would not sell his Vineyard: yet his Vineyard was but a part of his
Inheritance, & his Inheritance but a part of his birthright. Though Ahab profferd him a better vineyard, or the worth of it in money; yet saith Naboth, 1. King. 21. 3. The Lord forbid it me, that I should giue the inheritance of my fathers vnto thee. And shal we for trifles passe away our eternall Birthright? It is a wretched bargaine: yet the Blasphemer sweares away his birthright, the Epicure feasts away his birthright, the wine∣bibber drinks away his Birthright, the Lauish spends his birthright, the couetous sels his birthright for ready mony. There be some, 1. that sell their Birthright: it is said of the Lawyer that hee hath linguam venalem, a saleable tongue: the couetous venalem animam, a saleable soule: the harlot venalem carnem: a saleable flesh. Esau sold his birthright, Ahab sold himselfe to worke wickednesse, Iu∣das sold his soule for thirty peeces. Eccle. 10. 9. There is not a more wicked thing then a couetous man: for such a one setteth his soule to sale, because while he liueth he casteth away his bow∣els. Others pawne their Birthright: they are not so des∣perate as to sell it outright, but they will pawne it for a while. They seeme to make conscience of their waies generally, and to be good husbands of their talents: but when an opportune temptation comes, with meat in the mouth; a fit aduantage of much wealth, of high honour, of secret pleasure; they will embrace and fasten on it, though they pawne their soules for a season. And indeed he that knowingly ventures to sin, doth as it were mor∣gage his birthright, puts it to the hazard of redeeming by repentance. But it is dangerous to be a Marchant ventu∣rer in this case: the birthright is precious, if that infernall Broker get but a colour of title in it, hee will vse tricks to make thee breake thy day, and then sue out a Iudgement against thee. 3. Some lose their Birthright; profane and negligent wretches, that leaue their soule perpetually vn∣guarded, vnregarded. They may be carefull about many things, but one thing is necessary, to keepe their Birth∣right. While they sleepe, the enemy sowes tares: it is a
wretched slumber, that sleepes, and slips away the birth∣right. 4. Others giue away their birthright, & these are specially the enuious and the desperate. Malice giues it a∣way, and hath nothing for it. The Ambitious bargaines to haue a little honour for his Birthright, the Couetous to haue some gold for his birthright, the voluptuous to haue some sensuall pleasure for his birthright: but the malicious giues it away for nothing, except it be vexation, that doth anguish him, and languish him. The desperate destroy∣ing his body, giues away his birthright: hee hath nought for it but horrors within, and terrors without. These men serue the diuels turne for nothing. Looke O miserable man vpon the Purchaser of thy Birthright Christ, & con∣sider the price it cost him: if thou sell that for a little plea∣sure, that he bought with so much paine, thou thinkest him an idle Marchant. No Lord, as thou hast giuē it to vs, so keepe it for vs: that hauing now the assurance of it in grace, vvee may haue one day the full possession of it in glory. Written in heauen. This phrase is often vsed in the Scripture, and is but a metaphor whereby God declares the certaintie of some mens eternall predestination, and eternall saluation. Tostatus makes three written bookes of GOD. 1. The great booke, wherein are written all persons, actions, and euents, both good and bad. Out of this are taken two other bookes. 2. The booke of Prede∣stination, consisting onely of the Elect. 3. The booke of Gods Prescience, which he calls the Blacke booke, wher∣in are registred onely the Reprobate. But this latter booke hath no warrant in the Scriptures: it is true, that as there is a certaine number to be saued, so the Lord knoweth them that are ordained to destruction: but the Scripture giues onely a name of booke to the first, not to the worst. Non quòd scribuntur in aliquo libro, sed quòd non scribuntur in illo libro. Psal. 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the booke of the li∣uing, & let them not be written among the righteous. Reue. 17. 8. Whose
names are not written in the Booke of Life from the foundati∣on of the World. Not that they are written in any other booke, but that they are not written in that booke. In∣deed God may be said to haue diuerse Bookes. 1. Liber Prouidentiae, the booke of his Prouidence, wherein God seeth and disposeth all things that are done by himselfe in the World. Psal. 139. 16. Thine eyes did see my sub∣stance yet being vnperfect: and in thy booke were all my mem∣bers written, when as yet there was none of them. Not a spar∣row falls from the house, not a haire from our heads, with∣out the record of this booke. 2. Liber Memori, the booke of Gods memorie, wherein all things done by men, whether good or euill, are registred. Mala. 3. 16. A booke of remembrance was written before GOD, for them that feared the Lord, and thought vpon his Name. Reu. 20. 12. The bookes were opened, and another booke was o∣pened, which is the booke of Life. Hence it is plaine, that there are other bookes besides the booke of Life. This is that which manifesteth all secrets, whether mentall, orall, or actuall. Eccl. 12. 14. Whereby GOD shall bring euery vvorke into iudgement, with euery secret thing, be it good or euill. This Booke shal be opened in that day, Rom. 2. 16. vvhen God shall iudge the secrets of all hearts by Iesus Christ. 3. Liber Conscientiae, the booke of euery mans consci∣ence: this is a booke of Record or testimony; not so much of Iudicature, as of witnesse. 1. Ioh. 3. 20. If our heart condemne vs, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things. There is Conscientiae perrsa, that doth wholly condemne: there is Conscientiae dubia, that doth neither condemne nor ac∣quit: there is Conscientiae be ordinata; such a one had Paul, Rom. 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lye not, my conscience also bearing me witnesse in the holy Ghost. Euery mans consci∣ence beareth witnesse: but vbi cogitatio non habet quòd ac∣cuset, where the thought hath no matter of accusation a∣gainst a man, that conscience doth beare vvitnesse in the holy Ghost. Looke well to thy life, for thou bearest about
thee a booke of Testimonie, that shall speake either with or against thee. 4. Liber monumentorum, a booke of Monuments; which containes the acts of the Saints for the memorie of times to come. Of this nature were the Chronicles, the Acts of the Apostles, that martyrologie or golden Le∣gend of the Saints in the Chapter preceding my Text. God threatens the false prophets, that Ezek. 13. 9. they shall not bee written in the writing of the house of Israel. 5. Liber veritatis, the booke of Truth: this may also be called the booke of Life, because it containes those rules, that lead and direct vs to life eternall. As that is cal∣led a booke of vvarfare, wherein the precepts of the Mili∣tary Art are written. Iohn 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for therein yee haue eternall life. Eccl. 24. 23. All these things are the booke of the Co∣uenant of the most high God. 6. Liber Vitae, the booke of Life it selfe, wherein onely are written the names of the Elect, whom GOD hath or∣dained to saluation for euer. This is to be written in h∣uen. Reu. 1. 27. Into that holy City shall enter nothing that defileth: but only they which are written in the Lambes booke of Life. Paul speakes of his fellow labourers, Phil. 4. 3. vvhose names are in the booke of Life. When the Disciples returned said; Lord, euen the diuells are subiect to vs through thy Name: true saith Christ, I saw Satan as lightning fall from Heauen. Luke. 10. 20. Notwithstanding, in this reioyce not, that the spirits are subiect vnto you: but rather reioyce because your names are written in Heauen. This is a borrowed speech; Sicut nos ea literis consignamus, As we cōmit that to wri∣ting, the memory whereof we would haue kept. So doth God, not that he needes any booke of remembrance, but because all things are present with him, as if they were written in a booke. They among men which are chosen to any speciall place or seruice, are written in a booke: so the Romane Senators were called Patres conscripti: and it is called the Muster-booke, wherein stand the names
of the Souldiers pressed to the warres. To conclude, this writing in heauen, is the booke of Election, wherein all that shall be saued, are registred. Here vnauoydably wee come to the maine question, that may seeme to infringe this happy priuiledge of the Church. Whether to be written in Heauen be an infalli∣ble assurance of saluation: or whether any there registred may come to be blotted out. The truth is, that none writ∣ten in heauen can euer be lost; yet they obiect against it, Psal. 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the booke of the li∣uing, and let them not be written among the righteous. Hence they inferre, that some names once there recorded, are afterwards put out. But this opinion casteth a double a∣spersion vpon God himselfe. Either it makes him igno∣rant of future things, as if he foresaw not the end of elect and reprobate, and so were deceiued in decreeing some to be saued, that shal not be saued. Or that his decree is muta∣ble, in excluding those vpon their sinnes, vvhom he hath formerly chosen. From both these weakenesses S. Paul vindicates him. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of GOD standeth sure, hauing the seale, The Lord knoweth them that are his. First, the Lord knowes them that are his; this were not true if Gods Prescience could be deluded. Then his foundation stands sure: but that were no sure foundation, if those hee hath decreed to be his, should afterward fall out not to bee his. The very Conclusion of truth is this; Impossibilis est deletio: they vvhich are vvritten in hea∣uen, can neuer come into hell. To cleare this from the opposed doubt, among many I will cull out three pro∣per distinctions. 1. One may be said to be written in heauen simpliciter, and secundum quid. Hee that is simply written there, In quantum praedestinatus ad vitam, because elected to life, can neuer be blotted out. Hee that is but written after a sort, may; for hee is written Non secundum Dei praescien∣tiam, sed secundum praesentem iustitiam: not according to
Gods former decree, but according to their present righ∣teousnesse. So they are said to be blotted out, not in res∣pect of Gods knowledge: for hee knowes they were ne∣uer written there; but according to their present condi∣tion, apostating from grace to sinne. Lyran. 2. Some are blotted out, non secundum rei veritatem, sed hominum opinionem: not according to the truth of the thing, but according to mens opinion. It is vsuall in the Scriptures, to say a thing is done, quando innotescat fieri, when it is declared to bee done. Hypocrites haue a simulation of outward sanctitie, so that men in charity iudge them to be written in heauen. But when those gli∣stering starres appeare to be onely Ignes fatui, foolish me∣teors; and fall from the firmament of the Church; then we say they are blotted out. The written ex existentiâ, by a perfect being, neuer lost; but ex apparentiâ, by a dis∣sembled appearance, may. Some God so writes, In se vt simpliciter habituri vitam; that they haue life simply in themselues, though not of themselues. Others hee so writes, vt habeant non in se, sed in sua causa; from which falling they are said to be obliterated. Aquin. 3. Augustine sayes, wee must not so take it, that God first writes, and then dasheth out. For if a Pilate could say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; what I haue written, I haue written; and it shall stand. Shall God say, Quod scripsi expungam, what I haue written I will wipe out, and it stall not stand? They are written then Secundum spem ipsorum, qui ibi se scriptos putabant; according to their owne hope that pre∣sumed their names there. And are blotted out, Quando ipsis constet illos non ibi fuisse; when it is manifest to them∣selues that their names neuer had any such honour of in∣scription. This euen that Psalme strengthens, whence they fetch their opposition. Psal. 69. 28. Let them bee blotted out of the booke of the liuing: and let them not be written among the rightous. So that to bee blotted out of that booke, is in∣deed neuer to bewritten there. To bee wiped out in the
end, is but a declaration that such were not written in the beginning. But how then shall wee iustifie Moses his desire? Exod. 32. 32. If thou wilt forgiue their sinne, faire and good: but if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy booke, which thou hast written. Did Moses wish an impossibility? Some opinionate, that this was not the booke of life that Moses meant: but they erre. 1. Some by this vnderstand the booke of the Law: as if this were his meaning. If thou destroy the people to whom thou hast giuen the Law, let not my name be men∣tioned as the Law giuer. But it is answered. 1. that the booke of the Law was not yet written; and he could not desire blotting forth of a booke that was not. 2. This was in Moses his power when he wrote the Law, to leaue out his owne name; he needed not to trouble God about it. 3. He opposeth the greatest losse he could sustaine, against the greatest benefit the people could obtaine: but this was no great losse to bee blotted out of that booke. 4. Moses speakes of a booke that God had written: but the booke of the Law, sauing onely the Decalogue, Moses wrote himselfe. 2. Ierome vnderstands this desire of Moses for death in this life; Perire in praesentem, non in perpetuum. But if he conceiues no more then a temporall death, Gods an∣swere confutes it; Whosoeuer hath sinned against mee, him will I blot out. ver. 33. Onely sinners are raced out of this booke; but from the booke of terrene life, both sinners and iust come to be blotted: for good and bad are subiect to temporall death. 3. Caietan vnderstands it De libro Principatus in hac vita, to be the booke of Soueraignty: because it is decreed by God as in a booke, quòd isti vel illi principentur: that this or that man should haue the do∣minion. But God answeres, onely sinners are raced out of the booke: but in the booke of gouernment are bad Kings, so well as good. And for that booke, Ezek. 13. 9. as if he wished no more, but not to be counted of Israel; or haue his name among the Patriarchs and Prophets. If
Israel had perished, the booke of his Couenant with Is∣rael had also perished. So for that booke of Iasher. Iosh. 10. 13. it is thought to be lost; therefore no great matter to be put out of it. It must needs bee then the booke of life, and how could Moses wish a racing out of that booke? Some say, that by sinne a man may come to be blotted out of that booke, wherein he thought himselfe written. But if it could not be done without sinne, this constru∣ction were to make Moses Petere peccare mortaliter; to beg power to sinne mortally, that hee might bee blotted out. Neyther doth God for vnrighteousnesse race out a∣ny, but indeed they race out themselues. Some take it to be a parabolicall speech, to shew the intention of his de∣sire. As Rachel said to Iacob, Gen. 30. 1. Giue mee children, or else I die. Yet she had rather liue and haue no children, then haue children and presently dye. As if one should say; Do this, or else kill me: yet he had rather haue the thing omitted, then himselfe killed. Tostat. But this were to make Moses speake one thing, & meane another: where∣as he desired it from his heart. Others thinke Moses spake affirmatiuely, after this sense: that if God would not par∣don the peoples sinne, it would follow that himselfe should be blotted out. Rupert. But this had been against the iustice of God, that one should be damned for the sinne of another. Againe this had conuinced Moses of wauering and doubtfulnesse of his saluation: but the faithfull haue confidence, that though thousands should perish, yet they are sure of eternall blisse. Some say, Moses wished this after the disposition of the inferiour part of his soule; and not in voluntate ratio∣nem superiorem sequente; not in that will which is gouer∣ned by reason. They exemplifie it in Christ, who desi∣red the cup to passe from him, yet simpliciter vellet pati, sim∣ply he would suffer. But there is great difference in the example. 1. Christ eschewes death, Moses ensues death:
the obiect of their desires was vnlike. 2. Christ by his office was to beare the sinne and punishment of his peo∣ple: Moses was neuer called to such a mediatorship. 3. Christ prayeth there as a man: for as God hee prayeth not, but is prayed to. There is Duplex affectus, Mentis & Sensus. Christ in the affection of his minde was willing to suffer, but in his affection of Sense he desired the cup to passe. So that in Christ to escape death, was a naturall desire: in Moses to wish death, yea an eternall death, was a contranaturall desire: it proceeded not from the sen∣suall part, but from his inward feeling and meditation. Others thinke hee prayed, quia turbatus erat, being troubled: not considering at that instant whether that was possible that he begged. x impetu passionis, saith Ly∣ranus, vehementia fuisse abreptum, vt loquatur quasi ecsta∣ticus; saith Caluin. But this accuseth him of rashnesse: for it is fit he that prayeth, should bee of a calme and compo∣sed spirit. Others conclude, that Moses preferred the safe∣ty of the people before his own soule. Caluin. He thought of nothing, but vt sluus sit populus, that the people might be saued. But this is against the rule of charity: for though anothers soule be dearer to me then my owne body: yet my owne soule ought to be dearer vnto me then all mens soules in the world. yea if all the soules of the Saints; yea of the Virgin Mary her selfe, should perish, except my soule perished for them: saith Tostatus: Citius deberem eligere omnes illas perire quàm animam meam. I ought ra∣ther to chuse to saue my owne soule, then all theirs. Lastly, the most and best rest vpon this sense. Because the saluation of Israel was ioyned with the glory of God: both in respect of the promises made to the Fathers, which was not for his honour to frustrate: and to preuent the blasphemies of the enemies insulting on their ruine; God hath forsaken his people: Moses ante omnia gloriam Deispectat: He respected the glory of God aboue all: in regard whereof, he was carelesse of his owne saluation.
Precious to vs is the saluation of others, more precious the saluation of our selues, but most precious of all is the glory of God. Such a wish as this great Prophet of the olde Testament, had that great Apostle of the new. Rom. 9. 3. I could wish my-selfe accursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh. They say, to cleare both these desires from sinne, there is no other solution but this: that both of them for Gods glory in Israels safety desired a separation from glory for a time, not damnation of body and soule for euer. Howsoeuer, there was some difference in their wishes. Chrys. Moses wished Perire cum caeteris, Paul perire pro caeteris. Moses cum pereuntibus, Paulus ne pereant. Moses desired to perish with them that perished: Paul desired to perish, that they might not pe∣rish. But the aime of both was the Lords glory, and the peoples safety. Their zeale was ineffable, their example inimitable, their affection vnmatchable. Yet thus farre desirable, that all Ministers, like Moses and Paul, zealous∣ly seeke their peoples saluation. And I am perswaded, that a Parent doth not more earnestly desire the welfare of his childe, then doth a good Minister the sauing of his flocke. What we desire for you, doe you labor for your selues, and the Lord Iesus worke for vs all. There be some that would haue it granted, that Moses and Paul did sinne in those wishes; and the concession thereof doth safely end all controuersie. I see no preiudice in this answere, for the best Saints liuing haue had their weakenesses. But if you please after all these, to admitte also the hearing of my opinion. Mine I call it, because I neuer read or heard any yet giue it: I call it an opinion, because vnusquis{que} abundat sensu suo, and may take which his owne iudgement best liketh. By this Booke I thinke he meanes Gods fauour: as we vsually say, to be in a mans fauour, is to be in his bookes. We speake of one that dis∣semblingly cousoned vs, such a man shall neuer come in my bookes. For you will not enter that man into your
booke, whom you doe not both trust and fauour. To be blotted out of Gods booke, is to bee liable to his displea∣sure, subiectuall to his iudgements. Now I cannot bee perswaded, that Moses euer imagined God would eter∣nally destroy Israel: therefore nor did he beg eternall de∣struction to himselfe. Hee wished no more to himselfe, then he feared to them. But it is expresly set downe, ver. 14. that God would not cast away Israel to euerlasting perdition. The Lord repented of the euill, which hee thought to doe vnto his people. But thus; Lord, if they must needs vndergoe thy wrath and seuere punishment for their sin, so punish me in the same measure that haue not sinned. If thou wilt not fauour them, forget to fauour me: let mee feele thy hand with them. It was not then euerlasting damnation, that hee eyther feared to them, or desired to himselfe: but onely the desertion of Gods present loue and good pleasure to him, together with subiection to his iudgements; whereof they should taste so deepely, as if God had neuer booked them for his owne. This seemes to be the true sense by Gods answere; Those that haue sin∣ned, I will blot out of my booke. The offenders shall smart, they that haue sinned shall bee punished. So Dauid and o∣ther Saints felt grieuous impositions, though they neuer perished, but were ordained to eternall life. To conclude, they that are written in heauen can neuer be lost. Woe then to that Religion, which teacheth euen the best Saint to doubt of his saluation while hee liueth. Hath Christ said, Beleeue: and shall man say, Doubt? This is a racke and strappado to the conscience: for hee that doubteth of his saluation, doubteth of Gods loue: and he that doubteth of Gods loue, cannot heartily loue him a∣gaine. If this loue be wanting, it is not possible to haue true peace. O the terrors of this troubled conscience! It is like an Ague, it may haue intermission, but the fit will come and shake him. An vntoward beast is a trouble to a man, an vnto ward seruant a great trouble, an vntoward
wife a greater trouble, but the greatest trouble of all is an vntoward conscience. Psal. 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose sinnes are forgiuen: where there is no remission of sinnes, there is no blessednesse. Now there is no true blessednesse but that is enioyed, and none is enioyed vnlesse it be felt, and it cannot be felt vnlesse it be possessed, and it is not posses∣sed vnlesse a man know it, and how does he know it, that doubts whether he hath it or not? All soules are passengers in this world, our way is in the middle of the sea: we haue no sure footing: which way soeuer we cast our eyes, wee see nothing but deepe waters, the Deuill and our owne flesh raising vp against vs infinite stormes. God directs vs to Christ, as to a sure Anchor-hold, he bids vs vndoe our Cables, and fling vp our Anchors in the vaile, fasten them vpon Iesus: we doe so and are safe. But a sister of ours passing in the shippe with vs, that hath long taken vpon her to rule the helme, deales vnkindly with vs; shee cuts in pieces our Cables, throwes away our Anchors, and tels vs wee may not pre∣sume to fasten them on the Rocke, our Mediatour. Shee rowes and roues vs in the midst of the sea, through the greatest fogs, and fearefullest tempests: if wee follow her course, wee must looke for ineuitable shipwracke. The least flaw of winde will ouerturne vs, and sink our soules to the lowest gulfe. No, they that are written in the eter∣nall leaues of heauen, shall neuer be wrapped in the clou∣dy sheetes of darkenes. A man may haue his name writ∣ten in the Chronicles, yet lost: written in durable marble, yet perish: written on a monument equall to a Colossus, yet be ignominious: written on the Hospitall-gates, yet goe to hell: written on his own house, yet another come to possesse it. All these are but writings in the dnst, or vp∣on the vvaters; where the characters perish so soone as they are made. They no more proue a man happy, then the foole could proue Pontius Pilate a Saint, because his name was written in the Creed. But they that be written
in heauen, are sure to inherite it. Now to apply all this vsefully to our selues; some per∣haps would be satisfied how wee may know our names written in heauen. It is certaine that no eye hath looked in∣to Gods booke, yet himselfe hath allowed certaine argu∣ments and proofes, whereby wee haue more then a con∣iecturall knowledge. The principall is the Testimonie of Gods Spirit concurring with our spirit. Rom. 8. 16. But of this I haue liberally spoken in some later passages of this booke; together with the most pregnant signes of our e∣lection. Here therefore I am straightned to insert onely some (there omitted) effects. Which are these foure; If our hearts be on Gods booke, If the poore be in our booke, If wee well order the booke of our conscience, Lastly, if we can write our selues holy in earth, then be bold we are vvritten happy in heauen. 1. If our heart be on Gods booke; and this wee shall find è conuerso, if Gods booke be in our heart. Mary laid vp Christs words in her heart. It must not lye like loose corne on the floore, subiect to the pecking vp of euery fowle; but it is ground by meditation, digested by faith: manet alto corde repostum. God saies, My sonne, giue thy heart to me: doe thou pray, My Father, first giue thy selfe to my heart. I aske not whether this booke lyes in thy study, but whether the study of it lyes in thy heart. The life of the Scriptures is not in verborum folijs, sed in medul∣la cordis; not in the letters and leaues, but in the inwards of the heart. It is not lectio, nor relectio, but dilectio: not reading, but leading a life answerable, that assures vs. If we syncerely loue this booke, wee are certainly in Gods booke. Mary zealously louing Christs word, is said to chuse the better part, that shall neuer be taken from her. 2. If the poore be in thy booke: and this is recipro∣call, then thou art in their booke: and the conclusion is infallible, thou art in the booke of Life. For the relieued poore by their prayers, Luke 16. 9. entertaine, or make way for thy
entertainement into euerlasting habitations. And Christ at the last day calls them to himselfe, that haue beene cha∣ritable to his members; Come yee blessed, receiue the king∣dome prepared for you. Your works haue not merited this kingdome, for it was prepared for you: but as that vvas prepared for you; so your charitie hath prepared you for it: Come and take it. Let not thy left hand knowe vvhat thy right hand doth: Doe thou write it in the dust, the poore will write it in their hearts, GOD findes it in their pray∣ers, their prayers preuaile for thy mercie, & mercy writes thy name in heauen. Acts 10. 4. Thy prayers and thy almes are come vp for a memoriall before God. Therefore Cast thy bread vpon the waters, drowne it in those watry eyes: it is not lost in that Riuer; like Peter thou throwest in an angle, & bringest vp siluer; enough to make thee blessed. Via coeli est pauper: si non vis errare, incipe erogare. The poore is the Aug. high-way to heauen: if thou wouldest not wander in thy iourney, shew mercy. Non potes habere nisi quòd acceperis: non potes non habere quod dederis. Thou canst haue nothing vnlesse thou receiue it: thou canst keepe nothing vnlesse thou giue it. Him that the poore writes not charitable on earth, nor doth God write saueable in heauen. 3. If thy name be written Christian in the booke of thy Conscience, this is a speciall argument of thy regi∣string in heauen 1. Iohn 3. 21. For if our heart condemne vs not, vvee haue boldnesse and confidence towards God. Ang. VVhat if mans ignorance and vnmercifull ielousie blot thee out of the booke of his credite; Si de libro vinentium nunquam propria deleat conscientia: so long as thy owne conscience doth not blot thee forth the booke of blessednesse. If the good spoken of vs be not found in our conscience, that glory is our shame. If the euill spoken of vs be not found in our conscience, that shame is our glory. Therefore it is that Hugo calls the cōscience Librum signatum et clausum, in die Indicij aperiendum, a booke shut and sealed, onely at the Resurrection to be opened. Conscientiam, magis quàm .
famam attende: falls saepe poterit fama, conscientiae nunquam. Looke to thy Conscience more then to thy credite: fame may often be deceiued, conscience neuer. The beames that play vpon the water, are shot from the Sunne in hea∣uen: the peace and ioy that danceth in the conscience, comes from the Sonne of righteousnes, the Lord Iesus. If a hearty laughter dimple the cheeke, there is a smooth and quiet mind within. Vpon the wall there is a writing; a man sitting with his backe to the wall, how should hee read it? but let a looking-glasse be set before him, it vvill reflect it to his eyes, he shall read it by the resultance. The writing our names in heauen is hid, yet in the glasse of a good conscience it is presented to our eye of faith, and the soule reades it. For it is impossible to haue a good consci∣ence on earth, except a man be written in heauen. 4. If the booke of Sanctification haue our names writ∣ten, then surely the booke of Glorification hath them, and they shall neuer be blotted out. For God Ephe. 4. 1. hath chosen vs in Christ before the foundation of the vvorld; that wee should be holy and vvithout blame before him in loue. Now as we may reason from the cause to the effect, so certainely from the effect to the cause. Election is the cause, Holinesse the effect: as therefore euery one written in heauen, shall be holy on earth, so euery one holy on earth, is written in hea∣uen. This sanctitie is manifested in our obedience; vvhich must be Ad totum; Psal. 119. 6. I had respect to all thy commande∣ments. Per totum; ver. 112. I haue enclined my heart to keepe thy statutes Alway, euen to the end. De tote; ver. 69. to keepe thy pre∣cepts with my whole heart. In Rome the Patres conscripti were distinguished by their robes: and they of the Liue∣ry in London haue a peculiar habite by themselues, to dif∣fer from the rest of the Company. Is thy name enrolled in that Legend of Saints? thy liuery will witnes it; Phil. 3. 20. thy conuersation is in heauen. A Senator relating to his sonne the great honours decreed to a number of Souldiers,
whose names vvere written in a booke: the sonne was im∣portunate to see that booke. The father shewes him the outside; it seemed so glorious that he desired him to o∣pen it: No, it was sealed by the Councell. Then saith the sonne, tell me if my name be there: the father replyes, the names are secreted to the Senate. The son studying how he might get some satisfaction, desired him to deliuer the merits of those inscribed Souldiers. The father relates to him their noble atchieuements, and worthy actions of valour, wherewith they had eternized their names. Such are written, and none but such must be written in this booke. The sonne consulting with his owne heart, that he had no such trophies to shew; but had spent his time in courting Ladies, rather then encountring Knights; that he was better for a dance then a march: that he knew no drumme but the tabret, no courage but to be drunke. Hereupon he presently retyr'd himselfe, repented, entred into a combate with his owne affections: subdued them, became temperate, continent, valiant, vertuous. VVhen the Souldiers came to receiue their wreathes, he steps in to challenge one for himselfe. Being asked, vpon vvhat title; he answered, If honours be giuen to Conquerers, I haue gotten the most noble conquest of all. Wherein? These haue subdued strange foes, but I haue conquered my selfe: and indeed this is iudged the greatest victory. The application is familiar: thou desirest to know whose names are written in blessednes, it shall not be told thee, This or that indiuiduall person: but generally thus, men so qualified: faithfull in Christ, and to Christ: obedient to the truth, and for the truth: that haue subiected their owne affections, and resigned themselues to the guidance of the heauenly will: these men haue made noble con∣quests, and shall haue Princely Crownes: find in thy selfe this sanctimony, and thou hast a sure testimonie: thou art written in heauen. But all men challenge this: they beleeue and obey, and
doe good deeds: and therefore some to be sure of putting in themselues, constantly affirme all men are written. But infinite numbers vvill be deceiued at the last. For if there were vniuersall inscription, there should follow vniuer∣fall Election: if vniuersall election, then vniuersall saluati∣on. If the former vvere true, then vvere not election any such name. If the latter, to vvhat purpose did God make hell? 1. Ioh. 3. 16. God so loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne: What, that all should be saued? no, but that Who∣soeuer beleeues, might haue euerlasting life. Not all; for he that takes all cannot be said to chuse. Let this stirre vs vp to get security that our names are vvritten there. Benefits common to all, as light of the Sunne, dewes of heauen, are little regarded: but quae rarissima, carissima: things hard to come by, are much set by. Because God doth not giue riches to all men; but isti multum, illi paruum, huic nullum: much to one, little to another, none at all to a third: here∣upon men debase themselues to moiling slaues, yea to earth-rooting beasts, to get them. For the race of this vvorld, vvhere onel the first obtaines the goale, gets the money; all trusse vp their loynes, run apace, none vvill be hindmost. For heauen, vvhere all that runne well, shall speed well, and haue for their prize a Crowne of righteous∣nesse; men are so courteous, they will giue another leaue to goe before them. But let thy grace in this life, witnesse thy hope of glory in the life to come. To God the Iudge of all. We haue considered the Citizens, let vs now looke vpon the glorious maiesty of the King that gouerns them. Where first let vs obserue in generall, that there shall be a day of Iudgement, otherwise to vvhat purpose is there a Iudge? If there were no such scoffers, as to say: 2. Pe. 3. 4. Where is the promise of his comming? For since the Fathers fell asleep: all things continue as they were from the beginning of the cre∣ation: this obseruation might vvell haue bin spared. The
reason to proue it is deriued from the iustice and good∣nesse of God. 2. Thes. 1. 6. It is a iust thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with vs, vvhen the Lord Iesus shall bee reuealed from heauen vvith his mighty Angels. This for the honour of the faithfull, and for the horrour of repro∣bates. Here the good man findes the sharpest misery, the euill man sweetest felicity: therefore it is iust that there should be a time of changing turnes and places. Prou. 21. 18. The wicked shall be a ransome for the righteous, and the transgres∣sour for the vpright. The rich mans table stood full of de∣licates, Lazarus lackes crummes: therefore they must change states; Luk. 16. 25. Hee is comforted, and thou art tormented. There is a time to get, and a time to lose: Luk. 6. 25. Woe to you that laugh, for you shall mourne: Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are you that mourne, for you shall reioyce. God shall giue the one Fletum pro ris, the other Risum pro fletu: wiping away all teares from their eyes. Reioyce thou irrefragably dissolute, follow the lusts of thy owne heart: Eccl. 11. 9. but remember for all these things thou must come into iudgement. It is a deere penniworth, to buy the merry madnesse of one houre, vvith ages of pangs, infinite and eternall. If there were no iudgement, how should God be iust? But the righteous shall see the vengeance: Psal. 58. 11. So that a man shall say, Uerily there is a re∣ward for the righteous, verily there is a God that iudgeth the earth. otherwise vvhere is our hope? 1. Cor. 15. 19. For if in this life onely we haue hope in Christ, we of all men are most miserable. But it is obiected: 1. That the whole vvorld consists of belieuers or vn∣beleeuers: now there is no last iudgement for eyther of these. none for belieuers, for Ioh. 5. 24. He that belieueth hath euer∣lasting life, and shall not come into iudgement. None for vn∣beleeuers, for Iohn 3. 18. He that beleeueth not, is condemned already. I answere, first for the latter: the vnbelieuer is condem∣ned already in effect three wayes. 1. By the purpose of God, who did foresee and appoint his condemnation, as
a punishment for his sinne, and execution of his Iustice. 2. By the vvord of God, where his condemnation is set downe. 3. By his owne conscience, vvhich euery houre doth iudge and condemne him. Yet all this hinders not, but that he may also passe the iudgement of Christ at that generall Assises: vvhich is the manifestation and comple∣tion of that inchoate iudgement. To the former I an∣swere; it is not said The beleeuer shall not come into iudge∣ment; but he shall not come into condemnation. 1. Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ; euen the ve∣ry faithfull, absoluendicausa, that Christ may publikely acquit them. 2. That Conscience is a sufficient iudge, what needes more? I answere, properly Conscientia testis, non iudex: the Conscience is a witnesse, rather then a iudge. Indeed it hath a great office heere, and so it shall-haue there. It is felt now, but then more sensibly. Now many are so borne away with the precipices and streames of their sen∣suall pleasures; vt cogitationes accusatrices non audiant. Ly∣ran. That they heare not the accusation of their thoughts: but then it vvill be heard and felt. Novv it may plucke a man by the sleeue, and craue audience, but it is drowned vvith the noyse of good fellowship. Besides Hactenus est ccultus testis, it is hitherto a secret vvitnesse, only known to him that hath it: but then the booke that is now sealed, shall be opened, and all the world shall read it. As the seale leaues a print in the waxe behinde it; so the conscience an impression of past sinnes in the thoughts; indeleble cha∣racters, vvhich death it selfe shall not eate out. Consci∣ence here doth vvitnesse, Rom. 2. 15. 16. accuse or excuse: but Christ shall there iudge the secrets of all hearts. God the Iudge of all: let vs now looke into the particu∣lars; Quis, Qualis, Quorum. Deus, Iudex, vniuer sorum. The three vvords answer to three questions. Who? God. What is he? A Iudge. Of whom? Of all. God. It is manifest that this honour belongs to Christ,
therefore Christ is God. Acts 17. 31. God hath appointed a day, wherin he vvil iudge the world in righteousnes, by that man whom he hath ordained. Ioh. 5. 27. He hath giuen him authority to execute iudgment, because he is the Son of man. To this consents that article of our faith in the Creed; that he who suffred vnder Pilate, shall come to iudge quicke and dead. But it is obiected, that to iudge is the action of the whole Trinity: true, it is commō to all, but the execution of it pertains to one. God iudgeth, but by the Son: so distinctly. Rom. 2. 16. God shal iudge the secrets of al harts by Iesus Christ: God by Christ. But it is further obiected, that the Saints shall iudge. Mat. 19. 28. Ye shall sit vpon twelue thrones, iudging the twelue Tribes of Israel. 1. Cor. 6. 2. Know ye not, that the Saints shall iudge the world? This truly is a great honour to the Apostles and Saints. To be Iudge of a Circuit is an honourable of∣fice, vvhat is it then to iudge the vvorld? But there is great difference, they haue potestatem accessoriam; an ac∣cessory power; Christ imperatoriam, a principall and im∣periall power. Math. 28. 18. All power is giuen to me in heauen and in earth. He hath Honorem Primarium, the prime honour; they subordinatum, deriued from his. Christ giues Sen∣tentiam iudicatoriam, they onely apprbatoriam: hee the sentence of iudgement, they of approbation. As the Iu∣stices on the bench are in some manner Iudges: not in giuing the sentence, but in approuing the sentence giuen. The Saints therefore may be said to iudge; Vel exemplo, vel testimonio, vel ffragio. 1. By their example: for their liues shal condemn the wicked, as Noahs handy work did the old vvorld. So the Apostles shall iudge Israel, because their faith shall take frō Israel all excuse. Such a iudgement Christ speaks of: Mat. 12. 41. The Niniuits shal rise in iudgement with this generation, & shall condemn it. The Queen of the South shall rise vp in iudgement with it, and shall condemne it. The goodnes of the one shal iudge & condemne the badnes of the other. So Christ stops the blasphemous mouthes of the Iewes; accusing him to worke by Beelzebub. If I
doe it by him, by whom doe your children cast out De∣uils? Mat. 12. 27. Therfore they shall be your Iudges. 2. By their Testi∣mony, who can vvitnes that the meanes of saluation was offered them in the Gospell, which they not accepting are iustly condemned? Ioh. 12. 48. Hee that reiecteth me and receiueth not my words, hath one that iudgeth him. The word that I haue spoken, the same shall iudge him in the last day. So shal Babylon be iudged by those that would haue cured her, but she would not be cured. 3. By their suffrage and ap∣prouall of Christs righteous sentence. Thus shall the E∣lect iudge the world, yea euen the Angels. 1. Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not that we shall iudge the Angels? By world we must vnder∣stand the wicked, and by the Angels Deuils. And certain∣ly the Saints haue some place in this iudgment. Wisd. 3. 8. They shall iudge the Nations, and haue dominion ouer the people, & their Lord shall raigne for euer. Christ shall set all his ad∣uersaries before his own face, and the face of his Church: where they shall behold those become their Iudges, whom they once esteemed and vsed as their slaues. Wisd. 5. 5. This is he whom we sometimes had in derision: now hee is numbred among the children of GOD, and his portion is among the Saints. But vvhy is the execution of this iudgement committed to the second person in the Trinitie; to Christ? 1. It is fit that he, who came to be iudged, should also come to iudge. Tunc manifestus veniet inter iustos iudica∣turus Aug. iustè, qui occultè vener at iudicandus ab iniustis iniustè. He that came in humility to be iudged by the vniust vn∣iustly, shall come in glory to iudge all iustly. 2. As it is for the honour of Christ, so is it for the horror of his enemies; when they shall see him whm they haue pierced: intreating the Reu. 6. 16. Greg. Rockes and mountaines to hide them from the presence of him that sits on the Throne. In ma∣iestate visuri sunt, quem in humilitate videre noluerunt. Vt tantò districtius virtutem sentiant, quantò contemptius infir∣mitatem driserunt. They shall behold him in Maiesty,
whom they would not daigne to looke vpon in humility. The baser they esteemed his vveakenesse, the heauier they shall finde and feele his mightinesse. Then Christ stood like a Lambe before Pilate a Lyon: now Pilate like a ma∣lefactor shall stand before Christ his Iudge. Crucifie him, crucifie him, vvas the sentence of the Iewes: Bind them hand and foote, and throw them into vtter darkenesse, will be the sentence of Christ. Luk. 19. 14. We will not haue this man raigne ouer vs, was their sentence. Ver. 27. Bring those mine enemies which would not that I should raigne uer them, & slay them before me; this is Christs sentence. The vngodly conspire, Psal. 2. 3. Let vs breake his bonds afunder, and cast away his crds from vs: therefore, vers. 9. hee shall breake them with a rod of yron, and dish them in pieces like a potters vessell. Thus he that was once made the footstoole of his enemies, shall raigne Psal. 110. 1. till hee hath made all his enemies his footstoole. As Ioshua dealt vvith the fiue Kings hid in the Caue of Mak∣kedah, Iosh. 10. 24. brought them out, caused his Captaines of warre to set their feet on the neckes of them, then slew them, and hanged them on trees. So shall Christ triumph ouer his enemies; their neckes subiected to the feet of the Saints, and their substances cast into endlesse torments. 3. For the comfort of his chosen ones, hee is their Iudge, that is their Sauiour. He that gaue the bloud of mercy to saue them from the hand of Iustice, wil not now condemne them. O blessed mercy, that so triumphs a∣gainst Iudgement! yea Iustice and Mercy are met toge∣ther in this Iudge: Iustice vpon them that despised him, mercy to them that feared him. Happy faith that shall not be ashamed at that day! 1. Ioh. 2. 28. Abide in him, that when he shall appeare, we may haue confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his comming. The heauens shall be on fire, the ele∣ments melt vvith the flame; the earth be burnt, Castles, Cities, Townes and Towers be turned to one pile: the Deuils shall make a hideous noyse, the reprobates shrieke and howle like Dragons: all because this Iudges wrath is
kindled. But the faithfull shall reioyce: Ioh. 16. 22. I will see you a∣gaine, and your hearts shall reioyce, and your ioy no man ta∣keth from you. The musike of Saints and Angels shall be ioyned in one Quire; and all sing, Reu. 5. 13. Blessing, honor, glo∣ry and power be vnto him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lambe for euer. The Iudge. This is his authority: now there are cer∣taine properties required in a iust Iudge; some of them are found in some Iudges, many in few Iudges, all per∣fectly in no Iudge, but this Iudge of all, Iesus Christ. 1. Perspicacitas ingenij: sharpenesse of apprehension, and soundnesse of vnderstanding. Ignorance in a priuate person is a weakenes, in a Iudge a wickednesse. Ignoran∣tia Aug. Iudicis, calamitas innocentis. A Iudge ignorant, makes wretched the innocent. It was a curse; Esa. 3. 4. I will giue chil∣dren to be their Princes, and babes shall rule ouer them: that is, Gouernors of a childish discretion. It is a woe; Eccl. 10. 16. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a childe. Iustice was an∣ciently painted blinde, to shew that no fauour be giuen to persons: but it vvas not meant so blinde, as not to dis∣cerne causes. It is vvofull when Iudges are so blinde, that they are faine to feele the right. No man vvould haue his body come vnder the cure of a foolish Physician. nor his estate vnder an ignorant Iudge. But this Iudge of heauen and earth is so wise, that hee knowes the very secrets of mens hearts. Hebr. 4. 13. All things are naked and opened vnto the eyes of him, with whom wee haue to doe. The wicked can haue no hope, that a bad cause flourished ouer, should passe vnconstrued, vncensured. Reu. 1. 14. His eyes are as a flame of fire, cleare to search and finde out all secrets. Accordingly, he hath now put in his interlocutory, then will giue his de∣finitiue sentence. 2. Audacitas animi; boldnesse of courage: a timerous Iudge looseth a good cause. In the fable, vvhen the Hart is made Iudge betweene the Wolfe and the Lambe; it must needs goe on the Wolfes side. The feare of displea∣sing
Greatnesse is a sore Remora to the vessell of Iustice. Therefore the poore complaine; Psal. 11. 3. If the foundations bee cast downe, what can the righteous doe? Quis metuet offen∣dere, cum Iudex metuat abscindere? Who will feare to doe mischiefe, when he knowes the Iudge dares not punish him? Therefore when GOD made oshua Iudge of Is∣rael, obserue how he doubles this charge. Iosh. 1. ver. 6. 7. 8. 9. Be strong, and of a good courage. And the people a∣gaine. ver. 18. We will obey thee, onely be thou strong, and of a good courage. But this Iudge will not be danted with faces of men. Reue. 6. 15. The Kings of the earth, the great men, the rich men, the chiefe Captaines, and the mighty-men, hid them∣selues in the dennes, & in the rocks of the Mountaines. Those terrors of slaues, and mirrors of fooles; that made the vn∣derlings tremble, & Heb. 11. 38. hide themselues in caues: now for all their puissance are glad to runne into a hole, and cowardly shrowd themselues. Adducetur cum suis stultus Plato dis∣cipulis, Aristotelis argumenta non proderunt: Herois ma∣iestas Hierom. deijcietur: cùm filius pauperculae venerit iudicatrus terram. Then foolish Plato shall appeare with his scho∣lers, Aristotle shall be confuted with all his arguments, Herod pompe shall be turned to shame, when that Sonne of the Virgin shall come to iudge the world. 3. Honestas conscientiae, honesty of conscience. The Iudge that will be corrupted, dares corrupt the truth. Wofull is that iudgement which comes from him, who hath vaenlem nimam, a saleable soule. Flix was such a Iudge, who Act. 29. 26. hoped that money should haue beene giuen him of Paul. Qui vendit iustitiam pro pecuniae, perdit pecuniam cum anima. He that sells iustice for mony, shall lose mer∣cy and his soule. Amos 5. 12. You afflict the iust, you take a bribe, and turne aside the poore in the gate from their right. They haue built them houses of ewen stone. ver. 11. How? By bribes. What shall become of them? They shall not dwell in them: for Iob. 15. 34. fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. If any Iusti∣cers thinke so to raise themselues, it is but vt lapsu grauiore
ruant; that they may haue the sorer fall. There are cer∣taine rich stuffes forbidden by the Statute: but to weare clothes cut out of bribes, and laced with exactions; is specially forbidden by the Statute of heauen. When mo∣ney can open the locke of Iustices dore, the worst cause is first heard. This pocket-key is fitted for all dores. One spake vnhappily: I haue a key in my pocket, saith he, that will passe me in all Countryes: he meant his purse. In Ita∣lie it can open the dore of life: Doe you hate a man? for mony you may haue him pistold or poysond. In Frnce it can open the dore of loue: lust you for such a vvoman? money makes her your harlot. In Spayne it opens the dore of Iustice: the case shall goe on the rich mans side. In England it can open the dore of honour; mony makes a Gentleman, and reputation swels with the Barnes. In Rome it can open the dore of heauen, for they sell Claues, Altari, Christum; peace, and pardon, and heauen, and Christ himselfe. Gras lacerantur pauperes à prauis Iu∣dicibus, Isidor. quàm à cruentissimis hostibus. Nullus praedo tm cu∣pidus in alienis, quàm Iudex iniquns in suis. The robes of peace couering corruption, are worse to the poore then hostile inuasion. But this Iudge of heauen will take no bribes: other Iudges may procrastinate, put off, or per∣uert causes. Saepe non finiunt negotia, quousque exhauriant marsupia: they will often see an end of the Clyents mo∣ney, before the Clyents see an end of their cause. They often determine to heare, but seldome heare to deter∣mine. But Christ shall iudge those Iudges. Psal. 2. 12. Be instructed ye Iudges of the earth: kisse the Sonne lest he be angry, and ye perish. At that day Plus valebunt pura corda, quàm asta Bern. verba: conscientia bona, quàm marsupia plena. Pure hearts shall speed better then subtile words: a good conscience better then a full purse. Iudex non falletur verbis, nec flectetur donis. That Iudge will neither be mooued with our gifts, nor deceiued with our shifts. Happy soule, that forsaking the loue of money, hath gotten a pure heart to
appeare before Iesus Christ. 4. Impartialitas Iustitiae, impartiall Iustice. Tully tells vs of a Prouerbe. Exuit personam Iudicis, quisquis amici in∣duit: He hath put off the person of a Iudge, that puts on the person of a friend. The good Iudge neither hath his right hand filled with loue, nor his left with hatred: the scole of Iustice is not swayed. Indeed tamdiu Iudex, quam∣diu Iustus: he is so long a Iudge, as he is iust. Nomen quod ab quitate sumitur, per praeuaricationem admittitur. Zeleu∣cus was commended, that when (according to his Law for adultery, which tooke frō the offender both his eyes) his sonne was deprehended in that fact; put out one of his owne eyes, and one of his sonnes. Duo lumina cacantur iuxta legem, duo supersunt iuxta misericordiam. Two eyes are lost according to iustice, and two remaine according to mercy. A maruelous temper Inter iustum Iudicem, & misericordiem Patrem: betweene a iust Iudge, and a kind Father. But GOD is so iust, that because sin would let him saue none of vs, hee slew his Sonne to saue all of vs. Rom. 5. 8. God commendeth his loue to vs, in that vvhile wee were yet sinners, Christ died for vs. God commends his loue; in∣deed he might iustly commend it: and to vs by this token, that being rebels he bought vs with the bloud of his own Sonne. He will euer continue so iust, in punishing tray∣tors, in crowning his faithfull subiects. Iudex damnatur, cùm nocens absoluitur. Sen. He that iustifies the guilty, transferres the guilt to himselfe. But Gene. 18. 25. Shall not the Iudge of all the earth doe right? Yes, we haue all sinned, but Thou continuest holy, O thou vvorship of Israel. 5. Aequitas Sententiae; the equity of Sentence; it shal be giuen vpon good testimonie. Ambrose saies, It is not the part of a Iudge to condemne any man without an ac∣cuser. Christ did not cast away Iudas, though hee knew him a theefe, because he was not accused. When that adul∣teresse was left alone before Christ, he said Iohn 8. 10. Woman where are thine accusers? Hath no man condemned thee? She said,
No man, Lord. Then said Iesus; Neither doe I condemne thee: goe and sinne no more. But here shall be no want of ac∣cusers; their owne conscience, all the creatures, all the Elements, Angels, men, diuells shall accuse: then Christ shall iudge. Heu miser! sic deprehensus quò fugias? Anselm. Latere erit impossibile, apparere intolerabile. Whither wilt thou flie, O wretch thus accused? To lie hidden it wil be impossible, to appeare, insufferable. 2. Cor. 5. 10. Euery man shall re∣ceiue the things done in his body, according to that hee hath done, whether it be good or euill. The same, neither more nor lesse, but iust waight. The wicked wrought their pleasure while God did suffer: therefore God will worke his pleasure while they suffer. Of all; both good and euill, Elect and Reprobates, men and Angels: but of these in a different manner. To shew how this shall be done, I must lead your attentions orderly through fiue passages; a Citation, Separation, Probation, Sentence, and Retribution. 1. The Citation: there is a summons sent out to make all appeare before Christs Tribunall. This citing is done by the voice of Christ. Iohn 5. 28. All that are in the graues shall heare his voyce, and shall come forth. The power of this voice is vnspeakeable: to empty earth, sea, ayre, heauen, and hell: and presently to fill earth, ayre, heauen and hell. To empty all vpon his summons, and to fill all vpon his Sentence. Therefore it is compared to a Trumpet, the lowdest of all musicall instruments. 1. Cor. 15. 52. Chrys. The Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised. Uerè vox tub terribilis, cui omnia obediunt elementa. Petras scindit, Inferos aperit, portas aereas frangit, vinculae mortis dirumpit, et de profund abyssi animas liberatis corporibus assignat. A terrible voice, that shall shake the world, rend the rocks, breake the mountaines, dissolue the bonds of death, burst down the gates of hell, and vnite all spirits to their owne bodies. There shall be no concealing, no keeping backe from this voice. Now Christ calls; Math. 11. 28. Come vnto me all that labour:
Iohn 5. 40. yet you wil not come vnto me that you might haue life. Then he shall call, Come you that must labour in torments, and be laden for euer; then they must come to receiue the doome of death. Now Ephe. 5. 14. awake thou that sleepest, & Christ shall giue thee light: but they will not rise. At that day a∣wake thou wicked that art dead, and Christ shall send thee to darknesse: and then they must rise. This is that generall day, that shall congregate all: they shall come from the foure winds, and corners of the world, to make an vniuersall apparance. But if this be the voice of Christ, how is it then said, the Archangel shall sound the Trum∣pet of collection? Mat. 24. 31. Hee shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather all together. 1. Thes. 4. 16. The Lord shall descend from heauen with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpe of God. I answere, the voice is originally Christs, ministerially the Angels. As now he speakes to vs 2. Cor. 5. 20. by men, so at that day by Angels. O what a glory of our Sauiour shall then appeare, vvhen he is set on his Throne, before so full a Court, as all the reasonable creatures GOD euer made! Uideat nosiam in sanctimonia, vt tunc videamus eum in gaudio. Let him now behold vs in holinesse, that then we may behold him in happinesse. 2. The Separation: wee haue thus brought all toge∣ther, now we must separate one from another. The forme hereof is giuen by Christ himselfe. Mat. 25. 32. Before hm shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from an∣other, as a Shepheard diuideth his sheepe from the goates. This full and finall separation is reserued for Christ, and not performed till that day. For Siite crescere; Math. 3. 30. Let them grow both together, corne and tares, vntill the haruest. This world is the floore, fan while you will there will be some chaffe: fish neuer so discreetly, you shall meet with some sturdy dogge-fish that will rend the nette. In Heauen are none but Saints, in Hell none but reprobates, on earth they are both promiscuously blended together.
Do you wonder that the Lambes cannot liue in quiet? consider the number of goates among them. Ezek. 34. 18. They eate vp the good pasture, and tread downe the residue with their feet: they drinke of the fountaines, and foule the residue with their feet. My flocke are faine to eate that they haue troden, and to drinke that they haue fouled with their feet. But GOD shall iudge and sepa∣rate. ver. 20. Behold, I, euen I will iudge betweene the fatte cattell, and the leane cattell. Because they haue thrust with side and shoulder, and push'd all the diseased vvith their hornes: therefore I will saue my flocke, and they shal no more be a prey, and I will iudge betweene cattell and cattell. The goates will annoy till they be quite separated. Too many among vs haue these goatish conditions: they climbe vp ambitiously to the mountres of preferment, like goates: they pill and barke the Common-wealth, like goates: they lust after women as hote as goates: they trouble the vva∣ters of Israel, the peace of the Church, like goates: they tread vnder feet Gods blessings; like goates: they smell of impietie, as ranke as goates: and therefore they must be separated, as goates. We haue all from Adam the nature of the goate: let vs weepe away, and keepe away such goatish qualities. And let vs put on the properties of sheepe: which Christ Iohn 10. giues to be three; Audire, obedire, sequi: to heare Christs word, to obey Christs wil, to follow Christs steps. Search thy soule for these brands and markes of a sheepe, or else thou wilt prooue a goate. Hast thou fidem agni, the faith of a Lambe reposed in the Lambe of God? Hast thou innocentiam agni, the innocence of a Lambe, free from wrong? Vellus agni, the fleece of a Lambe, to warme the poore? humilitatem agni, the humblenesse of a Lambe, a stranger to pride? patientiam agni, the pati∣ence of a Lambe, ready to lay downe thy life for Christ? then thou shalt haue gloriam agni, the reward of a Lambe, assured saluation in heauen.
Thus the goates and the sheepe be like in externall fa∣shion: they feed both in one pasture, lie both in one fold, all their life time: but Christ will put them asunder at the last day. Like two trauellers that goe together to one Towne, take vp one Inne, feed together at one boord, sleepe together in one bedde: but in the morning their wayes part. The sheepe and goates eate together, drinke together, sleepe together, rot together, but at this day there shall be a separation. The goates may deceiue man both in life and death, they may be taken for sheepe, but Christ can discerne betweene cattell and cattell. God iud∣geth by the Liuer, man by the Liuery. If the Liuer be rotten, looke the flesh neuer so faire, the good market∣man will not buy it. If Christ finde not the hart sound, he vvill none of the carkasse. 3. The Probation; euery man must vndergoe his try∣all. From the prison of the graue; they are set before the Iudge, and there suffer discussion or tryall. There are certaine bookes to be opened for this probation: some rolles Reu. 20. 12. or Records filled vp in the Court of Heauen. There is Li∣ber praeceptorum secundum quem, & liber conscientiae ex quo iudicamur. Quicquid praecipitur scriptum in illo, quicquid delinquitur in isto. Here is Diuina scientia, & humana con∣scientia met together. Wee may forget our sinnes, but God keepes a true Register. If the sufferings of the Saints be recorded, then sure their violences by whom they suf∣fer are not forgotten. Now the book of the Law where∣by men are iudged containes three leaues: Nature, the Law written, and the Gospell. Some must be tryed by the first onely, some by the first and second, others by all three. First, that some shall be iudged onely by the Law of Nature, it is cleare. Rom. 2. 12. As many as haue sinned without the Law, shall perish without the Law. Here two things are considerable, two things; one, what this Law of nature is: the other, whether the breach of it be sufficient to con∣demne.
1. It is a knowledge of certaine principles tending to liue well; and of conclusions thence necessarily inferred, agreeable with the eternall rule of Truth, planted by God in man, and teaching him to worship his maker. Thus Melancthon defines it. The matter of it is Principles with conclusions directing to a good life. Parents are to be honoured; this is a principle engraffed: therefore I must honour my Parents, this is a conclusion deducted. The forme of it is an accordance with the rule of truth, Gods morall Law: for the Law naturall is the summary abridgement of the Law morall. The Author of it is God, who hath written it in mans heart. Ambros. Deus om∣nium Creator singulorum pectoribus infudit. The end is, that it might be a testimony of that Diuine prouidence whereby God now ruleth, and of that Iustice whereby he will iudge men. This agrees with the Apostles definitiō. Rom. 2. 15. Which shew the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witnesse, and their thoughts excusing or accusing. The worke, there's the matter of it: of the Law, there's the forme: written, there's the Author that imprints it: the conscience accusing or excusing, there's the end. In this inward testimony arising from nature, are these two principall things: , a comprehen∣sion of practicall principles, and naturall discerning be∣tween iust and vniust. And , conscience chide∣ing for chusing euill, and approuing for doing good. The one makes the proposition, the other the assumption. 2. The other point to be discussed is, vvhether the breach of this Law doth condemne. Some obiect, that it is quite blotted out of man, therefore cannot bind him. No question, it is much obscured in respect, both of in∣tellectuall and effectuall faculties. For vnderstanding it gropeth, Acts 17. 27. ifhaply it might feele after God. Adam had the knowledge of good by experience, of euill onely by contemplation: but falling he had also an experimentall knowledge of euill. For affection, mans will is so per∣uerse,
that when as naturally he desires to be happy, yet hee wiilingly commits those things against his first in∣tendment, that make him most vnhappy. As a thiefe steales, to keepe himselfe from famine, and so from mi∣sery: thus Ne miser fit, malus fit: & ideo miserior, quia malus. Lest hee should be wretched, he becomes wick∣ed: and is so much the more wretched by beeing wick∣ed. Beatus vult esse hmo, etiam non sic viuendo vt possit Aug. esse. Man seekes for blessednesse in all places, but where it is. Yea, custome brings this will to contempt of sinne. Peccata quamuis horenda, cùm in consutudinem vene∣rint, creduntur parua, aut nulla. Aug. Sinnes horrid and vncouth at first, become triuiall and familiar by pra∣ctice. Thus is this naturall light dimmed and ouercast by the corruption of prosperous lusts: yet ne ipsa quidem delet ini∣quitas: sinne doth not quite race it out. 1. Because there are certaine principles reuiuing in the most dissolute. As the desire of happinesse; and euery one would attaine that end, though they erre in the meanes. Yea they know that euill is to bee auoided, which appeares in that they would not haue any wrong offered to themselues. These generall rules all know, albeit in the particular ap∣plications they are blinded. Hence it came, that some grosse sinnes were not condemned of them: as robbery among the Germans, lust of males among the Grecians. Rom. 1. 27. Indeed God did punish malitiam per duri∣tiem: yet still remaine some sparkes and cold sinders of that primary and originall fire. 2. That the light of na∣ture is not quite extinct, appeares by the force and wor∣king of the conscience; for this doth vexe and sting the most obstinate soule. By this Cain was driuen to confesse the monstrousnesse of his sinne. 3. The practice of natu∣rall men euinceth it, who by force of nature performed some things agreeable to equity. Rom. 2. 14. The Gentiles hauing not the Law, doe by nature the things contained in the Law.
The very Gentiles had many excellent politicke Lawes, and positiue constitutions. This seemes to cleare the meaning of Plato's two assertions: Legem esse inuentionem veritatis, that was the Law of Nature: Legem esse imita∣tionem veritatis, such were the positiue decrees grounded vpon the other. But what precepts doth this Law con∣taine, and what remnants of it doth man retaine? The Law of nature commands man, to liue religi∣ously to God aboue him, iustly to man with him, soberly to things vnder him. To deale iustly with men nature giues him two rules: one affirmatiue, What thou wouldest haue others to doe to thee, so doe to them: the other nega∣tiue, Quod ibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris: Do not that to others, which thou wouldst not haue them doe to thee. Euen nature Instructs a man how to rule his affections. So Tullie; Animus imperat corpori, vt Rex ciuibus: ratio li∣bidmi, vt seruis dominus. The minde gouernes the body, as a King raignes ouer his subiects: the reason lust, as a master ouer his seruants. Whence had hee this, but from nature? There is vis rationis, orationis, adorationis. By the vertue of reason man loues man, by the power of discourse man regards himselfe, by the power of worship man respects God. If wee should examine the particular commandements. 1. They acknowledged one God: Tlly protested, that when he wrote seriously, he mentioned but one God: and he did but ludere, play the Poet when he spake of more. Moses called this God , and Plato . 2. Numa Pompilius iudged it vnlawfull to ascribe any forme to God inuisible. 3. They durst indeed play with their puppets, imaginary gods; Uenus and Cupid, &c. But for the Deity, O may not the reuerence of his vn∣knowne name condemne vs! They cry out, Great is their Diana: this vindicates them from vilipending the name. If they had knowne a greater God, they would haue gi∣uen greater reuerence to his Name. 4. Diuers of the Gen∣tiles had their Sabbaoths, mingled with strange superstiti∣ons:
but they were taught by nature to set apart some time for worship. 5. They commanded and commended honour to Parents: Solon ordaining no law for Parricides, answered there were none so vnnaturall for to attempt it. 6. That murder was held abominable, appeares by their punishing it, according to Gods Law, with death. 7. That Adultery was odious, it is manifest by Pharaoh. Gen. 12. 19. Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might haue taken her to me to wife. By Abimelech to Abraham; Gen. 20. 9. What haue I offended thee, that thou hast brought on mee, and my king∣dome a great sinne? By Abimelech to Isaac: Gen. 26. 10. What is this thou hast done vnto vs? one might haue lyen with thy Wife, and thou shouldest haue brought guiltines vpon vs. 8. Theft some punished with death, other with double restitution. Cato being asked, Quid foenerari? what it was to practise vsury; answered, Quid hominem ccidere? the same, that to kill a man. 9. They so hated and auoided falshood and lying, that they would not suffer a man to be witnesse a∣gainst his enemy. 10. They thought it vnlawfull to co∣uet other mens goods. One of them said, Concupiscere alien, sit à me alienat. But now their naturall knowledge being so obscured, shall yet the Law of nature condemn? yes, for Rom. 1. 20. the inui∣sible things of God might be vnderstood by the things that are made: so that they are without excuse. God could not bee apprehended by them any other way then by nature: yet sinning against him they are without excuse. Ier. 10. 25. Powre out thy fury vpon the heathen that know thee not: Psal. 79. 6. and vpon the kingdomes that haue not called on thy name. 2. Thes. 1. 8. He shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God. By this shall many millions of men be condemned. Inex∣cusabilis oft omnis peccator, vel reat originis. Originall guilt makes vs inexcusable, without voluntary addita∣ment. Aug. Ignorantia ius qui oluit intelligere, est peccantis cul∣pa: Ignorantia eius qui no potuit intelligere, est peccati pna. In virisque non est iusta xcusatio, sed est iusta damatio.
His Ignorance that would not vnderstand, is the wicked∣nesse of sinne: his ignorance that could not vnderstand, is the punishment of sinne. Doth not this latter excuse? Yes a Tanto, but not a Toto: from so much guiltines, but not from all guiltines. Ignorance can be no plea, for all are bound to know: it serues not a malefactors turne, to plead Ignortiam iuris, that hee knew not the Law of his Prince which he hath broken. I know that simple nesci∣ence is minoris culpae, but not nullae; a lesse fault, not no fault. The Luk. 12. 47. knowing seruant disobedient shall haue many stripes: the ignorant is not spared, though lesse punished. To the ignorant are two wants, knowledge and a good will: but hee that sinnes wittingly, hath but one want, onely a good will. Hee that failes on knowledge, hath voluntatem facti & peccati, a will both to the deed, and to the sinne. He that failes in ignorance, hath onely volunta∣tem facti non peccati, a will of the deed not of the sinne, though the deed be a sinne. Perer. Ignorantia duplex; vna quae est causa culpae, altera cuius causa culpa est. There is an ignorance that is the cause of sinne; and there is a sinne that is the cause of ignorance. No ignorant hath his sinne mitigated; but Is solùm qui non habuit vnde discere, saith August. He onely that had no meanes of learning. For Christ is a iust Iudge, and would not condemne without fault. We haue all good meanes of knowledge, GOD keepe vs from the condemnation of ignorance. The next booke is the Law: that others shall be iudged by this, it is cleare without question. Rom. 2. 12. As many as haue sinned in the Law, shall be iudged by the Law. The Iewes shall be thus iudged rather then the Gentiles, who had not the Law written. The Law of Moses did onely bind the Hebrewes, the Prophets were not commanded to publish it to the Gentiles. Paul calls the times before Christ, Acts 17. 30. the times of ignorance; and the Gospell Rom. 16. 25. a my∣stery kept secret since the world began. Now to obiect, first that the Iewish Merchants taught other Nations the Law,
is vaine: for they were generally more apt discere religio∣nem alienam, quàm docere suam; to learne false religions, then to teach the true. And many of them did not euen by their owne types and sacrifices, perfectly vnderstand the sacrifice of Christ. Then to say, their bookes were manifest, is false: for the Iewes kept them. Rom. 3. 2. Vnto them were committed the oracles of God. They were first dposi∣tarij, then oeconomi, dispensers. Esa. 2. 3. For out of Sion shall goe forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem. Psal. 147. 19. He sheweth his word vnto Iacob, his statutes vnto Israel, he hath not dealt so with any Nation. So Christ to the Sama∣ritan woman; Iohn 4. 22. Saluation is of the Iewes. Now as this crediting facit ad honorem persona cui confidimus. Ambr. makes to the honour of the person whom we credit. This was a great credit to the Iewes; so it brings them to a strict account: exigendum cum vsis; as in the Talents; God lookes for his owne with vsury. Some of them kept them in their hands, but not in their hearts; alijs magis pro∣fuura quàm ipsis. Erasm. for the benefit of other, more then of themselues. Now this booke is the Touchstone or tryall of our workes: whatsoeuer wee haue eyther thought, said, or done; is eyther with or against this Law of God. How we wrangle heere to iustifie many things, which there will not abide the tryall? How many arguments doth a contentious man produce, to countenance his wrangling Law-suites? Defensio iuris, Intentio legis, retardatio iniuri∣arum. The defending of his right, the purpose of the Law, the keeping backe of iniuries; forbeare one wrong, and prouoke more: and Correctio iniustorum, the punish∣ing of euill doers: and be not these smooth colours? who can now say, Peccasti in litigando? thou hast done ill in go∣ing to law? but still we reckon vvithout our Oast: thou thinkest thy penny good siluer, as the foole thought his peble a diamond: bring it to the test. . Cor. 6. 7. There is vtterly a fault among you, because ye goe to law one with another.
Whether vvill God iudge thee according to thine owne humour, or according to this precept? Alas he vvill then try thee Secundum legem suam, non secundum legem tuam; after his law, not after thy lust. It is opus carnis, and will not abide tentationem ignis. Gal. 5. 20. Contention, strife, variance, are works of the flesh: & they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Hell fire wil confute alreasons. So among others, an angry word calls on a challenge: they haue plausible reasons for it. Their credit lyes vpon it: and better lose life then reputation. If being wron∣ged they chalenge not, or being chalenged they answere not; the vvorld condemnes them cowards. So they fight not so much against anothers life, as against their owne reproach. This were somewhat if it were tam bene, quàm magnè propositum: if the proiect were as Christian, as it is Romane. Now they must go to the field, pray, embrace, forgiue; then fight and kill. But is this the Law that God vvil iudge by? no, that Law is, Thou shalt not kill. But per∣haps they purpose not to kill; yet saith God; Returne not euil for euil: how doth this agree with thy color & humor? Yet more peremptorily. Rom. 12. 19. Aenge not your selues, but giue place vnto wrath. For vengeance is mine, sayth the Lord. Will you steale this from him in a glorious theft? hazard your soule more then your body? thrusting one vpon an enemies sword, the other on Gods sword? Will you meet together in so bloudy a designe; wherein vterque le∣taliter peccat, saepe alter aeternaliter perit, both sinne deadly, often one or both perish eternally▪ Thus your pretences may blanch it ouer with the name of honour: but the law you must be tried by, will finde it homicide. For Vsury, how is it bedawbed with arguments, pro∣babilities, patronages, examples! Bookes haue been writ∣ten to iustifie it: But none of these is that law wherby the Vsurer must be iudged. They doe not onely reason thus; I must giue to the poore, therefore I must take vsury of the rich: an argument of Stand-gate hole: I may robbe
some, that I may giue to others. But they defend it by Scripture. Exod. 22. 25. If thou lend money to the poore, thou shalt not lay vpon him vsury. Not on the poore; therefore they in∣ferre, vvee may lay it on the rich. Prou. 22. 22. Robbe not the poore, be∣cause hee is poore, faith Salomon, therefore wee may robbe the rich, because he is rich, and can spare it. Is not this a goodly strong argument? So because it is said, Exo. 22. 22. Ye shall not afflict the widow, or fatherlesse child: it must needes follow, that they may trouble a woman maried, or a child that hath a father. There are infinite excuses: but the Law of triall is; Thou shalt not lend vpon vsury: studie an answere to that question. As much may be said for Impropriations: what shall become of all our legal pleas, our Alienations, Prohibitions, Customs, Fines? all fine excuses? when Christ shal set the sacrilegious before him, and read this Law; Math. 3. 8. Thou shalt not robbe God of his tythes and offerings? VVhere now are all reasons and excuses? This spirituall Court will admit of no corrupt customes, no deuices: Mee thou hast robbed, by me thou shalt be condemned. Lord, enter not into iudgement with vs: who shall be iustified in thy sight? We cannot answere ex millibus vnum, one of a thousand. Helpe vs, O thou Iudge and Sauiour: let thy mercy as Iesus, help vs against thy Iustice as Iudge. VVe must come vnder probation, defend vs from reprobation, and let vs find approbation; not for our workes, but thy mercies, O blessed Redee∣mer. Amen. Lastly, others are to be iudged by the Gospell: and this certainly bindeth our conscience hee, for it shall iudge vs hereafter. Iohn 3. 18. He that beleeueth not on Christ, is con∣demned. Now the Gospel requires of vs two things, Faith and Obedience. Faith; Mark 1. 15. Repent and beleeue the Gospel. O∣bedience; Rom. 6. 17. Ye haue obeyed from the heart that forme of doc∣trine. Which obedience must be Prompta, yee haue obeyed: voluntaria, from the heart: discreta, that true forme of doc∣trine. Lyran. Indeed Obedientia Euangelica est ipsa fides.
Many thinke they are not bound to beleeue the Gospel; but by this they shall be iudged. True it is, that all are not bound to it: they to whom Christ neuer spoke, was neuer spoken, haue an excuse; not of euery sinne, but of this sinne, that they haue not beleeued on Christ. It is obiected, The Law bound all, therefore the Gospel bindes all. No, for the Law was gi∣uen to mans nature: so though the knowledge was lost by mans default, yet the bond remaines on Gods part. The Gospel was neuer giuen to mans nature, but after the fall, and is aboue nature. Adam was the roote of man∣kind in respect of nature, not in respect of grace. When God gaue the Law to him, hee bound him and all his po∣sterity to keepe it. When he gaue the Promise to him, & faith to beleeue it, hee did not withall giue it to all man∣kind. Neither if Adam had afterwards falne from faith, should all mankind haue falne with him. The first Adam was not the roote of the Promise, but the second. But now to our selues; we must all stand before the Tribunal of Christ: to the Statutes of the former bookes who can answere? All our helpe is in this latter booke, we flie to the Gospel. We Iohn 1. 29. behold the Lambe of GOD, that taketh away the sinne of the vvorld: and comfort our selues, that 1. Iohn 2. 2. if any man sinne, wee haue an Aduocate vvith the Father, Iesus Christ the righous: and hee is the propitia∣tion for our sinnes. Now as Festus said to Paul. Acts 25. 12. Hast thou appealed vnto Caesar? vnto Caesar shalt thou go. So, hast thou appealed to the Gospel? thou shalt goe to the Gospel for thy tryall. Vel te totaliter absoluit, vel te capitaliter damnat. It shall either throughly iustifie thee, or extremely con∣demne thee. The Spirit shall conuince the world of sinne, saith Christ; Iohn 16. 9. Because they beleeue not on mee. Now what is the holy Ghosts iudgement here, will be Christs here∣after. But why are they condemned of sinne for not be∣lieuing? 1. Because other sinnes are condemned by na∣ture and Law; as murder, adulterie: both among Iewes
and Gentiles: but not to belieue is the proper sin of Chri∣stians; and it is a grand sinne, because they haue the doc∣trine of faith. 2. Because infidelity is the roote of all sins, as faith is of all good works: the want of faith leads from transgression to presumption, from presumption to de∣spaire. 3. Especially, because faith takes away the guilt of all sinnes, and freeth from condemnation: but infidelitie retaines the guilt of it selfe and others. Omnia peccata per infidelitatem retinentur, per fidem remittuntur. Aug. Luther hath it out of Augustine. Nullum peccatum nisi infidelitas, nulla iustitia nisi fides. There is no sinne but infidelitie, no righteousnesse but faith. Not that Adultery, Intempe∣rance, Malice are no sinnes: but Infidelitate manente, ma∣net omne peccatum: eadem decedente absolutur, omnia quoad reatum. Vnfaithfulnesse remaining, euery sinne re∣maines, that departing, euery sinne is pardoned, and quite taken away in respect of the guiltinesse. Peccata sunt, tua peccata non sunt. After thou becommest a Beleeuer, the sinnes thou doost are sinnes; but not thy sinnes, because they are forgiuen thee. This appeares by the purpose of Christs comming; which was to 1. Iohn 3. 8. dissolue the works of the deuil: belieue on him, & thy sins are dissolued, absolued: thou art as if thou neuer hadst offended. Non quòd peccatū omninò non erit, sed quòd non omninò impatum erit. Not that sinne altogether should not be, but that it shall not be imputed. How quicke a riddance penitent faith makes with our sinnes! They are too heauy for our shoulders, faith presently turnes them ouer to Christ. Whereas there would goe with vs to iudgement a huge kennell of lusts, an Army of vaine words, a legion of euill deedes: faith instantly dischargeth them all, kneeling downe to Iesus Christ, beseeching him to answere for them. Therfore make we much of faith: if our soules be bal∣laced with this, they shall neuer shipwracke. Aasuerus had many virgins, none pleased him like Ester: none pleaseth God but faith; all the rest for her sake. Shee is
that Iudith, that saueth the life of all thy good workes, by cutting off the vsurping head of Satan. Thou canst not be vnwelcome to God, if thou come with confidence: nothing more offends God, then the not taking his word. Sinne offends his Law, but vnbeliefe offends his Gospel. Though we doe not what he bids vs, yet let vs be sure he will doe what he tells vs. It is good to obey the for∣mer, better to belieue the latter: because he is more able, and more good then we. Well now, after this Gospel we must be iudged: so Paul writes to his Romanes; Rom. 2. 16. GOD shall iudge the secrets of all hearts by Iesus Christ, according to my Gospel. Thou canst not satisfie the Law, therefore study thy soule an answere to this booke. Otherwise, saith Christ, The vvord that I haue spoken, the same shall iudge Iohn 12. 46. thee in the last day. The Sermons thou hast heard, shall rise vp in iudgement to condemne thee. Hence arise three conclusions. 1. It is no presumption for a Christian to belieue the pardon of his sinnes in Christ: for to doe the will of God is not to presume. If we doe not belieue this, Christ shal iudge vs damnable by the Gospell: therefore if wee doe conscionably belieue this, he shall acquite vs by the Go∣spel. Non est praesumptio credentis, vbi est authoritas iuben∣tis. There is no presumption in man to belieue it, when there is the authority of God to command it. Of all things in a Christian, God doth not loue a nice dainty, and mai∣denly faith. He loues to haue a mans modesty bashfull, his humility fearefull, his penitence sorrowfull, his pati∣ence ioyful, his compassion pitifull: but he loues a faith that hath boldnesse in it. That is not afraid to trouble God with aiance, or suppliance: but is confident ruat rcus et ortus. Without faith it is dangerous pressing into the Presence Chamber; as it was to the marriage without the wedding garment: but in faith Sequere et consequere; qui cupit, capit; speake and speed. Iohn 16. 23. Whatsoeuer you shall aske the Father in my Name, hee will giue it you. It is no sin
to trust God with thy soule: Paul teacheth it by example. 2. Tim. 1. 12. I know whom I haue beleeued, that he will keepe that I haue committed to him against that day. Peter by counsel, 1. Pet. 4. 19. Com∣mit your soules to God in weldooing. It is no sin to call God Father; for he hath sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba Father. It is no sin to trouble him with our Gala. 4. . suites: Heb. 1. 22 Let vs draw neere with a true heart in full assurance of faith. Not to doe this faithfully, is against the Gospel; therefore to be iudged of that sinne. The infallible certaintie of a true Christians saluation, is knowne to himselfe, and cannot be doubted vvithout sinne. For if it be sinne to distrust this, it is then righte∣ousnesse to belieue it. The summe of the Gospel is mans saluation by Christ: he that belieues not this, belieues not the Gospell: and he that knowes the Gospel, and belieues it not, shall by it be condemned. Now God in the Go∣spel doth not require that absolute perfection, which he did in the Law, vnder the perill of damnation: but quali∣fies the rigour of the Law by the satisfaction of a Media∣tor. So that the Gospell accepts the intent and endeuour for the act; as the will to repent for penitence, and the wil to belieue for faith. It is then not onely a weakenes, but a wickednes to distrust Gods mercy in thy saluation; let not this faultiudge thee before Iesus Christ. 3. The Gospel requires probation of faith by a good life. Norma fides, forma vitae: as we belieue we must liue. Doe we belieue Christ hath redeemed vs? We must liue like such as are redeemed: if freed, let vs demeane our selues as children of freedome. It is nothing at this iudge∣ment to say, I haue belieued, when the life shall witnesse the contrary: thy lips affirme, but thy works deny. As our Sauiour said, Opera testantur de me; my workes beare witnesse of me, that I am Christ: so thou must say, Opera te∣stantur de me, my works beare witnesse of me, that I am a Christian. Thou shalt be saued for thy faith, not for thy works: but for such a faith as is without works thou shalt
neuer be saued. Works are disioyned A iustificando, non a iustificato; from the act of iustifying, not from the per∣son iustified. If this Iudge for his owne merits giue vs saluation, wee must shew him the faire copy of our con∣uersation. Quicquid Christus operatur pro nobis, operatur in nobis. Whatsoeuer Christ vvorkes for vs, he also workes in vs. If he hath freed vs from the damnation of sinne, he hath also freed vs from the dominion of sinne. Albeit in our iustification Fiet nobis secundum fidem nostram; Be it vnto vs according to our Faith: yet in saluation Reddetur vnicuique secundum operasua; Euery man shall bee rewar∣ded according to his workes. Let not that which is a word of comfort to vs, be a bill of inditement against vs. 4. The Sentence. As there be two sorts of men to be sentenced, so there is a double sentence: one of Absoluti∣on, the other of Damnation. With Absolution our Saui∣our begins in action, with that let vs begin in meditation. He begins with fauour, O he is ready to shew mercy: and comes slowly to wrath and iudgement. In the Absolution are considerable foure circumstances; A Calling, a Com∣mending, a Reply, and an Answere. First, the calling is set downe. Math. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, in∣herit the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. In which gracious speech wee may perceiue sixe gradations. 1. Amabilis vocatio; Come. This was the voyce of Christ generally to all in the day of Grace, is particularly to the Elect in the day of Glory. Now he calls more then vvill come, then he will not call all that would come. Now he giues many Venite's. Mat. 11. 28. Come to me all that labour. Ioh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drinke. Reu. 2. 7. The Spirit and Bride say, Come, and let him that heareth say, Come: and let him that is athirst come. Send not others, but come your selues. Come to no others, eyther Saints or An∣gels, but come to me. Let vs take heed of that Discedite, quia nolstis venire; Mat. 7. 23. Depart from me; good reason, for
Ioh. 5. 40. you would not come vnto mee. You declined my call when I was humbled. Mat. 13. 55. Is not this the Carpenters Sonne? I vvill decline you now I am exalted; Luk. 14. 24. None of those men that were called shall tast of my supper. But such as haue obediently heard his Come in holines, shall also graciously heare his second Come in happinesse. 2. Suis Benedictio; Ye Blessed. Neuer man was, is, or shall be, but desires secundum sensum suum, after his own sense to be blessed; saith Aristotle: though the most haue sought it out of the right vbi, vvhere it vvas not to bee found. In Christ onely it is found, vvho is indeed the Father of blessednesse. Mat. 3. 3. Blessed are the poore in spi∣rit. The first vvord of the first lesson of Christs first Ser∣mon is Blessed. So he beginnes, so there he continues, so here he concludes, Come ye blessed: a vvord able to make a man blessed. 3. Patris dilectio, Of my Father: to be blessed of God, is to be surely blessed. Parents doe vvell in blessing their children, Princes in blessing their people: here's the dif∣ference, Benedicunt, but not Beatificant: they may wish them blessed, but not make them blessed. But saith God to Abraham; Gen. 22. 17. In blessing I will blesse thee: Gen. 27. 33. I haue bles∣sed him, and he shall be blessed. All blessednes springs from that fountaine: the Lord hath blessed vs, and requires vs to blesse him; Rom. 9. 5. who is ouer all, God blessed for euer. Amen. This the vniuersall song of all creatures giues him; Reu. 5. 13. Blessing, honour, &c. 4. Foelicitatis Possessio, Inherite. Inheritance is of Birth, not industry: the younger brother is often of more desert then the elder, yet cannot this make him his Fathers Heyre. This is of Inheritance, therefore not of merit. It differs from an earthly Inheritance in three things. 1. In that the Testator must be dead, and the successor liuing: in this God the Testator is euer liuing, and his heyres be∣fore they can fully possesse it, must bee dead. Ambr. A temporall inheritance diuided, is diminished: one is of
so much land shortned, as is to another shared. The heires heere are without number; Reu. 7. 9. of all nations, kinred and lan∣guages; yet though the inheritance be imparted, it is not empaired. Tanta singulis, quanta omnibus. Euery one hath as ch as any one. Ardens. 3. The partition of an earth∣ly inheritance breeds among the coheyres enuy & grudg∣ing: but in this the ioy of one is the ioy of all. Dispar glo∣ria singulorum, tamen communis laetitia omnium. Aug. One starre may excell another starre in glory, but none shall enuy another in glory. There shall be no repining at a∣nothers more glorious clearenesse, where remaines in all one gracious dearenesse. Inherite. 5. Haereditatis Perfectio; a kingdom. The top of mans desires is a kingdom; nil nisi Regna placent. Yet if they be earthly kingdoms, they will not satisfie: Alexander is not content with his vniuersall Monarchy. But here is a king∣dom will satisfie: you will say, there are many Kings, & but one kingdome; therfore not roome enough: yes, for the bounds of the least are not narrower then heauen it selfe. 6. Regni Paratio; Prepared for you: Not merited in your times, but prepared before all times. It had no be∣ginning in respect of Gods intention: it shall haue no end in respect of your possession. Gods decree to giue it vs had no beginning, but shall haue an end: our fruition of it shal haue a beginning, but no end: Gods mercy in both hath neither beginning nor end; but is from euerlasting to euerlasting. Had the Lord such care to prouide a kingdom for his children before they were; then sure hee will giue it them at the appointed time. So certaine are they of blessednesse, that it is prepared for them from the foundation of the world. For you: not for all: there is no vniuersall ele∣ction, God decrees not all to bee saued. Then Christ should haue said thus, Inherit the kingdome; Paratum om∣nibus, Datum vobis: prepared for all, and giuen to you: but he saith, Prepared for you, therefore not purposed to all. Seeing there is so good cheare prepared for vs, let vs pre∣pared
for vs, let vs prepare our selues for that: like some dainty guest, who knowing there is such delicate fare be∣hinde, keepes his stomacke for it. Let vs disdaine the course diet of this world, that dangers vs to the dropsie of couetice, or the surfets of ryot. We vse to fast on the Eeues, that vve may feast on the Holy-dayes: let vs here abstaine from the table of sinne, that wee may heereafter banket in the Kingdome of Heauen. This is matter of comfort to vs: heere the world con∣demns the godly: therefore they shall haue a time of ab∣soluing. When that Generall Session comes, Luke 21. 28. then looke vp, and lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth nye. There is no mercy to be had in this vvorld, for the wick∣ed themselues are accusers, witnesses, iudges: but at that day a poore mans case will be heard. Therefore Psal. 10. 14. the poore committeth himselfe vnto thee, for thou art the helper of the fatherlesse. Christ vvill take the cause into his own hand. Reu. 6. 10. The soules vnder the Altar cry with a loud voyce; How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not iudge and auenge our bloud on them that dwell on the earth! Yes, it is fit euery one should haue a day of hearing. This is theirs, that shall be ours: Psal. 58. 10. The righteous shall reioyce when hee seeth the vengeance. Reioyce? yes, they haue no charity to vs on earth, vve must haue no charity to them in hell. 2. The Commendation followes the calling, Mat. 25. 35. For I was hungry, and ye gaue me meate: I was thirsty, and ye gaue mee drinke, &c. Christ witnesseth their faith from the effects: they brought foorth fruits of mercy. Thus it is euident, that not according to the internall ha∣bite of faith and charity, but according to the externall acts proceeding from them, is the reward bestowed. Christ before iustified them by their faith, apprehending his merits: now hee iustifies them by testimony (of that faith) arising from their vvorkes. The point Christ in∣sists in, is their workes of mercy; which are sixe, visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo fratres. Giuing them meat,
drinke, harbour, clothing, visitation in sicknesse, redemption from bondage. Where obserue, that the maine point Christ will scanne at the last, is the point of mercy. Not how wise, nor how learned, nor how iust, but how mercifull. Ambr. Now if a Scholler standing for preferment, knew directly that one question vvherein hee should be opposed; he would study a full and ready answer to it. We all know that one and maine question wherein Christ vvill examine vs, vvhat vvorkes of mercy haue we done: if we haue gotten no demonstration of mercy, vve are vvorthily condem∣ned. Now their mercy is commended, partly in respect of the obiect, and partly in respect of the act. For the obiect, it is done to Christ: happy mercy that is done to the Lord Iesus; it shall neuer passe vnrewarded. 2. Chr. 24. 22. Ioash forgot the kindnesse of Iehoiada; but the King of heauen will remember all the good done vnto him. Sayes that good malefactor; Luk. 23. 42. Lord, remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome. I will not forget thee, answeres Iesus; To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. I was hungry, and ye fedme. I, and me, saith Christ. In regard of the act, the thing they distribute and con∣tribute, is not bare vvords, but actuall mercies; food, clo∣thing, &c. This is the effect of a true faith, not a verball, but a reall working faith. A faith, not like that the Psal∣mist seemes to mention, (though in another sense) I be∣lieued, & ideo locutus sum, and therefore I spake: but such as the Apostle speakes of; I belieued, & ideo operatus sum, and therefore I wrought a faith working by loue. It is easie to mistake Saint Paul, Rom. 14. 22. Hast thou faith? haue it to thy selfe before God. vnlesse vve expound him by S. Iames, Iam. 2. 18. Hast thou faith? shew thy faith by thy workes. If vve vvill be the children of Abraham, Rom. 4. 11. who is the Father of them that belieue: wee must bee so by Sara, vvho is the mother of 1. Pet. 3. 6. them that obey. They that vvill be trees of righteousnesse in Gods garden, must not bee
like the fig-tree in the Gospell, that had onely leaues, no fruit: but like the Psal. 1. 3. tree that brings forth her fruit in due sea∣son. Or like Aarons rod, that of a dead sticke, hauing life and sappe put into it; presently bare Almonds; fruit, no leaues spoken of. Some giue words enow; contrary to Moses, who was a man of few vvords. The Papists vvill rather loose a penny then a Paternoster: these vvill giue ten Paterno∣sters before one penny. They giue the words of Nep∣thali, pleasant words; but no meate. As if the poore were like Ephraim, Hos. 12. 1. fed with the wind. Or as if their word were verbum Domini, the Mat. 4. 4. word of God, that men might liue by it. Salomon sayes, Wisedome is good with an inheritance, so good counsell is good vvith an almes. If a famished man begge bread of thee, and thou onely fallest to instruct his soule, but deniest food to his body: hee may reply, as Hushai said to Absolon of Achitophels counsell. 2. Sam. 17. 7. The counsell that Achitophel hath giuen is good, but not at this time. Martial demands of Caius a small piece of siluer; Quod vel donanti non graue. Caius blamed him for his idle profession of Poetry, counselled him to study the Lavv, that vvould enrich him. To him Martial; Quod peto da mihi tu, non peto consilium. Giue me that I aske thee, I doe not aske thee counsell. Many are like S. Peters fish; it had money in the mouth, but not a hand to giue it. Or like Diues his dogs; they can licke a poore man vvith their tongues, else giue him no reliefe. Diogenes a witty beg∣ger would vsually walke in a place where earthen Statues were erected, in honour of some that died for their coun∣try. To them he would pray, to them reach out his hand, bow, and beg: being asked the reason, he answered; Ni∣hil aliud quàm repulsam meditor. I thinke of nothing, but a repulse and deniall. Wee haue many such liuing Sta∣tues, meere Idols: that haue mouthes and speake not, eyes and pity not, hands and giue not: the poore are sure of nothing but a repulse.
3. The reply, or question vpon this commendation made by the Saints. Math. 25. 37. Then shall the righteous answere him; Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fedde thee? or thirstie, and gaue thee drinke? &c. This is no de∣niall of that truth Christ hath auouched. But 1. to mag∣nifie Christs mercy, who takes these workes as done to himselfe, which are done for his sake. Let no couetous Churle plead, he wants subiects vpon whom to exercise his mercy; Pauper vbique iacet: which way can he walke, and not behold one hungry, another thirsty, &c? 2. To testifie their humilitie, that albeit these things are true, yet they acknowledge no merite in them: they haue not done so much of these as they ought. Besides, they might haue an after-consideration of their sinnes past; which va∣lued with their good works, they find one to out-weigh a thousand. The Papists ostent their merits on earth, the Saints dare not doe so euen ready for heauen: but Reu. 4. 10. cast downe their crownes before the Throne: saying, Thou, O Lord, art onely vvoorthy to receiue glory and honour. They haue nec boni inopiam, nec in bono superbiam. They are not poore in good workes, nor proud of good workes. They wrote their charity in the dust, therefore did God write it in Marble. They seeme to forget the works of mercie they haue done, therefore are they remembred by Iesus Christ. 4. The answere of Christ, Mat. 25. 40. In as much as yee haue done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto me. The miseries of my brethren are my own miseries. Heb. 4. 15. Wee haue an high Priest touched with the feeling of our infirmities. That invulnerable and glorified brest, is still touched with the sense of our wounds. Saul, thou per∣secutest mee: he sayes not mine, but me: me in mine. Zach. 2. 8. He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye. Surely he will pity the misery of euery one, that is afflicted with the sorowes of all. Quis recusabit pro Christo pati, quando Christus compatitur patienti? Who would refuse to suffer
for Christ, when he is sure that Christ suffers with him? Here is excellent direction for our works of mercy: that no sinister end draw them from vs, but syncere loue to Christ. If any fish for the applause of men, his bait shal be his owne hooke, to snare himselfe. Da Christo; looke on the poore man, and in that member behold the Head, Christ. Mat. 10. 42. He that shall giue a cup of cold water to one of these little ones, in the name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose his reward. A cup of water is but a small gift, yet done in that Name, and for that cause, it is rewarded, as an excellent worke of mercy. It is the true note of a child of God, to shew mercy to a Christian, because he is a Christian. Na∣turall men haue their priuate ends, and aduantagious re∣spects, in their beneficences. Such a one shall doe me ser∣uice, flatter my addiction, bring intelligences to mine eare; I will make him my property: my charity shal bind him to me. Morall men will sometimes giue, euen for pi∣ties sake: but the true Christian doth it for Christ his sake, and lookes no further. Gala. 6. 10. Dooing good vnto all, especially to them that are of the houshold of faith. Some thinke, that the best worke is to build Temples and Monasteries: but in∣deed the best worke is to relieue (not the dead, but) the liuing Temples of Christs mysticall Body. It was an an∣cient complaint; Fulget Ecclesia in parietibus, get in pau∣peribus. The Church flourisheth in her glorious buil∣dings, but mourneth and pines away in her poore mem∣bers. Deny not due cost to the dead walls, but first satis∣fie the liuing bowels; that Christ may say, Come yee blessed. I come now to the sentence of Condemnation, Math. 25. 41. Then shall he say to them on the left hand; Depart from mee yee cursed, into euerlasting fire prepared for the De∣uill and his angels. In this forme of damnatory iudgement, are foure points considerable. A Reiection of the vvic∣ked, a Reason of that reiection, an Obiection against that reason, a Confutation of that obiection. In the Reiection
are many particulars gradually inhancing their iudge∣ment. They are partly Priuatiue, & partly Positiue. De∣part from mee yee cursed, there is Poenadami: Into euerla∣sting fire, there is Poena sensus. As there be two kindes of sinne: Delictum and Peccatum. Delictum est desertio boni, Bern. Peccatum perpetratio mali: the one a forsaking of that is good, the other a committing of that is euill. So there is a like proportion of punishment; a depriuing of ioy, and a giuing ouer to torment. Heere is 1. A grieuous refusall; Depart. This seemes nothing to the wicked now, such is their dead securitie. Depart? Why they are content to be gone. Ecclc. 8. 11. Because sentence a∣gainst an euill worke is not executed speedily, therefore their heart is fully set in them to doe euill. But as when a Prince o∣pening his long locked vp Treasurie, graciously takes some in with him, and saying to other ill-meriting fol∣lowers, Depart: it will be a disgracefull vexation. So when the glory of heauen, and those vnualuable treasures shall be opened, and dealt about to the faithfull; vvhat horror will it be to the Reprobates to be cast off with a Depart? Luke 10. 23. Blessed are the eyes that see the things vvhich yee see: saith Christ to his Saints. For Kings haue desired to see them, and were not suffered. If it were such a Blessednes to see Iesus in humility, what is it to see him in glory? But from this the wicked are bidden, Depart. 2. The losse of Saluation; From mee: your Sauiour that was wounded for you; that offered my bloud to you, which was offered for you. And if from mee, then from all that is mine; my mercy, my glory, my saluation. Con∣sider here, what an excellent thing it is to haue familiarity with Christ on earth, that he may not cast vs off as stran∣gers from heauen. He that would haue Christ know him there, must not be a stranger to Christ here. He must haue some fellowship with GOD: How? If wee walke in the light, we haue fellowship with God, and with his Sonne Iesus 1. Iohn 1. Christ. To walke in the darke, is to haue fellowship with
the Prince of darknesse: to walke in the light, is to haue fellowship with the Father of lights. VVill a Reprobate that hath alwaies turned his back vpon Christ, here presse into his company? Vpon what acquaintance? Yes, Luk. 13. 26. Wee haue eate and drunke in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets: as if they should say, We haue fed at thy Com∣munion table, and heard thee preach in our Pulpits. Still this proues no acquaintance: for in the one you did eate Panem Domini, non Panem Dominum; the bread of Christ, but not Christ with the bread. In the other you haue heard Uerbum Domini, not regarded Dominum verbi. Your eare hath beene open, but your conscience shutte. Therefore, ver. 25. Non noui vos; as familiar as you pre∣sume, yet you are such strangers to me, that I know you not. They neuer vvillingly came neere Christ but to perse∣cute him; therefore hee shall then cast them farre enough off for euer. 3. The deserued Malediction; Yee cursed. Hee is cur∣sed, that being borne in sinne, liues in it, and dyes in it, without seeking recouery. I call this curse merited, be∣cause they loue it. Psal. 109. 17. As hee loued cursing, so let it come vn∣to him. Hath he loued it? Let him take his loue. As hee clothed himselfe with cursing as with a garment: so let it come into his bowels like vvater, and like oyle into his bones. ver. 18. It was his outside, let it be his linings: it was his outward stuffe, let it be his inward stuffing. Euery one that hath not first a pardon by Christ, must heare this curse pro∣nounced against him from Christ. O then suffer not thine eyes to sleep, till Christ hath sealed thee a Quetus est. Giue no peace to thy selfe, till thou haue peace with GOD. Quamdiù impnitentia manet, maledictio imminet. So long as vnrepentance abides in vs, Cursednesse hangs ouer vs. He that wilfully goes on in knowne wickednesse, hazards himselfe to ineuitable cursednesse. Goe ye cursed. 4. The horrour of the paines; Into euerlasting fire. Fire; of all elements the most violent, therefore fittest to
describe those pangs. Esay 30. 33. The pile thereof is ire and much wood: the breath of the Lord, like a riuer of bristone, doth kindle it. Euerlasting; the torments thereof are euer fry∣ing, neuer dying. Mark. 9. 44. Where the worme dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. Aug. Vermis corrodet conscientiam, ignis comburet carnem; quia & corde & corpore deliquerunt. The fire shall torture their flesh, the worme their spirit: because both in flesh and spirit they haue sinned. The reprobates shall be packed and crowded together, like rickes in a fiery furnace, hauing not so much as a chinke where any winde may enter in to coole them. 5. The preordinance of their torments; Prepared for the Deuill and his Angels: ordained before-hand. Origen held that the Deuill and his angels should one day be re∣leased from their tortures: and that these words of Christ vvere spoken Minaciter, potiùs quàm veraciter; rather by way of threatning, then true meaning. But Augustine an∣swers, that the Scripture hath confuted him plenissime ac planissimè. For the fire prepared for Satan is not tempo∣rarie, but euerlasting: vvhere though flouds of teares bee continually raining vpon it, yet can it not bee put out. Prepared: to the terror of vvicked men, that couenant with hell: alas they are deceiued, it vvas made for some purpose. That fire vvas prepared for some, and some haue prepared themselues for it. Burning in lusts, in ma∣lice, in reuenge; vntill themselues, their lusts, malice and reuenge, and all burne in hell. The Deuill was crafty, yet he could not scape hell: be as vvily as you can, yet be∣ware hell. It is not policy, but piety, that must escape this fire. Now as this brings to the vvicked much terror, so it helpes to preserue the godly against error. And this vvas one principall cause of the penning this sentence. The vvise master of the family vvill chide his seruants, vea and vpon desert correct them, in the presence of his child, that he may learne by it to stand in awe of his Father. So
deales God; Minatur quod faciet improbis, ne faciat quod minatur sanctis. He threatens the vvicked vvhat he vvill doe to their sinnes, that the godly may auoid vvhat hee threatens for sinnes. Omnis minatio amica monitio: euery threatning is a faire vvarning. The Lord giue vs mutare sententiam nostram, vt ipse mutet sententiam suam; to change our minde, that God may change his menace. Let vs now come humbly to him in repentance, that vve may neuer depart from him into vengeance. The other circumstan∣ces I will but touch. 2. The reason of this reiection, Mat. 25. 42. For I was hungry, and ye gaue mee no no meate: I was thirsty, and yee gaue me no drinke. They are not iudged Ex malis commis∣sis, sedex bonis omissis; not by the euill deedes they haue done, but by the good things they haue not done. Christ saies not, Yee tooke away my meat vvhen I vvas hungry: but you gaue me not your meate. You did not strip mee of the clothes I had, but you gaue me no clothes vvhen I had not. Mat. 3. 10. The axe cuts vp the tree which brought not forth good fruit; though it bee not accused for bringing foorth bad fruit. Innocency is good, but not enough: vve see that not to haue relieued, is an vnanswerable inditement at that day. How heauy vvill this sentence fall vpon ma∣ny among vs! What heapes haue many in this City; per∣haps some got vvithout a tenter'd conscience, yeeld it no worse: yet vvould to God it vvere so vvell: for it is hard Bonum cito uadere diuitem; for an honest man to become rich on the sodaine. They haue it, and now may they not keepe it? is it not their owne? But O it is fearefull, vvhen for this keeping they shall be condemned. It is not a groat weekely, or monethly to the poore, and a small pension to the much-robbed Church, that can discharge you: but you must giue proportionably. Pleade what you can to the poore, Christ vvill not be so answered. Who can force me to giue? none: but because thou wilt not giue vnfor∣ced, thou shalt iustly be condemned.
3. The obiection against this reason, Math. 25. 44. Lord, when saw wee thee an hungred, or athist, &c. and did not minister vnto thee? They haue a kinde of impudence still adhering to their foreheads: they would seeme to iu∣stifie themselues, though they bee deseruedly punished. When did we see thee? Often. When this poore widow hath departed without thy mercy, that orphan vvithout thy helpe, that blinde or lame vvithout thy almes. When? when not? euery occasion shall be a bill of enditement a∣gainst thee. Who will wonder to see a Romish Pharise sooth and flatter himselfe on earth, when hee is not asha∣med to doe it in iudgement efore the Lord Iesus Christ? Sed nulla defensio absoluet reum, nulla infensio dissoluet iudici∣um. Plead they whether subtilly, or angrily, as if some vvrong vvere done them; it is Equity it selfe that doth sentence them. 4. The confutation of their obiection. Math. 25. 45. Insomuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. This one distinction takes away all their argu∣ments: here is a full answer to their Quando: a declarati∣on of their death-deseruing wickednesse: that would haue no pitty on the Lord Iesus. Iam. 2. 13. Iudgement mercilesse shall be giuen to them that shew no mercy: you know this. Diues was denied a drop, because he would not giue a crumme: you know this: Hee that stoppeth his eare at the cry of the poore, shall cry himselfe and not be heard. Did not I tell you Prou. 21. 13. thus? The poore you had euer, this mercy you shewed neuer: therefore Goe ye cursed. 5. Lastly the Retribution: this is set downe in briefe; but the matter it containes, is long and euerlasting. Iohn 5. 29. All shall come forth; they that haue done good, to the resurrection of life; they that haue done euil, to the resurrection of condem∣nation. Mat. 25. 46. These shall goe away into euerlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternall. An estate soone versed: neuer to bee reuersed. The voice of Christ shall speake it; and the power of Christ shall effect it. No Angell shall
speake against it, no deuill shall withstand it. How should this teach Saint Pauls vse; who conside∣ring that there shall be a resurrectian of the dead, both of the iust and vniust; resolued with himselfe Acts 24. 16. to haue alwaies a good conscience void of offence toward God, and toward man. Let it instruct vs al to watch for this day; a decaied charge, then which nothing was more current in the mouth of Christ. Let mee conclude with that sigh from his soule; Could ye not watch with me one houre? It will not bee long ere the glasse be runne, the houre out; Iudas is at hand, iudgement is not farre off: then may you sleepe and take your rest. This day is neerer you now, then when you first entred the Church. Twice haue the blasted eares eat vp the full corne: twice haue the leane kine deuoured the fatte: Pharaohs dreame is doubled for the certainty and expedition. Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry. If wee shall haue comfort in this day when it is come, wee must long for it before it doe come. What comfort shall the Vsurer haue? hee desires not this day: for then the Reu. 10. 6. Angell sweares there shall bee no more time; and his profession is to sell time. He sels it deare, very costly to anothers purse, but most costly to his owne soule. Such as bribe for Offices, farme Mono∣polies, contract an vsurious rent for life; doe they desire it? Amos 5. 18. Woe vnto you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkenesse, and not light. The soule groaning vnder sinne desires it. Rom. 7. 24. Who shall de∣liuer me from the body of this death? The suffering soule may desire it. Come Lord Iesus. The faithfull Spouse wedded to Christ desires this comming of her Husband: she is now espoused, that is the plenary consummation of the marriage. Reu. 19. 7. Let vs be glad and reioyce, and giue honour to him: for the marriage of the Lambe is come, and the Bride hath made her selfe ready. Blessed are they that bee called to this marriage supper. To the vngodly it will be a fearefull day. Ignis vbique
ferox ruptis regnabit habenis: there shall follow an vniuer∣sall dissolution. Downewards goe Satan, his angels, and reprobates; howling, and shriking, & gnashing of teeth: the effect of a most impatient fury: to be bound hand and foote with euerlasting chaines of darkenesse. Where fire shall torture, yet giue no light: wormes gnaw the heart, yet neuer gnaw in sunder the strings: eternall paines pu∣nire, non finire corpora. Small sorrowes grow great with continuance: but O misery of miseries, to haue torments vniuersall, and withall eternall: not to be endured, yet not to be ended. Vpwards goes Christ, the blessed Angels and Saints, singing with melodie as neuer mortall eare heard. The onely song which that Quire sung audible to man, was that which the Shepheards heard: Luk. 2. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will towards men. Yet Christ was then comming to suffer: what may we thinke are those Halleluiahs euerlastingly chanted in the Courts of Heauen! we know not, yet we may know one speciall note, which an vniuersall Quire of all nations, kinred, and tongues; Angels, Elders, All shall sing; Reu. 7. 12. Blessing, and glory, and wisedome, and thankesgiuing, and honour, and power, and might bee vnto our God for euer and e∣uer. Amen. To the spirits of iust men made perfect. The Citizens of heuen are of two sorts; by Creation or Adoption. Crea∣ted and naturall Citizens are the Angels, Adopted are Men. Of these be two kindes, some Assumed, and others Assigned. The Assigned, such as are decreed in their times to be Citizens; said before to bee written in heauen. The Assumed, such as are already possessed of it, here Spirits of iust men made perfect. But how then is the Apostles meaning cleared? How are the militant on earth said to be come vnto these iust spirits in heauen? Yes, wee haue a Communion with them, participating in Spe, what they possesse in Re. . 2. 19. Now we are no more strangers and for∣reiners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
houshold of GOD. Onely our apprentiship of the flesh is not yet out; but they haue their freedome. But as wee haue all an vnion with Christ, so a Communion vvith Christians: the combatant on earth, with the triumphant in heauen. Spirits: this word hath diuerse acceptions. It is taken 1. Pro animo, for the Mind. Luke 10. 21. Iesus reioyced in spirit. 1. Chron. 5. 26. God stirred vp the spirit of the King of Assyria. 2. Pro sede rationis, et , 1. Cor. 2. 11. What man knowes the things of man, saue the spirit of man which is within him? 3. Pro Affectuvel Afflatu, for the motion of the mind, whether good or bad. Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what maner spirit ye are of. So there is called the spirit of lust, the spirit of pride, &c. 4. Pro do∣nis spiritus sancti, for the gifts of Gods Spirit. Act. 8. 15. Peter and Iohn prayed for the disciples at Samaria, that they might receiue the holy Spirit; meaning the graces of the holy Spirit. Gala. 3. 2. Receiued yee the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? 5. Pro ef∣ficacia Euangelij, for the effectuall working of the Gospel; and so it is opposed to the letter. 2. Cor. 3. 6. The letter killeth, but the Spirit giueth life. 6. Pro spiritualibus exer∣citijs; for spirituall exercises. Gala. 6. 8. He that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reape euerlasting life. Iohn 4. 23. True worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit & truth. 7. Pro regenerata parte: for the regenerate part of a Christian, and so it is opposed to the flesh. Gala. 5. 17. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit lusteth against the flesh. 8. Lastly, Pro anima immortal, for the immortall soule. Eccl. 12. 7. Dust shall returne to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall returne to God who gaue it. This spirit did Steuen commend into the hands of Christ. Act. 7. 59. And Christ into the hands of his Father. Math. 27. 50. yielding vp the spirit. Thus it is taken here. Spirits, he doth not say bodies: they lie in the dust vn∣der the hope of a better resurrection. Spirits: Wee find
here what becomes of good mens soules when they for∣sake their bodies: they are in the heauenly Citie. There are many idle opinions, what becomes of mans soule in death. Some haue thought, that the soules then, though they die not, yet are still kept within the body (as it were asleepe) vntill the last day. But the Scripture speakes expresly the contrary: for Diues his soule was in hell, and Lazarus his soule in Abrahams bosome. Reu. 6. 9. I saw vnder the Altar the soules of them that were slaine for the Word of God. Some haue imagined a transmigration of soules forsakē of their owne bodies, into other bodies. Herod seemes to be of this opinion: when newes was brought him concerning the fame of Iesus, he said to his seruants; Mat. 14. 2. This is Iohn the Baptist, he is risen from the dead. He thought that the soule of Iohn was put into the body of Iesus. It is alleaged, that Nebuchadnezzar liuing and feeding with beasts, vntill seuen times were passed ouer him; had lost his owne soule, and the soule of a beast was entered in the roome. But this is a friuolous conceit: indeed God had bereft him of cō∣mon reason, yet he had still the soule of a man. Doe not many among vs, that haue the soules of men, liue like de∣bauched beasts? The lustfull like a goate, the couetous like a vvolfe, the drunkard like a hogge, the Politician like a foxe, the rayler like a barking curre. Others think, that the soule neither dieth nor sleepeth, nor passeth out of one body into another, but wandreth vp and downe here on earth among men: and often appeareth to this man, oftē to that: whence came that fabulous opinion that dead men walke. For this purpose they alleage the Witch of Endor, who made Samuel appeare to Saul, and answere him. But the truth is, that was not Samuel indeed, but an apparition, the meere counterset of him. For not all the Witches in the world, nor all the Diuels in hell can dis∣quiet the soules of the faithfull: for they are in Gods kee∣ping. Dying, their soules are immediatly translated to blessednesse: there are the spirits of iust men made perfect:
and there to abide, vntill the generall Resurrection shall restore them to their owne bodies. For the soules of the Reprobates, departing in their sinnes, they goe directly to hell, and are kept there as in a sure prison. Let this instruct all such as haue a Christian hope, to let their soules depart with comfort. Emittuntur, non amit∣tuntur: death doth not lose them, but loosen them, & set them free from the bondage of corruption. Howle and lament if thou thinke thy soule perisheth. There are some that feare not so much to die, as to be dead: they know the pang is bitter, but it is short: it is the comfortlesse e∣state of the dead that is their dread. They could well re∣solue for the act of their passage, if they were sure to liue afterwards. Animula vagula blandula, Whither goest thou, said that Heathen Emperour on his death-bed? la∣menting the doubtful condition of his soule after the par∣ture. Very not beeing is abhorred of nature; if death had nothing else to make it feareful. It is vvofull to lie rotting in the silent graue, neither seeing, nor seene. Heere the Christian lifts vp his head of comfort; Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit. I lose it not, because thou hast it: thou wilt keepe it in peace, and gue it mee backe againe in eternall ioy. Of iust men. Iustice is ascribed to a Christian tvvo waies: There is 1. Passiua iustitia, a passiue iustice, Christs righteousnesse imputed to him: and heereby hee stands perfectly iust before God. This the Apostle calls Rom. 3. 22 The righteousnesse of GOD, which is by faith of Iesus Christ vn∣to all. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made vnto vs righteousnesse. This iustice is attained by faith; Heb. 11. 7. Noah became heire of the righteous∣nesse which is by faith. Rom. 4. 3. Abraham belieued GOD, and it was counted vnto him for righteousnesse. Without this no spirit shall appeare iust before God in heauen. Our owne righteousnesse is a couering too short to hide our naked∣nesse: Christs garment is a long robe, that couers all. 2. Actiua iustitia, actiue righteousnesse, an effect of
the former: which is indeed a testimonie that wee are iu∣stified by Christ. 1. Iohn 3. 7. Let no man deceiue you: hee that doth righteousnesse, is righteous. Therefore saith Iames, Iam. 2. 24. A man is iustified by his works: if his meaning had beene that our owne works simply acquit vs before GOD; it could ne∣uer be reconciled to that of his master; when vvee haue done all we can, we must call our selues vnprofitable ser∣uants. Nor to that of his fellow; Rom. 7. 23. I see a law in my mem∣bers, warring against the law of my minde: nor to that of himselfe; Iam. 3. 2. In many things wee sinne all. Now this iustice effectiue from God, actiue in vs, is taken two waies; La∣tè and Strictè. In a larger sense it is taken for all Pietie, and so iustice and holinesse are all one. Properly taken, Iustification is imputed, Sanctification inherent: but vnderstanding our iustnesse an effect of Christs iustice imputed to vs, so Iu∣stus and Sanctus are conuertible termes. They are Iust spi∣rits, that is, they are Saints. Now if we desire to come ad Sanctos, to the Saints: wee must liue sanctè, a holy life. God by telling vs who are in heauen, teacheth vs who shall come to heauen; none but Saints. They are set be∣fore vs as examples: Vt eorum sequamur gratiam, et conse∣quamur gloriam: that steering their course, wee might come to their Hauen. The Scripture teacheth vs Quid a∣gendum, what is to be done: the Saints Quo modo, how it is to be done. Uita sanctorum, interpretatio scripturarum. The liues of holy men is a kind of Commentary or inter∣pretation of the holy writ. Let vs as we doe by good co∣pies, not onely lay them before vs, and looke on them, but write after them. For it is not sufficient Legere, sed degere vitam sanctorum: not to read, but to lead the liues of Saints. Papists in this goe too farre, as euil men come too short. Good men imitate the Saints, but doe not worship them: Papists worship the Saints, but doe not imitate them: lewd men doe neither. Perhaps they will imitate their infirmities: as if onely for that they liked them, for
which onely God misliked them. The Saints are to bee held as Patternes, not as Patrones of our life. But the Pa∣pists praise not God in his Saints, nor the Saints for God, but as God. Onely let vs reuerently walke in their grace, that we may ioyfully come to their place. In a stricter sense it is taken for that morall vertue, which giues to euery man his owne. This vertue hath beene highly commended in the heathen: but one saith truly, Iustitia ethnic orum miranda potius, quàm laudanda: their Iustice deserued more admiration, then commenda∣tion: they wanted him that should make them iust. They so affected this iustice, that they tooke Sirnames from it; Aristides was called Iustus: Scipio, Iustus: Fabius, Iustus. Their iustice was no vertue, but a shadow of vertue. They neyther knew the Lord Deum virtutis, nec Christum virtutem Dei; the God of vertue, nor Christ the vertue of God. Onely Iesus is Iustus. 1. Pet. 3. 18. Christ suffered for sinnes, the iust for the vniust. Acts 3. 14. Ye denyed the Holy one, and the Iust. There was another Col. 4. 11. Iesus called Iustus, a helper of the A∣postles: but Christ is Dominus Iustitia nostra; Ier. 33. 16. The Lord our Righteousnesse. By him we are onely made iust: Esa. 45. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be iustified, and glory. Being thus iustified, let vs be iust: not doing that to o∣thers, which we would not haue others do to vs: and do∣ing that to others which wee desire to bee done to our selues. Some are iust in small matters: so the Pharises Mat. 23. 23. pay tithe of mint, & annise, and cummine; but omit waigh∣tier things. This is Pharisaica Iustitia, a Puritane righte∣ousnesse: not to endure an houres recreation on the Sun∣day, yet to robbe the Church by vsurpations, to exact in∣terests and forfets; these be nothing. So the mony might not be put into the Treasury, that might hire Iudas to be∣tray his master. The tenne brethren were so iust, as to re∣turne the mony in their sackes; yet stucke not to sell their brother Ioseph. Some are iust in great things, not in small. As the o∣ther
straine at a gnat, and swallow a camell: so these are like the nette, that takes the great fishes, and lets goe th little frie. Wantonnesse is no fault with them, if it extend not to adultery. They sticke not to sweare, so long as they sweare not to a lie. Maliciously to hate, or peeuishly to quarrell, is triuiall; if they proceede not to blowes and bloud. So long as they are not drunke, swallow downe wine, and spare not. De minimis non curat Lex; the Law takes no notice of small faults. But indeed Eadem ratio ro∣tunditatis, there is the same respect of roundnesse in a penny, that is in a platter; though not of largenes. To steal the bridle, as to steale the horse, is Tam, though not Tan∣tum: such a sin, though not so great a sinne. Thou sayest minimum est, minimum est; it is little, it is little. Sed in mi∣nimo fidelem esse magnum est: to bee faithfull in a little is a great vertue. Mat. 5. 19. Whosoeuer shall breake one of these least com∣mandements, hee shall be called least in the kingdome of hea∣uen. Erit minimus, that is Nullus: he shall be least in hea∣uen, that is, he shall not be there at all. But well done good seruant: Luk. 19. 17. Because thou hast beene faithfull in a very little, haue thou authority ouer tenne Cities. Benè vtere paruo, fru∣ere magno: the iust dispensation of a little, shall bring thee to be intrusted with much. Whether great or small wee must be iust, if we looke euer to raigne with these iust spi∣rits. Ad societatem iustorum non admittuntur nisi iusti. I wonder what place the defrauder expects; that wraps vp his conscience in a bundle of stuffes, and sweares it a∣way. The buyer thinkes he is iust, and hee is iust couso∣ned, no more. The Vsurer would storme and stare, as if had seene a spirit, if hee were taxed for vniust. Presently he consults (his Scriptures) his bonds, and (his Priest) his Scriuener: and there the one sweares, the other shewes in blacke and white, that he takes but ten in the hundred. Is he then vniust? Yes, Ezek. 22. 16 Thou hast taken vsury and increase, and hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by extortion. Hee takes hire for that should be freely lent: is not this vniust?
Besides, the people curse it, and they curse not but for in∣iustice. Ier. 15. 10. I haue neyther lent on vsurie, nor men haue lent me on vsury, yet euery one doth curse me. Insinuating, that if a man lend vpon vsury, it is no wonder if the people curse him. Where must the Lay-Parson sit, that fattes himselfe with the Tyth-graine, & will not giue the poore Minister the straw? Is this iust? He takes the tenth of his neighbours profits, and neuer so much as reades him an Homelie for it: is this iust? Hee layes sactilegious hands on Gods sanctified things, and neuer askes him leaue: is this iust? Where shall the Engrosser appeare, that hoords vp commodities bought with ready mony, and when he vents them, makes the poore pay treble vsury for it: is this iust? What shall become of that vnspeakeably rich Transporter, who carries out men and money, to the im∣pouerishing of the Land, and brings home gawdes and puppets, fitte for no bodies vse but prides? Surely, as hea∣uen is for Iust spirits, so there is some other place for the vniust. 1. Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the vniust shall not inherite the kingdome of God? If not Gods kingdome, then the king∣dome of darkenes; downewards, hell. I do not say, that euery vniust deed throwes a soule thither: Iniustum esse damnat, non iniustè semel agere; to be vniust is damnable, not one thing vniustly done: the habite, not the act. But for others; Qui iniustè dominantur, istè damnantur. They haue vniustly liued, but they shall bee iustly con∣demned. Made perfect. This is a passiue quality; non qui se per∣ficiunt, sed qui perficiuntur: not such as haue made them∣selues perfect, but are made perfect. The other property is actiuely expressed; Iust, it is not said Iustified: not that they made themselues iust, but that Christs righte∣ousnesse hath iustified them; so both they are, and are re∣puted iust. But here passiuely, Perfected: which plainely shewes that all is from God: for omne maius includit mi∣nus. If onely Christ make them perfect; then only Christ
doth make them ust. For it is nothing so difficult for a iust man to become perfect, as for an euill man to become iust. As it is easier for a man healed and directed the way, to come to the goale; then for him that lies lame in dark∣nesse. Qui dedit ingressum, must also dare progressum: con∣ficere & perficere; to make and to make vp, to doe and to perfect, are both the workes of God. Wee could neuer be iust, vnlesse Christ iustifie vs: neuer come to perfecti∣on, vnlesse he perfect vs. He that begun this good work, must also finish it. Made perfect. In heauen are none but the perfect. Ta∣lis sedes expectat talem sessorem: such a house requires such an inhabitant. On earth there is a kind of Perfection: all the faithfull are perfectly iustified, but not perfectly san∣ctified. The reprobates are perfectè imperfecti: the godly imperfectè perfecti: those perfectly imperfect, these imper∣fectly perfect. They are so perfect that they are acquitted in Christ, and there remaines no iudgement for them, but onely a declaration of their pardon. Iustification admits no latitude, in it nec magis nec minus, for none can be more then iust. But the perfection of sanctity is wrought by degrees: non plenam induimus perfectionem, donec totam exuimus infectionem: all the staines of our infection must first be cleansed, and quite washed away; before this full perfection be giuen vs. Christs bloud doth now wholly take from vs the guiltinesse of sin, not wholly the polluti∣on of sinne: that blessednesse is reserued only for heauen. Let vs therefore be perficientes, going and growing vp, that at last we may be Perfecti, made perfecti. This is not wrought on a sodain; a child doth not presently become a man. Euen the Lord Iesus had his time of growing, and can any member grow faster then the Head? Indeed the malefactor on the crosse shot vp in an houre; but this was miraculous, and God seldome workes by such miracles. God neyther sends Angels from heauen, nor the dead from hell, to giue warning to men vpon earth. Luk. 16. 31. If they
heare not Moses and the Prophets, neyther will they bee per∣swaded though one rose from the dead. But repentance hath the promise of a Qandocunque; whensoeuer a sinner repents, &c. I will not limit Gods infinite mercy; but onely ad∣uise thy sicke soule, who after a desperate and inueterate wound lookest for a suddaine cure by repentance: it is better to make this thy dyet, then thy physicke. Repent euery day, that thou maist haue remission one day. Melior medicus qui excludit morbos, quàm qui curat. He is a bet∣ter Physician that keeps diseases off vs, then he that cures them beeing on vs. Preuention is so much better then healing, because it saues the labour of being sicke. Thou allowest not a Surgion vnnecessarily to breake thy head, to try his skill, and the vertue of his plaister. Sprindges were better taken away quae non prosunt, because they doe no good: then the setting of watchmen by them to warn trauellers, ne noceant; that they be not hurt by them. Take away thy lusts quite, this is the way to be sure: for repen∣tance may be like Baal, so fast asleepe that all thy cryes are not able to waken her. To conclude, hee that will weare a crowne in heauen, must be all his life on earth preparing the gold to make it. Not that thy owne vertues crowne thee, but that GOD without thy vertues will neuer crowne thee. The robe of glory that is worne there, must be spun and wouen heere: spun out of the side of Christ by faith, and embroydered with our good workes. That eternall light ariseth from this internall life. 1. Tim. 6. 19. Lay vp in store for your selues a good foundation against the time to come, that you may lay hold on eternall life. The ground worke of saluation is made here: that high Tower of glory that is built for thee in heauen, hath the foundation of it laid vpon earth. How should a man be Perfectus, that was neuer factus, well begun? I wonder what perfection a wine-bibber lookes for; sure to be a perfect drunkard. What perfection expects the luxurious prodigall: sure to bee a perfect beg∣ger.
What perfection hopes the couetous Churle; that allowes himselfe a race of fourescore yeares; and sets God at the latter end of it: and he hath that place too with this condition, that hee trouble not his minde about it till the last day comes. Surely to liue vnblessed, and to die vn∣pittied: but that some now blesse God hee's gone; and o∣ther say, it's pitty he died no sooner. All his proiections haue aimed at this perfection, to make himselfe a perfect slaue. What perfection dreames the Iesuite to himselfe, but to become a perfect traitor? What perfection is likely to the incontinent adulterer, but to bee a perfect Lazar. What the malicious, but a perfect villaine: what the proud, but a perfect foole: what the blasphemer, but a perfect Deuill? They say, earely holinesse proues ripe corruption: but I am sure, habituated prophanesse proues ranke damnati∣on. Alas, how should they make an end, that neuer be∣gin? This man began to build, saith Christ, but could not make an end: how should they finish that neuer began? you that spend your dayes in a lazie forgetfulnesse of religion, examine your owne consciences: do you euer think to be perfect? Are you content still to be abortiue, and shall you be perfected in the womb of the graue? God hath giuen you time and meanes: he did not say, Sumite & consumite: take it, and spend it at your pleasure. O begin, that you may continue and end: heare to learne, learne to doe, doe to continue, continue to be perfect. Begin betimes, lest Gods end come before your beginning. Enter into the way of Piety, and follow it: striuing with all your pow∣ers to grow vp Eph. 4. 13. to a perfect man, vnto the measure of the sta∣ture of the fulnesse of Christ. And to Iesus the Mediator of the new Couenant, and to the bloud of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then that of Abel. We haue considered the glory of the Citie, the fe∣licity of the Citizens; we are lastly come to the Mediator, who brings both these together, and without whom they
had beene euerlastingly asunder. We are all by nature be∣longing not to Mount Sion, but to the valley of Hinnon: not to the celestiall Ierusalem, but to the infernall Babylon: not to the society of glorious Angels, but of afflicting Deuils: not to the Church of the first borne, but to the as∣sembly of abortiue reprobates: wee had no reference to God as a kinde Father, but as a seuere Iudge: not to iust spirits made perfect from sinne, but to lost spirits made per∣fect in sinne. Thus were wee by nature, but Iesus hath brought vs to Mount Sion, &c. How blessed a thing will it be to come vnto this Iesus! It was Saint Augustines speciall wish, to haue seene Christ in the flesh. If there were such cōfort in seeing Christ humbled, if such admi∣ration in seeing him transfigured, what ioy is it to behold him in heauen glorified! How glorious a matter do some thinke it to stand in the Court of an earthly Prince, to re∣ceiue a gracious looke, to heare a royall word, or to bee commanded some honourable seruice! what is it then to stand in the Court of heauen, to haue the King of Kings speake peaceably to vs, to behold our Lord Iesus crow∣ned with that immortall Diadem, to sing his prayses as free from flattery, as from inconstancy, and to liue in that Paradise for euer! Vbicunque fueris Domine Iesu: where∣soeuer thou art O blessed Sauiour, giue vs no more hap∣pinesse then to be with thee. If thou be in the earth, wee will trauell day and night to come to thee; if on the sea, with Peter we will swimme to thee: if on the Crosse, we will stand weeping by thee: if riding in triumph, we will sing Hosanna to thee: if transfigured on Tabor, we will bee rauished with thee: but if sitting in thy heauenly Throne, how blessed euen to looke vpon thee! It is his Iohn 17. 24. will, that we should be with him where he is, and behold his glory. Wee are now come to him by a coniunction mysticall, wee shall then haue a vicinity locall, and e∣ternall. The Mediator, not a Mediator, but The, That Media∣tor,
that onely one. 1. Tim. 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Media∣tor betweene God and men, the man Christ Iesus. God was angry, man was guiltie, Christ is the Mediator betwixt them: who being God, could satisfie God, and beeing man, could suffer for man. We are lost, and desire some∣thing to recouer vs: what shall that be? Mercy? No, God is iust: he that hath offended must be punished. Shall it be Iustice? No, we haue need of mercy: that he who hath offended might be spared. Here, to be so merciful as not to wrong his iustice, to be so iust as not to forget his mer∣cy; there must be a Mediator. This must not be the world, that was Gods owne before, he made it: not Angels, for they are engaged for their owne creation; and being fi∣nite, cannot satisfie an infinite Maiestie by infinite pu∣nishment for infinite sinnes. Gods Sonne must doe it: now if hee come to satisfie for pride, he must put on humilitie: if for rebellion, he must put on obedience: if for stubbornnesse, he must put on patience: he must serue if he will deserue: this God a∣lone cannot doe: if to die, he must be mortall, this onely God cannot be. Therefore this Mediator is made man, to be himselfe bound; as he is GOD to free others that are bound. Man to become weake, God to vanquish. Man to die, God to triumph ouer death. This is that sacred Ladder, whose top in heauen reaching to the bosome of God, expresseth his Diuinitie: & his foote on earth close to Iacobs loynes, witnesseth his Humanitie. We are bank∣rout debters, God is a sure Creditor, Christ sets all on his score. We are ignorant Clients, God is a skilfull Iudge, Christ is our Aduocate to plead our cause for vs. God is a iust Master, we are vnfaithfull, vnfruitfull, vnprofitable seruants, this Mediator takes vp the matter betweene vs. Of the new Couenant. For Moses may seeme to be a Mediator of the Old Couenant. Deut. 5. 5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the Word of the Lord. This
Mediatorship of the New couenant is a high office, com∣petible to none but the Lord Iesus. Who should appeare betweene a iust God, and sinfull men; but he that is mor∣tall with men, and iust with God? It is a Couenant, for there is something agreed on both sides: we couenant to belieue, and God to forgiue. A New couenant; there was cold comfort for vs in the old. A man reading, Fac hoc et vines, Doe this and thou shalt liue: thinks of it as if he were bidden to catch a starre from the firmament, & take it for his labour. But in the New, Crede et vine; belieue & liue for euer. The condition on mans part is belieuing, the co∣uenant on Gods part is Sauing. Now, though it be true, that it is as easie for man of himselfe to fulfill the Law, as it is to belieue the Gospel, yet the New couenant, Dat cre∣dere, giues a man power to belieue: for faith is the faire gift of God. Praecipit non adiuvat Lex, offert et affert E∣uangelium. The Law giues commandement, but not a∣mendment: the Gospel brings saluation to our hearts, & our hearts to saluation. As it chargeth vs, so it aydeth vs. As this Mediator giues Fidem quam credimus, the faith which we belieue, mercy and remission: so also Fidem qua credimus, the faith whereby we belieue, grace to appre∣hend this mercy. Heb. 8. 6. Christ hath obtained a more excellent ministery, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Couenant, which was established vpon better promises. Briefely here consider the excellencie of this New and Euangelicall Couenant, aboue the Old and Legall. In the beginning God made man righteous: for he created him Gene. 1. 27. in his owne Image, which the Apostle saies Ephe. 4. 24. consisted in righteousnesse and the holinesse of truth. But man soone de∣faced this goodly and godly picture. Eccl. 7. 29. This I haue found, that God made man righteous, but he sought out many inuen∣tions; waves to make himselfe wicked and wretched. Hence it followed that our restitution was a greater work then our constitution. The house was with more ease built vp new, then repaired being old and ruinous. That
was done per verbum enuntiatum, this per verbum annunti∣atum. There he spake the word, and all things were crea∣ted: here the Iohn 1. 14. Word was made flesh: Fecit mira, tulit dira: passus dura verba, duriora verbera. There it was done by saying, Dic verbum tantùm: here by doing, yea by dying: suffering grieuous words, more grieuous wounds: Factus in terris, fractus in terris. There all begun in Adam, who was Terrae filius, a sonne of the earth: here all in Christ, who is Coeli Dominus, the Lord of Heauen. Spirituall life is better then naturall, firmer, surer. There man had one∣ly a power to stand, but with it a power to fall, according to his owne pleasure: heere he hath a certaintie of insepa∣rable coniunction to Christ. He so stands as neuer to fall, so liues as neuer to die, so is loued as neuer to bee hated. There Adam and Eue were married to propagate filios carnis, children of the flesh: heere Christ is married to his Church, to beget filios spirituales, children in the Spirit: and that with a bond neuer to be diuorced. Thus at first God commanded that to exist, which was not before: now he makes one contrary to be changed into another: flesh into spirit, darknesse into light, corruption into ho∣linesse: greater miracles, then changing stones into bread; Dignus vindice nodus, a knot worthy the finger of God to vntie. Here is the wonderfull worke of the New Coue∣nant: we were made Ex spirituoris, redeemed ex sanguine cordis: created by the breath of Gods mouth, but saued by the bloud of his heart. Therefore not sixe Cherubims as in the vision of Esay, nor foure and twenty Elders, as in the Reuelation of Iohn; but a royall Armie of heauenly souldiers were heard praysing GOD at the birth of Ie∣sus Christ. In summe, there is but one Mediator of the New Coue∣nant: neither Saint nor Angel hath any part in this dig∣nity. Melancth. Idem est multos Deos fingere, ac sanctos mortuos inuocare: to worship old Saints, is to make new Gods. He that shall pray to dead men, dishonours the li∣uing
Mediator. Saint Paul saith expresly, 1. Tim. 2. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator betweene God and men, the man Christ Iesus. Whence it is manifest, that it is the same blas∣phemous presumption to make moe Mediators then one, that to make moe Gods then one. Heere the Romanists distinguish; Christ is the sole Mediator of Redemption, not of Intercession. Opus est mediatore ad mediatore Chri∣stum. VVee must haue a Mediator of intercession to this Mediator of redemption. A blind answere: for Paul di∣rectly there speakes of prayers and Intercession. ver. 1. &c. But say they, Our prayers are to be made to God a∣lone, tanquam per cum implenda; because our desires are fulfilled onely by him: but vnto the Saints, tanquam per eos impetranda; because they are obtained by them. As if Christ were so busie that hee could not tend to heare vs: or so stately, that hee vvould not bend to heare vs: or so vniust, as to deny his owne Venite, and not to per∣forme his promise; Mat. 11. 28. Come vnto me all that labour. We oppose against them that comfortable saying of S. Iohn. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. If any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate with the Fa∣ther, Iesus Christ, the righteous. They answere, Indeed Christ is our chiefe Aduocate, Saints and Angels secon∣dary or subordinate Aduocates. But the word Aduocate is borrowed of the Lawyers, & signifies him only that doth plead the iustice of his clients cause. A stranger in the court may become a petitioner to the Iudge, & intreat fauor for the person guilty: but Aduocates are Patrons & Proctors of their Clients. Angels in heauen, & Saints on earth, are suitors in our behalfe to God: but Christ alone is our Ad∣uocate. And vpon good cause, for who but he can so well plead his own righteousnes whereby he hath iustified vs? Therefore the Apostle calls him there our Propitiation: he that wil be our Aduocate, must also be our Propitiation: no Saints or Angels can be a Propitiation for vs; therefore no Saints or Angels can be our Aduocates. Augustine sayes, that if S. Iohn had offered himselfe to this office, he had
not been Apostolus, sed Antichristus. We obiect further Christs promise. Iohn 16. 23. Whatsoeuer you shall aske the Father in my Name, he will giue it you. Not in Maries, or Peters, but in my Name. Bellarmine answers, that there may be a Mediator between disagreeing parties three waies. 1. By declaring who hath the wrong: and so there is no controuersie; for all agree that GOD is the party grieued. 2. By paying the Creditor for the Deb∣ter; so Christ is alone Mediator. 3. By desiring the Cre∣ditor to forgiue the Debter; and in this sense, he saies An∣gels and Saints are Mediators. But this distinction is no other then Bellarmines mincing; who indeed seemes to be ashamed of the blasphemous phrases in their Missals. As Maria mater gratiae: Sancte Petre miserere mei, salua me, &c. These, saith he, are our words, but not our mea∣nings; that Mary or Peter should conferre grace on vs in this life, or glory in the life to come. Yet both their Schoole and Practice speakes more. For Aquin sayes, our prayers are effectuall by the merits of Saints; & that Christs intercession is gotten by the patronage of A∣postles, by the interuention of Martyrs, by the bloud of Becket, and merits of all Saints. And the practice of the people, is to hold Angels and Saints immediate Me∣diators, able to satisfie and saue. But as one hath well ob∣serued; if euery Saint in the Popes Calender be receiued as a Mediator, we shall worship vnknowne men, as the Athenians did vnknown gods. For the best Papists doubt whether there were euer any S. George, or S. Christopher. But say they, The Virgin is a knowne Saint: she can and may by the right of a Mother command her Sonne Bon. Christ. Their whole Church sings, O foelix puerpera, no∣stra pans scelera, inre matris impera. And Maria consolatio infirmorum, redemptio captiuorum, liberatio damnatorum, salus uniuersorum. They haue giuen so much to the Mo∣ther, that they haue left nothing for the Sonne. Ozorius the Iesuite saies, Caput gratiae Christus, Maria collū: Christ
is the Head of grace, but Mary is the Neck: no grace can come from the head, but it must passe through the necke. They inuocate her their Aduocate: but of Christs medi∣ation the medium or better halfe is taken from him: as if he were still a child, in subiection to his Mother. But as he is Mariae filius, so he is Mariae Dominus: the Sonne and the Lord of his Mother. Therefore the first words that we read Christ euer spake to his Parents, were rough, and by way of reproofe. According to Saint Luke, these were his first: Luke 2. 49. How is it that yee sought mee? Wist yee not that I must be about my Fathers busines? According to Saint Iohn more sharply, Iohn 2. 4. Woman, vvhat haue I to doe vvith thee? Quanquàm locuta est iure matris, tamen duriter respondet. Where was then their Monstra te esse Matrem? Though at the commaund of his Mother he spake, yet hee spake roughly. Whereas Gods kingdome consists of his Iustice and Mercy; the Papists attribute the greatest part, which is his Mercy, to Mary: making her, as one noted, the La∣dy high Chancelour, & Christ as it were the Lord chiefe Iustice. As we appeale from the Kings-Bench barre to the Chancerie, so a Papist may appeale from the Tribunall of God to the Court of our Lady. So they make her Domi∣na fac totum: when one flatteringly wrote of Pope Adri∣an; Traiectum plantauit, Louanium rigauit, Caesar autem in∣crementum dedit. Traiectum planted, Louaine watered, but the Pope gaue the increase: one wittily vnderwrites; De∣us interim nihil fecit; God did nothing the while. So if Mary be the comfort of the weake, the redeemer of cap∣tiues, the deliuerer of the damned, the saluation of all, the Aduocate of the poore, the Patronesse of the rich; then sure Christ hath nothing to doe. No beloued; Abraham is ignorant of vs, the blessed Virgin knowes vs not; but the Lord Iesus is our Redeemer. Prayer is not a labour of the lippes onely, but an inward groning of the spirit, a powring out of the soule before God. Now Saints and Angels vnderstand not the heart: it is Psalm 7. 9. the righteous God
that tryeth the heart and the reynes. Christ is the master of all Requests in the Court of Heauen, there needs no porter nor waiter. It is but praying, Lord Iesus come vnto me: and he presently answeres, I am with thee. Heare mee O Christ, for it is easie to thy power, and vsuall to thy mer∣cie, and agreèable to thy promise. O blessed Mediator of the new Couenant, heare vs. To the bloud of sprinkling. Aspersionis, Hebraico more pro asperso. Two things are implyed in the two words; Sacrificium and Beneficium. Bloud, there is the sacrifice of Sprinkling, there is the benefite. To the bloud. To speake properly, it is the death of Christ that satisfies the Iustice of God for our sinnes: and that is the true materiall cause of our redemption. Yet is this frequently ascribed to his bloud. Hebr. 9. 14. The bloud of Christ purgeth the Conscience from dead works. Ioh. 19. 34. Out of his pierced side came forth bloud and water. As God wrote nothing in vaine, so what he hath often repeated, hee would haue se∣riously considered. Non leuiter praetereat lectura nostra, quod tam frequenter insculpsit Scriptura sacra. There are some reasons why our saluation is ascribed to CHRISTS bloud. 1. Because in the bloud is the life. Gen. 9. 4. Flesh with the bloud therof, which is the life therof, you shall not eat. Leu. 17. 14. The soule of a beast is in the bloud, and in the bloud is the life of euery reasonable creature on earth. The effu∣sion thereof doth exhaust the vitall spirits, and death fol∣lowes. In Christs bloud was his life; the shedding of that was his death: that death by the losse of that bloud is our redemption. 2. Because this bloud answeres to the types of the le∣gall sacrifices. This our Apostle exemplifies in a large con∣ference. Heb. 9. 18. &c The first Testament was not dedicated without bloud. Moses sprinkling the booke and all the people, sayd, This is the bloud of the Testament. Almost all things are by the Law purged by bloud, and without shedding of bloud is no
remission. No reconciliation, no remission without bloud. All directed vs to this Lambe of GOD, whose bloud onely vindicates vs from eternall condemnation. Not that the bloud of a meere man could thus merite; but of that man who is also God: therefore it is called the Acts 20. 28. Bloud of God. 3. Because bloud is fitter for applyment to the heart of man; who is so weake in apprehension that GOD is faine to lead him as it were by the senses? Not that there is a necessary receiuing of Christs materiall bloud by eue∣rie one that shall be saued: so it might sprinkle vpon the souldiers that crucified him, who yet might go to hell. But it is receiued Mentaliter & Sacramentaliter; there is a mentall and a sacramentall application. Thus wee are said to drink his bloud, that receiue it spiritually by faith. The Papists in their opinion are fed orally with the very ma∣teriall bloud of Christ: but then surely none of them can goe to hell; for hee that eates the flesh, and drinkes the bloud Iohn 6. of the Sonne of Man, hath eternall life. But now the Priests, for feare belike lest too many of the people should be saued, and so Purgatory the Popedomes pillar be quite ouerthrowne, haue taken away the Cup from them; and turned Christs Bibite omnes into Bibite non omnes; Drinke ye all, into drinke ye onely Priests, not the rest. When they had giuen this bloud so high an honor, they thought it too good for the common sort. First they said, it is re∣ally in the Cup; there they gaue it too much: then they tooke it from the people, there they gaue them too little. First they strained it, and then they restrained it. But they answere, the people haue this bloud in the bread; for that is flesh, and can there be flesh without bloud? If so, why then doe themselues take the Cup? Eyther it is necessary for the people, or superfluous for the Priests. Vnlesse they value a Clergy mans soule at a higher rate then a Lay∣mans: as if Christs bloud were not shed for the one, so well as for the other.
But to let goe their sacrilegious absurdities, let vs con∣tent our selues spiritually to receiue this bloud, shed for vs, and communicated to vs. This bloud is ready for ap∣plication, if our hearts be ready for apprehension. To vs it is, though not elementally, yet alimentally profitable. There is a bloud that nourisheth, as the Pelican her young ones with her owne bloud; Christ so feedes our soules to saluation with this bloud. There is a bloud that mollifies; as the warme bloud of a goate softens the Adamant: wee haue obdurate hearts if Christs bloud cannot melt them. There is a bloud that purgeth as the Kids; so the 1. Iohn. 1. 7. bloud of Christ cleanseth vs from all sinne. There is a bloud that colours, as the Deeres; so doth Christs bloud giue a pure colour to his Church; Thou art all faire my loue. Reu. 7. 14. These are they which haue washed their robes, and made them white in the bloud of the Lambe. This bloud is Semen vitae, sub∣stantia gratiae, fundamentum iustitiae, aedificium meriti, magna charta coeli. A fluxe of bloud in the head is stanched by opening a veine in the foote: but here to saue all the mem∣bers from bleeding to death, bloud must be drawne from the Head. As Eue came out of Adams side sleeping, so the Church is taken out of Christs side bleeding. Thus God disposed it in mercy; Ut effundatur sanguis Christi, ne confundatur anima Christiani: that Christs bloud should be spilt, to saue our soules from spilling. Of Aspersion; in relation to the typicall maner. Exod. 24. 8. Mo∣ses tooke the bloud, and sprinkled it on the people. To this al∣ludes Paul here; and Peter calling it 1. Pet. 1. 2. the sprinkling of the bloud of Iesus Christ. In the Passeouer the dores were sprinkled with the bloud of the Paschall Lambe; and the destroying Angell passed ouer them. All those whom the eternall iudgement shall passe ouer, must haue their hearts thus sprinkled. We haue many spots, had need of many droppes. For a spot of auarice a drop of this bloud: for a spot of lust a drop of bloud: for a spot of drunkennesse a drop of bloud: for a spot of oppression a great drop of
bloud: for the wounds and gashes of oathes, execrations, blasphemies, many drops of bloud to stanch them. Yea we are not onely sinners, but saith Micah, Sinnes: there∣fore must be sows'd and drench'd in this bloud, that wee may be be cleane. That speaketh better things then that of Abel. This is a Metaphor, to shew the force of Christs bloud, so preuai∣ling with God as if it had a tongue. The comparison is between Abels bloud and Christs: now Abels is said to cry; Gen. 4. 10. The voyce of thy brothers bloud cryeth vnto mee from the ground. Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis. So Christs bloud is said to speake; Quot vulnera, tot voces; so many wounds, so many words. There is great respondence of Christ to Abel. Abel was slaine by his brother, Christ by his brethren; the voice of the Iewes was Crucifie him. Abel was slaine because he sacrificed; Christ was slaine that he might be sacrificed. Cain enuied Abel because he was accepted; the Iewes ha∣ted Christ because hee was good. Abel might say to his brother; For my sacrifice dost thou kill me? Christ did say to the Iewes; For which of my good workes doe you stone mee? Abel was so slaine, that his bloud was aboundantly shed, and that in many places; for it is said Vox sanguinum; the voice of blouds. So Christs bloud was let out with thornes, scourges, nailes, speare. As Cain sustained a threefold pu∣nishment; he was cursed in his soule, a vagabond on earth, vnprosperous in his labours. So are the Iewes plagued; they haue no place they can call their owne; when they haue heaped vp riches, some other takes them away; they cannot see their owne City but they must pay for it; they are cursed in their obstinate blindnesse: thus according to their owne request, the bloud of Christ is vpon them and vpon their children. But now Christs bloud speakes better things: Abels cryed vindictam, Christs speakes misericordiam. That, Lord see and reuenge; this, Father, forgiue them, they know
not what they doe. God hath an eare of mercy, so well as of Iustice. If he heard that bloud speaking for confusion, then he will heare this speake for remission. If hee heard the Seruant, he will much rather heare the Sonne: if he heard the seruant for spilling, hee will much more heare the Sonne for sauing. Postula à me, saith God to his Son: Psal. 2. 8. Aske of me, and I will giue thee: the Father will deny the Sonne nothing. Thus hath he saued vs Prece & Pretio, by his bloud, and that a speaking bloud: if that bloud speake for our safetie, nothing shall confound vs. Now the bloud of this Mediator our Lord Iesus speake for vs to the Fa∣ther of mercy, that the Holy Ghost may seale vs vp to eternall redemption. To whom, three persons, one blessed God, be praise for euer. Amen.
THE WORLDS GREAT RIDERS: OR, The rage of Oppression. PSALME. 66. 12. Thou hast caused men to ride ouer our heads: wee went through fire and through water: but thou brough∣test vs out into a wealthy place. THIS verse is like that Sea, Math. 8. 24. So tempestuous at first, that the vessell was couer'd with waues: but Christs rebuke quie∣ted all, and there followed a great calme. Heere are cruell Nimrods riding ouer innocent heads, as they would ouer fallow lands; and dangerous passages through fire and water: but the storme is soone ended, or rather the passengers are landed. Thou broughtest vs out into a wealthy place. So that this straine of Dauids musicke or Psalmodie consists of two notes; one mournefull, the other mirth∣full: the one a touch of distresse, the other of redresse:
which directs our course to an obseruation of Misee, Mercie; of grieuous misery, of gra∣cious Mercy. There is desolation, and Consolation in one verse: a deepe deiection, as laid vnder the feete of beasts; a high erection, brought out into a wealthy place. In both these straines God hath his stroke: he is a prin∣cipall in this Consort. He is brought in for an Actor, Author; an Actor in the Persecuti∣on, an Author in the deliuerance. Thou causest, &c. Thou broughtest &c. In the one he is a causing worker, in the other a sole-working cause. In the one he is ioyned with company, in the other he workes alone. He hath a finger in the former; his whole hand in the latter. We must begin with the Miserie, before wee come to the Mercie. If there were no trouble, wee should not know the worth of a deliuerance. The passion of the Saints is giuen by the hearty and ponderous description, for very grieuous: yet it is written in the forehead of the Text, The Lord caused it. Thou causedst men to ride, &c. Heereupon some wicked Libertine may offer to rubbe his filthinesse vpon Gods purity; and to plead an authen∣ticall deriuation of all his villany against the Saints from the Lords warrant: He caused it. Wee answere to the iu∣stification of Truth it selfe, that God doth ordaine and order euery persecution, that striketh his children; with∣out any allowance to the instrument that giues the blow. God workes in the same action with others, not after the same manner. In the affliction of Iob were three Agents: God, Satan, and the Sabeans. The Diuell works on his body, the Sabeans on his goods: yet Iob confesseth a third party. The Lord giues, and the Lord takes away. Here Op∣pressors trample on the godly, and God is said to cause it. He causeth affliction for triall: (so ver. 10. and 11. Thou
hast tried vs, &c.) they vvorke it for malice: neither can God be accused, nor they excused. In a sinfull action there be two things: the Materiall, and the Formall part: which we commonly distinguish into the act and defect. The Materiall part is of GOD; from whom is all Motion: the Formall is from the pra∣uitie of the agent. Persecutors could not accuse vs malici∣ously, if GOD gaue not motion to their tongues; nor strike vs wrongfully, if he denied strength to their hands. Thought, sight, desire, speech, strength, motion are Gods good gifts: to turne all these to his dishonour, is the wic∣ked persons fault. God hath another intent, then man hath, euen in mans worke. The Chaldeans steale Iobs wealth, to enrich them∣selues: the Diuell afflicts his body, in his hatred to man∣kind: God suffers all this for the triall of his patience. Man for couetousnesse, the diuell for malice, God for pro∣bation of the afflicted's constancie, and aduancing his owne glory. In the giuing of Christ to death, as Augu∣stine obserues; the Father gaue the Sonne, the Sonne gaue Epist. 48. himselfe, Iudas betrayed him, and the Iewes crucified him. In one and the same tradition, God is to be blessed, and man condemned. Quia in re vna quam fecerunt, causa non vna ob quam fecerunt. Because in that same thing they all did, there vvas not the same cause vvhy they all did it. Gods end was loue, Iudas his auarice, the Ievves ma∣lice. The couetous Extortioner taketh away the goods of his neighbour; that robber spoyleth. He could haue no tongue to plead, nor wit to circumuent, nor hands to car∣ry away, without God: from him hee hath those crea∣tures, that notion and motion. But to peruert all these to damnifie others, and to damne himselfe, ariseth from his owne auarous and rancorous prauity. His intent is wic∣ked; yet not without Gods wisedom to raise profit from it. Perhaps the oppressed had too good a liking to the
World, and beganne to admit a little confidence in their wealth: the Lord hath benefited them, in taking away these snares, to saue their soules. Yet without toleration, countenance, or helpe to the wicked. The Vsurer hath done thee good: by making thee poore in purse, helped thee to the riches of grace; yet he goes to hell for his labour. They that doe GOD seruice against their wills, shall haue but shrewd wages. It cannot be denied, but the diuell did God seruice; in trying Iob, winnowing Peter, buffetting Paul, executing Iudas: yet shall not all this ease the least torment of his damnation. For triall here, are these oppressors suffred to ride ouer the godly's heads, and to driue them through fire and vvater: when these haue like furnaces, purged them from drosse & corruption, themselues shall be burnt. For it is vsuall with God, when he hath done beating his chil∣dren, to throw the rodde into the fire. Babylon a long time shall be the Lords Hammer to bruise the Nations, at last it selfe shal be bruised. Iudas did an act, that redounds to Gods eternal honour, and our blessed saluation, yet was his wages the gallhouse. All these hammers, axes, rods, sawes, swords, instruments, when they haue done those offices they neuer meant, shall for those they haue meant, be throwne to confusion. I will now leaue Gods iustice to himselfe; and come to the iniustice of these Oppressors, and the passion of the sufferers. And because the qualitie of these latter shal adde some aggrauation to the cruell malice of the former; I will first set before your eyes the Martyrs. The Psalme beeing written by Dauid, and the suffrers spoken of in the first person plurall; We, Vs, and Our: it followes, that it was both Dauid, and such as Dauid was; beloued of God, holy, Saints. And whom doth the vvorld thinke to ride ouer, but Saints? Psal. 44. 22. Who should be appointed to the
slaughter, but Sheepe? The Wolfe will not prey on the Fox, he's too crafty: nor on the Elephant, he's too mighty: nor on a dogge, he's too equall: but on the silly Lambe, that can neither run to scape, nor fight to conquer. They write of a Bird, that is the Crocodiles toothpicker, and feedes on the fragments left in his teeth whiles the serpent lyes a sunning: vvhich when the vnthankfull Crocodile would deuoure, God hath set so sharpe a prick on the top of the Birds head, that he dares not shut his iawes till it be gone. And they speake of a little Fish, that goes bristling by the Pike, or any other rauenous water-creature, and they dare not for his pricks & thornes, touch him. Those whom Nature or Art, strength or sleight, haue made in∣exposable to easie ruine, may passe vnmolested. The wic∣ked will not grapple vpon equall termes: they must haue either locall or ceremoniall aduantage. But the godly are weake and poore; and it is not hard to prey vpon pro∣strate fortunes. A lowe hedge is soone troden downe; and ouer a vvretch deiected on the base earth, an insulting enemy may easily stride. Whiles Dauid is downe, (or ra∣ther in him figured the Church) the plowers may plow vpon Psal. 129. 3. his backe, and make long their furrowes. But what if they ride ouer our heads, and wound our flesh, let them not wound our patience. Though we seale the bond of conscience vvith the bloud of innocence; though we lose our liues, let vs not lose our patience. Lac∣tantius De falsa Sa∣pient. lib. 4. sayes of the Philosophers, that they had a sword, and wanted a buckler: but a buckler doth better become a Christian, then a sword. Let vs know, Non nunc hono∣ris nostri tempus esse; sed doloris, sed passionis; that this is not the time of our ioy and honour, but of our passion and sorow. Therfore, let vs with patience runne the race, &c. Heb. 12. 2. But leaue vvee our selues thus suffring; and come to speake of that we must be content to feele, the oppression of our enemies. Wherein we will consider
the Agents, Actions. The Agents Are Men. Thou hast caused men to ride, &c. Man is a sociable liuing creature, and should conuerse with man in loue and tranquillity. Man should be a supporter of man, is he become an ouerthrower? He should help and keep him vp, doth he ride ouer him, and tread him vnder foot? O Apostacie, not onely from diuinitie, but euen from hu∣manitie. Quid homini inimicissimum? Homo. The greatest Sen. danger that befalls man, comes whence it should least come; from man himselfe. Caetera animantia, saith Pli∣nie, in suo genere, probe degunt, &c. Lyons fight not vvith Lions: Serpents spend not their venims on serpents: but Man is the maine suborner of mischiefe to his ovvne kind. It is reported of the Bees, that grotante vna, lamen∣tntur omnes: when one is sicke, they all mourne. And of Sheepe, that if one of them be faint, the rest of the flocke will stand betweene it and the Sunne, till it be reuiued, onely man to man is most pernicious. Wee knowe that a bird, yea a bird of rapine, once fed a man in the Wilder∣nesse: 1. King. 17. 6. Dan. 6. 22. that a beast, yea a beast of fierce cruelty, spared a man in his denne. Whereupon saith a learned Father, Fe∣rae parcunt, aues pascunt, hommes saeuiunt. The birds feed Cypr. Ser. 6. man, and the beasts spare him; but man rageth against him. Wherefore, I may well conclude with Salomon, Prou. 17. Let a Bearerobbed of her whelps meet a man, ra∣ther Prou. 17. 12. then a foole in his folly. God hath hewne vs all out of one rock, temperd all our bodies of one clay, and spirited our soules of one breath. Therefore saith Augustine, Sith we proceed all out of one stock, let vs all be of one mind. Beasts molest not their owne kind; and birds of a feather flie louingly together. Not onely the blessed Angels of heauen agree in a mutuall
harmonie; but euen the very diuells of hell are not diui∣ded, lest they ruine their kingdome. We haue one greater reason of vnitie and loue obserued, then all the rest. For whereas God made not all Angels of one Angell: nor all beasts of the great Behemoth: nor all fishes of the huge Le∣uiathan: nor all birds of the maiesticall Eagle: yet hee made all men of one Man. Let vs then not iarre in the dispensation of our mindes, that so agree in the composi∣tion of our natures. You see how inhumane and vnnatu∣rall it is, for man to wrong man; of his owne kinde, and as it were, of his owne kinne. Thus for the Agents. The Action Is amplified in diuers circumstances; climbing vp by rough staires to a high transcendency of Oppression. It ariseth thus; In Riding. Riding ouer vs. Riding ouer our Heads. Driuing vs through fire and water. 1. They ride. What need they mount themselues vp∣on beasts, that haue feete malicious enough to trample on vs? They haue a Foote of Pride, Psalm. 36. from which Psal. 36. 11. Dauid prayed to bee deliuered. A presumptuous heele, which they dare lift vp against God; and therefore a ty∣rannous toe, to spurne deiected man. They need not hor∣ses and mules, that can kicke with the foote of a reuenge∣full Psal. 32. 9. malice. 2. Ouer vs. The way is broad enough wherein they trauell, for it is the Deuils roade; they might well misse the poore: there is roome enough besides, they need not ride Ouer vs. It were more braue for them to iustle with champions, that will not giue them the way: wee neuer contend for their path: they haue it without our enuie, not without our pitie: why should they ride Ouer vs? 3. Ouer our heads. Is it not contentment enough to
their pride to ride? to their malice, to ride ouer vs? but must they delight in bloudinesse, to ride ouer our heads? will not the breaking of our armes and legges, and such inferiour limbes, satisfie their indignation? Is it not e∣nough to wracke our strength, to mocke our innocence, to prey on our estates; but must they thirst after our blouds and liues? Quò tendit saua libido? whither will their madnesse runne? But we must not tie our selues to the latter. Heere is a mysticall or metaphoricall gradation of their cruelty. Their Riding Ouer vs Ouer our heads is Proud Malicious Bloudy Oppression. They Ride. This phrase describes a vice compounded of two dam∣nable ingredients; Pride, and Tyrannie. It was a part of Gods fearefull curse to rebellious recidiuation, Deut. 28. that their enemies should ride and triumph ouer them; and they should come downe very low, vnder their feet. It is deliuered for a notorious marke of the great Whore of Reuel. 17. 4. Babylons pride, that she rides vpon a scarlet-colou'rd Beast. Saint Paul seemes to apply the same word to oppression. 1. Thes. 4. That no man oppresse his brother. The originall 1. Thes. 4. 6. ; to goe vpon him, climbe on him, or tread him vnder foote. O blasphemous height of villany; not onely by false slanders to betray a mans innocence, nor to lay violent hands vpon his estate; but to trip vp his heels with frauds, or to lay him along with iniuries, and then to trample on him! And because the foote of man, for that should bee soft and fauouring, cannot dispatch him, to mount vpon beasts, wilde and fauage affections, and to ride vpon him. Ouer vs. This argues their malice. It were a token of wilfull
spight for a horseman, in a great rode, to refuse all way, and to ride ouer a poore traueller. Such is the implacable malice of these persecutors. Esa. 59. Wasting and destructi∣on Esa. 59. 7. are in their paths: yea, wasting and destruction are their paths. They haue fierce lookes, and truculent hearts: their very breath is ruine, and euery print of their foot va∣station. They neyther reuerence the aged, nor pity the sucking infant: Virgins cannot auoid their rapes, nor women with childe their massacres. They goe, they run, thy stride, they ride ouer vs. The language of their lippes, is that which Babylon spake concerning Ierusalem: Downe with it, downe with it, Psal. 137. 7. euen to the ground. Rase it, rase it, euen to the foundation thereof. Desolation sits in their eyes, and shootes out through those fiery windowes, the burning glances of waste, hauocke, ruine: till they turne a land into solitude; into a Desart, and habitation for their fellow-beasts, and their worse selues. O vnmercifull men! that should be to men kinde as God; but are more ragingly noxious then wolues. They haue lost the nature, let them also lose the name of men. Uix repperit vnum, Talibus è multis, hominem consultus Apollo. But it is e∣uer true: Optimi corruptio pessima. The fairest flowers pu∣trified, stinke worse then weedes: euen an Angell falling became a Deuill: and man debauched, striues to come as neere this Deuill as he can. They should put their hands vnder our falling heads, and lift vs vp: but they kicke vs downe, and ride ouer vs. Ouer our heads. This notes their bloudinesse, vnpacifiable but by our slaughters. The pressing, racking, or breaking of our in∣feriour limbes contents not their malice: they must wound the most sensible and vitall part, our heads. The Lord be blessed, that hath now freed vs from these blou∣die
ridings; and sent vs peace with Truth. Yet can wee not be forgetful of the past calamities in this Land; nor in∣sensible of the present in other places. The time vvas when the Bonners and butchers rode ouer the faces of Gods Saints, and madefied the earth with their blouds; euery drop whereof begot a new beleeuer. When they martyred the liuing with the dead; burnt the impotent wife with the husband; who is content to die with him, with whom she may not liue; yea, reioycing to go toge∣ther to their Sauior. When they threw the new-born (yea scarce-borne) infant, dropping out of the mothers belly, into the mothers flames: whom, if they had been Christi∣ans, they would first haue Christned, if not cherished. This was a fiery zeale indeed; set on flame with the fire of hell. They loue fire still: they were then for fagots, they are now for powder. If these be Catholikes, there are no Canibals. They were then mounted on horses of authority, now they ride on the wings of policy. Our comfort is, that though all these, whether perse∣cutors of our faith, or oppressors of our life, ride ouer our particular heads, yet we haue all one Head, whom they cannot touch. They may massacre this corporall life, and spoyle the locall seate of it, whether in head or heart: but our spirituall life, which lies and liues in our Head Iesus Christ, they cannot reach. No hellish stratagems, nor combined outrages; no humane powers, nor diuellish principalities can touch that life: for it is Colos. 3. 3. hid with Christ in God. Indeed this Head doth not onely take their blowes, as meant at him; but he euen suffers with vs. Acts 9. 4. Saul, why per∣secutest thou me? Saul strikes on earth, Christ Iesus suffers in heauen. There is more liuely sense in the Head, then in other members of the body. Let but the toe ake, and the head manifests by the countenance a sensible greefe. The body of the Church cannot suffer, without the sense of our blessed Head. Thus saith Paul, 2. Cor. 1. 5. The sufferings of
Christ abound in vs. These afflictions are the showres that follow the great storme of his passion. Colos. 1. 24. Wee fill vp that which is behinde, of the affliction of Christ in our flesh. Wee must be content for him, as hee was for vs, to weep, and groane, and bleed, and dye, that we may raigne. If wee Psalm. 126. 5. sow not in teares, how shall we look to reape in ioy? how shall we shine like starres in heauen, if we go not through this fierie tryall? or land at the hauen of blisse, if wee passe not the waues of this troublesome water? You see the Riders: but you wil say, What is this to vs? we haue no such riders. Yes, many; too many; euen so many as we haue Oppressors, eyther by tongue or hand. Shall I name some of them? The malicious slanderer is a perillous Rider; and hee rides like death vpon a Reuel. 6. 8. pale horse, Enuie. Thus were the Pharises mounted, when they rode ouer Christ, euen the Head of our heads. If Iesus will not be a Pharise, they will naile him to the Crosse. These venemous Cantha∣rides light vpon Gods fairest flowers: and striue, either to blast them with their contumelious breaths, or to tread them vnder their malicious feete. The griping Vsurer is a pestilent Rider; and hee is mounted on a heauy Iade, Mammon or loue of money. Euery step of this beast wounds to the heart, and quasheth out the life-bloud. O that this sordid beast of vsury, with all his ponderous and vnweldy trappings; bils, obligati∣ons, pawnes, morgages, were throwne into a fire tem∣porall; that the riders conuerted soule might bee saued from the fire eternall. If any Alcibiades had authority and will, to kindle such a fire in England as was once at Athens, I beleeue that no teares would be shed to quench it: but the musike of our peace would sound merrily to it: and the rather, because there would be no more grones to mollifie it. The destructiue depopulator is another pestiferous
Rider. He is a light Horseman; he can leape hedges and ditches, and therefore makes them in the midst of plaine fields. He loues to ride in his owne ground; and for this purpose expelleth all neighbors. Though Salomon sayes, that the King is serued by the field that is tilled: ye hee, as if he were wiser then Salomon, promiseth to serue him bet∣ter Eccl. 5. 9. with grasse. Hee posteth after the poore, and hunts them out of his Lordship. He rides from towne to town, from village to village, from land to land, from house to house; à doloso fur to ad publicum latrocinium, and neuer rests till he hath rid to the Deuill. And there is a fourth Rider gallops after him amaine, as if hee had sworne not to be hindmost, the oppressing Landlord: and hee rides vpon a horse that hath no pace but racking; for that is the Masters delight, racking of rents: and he hath two Lacquays or Pages run by him, Fines, and Carriages. Thus ascended, & attended, twice a yeare at least, he rides ouer the heads and hearts of the poore Tenants: that they can no more grow in wealth, then corne can that is scattered in the high way: for they as that, are continually ouer-ridden by their mercilesse Landlords. Let these riders take heede, lest the curses of the poore stumble their horses, and breake their neckes. The churlish Cormorant is a mischicuous Rider: hee sits on a black Iade, Couetousnesse; and rides onely from market to market, to buy vp graine, when hee hath store to sell: and so hatcheth vp dearth in a yere of plenty. Our Land is too full of these riders: they repine & complaine of the vnseasonablenesse of the weather, of the barrennesse of the earth: but they conceale the true cause, whereof their owne soules are conscious, their vncharitablenesse. The earth hath neuer been so frozen as their consciences: nor is the ground so fruitlesse of plenty, as they of pitie. This is not mala terra, bona gens; but mala gens, bona ter∣ra: vve haue bad minds, good materialls. The earth hath
not scanted her fruits, but our concealings haue beene close, our enhancings rauenous, our transportations la∣uish. The Lord sends graine, and the diuell sends gar∣ners. The imprecations of the poore shall follow these iders, and the eares of God shall attend their cries. There is the proud Gallant, that comes foorth like a May-morning, decked with all the glory of Art; and his adorned Lady, in her owne imagination a second Flora: and these are Riders too, but closer riders: the world with them runnes vpon wheeles; and they hastning to ouer∣take it, out-runne it. Their great reuenues will not hold out with the yeere: the furniture on their backs exceedes their rent-day. Hence they are faine to wring the poore spundges of the Country, to quench the burning heat of the City. Therefore say the Countrey-men, that their Carts are neuer worse employed, then when they do ser∣uice to Coaches. There is the fraudulent Tradesman; that rides no fur∣ther then betweene the Bursse and the shop, on the backe of a quick-spirited hobby call'd Cheating: and whereas greatnesse presseth the poore to death with their weight, this man trips vp their heels with his cunning. They haue one God at the Church, another at their shops: and they will fill their coffers, though they fester their consciences. This Rider laughes men in the face, whiles he treads on their hearts; his tongue knowes no other pace, but a false gallop. The bribe-groping Officer, in what Court soeuer his dition lies, is an oppressing Rider: they that would haue their suites granted, must subiect their necks to his feete, and let him ride ouer them. He confutes the old allegory of Iustice, that is vsually drawne blind; for he will see to doe a Petitioner ease by the light of his angels. Nothing can vnlocke his lips but a golden key. This Riders horse, like that proud Emperors, must be shod with siluer: and the poore man must buy of him, and that at a deare rate,
his owne treading on. I come to him last, whom I haue not least cause to think vpon, the Church-defrauder; that rides vpon a vvinged horse, as if he would flie to the diuell, called Sacriledge. He may appeare in the shape of a Protestant, but he is the most absolute Recusant; for he refuseth to pay God his owne. He weares the Name of Christ, for the same pur∣pose the Papists weare the Crosse; onely for a charme. These are the Merchants of soules, the Pyrats of Gods Ship the Church, the vnderminers of Religion; that are still practising traines to blow it vp. They will not pay their Leuites, their Leuites must pay them. They will not part with their Cures, whereof they haue the donation, but vpon purchase. But it is no wonder if they sell the Cures, that haue first sold their soules. The charitable man dreames of building Churches, but starts to thinke that these men will pull them downe againe. There is yet one other Ridr, though he spurres post, must not passe by me vn-noted: the Truth-hating Iesuite, that comes trotting into England on a redde horse, like Murder; dyp't and dy'd in the bloud of soules; and if he can reach it, in the bloud of bodies too. Neither doth he thirst so much after ordinary bloud, that runnes in com∣mon veines, as after the bloud-Royall. There is no dis∣case, saith one, that may so properly be called the Kings∣euill. He is the diuells make-bate, and his cheefe Officer to set Princes together by the eares. He sittes like the Ra∣uen, on a dead bough; and when the Lyon and Leopard come forth to fight, he sounds out a poynt of ware; ho∣ping which soeuer falls, his carkase shall serue him for a prey to feed on. His maine study is to fill the Schooles with clamours, the Church with errors, the Churchyard with corpses, and all Christan states with Tragedies. The Seminaries were once, like that strange weed, Tobaccho at the first comming vp; but here and there one enter∣tain'd in some Great mans house; now you may find them
smoking in euery cottage. The haue deseruingly encrea∣sed the disgrace of that Religion: so that now in the com∣mon censure, A Papist is but a new word for a Traytor. They receiued their errand at Tyber, and they deliuer it at Tyburne. There are many other Riders, so properly ranking thēselues in this number, and assuming this name; which for modesties sake, I bury in silence. Considering, that Quaedam vitia nominata dcentur: some sinnes are taught by reprouing their names. But I perceiue a preuention: I haue not time enough to end our miserie, much lesse to enter the speech of our mercy. The iourney they make vs take through fire and vvater, requires a more punctuall tractation, then your patience will now admit. Two short vses shall send a∣way our Oppressors with feare; our selues with ioy. 1. For them; let all these tyrannous Riders know, that there is one rides after them; a great one, a iust one; euen he that rides on the vvings of the wind, and the cloudes are the dust of his feete. He that hath a bridle for these Senache∣ribs, and strikes a saffle through their iawes; and turnes their violence with more ease, then the wind doth a fane on the house-top. Then a horse shall be but a vaine thing to saue a man, saith the Psalmist. Horse and Master shall fall together. Then the couetous Nimrod, that rode on the blacke beast Oppression, shal be thundred down from his proud height; and the Iade that carried him shall dash out his braines, and lye heauier then a thousand talents of lead on his conscience. His oppression shall damne himselfe, as before it did damnifie others. It was to them a momen∣tany vexation, it shall be to him an eternall pressure of tor∣ment. Then the bloud-drawing Vsurer, that rode so furi∣ously
on his Iade Extortion, shall (if timely deprecation and restitution stay him not) runne full butt against the gates of hell, and breake his necke. And hee that at the barres of temporall Iudgements, cryed out for nothing but Iustice, Iustice, and had it: shall now cry lowder for mercy, mercy, and goe without it. And let the Cormorant, that rides euer on the back of Engrossing, whose soule is like Erisicthons bowels in the Poet, Quodque vrbibus esse, Quodque satis poterat populo, non sufficit vni. that starues men to feed vermine; know, that there is a Pursuiuant flies after him; that shall giue him an eternall arrest, and make him leaue both Horreum and hordeum, his barne and his barley; to goe to a place, where is no food but fire and anguish. And the lofty Gallant, that rides ouer the poore vvith his Coaches and Caroches, drawn by two wilde horses, Pride and Luxurie; let him take heed, lest he meet with a wind that shall take off his Charriot-wheeles, as Pharaoh was punished; & drowne horses, and chariots, & Riders; Exod. 14. not in the Red-Sea; but in that infernall Lake, vvhence there is no redemption. Let all these Riders beware, lest hee that rides on the wings of vengeance, with a sword drawne in his hand, that will eate flesh, and drinke bloud; that will make such haste in the pursute of his enemies, that he will not bait or refresh himselfe by the way; lest this God before they haue repented ouertake them. Psal. 45. 4. 5. Gird thy sword vpon thy thigh, O most mighty; and in thy maiestie ride prosperously, &c. and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Then shall the Psal. 137. 7. 8. Lord remember the children of Edom in the day of Ierusalem; and reward them, as they serued vs. Loe now the end of these Riders: Psal. 36. 11. Zach. 10. 5. There are the workers of iniquitie fallen: they are cast downe, and shall not be able to rise. Zach. 10. The riders on horses shall be confounded.
2. For vs, though passion possesse our bodies, let pati∣ence possesse our soules. The law of our Profession bindes vs to a warfare: patiendo vincimus our troubles shall end, our victory is eternall. Heare Dauids triumph, Psalm 18. I Psal. 18. 38, 39, 40. haue wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen vnder my feete. Thou hast subdued vnder mee, those that rose vp against mee. Thou hast also giuen me the neck of mine enemies, &c. They haue wounds for their woundes: and the treaders downe of the poore, are troden down by the poore. The Lord will subdue those to vs, that would haue subdued vs to themselues: and though for a short time they rode ouer our heads, yet now at last wee shall euerla∣stingly tread vpon their necks. Loe then the reward of humble patience, and confident hope. Speramus et Supe∣ramus. Deut. 32. 31 Psalm. 20. 7. Our God is not as their God, euen our enemies bee∣ing iudges. Psal. 20. Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in horses. But no Chariot hath strength to oppose, nor horse swiftnesse to escape, when God pursues. They are brought downe, and fallen: we are risen, & stand vpright. Verse. 8. Their trust hath deceiued them; downe they fall, and ne∣uer to rise. Our God hath helped vs; wee are risen; not for a breathing space, but to stand vpright for euer. Tentations, persecutions, oppressions, crosses, infa∣mies, bondage, death; are but the way wherein our bles∣sed Sauiour went before vs; and many Saints followed him. Behold them with the eyes of faith, now mounted aboue the clowds, trampling all the vanities of this world vnder their glorified feet; standing on the battlements of heauen, and wafting vs to them with the hands of en∣couragement. They bid vs fight, and wee shall conquer; suffer, and we shall raigne. And as the Lord Iesus, that once suffered a reprochfull death at the hands of his ene∣mies, now sits at the right hand of the Maiestie in the highest places, farre aboue all Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominations, till his enemies bee made his footestoole. So one day, they that in their haughty pride, &
mercilesse oppressions, rode ouer our heads, shall then lie vnder our feete. Through thee will wee push downe our ene∣mies: through thy Name will wee tread them vnder that rise vp against vs. At what time yonder glorious skie, Coe∣lum stellatum, which is now our seeling ouer our heads, shall be but a pauement vnder our feet. To which glory, he that made vs by his Word, and bought vs by the bloud of his Sonne, seale vs vp by his blessed Spirit. Amen.
THE VICTORIE OF PATIENCE: With the expiration of Malice. PSALME. 66. 12. VVe went through fire, and through water: but thou broughtest vs out into a wealthy place. I DID not, in the former Sermon, draw out the oppressing cruelty of these Persecutours, to the vtmost scope and period of their malice: nor extend their impium imperium to the furthest limit and determination ther∣of. There is yet one glimpse of their stinking candle, before the snuffe goes out; one groane ere their malice expire. We went through fire and water. The Papists, when they heare these words, went through fire and water; startle, and cry out, Purgatory: direct proofes for Purgatory. With as good reason, as Sedulius, on that dreame of Pharaohs Officer, Gen. 40. 10. A vine was before me; and in the vine were three branches: sayes that Apol. contr. Alcor. Francisca. li. 2. c. 1
the Vine signifies St. Francis; and the three branches the three Orders deriued from him. And as a Pope on that of Samuel: Behold, to obey is better thn sacrifice: and stub∣bornnesse 1. Sam. 15. 22. is as Idolatry: inferres, that not to obey the Apo∣stolike See of Rome, was Idolatry by the witnesse of Sa∣muel. Or as one writes of St. Fracis; that because it is said, Vnlesse you become as little children, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heauen; he commanded one Massaeus to tumble round like a little childe, that he might enter. Or as, when the contention was betwixt the Seruices of Am∣se and Gregorie, which should take place; by the com∣mon consent both the Masse-bookes were layd on the . de Vorag. in vita Gregor. Altar of S. Peter; expecting some decision of that doubt by reuelation. The Church dores being opened in the morning, Gregories Missal-booke was rent and torne into many pieces; but Ambroses lay whole, and open vpon the Altar. Which euent, in a sober exposition, would haue signified the Masse of Gregory cancelled and aboli∣shed: and that of Ambrose authenticall and allowed. But the wise Pope Adrian expounds it thus: that the renting and scattering of Gregories Missall intended, that it should be dispersed ouer all the Christian world, and onely re∣ceiued as Canonical. Or as that simple Fryer, that finding Maria in the Scripture, vsed plurally for Seas; cryed out in the ostentation of his lucky witte, that he had found in the olde Testament the name of Maria, for the Virgin Mary. But I purpose not to waste time in this place; and a∣mong such hearers, in the confutation of this ridiculous folly. Resting my selfe on the iudgement of a vvorthie learned man in our Church; that Purgatory is nothing . pag. 106. de Purgator. else but a Mythologie; a morall vse of strange fables. As when Pius the second had fent abroad his Indulgen∣cies, to all that would take Armes against the Turke; the Turke wrote to him, to call in his Epigrams againe. Or as Bellarmine excused Prudentiu, when hee appoints cer∣taine De Purgator. lib. 2. cap. 18.
holy-dayes in hell, that hee did but poetize. So all their fabulous discourse of Purgatory is but Epigrams & poetry; a more serious kinde of iest. Wherein they laugh among themselues, how they couzen the world, and fill the Popes coffers. Who for his aduantage, Ens non esse facit, non ens fore. So that if Roffensis gather out of this Contr. Luther. Art. 37. place, that in Purgatory there is great store of water; Wee went through fire and water. We may oppose against him Sir Thomas More; who proues from Zachary 9. that there Zach. 9. 11. is no water at all. I haue sent forth thy prisoners out of the pitte, wherein is no water. Set then the frost against the raine, and you may goe in Purgatory dry-shod. If there be nothing left but fire, I make no question, but there is not a sparke difference betwixt Purgatory and Hell. I should narrow vp the scope and liberty of Gods spi∣rit, if I should heere tie my discourse to the letter. Wee went through fire, and through water. It is an effect of our persecution; and may thus be resolued: we were by their malice driuen to great extremity. Fire and water are two elements, which (they say) haue no mercy: yet eyther of them more then our oppressors. The time was that a red Sea diuided the waters; and gaue dry passage to the chil∣dren Exod. 14. of Israel and of God. Whereof the Psalmist heere Psal. 66. 6. sings, vers. 6. Hee turned the Sea into dry land: they vvent through the floud on foote, there did wee reioyce in him. And the fire in an Ouen, whose heate was septupled, touched not those three seruants of the Lord. But these more in∣censed and insensible creatures haue no mercy; nor can they inuent a cruelty, which they forbeare to execute. Some translations haue it: Wee went into fire, and into water: which extends their persecution to our deaths, and comprehends the latitude of mortall martyrdome. And thus vnderstood, the next words, of the deliuerance (Thou broughtest vs out into a wealthy place) must bee meant of our glory in heauen. But the euident circumstances fol∣lowing deny that interpretation: therefore I adhere to
the last and best Translation; Wee went through fire and through water. Wherein two things may seeme to be imported, and imparted to our consideration. 1. We went. They went so conueniently as they might, and so conscionably as they durst, from the hands of their persecutors. 2. The hard exigents they were driuen to; when to passe through fire and water, was but a lesse euill compared with that they eschewed. Per mare mactantes fugimus, per saxa, per ignes. 1. From the former obserue, that it may be lawfull in time of persecution to flie. This was granted, yea in some respects enioyned by Christ. But must be warily vnder∣stood; and the rule in a word may bee this. When our suffering may stand the Church of God in better stead then our flying; we must then lose our liues, to saue Gods honour and our owne soules. To deny God this fealtie and tribute of our blouds, when his glory hath vse of such a seruice at our hands, is not onely to deny him that is his owne by many deare titles; of creation which was ex spi∣ritu oris, by the breath of his mouth; and of redemption which was ex sanguine cordis, by the bloud of his heart. But to withdraw this iustly required testimony, is to be∣tray and crucifie him; and scarce inferior to their periury, whose false witnesse condemned him. In this we restore to God his talent with profit; not on∣ly our owne soule he gaue vs, but as many more as our example workes vpon, and winnes to him. When the people admired the great bounty of Iohn, called Eleemo∣synarius, Lorin. he answered them; O brethren, I haue not yet shed my bloud for you, as I ought to doe for my masters sake and testimony. In the early morning of the world, did Abel dedicate Martyrdome, without example: and the Lord did approue it by accepting Abels sacrifice, and Chrysost. Abel for a sacrifice. I haue read that a worthy Martyr
of ours, Dr. Rowland Taylor, wrote first▪ with inke, & after with his bloud; that it is not enough to professe the Gos∣pell of Christ ad ignem exclusiue; but we must cleaue to it ad ignem inclusiuè. This was an honor that Christ accep∣ted presently after his birth, the Holocaust or Heccatomb of many innocent infants, murdered and martyred for Math. 2. his sake. So that suffering for Iesus, is a thing to which he pro∣miseth an ample reward. No man shall for sake parents, or friends, or inheritance, or liuing, or life for my sake; but hee shall haue in exchange a hundred fold so much comfort in this life, and in the world to come life euerlasting. But all times and occasions yeeld not warrant for such a seruice. Much lesse can the Seminaries, dying in England for trea∣son, arrogate to themselues the glory of Martyrdome; though a vicious affectation of it hath hartned and hard∣ned them to such a prodigality of their blouds. They come not to maintaine the verity of Scriptures, but the vanity of Traditions; the entangling perplexities of Schoolemen, the obscure, tetricall, and contradictory as∣sertions of Popes: who commands them to steale that with their liues, which not onely is in inuolued beeing, but in future contingence; whatsoeuer the Romane Church, that is the Pope, shall heereafter constitute or declare. 2. From the latter words; Through fire and water, ob∣serue; that the children of God must not expect a gentle and soft entertainment in this world, but hard exigents; when to flie from their enemies they are faine to passe through fire and water. Affliction for the Gospell is cal∣led by Paul, the markes of the Lord Iesus. The world of∣ten Gal. 6. 17. sets a man, as those three seruants of God were set in Daniels Prophecie. On the one side a harmony of sweet Dan. 3. musike, the Cornet, Flute, &c. on the other side a bur∣ning furnace, hette aboue ordinary seuen times. Worship
the Idoll, and enioy the delight of musicke: not worship it, and be cast into the fiery ouen. Ioyne with the world in his vngodly customes, and the world will loue, feast, tickle your eares with musicke. Separate your selues, and it will hate you, Ioh. 15. If you were of the world, the world would loue his owne: but because I haue chosen you out of the Ioh. 15. 19. world, therefore the world hateth you. Thou shalt bee like Abrahams Ramme, tyed in a bush of thornes; from which thou canst not extricate thy selfe, till thou be made a sacrifice. Gen. 22. 13. I haue read that Caligula the Tyrant being dead, there were found in his Closet Duo libelli; one called a sword, the other a dagger; wherein many were by name prick'd for death, and destin'd to it in the Emperours bloudy intention. Presumptuous enemies so cast lots on a Na∣tion before they haue it; and talke of diuiding a spoyle ere they come at it. Iudg. 5. Haue they not sped? haue they Iudges 5. 30. not diuided the prey? So the proud aduersary in that won∣derfull yeare, 88.; that came with an Inuincible Nauy, and implacable fury; the Ensignes of whose shippes wee victoria, victoria; brought ready with them instruments of torture; as if the Land of peace and mercy had in it no such engines of cruelty; and swallowed downe an abun∣dant hope of our desolation. They threw at dice for our wiues and daughters, lands and vineyards, houses and heritages, shires and kingdome. They purposed to driue vs through fire and water, but fire and water was their de∣struction. Fire broke the sinewes of their combination, and the waues deuoured both their hopes & themselues. The godly at last shall be as mighty men, Zach. 10. 5. treading downe their enemies in the myre of the streets in the battell: and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them. The grieuousnesse of these afflictions must teach vs two vsefull lessons: Patience. Prayer.
1. Patience, Acts. 5. The Apostles departed from the presence of the Councell, reioycing that they were counted wor∣thy Acts 5. 41. to suffer shame for the name of Christ. A true Christian reioyceth in his tribulation: especially when it is for his Sauiours sake; and takes greater pleasure in his yron fet∣ters, then a proud Courtier doth of his golden chaine, Reu. 14. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord. But if it be so blessed a thing to dye in the Lord; what is it to die for the Lord! Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. It was Hardings inuectiue against our reuerend, Psal. 116. 15. learned, and precious Iewell; that Protestants were worse then the Deuill: for whereas bread and water and the crosse could scarre away Deuils; Princes could be rid of them by no meanes, but Fire. To whom that excellent Bishop answeres; that though it pleased his malicious hu∣mour, to make but a ieast of the bloud of Gods Saints; yet it was no more ignominie for Lambes to suffer what Christ suffered; then it was praise and credit for wolues to betray him, as Iudas did. Our patience is our crowne, and others conuersion. Eusebius from Clement reporteth, that when a wicked ac∣cuser had brought S. Iames to condemnation; seeing his Christian fortitude, hee was touched in conscience, con∣fessed himself a Christian, and so was taken to execution with him. Where earnestly beseeching S. Iames to for∣giue him, he after a little pawse kissed him, and said, Peace be to thee, brother; and they were beheaded together. O blessed Patience! which not onely gets honour to our selues, but brings other to saluation; and in all glorifies God. 2. Prayer. This was the Apostles refuge in the time of affliction, Act. 4. 24. Bernard in a Fiction doth excel∣lently expresse this necessity, enforce this duty. He sup∣poseth the kings of Babylon and Ierusalem (by whom hee meanes the world and the Church) to bee at warre one a∣gainst the other. During this hostility, a souldier of Ieru∣salem
was fled to the Castle of Iustice. Siege was laid to this Castle, and a multitude of enemies enuironed and en∣trenched it round. There lyes neere this Souldier a faint∣hearted coward, called Feare: this speakes nothing but discomfort: and when Hope would step in to speak some courage, Feare thrusts her out of dores. Whilst these two opposites feare and hope stand debating, the Christian Souldier resolues to appeale to the direction of sacred Wisedome; who was chiefe Councellor to the Captaine of the Castle, Iustice. Heare Wisedome speake. Dost thou not know, faith she, that the God whom wee serue is able to deliuer vs? Is he not the Lord of hostes? euen the Lord Dan. 3. 17. mighty in battell? we will dispatch a messenger to him with information of our necessity. Feare replies, What messenger? Darkenesse is on the face of the world: our walls are begirt with an armed troupe; which are not onely strong as Lyons, but also watchfull as Dragons. What messenger can eyther scape through such an hoast, or finde the way into so remote a Countrey? Wisedome calls for Hope, and chargeth her with all speed to dispatch away her olde messenger: Hope calls to Prayer, and sayes, Lo heere a messenger speedy, ready, trusty, knowing the way. Ready; you can not sooner call her then she comes. Speedy; shee flies faster then Eagles, as fast as Angels. Trusty; what embassage soeuer you put in her tongue, shee deliuers with faithfull secrecie. She knowes the way to the Court of Mercie; and shee will neuer faint till shee come to the chamber of the royall Presence. Prayer hath her message, away she flies, borne on the sure and swift wings of faith and zeale: Wisedome hauing giuen her a charge, and Hope a blessing. Finding the gate shut, she knockes and cryes; Open, ye gates of righteousnes, and be ye open ye euerlasting dores of glory: that I may enter, and deliuer to the King of Ierusalem my petition. Iesus Christ heares her knock, opens the gate of mercy, attends
her suite, promiseth her infallible comfort and redresse. Backe returnes Prayer, laden with the newes of conso∣lation: she hath a promise, and she deliuers it into the hand of Faith: that were our enemies more innumerable then the Locusts in Egypt, and more strong then the Gy∣ants, the sonnes of Anak: yet Power and Mercie shall fight for vs, and we shall be deliuered. Passe wee then through fire and vvater, through all dangers and difficul∣ties, yet we haue a messenger, holy, happy, accessible, ac∣ceptable to God, that neuer comes backe without com∣fort, Prayer. And here fitly I will end our Misery, & come to Gods Mercy. Desolation hath held vs long, but our consola∣tion is eternall. But thou broughtest vs out into a wealthy place. The Song, you see, is compounded like Musike: it hath acutum and graue, high and low, sharp and flat. Thou causedst men to ride ouer vs. But thou broughtest vs out. Sor∣row and ioy, trouble and peace, sowre and sweet, come by vicissitudes. Inuicem cedunt dolor et voluptas. This dis∣cord in Musike hurts not, but graceth the song. Whiles greefe and pleasure keepe this alteration in our life, they at once both exercise our patience, and make more vvel∣come our ioyes. If you looke for the happinesse of the wicked, you shall find it in primis, at the beginning: but if you would learne what becomes of the righteous, intel∣liges in nouissimis, you shall know it at last. Marke the vp∣right man, and behold the iust: for the end of that man is Psal. 37. 37. peace. We were sore oppressed, but thou broughtest vs out into a wealthy place. Euery word is sweetly significant, and amplifies Gods mercie to vs. Foure especially are remarkable; the Deli∣uerer, the Deliuerance, the Deliuered, and their felicitie or blessed aduancement. So there is in
the Deliuerer aliquid Celsitudinis, Thou Deliuerie Certitudinis, Broughtst out Deliuered Solitudinis, vs, Happines Plenitudinis, Into a vvealthy place. There is highnesse and lownesse; sure∣nesse and fulnesse. The Deliuerer is great, the Deliuerance certaine; the Distressed grieuous, their exaltation glori∣ous. There is yet a first word, that like a key vnlocks this golden gate of mercy; a veruntamen; But This is vox respirationis; a gaspe that fetcheth back a∣gaine the very life of comfort. But thou broughtest, &c. We were fearfully endangered into the hands of our ene∣mies; they rode and trode vpon vs, and droue vs through hard perplexities: But thou, &c. If there had beene a full point or period at our miserie; if those gulfs of persecuti∣on had quite swallowed vs, & all our light of comfort had beene thus smothered and extinguished; we might haue cryed, Perijt spes nostra, yea perijt salus nostra; our hope, our help is quite gone: He had mocked vs that vvould haue spoken, Be of good cheere. This same But is like a happy oare, that turnes our vessell from the rocks of de∣spaire, and lands it at the hauen of comfort. But, &c. Thou. Thou onely, without helpe or succour of either man or Angell; that art able to saue with a few, as well as with many; that art A man of vvarre. Exod. 15. and com∣mest armed against thine enemies, with a speare of wrath, Exod. 15. 3. and a sword of vengeance. Thou, of whose greatnesse there is no end, no limits, no determination. Thou, O Lord, without any partner, either to share thy glory, or our thanks. Thou broughtest vs out. Thou of thy owne goodnesse, so well as by thy ovvne greatnesse, hast deliuered vs. No merite of ours procured,
or deserued this mercy at thy hands: but our freedome comes onely by thy Maiestie, of thy mercy. Here were no armes of flesh, nor Armies of Angels, in this worke of our Redemption: but Thou hast brought vs out, that vvee might praise thy Name. Therefore wee say: Blesse the Lord, O our soules: O Lord, thou art very great, thou art Psal. 104. 1. clothed vvith honour and maiesty. Eduxisti: Broughtest out. Great workes become a great God. Opera testantur de me, saith our Sauiour. My workes beare witnesse of mee. I heale the sicke, cleanse the Leprous, giue sight to the blinde, raise the dead, cast out deuils. Will you not be∣lieue, O ye carnall eyes, vnlesse you see? will you trust your fiue senses aboue the foure Gospels? vers. 5. Come then, and see the workes of God. See workes: not a fancie, speculation, or deceiuing shadow; but reall, visible, acted, accomplished workes. Eduxists. Sensus assensus. Let de∣monstration conuince you: the Snare is broken, and we are deliuered. The Lord workes potenter and patenter. There is not onely manifold mercy, but manifest mercy in his doings. He brought vs out. When the vngodly see vs so low brought, that perse∣cutors ride ouer our heads; they are ready to say; Where is now their Gd? Behold, hîc est Deus; our God is heere, where there was need of him: opus Deo, a work fit for the Deity to performe. Misery had wrapped and entangled vs; the wicked hands had ty'd vs, as the Philistines did Samson with the bands of death. Here then was Dignus vindice nodus; a knot worthy the finger of God to vntie. He looked downe from the height of his Sanctuary: from hea∣uen Psal. 10. 20. did the Lord behold the earth. For what purpose? To heare the groning of the prisoner: to loose those that are ap∣pointed to death. Behold, the waters went ouer our soule, yet we were not drowned. Malice had doomed vs to the Fire; but our comfort is, Nihil potestatis in nos habusse ig∣nem,
that the fire had not power ouer vs. They trode vs vnder their cruell insultations, but the Lord hath lifted vs vp. The Lord of Hosts was with vs: the God of Iacob was Psal. 46. 11. our refuge. Vs. To this act of God, if we tye the Subiect wherein hee workes; and knit to Eduxisti, Nos: which I called ver∣bum solitudinis, a word of former wretchednesse and cala∣mitie: we shall finde our misery a fit obiect for GODS mercy; Especially if you set the others malice against our meeknesse; their wickednesse against our weakenesse: the persons whom God deliuers, & the persons from whom, will greatly commend the mercy of our deliuerance. It is a pleasure to God, to haue his strength perfected in our infirmitie. When the danger is most violent in it own nature, and our sense, then is his helping arme most welcome. Esa. 17. In the day of griefe, and of desperate sorrow, the haruest shall be great; a plentifull croppe of ioy. Qui Deus est noster, Deus est salutis. Psal. 68. 20. He that is our God, is the God of saluation: and vnto God the Lord belong the issues from death. He delights to haue vs say in this deepe extremity; Eduxisti. Thou hast brought vs out. When Io∣nas was taken vp by the Mariners, put from the succour of the Shippe; no helpe in any Rockes, nor mercy in the waters; neither means nor desire to escape by swimming: for he yeelds himselfe into the iaws of death with as mor∣tified affection, as if a lumpe of lead had beene throwne into the sea: a man would haue thought that saluation it selfe could not haue saued Ionas. Yet Ionas shall not die. Here is now a deliuery fit for God, a cure for the almigh∣tie hand to vndertake. Mans extremity is Gods opportunity. Distressed de∣sire is importunate. Psal. 102. 13. It is time that thou haue mercy vpon vs: yea the time is come. But if God doe not presently an∣swere, we are ready to pant out a groane of despaire, The
time is past. If our importunity preuaile not, wee thinke all opportunity is gone. But God sayes, Tempus nondum venit; the time is not yet. God waites the maturity of the danger, the more to increase his honour. As Alexander cheared himselfe when hee should fight with men and beasts; haughty enemies, and huge Elephants. Tandem par animo meo periculum video. I see at last a danger some∣what equall to my minde. Will you heare when this time is come, Iohn 11. Martha tells Christ: Master, if thou hadst beene heere, my brother had not died. Christ knevv Iohn 11. 21. this before, vers. 15. Lazarus is dead▪ and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, that you might belieue. Ob∣serue the different thoughts of God and man. Martha is sorry, Christ is glad. She thought that the time of helpe was past: Christ thought that the time was not oppor∣tune till now. Iairus his seruant comes and tels him, Mark. 5. 35. Thy daughter is dead; trouble the master no further. This was the word Christ expected to heare. And now he sayes, Be not afraid, onely beleeue. Heare the Israelites desperate complaint. The waters of the Sea roare before their fa∣ces; the wheeles of the Chariots rattle behinde their backs: hereon they cry to Moses, Exod. 14. 11. Were there no graues in Egypt, that thou hast brought vs hither to die? Now saith Moses; Feare not, stand still, and see the saluation of God. From that hath beene spoken, and that which follows, we may obserue two workes of Gods mercy. Which consist Remouendo Promouendo: the one remouing avvay much euill, the other preferring to much good. Eduxisti, shewes his kindenesse in freeing vs from calamity; In lo∣cum opulentum, his goodnesse in exalting vs to dignity. The former is an act of deliuerance, the latter of aduance∣ment. So there is Terminus à quo, from whence vvee are freed; and Terminus ad quem, to which vvee are ex∣alted.
For the former, wee haue God heere Educentem, bringing out of trouble. Sometime wee finde GOD Ducentem; leading, guiding, directing. Wilt not thou, O Lord, goe forth vvith our hoastes? And Hee ledde them Ducit. Inducit. Adducit. Reducit. Educit. Non sed. through the wildernesse, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Sometimes Inducentem, vers. 11. Thou broughtest vs into the net: thou hast laid affliction vpon our loynes. Sometimes Adducentem. Thou, O Lord, hast brought vs home to thy selfe, &c. Sometimes Reducentem, Psalm. 126. 4. Turne againe our captiuitie, O Lord, as the streames in the South. Often Educentem, Psalm. 105. 43. Hee brought forth his people vvith ioy, and his chosen with gladnesse. Ne∣uer Seducentem; beguiling, deceiuing, causing to erre: for that is opus Diaboli, who is the Accuser and Seducer of men. For the latter: Into a wealthy place. The greatnesse of our felicity doth farre transcend the grieuousnesse of our past misery. The dimension of our height exceedes that of our depth: neyther did affliction euer bring it so low, as our eleuation hath aduanced vs high. Hereon S. Paul Rom. 8. The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to Rom. 8. 18. be compared with the glory, which shall bee reuealed in vs. whether we compare or their Strength, Length. For their vigour or strength: the affliction of man, in the greatest extremitie, that he can lay it on man, is but finite as the afflicter. The blow comes but from an arme of flesh, and therefore can wound but flesh. Yeeld the extention of it to reach so farre as any possible malice can driue it: yet it can but racke the body, distend the ioynts, sluce out the bloud, and giue liberty to the imprison'd soule. Which soule they cannot strike. There∣fore saith Christ, Feare not him that hath power ouer the body onely, not ouer the soule. And euen in the middest of this dire persecution, God can eyther quite deliuer vs,
that the storme shall blow ouer our heads, and hurt vs not: or if he suffers vs to suffer that, yet he will so qualifie the heat of it, that the coole refreshing of his blessed spi∣rit inwardly to the Conscience, shall in a manner extin∣guish the torment. But now this vvealthy place; the spring of ioy that succeedes this winter of anguish, is il∣limited, insuppressible, inexpressible, infinite. So strong∣ly guarded with an almighty power, that no robber vi∣olently, nor theefe subtilly, can steale it from vs. Some pleasure is mixed with that paine, but no paine is incident to this pleasure. There was some laughter among those teares, but there shall be no teares in this laughter: For Teares shall bee quite wiped from our eyes. By hovv much then the power of God transcends mans; yea Gods mer∣cie mans malice; by so much shall our reioysing exceede our passion. By how much the glorious City of heauen, walled with Iasper and pure gold, shining as brasse, is Reu. 21. 12. 18. stronger then the vndefensed and naked cottage of this transient world: our future comforts arise in measure, pleasure and security, aboue our passed distresse. Thus for Strength. If we compare their Length, we shall finde an infinite inequalitie. Paul calls affliction momentany, glory eternall. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Time shall determine the one; and that a short time, a very winters day: but the other is aboue the wheeles of motion, and therefore beyond the reach of time. For a moment in mine anger, saith the Lord, I did hide my face from thee; but with euerlasting mercy I haue had compassion on thee. Nothing but eternity can make eyther ioy or sorrow absolute. Hee can brooke his imprison∣ment, that knowes the short date of it: and he finds poore content in his pleasure, that is certaine of a sodaine losse. We know that our pilgrimage is not long through this valley of teares, and miserable Desart; but our Canaan, home, Inheritance is a wealthy place; glorious for counte∣nance, blessed for continuance: vvealthy, vvithout
want; stable, vvithout alteration; a constant Man∣sion, an immoueable Kingdome. Vnto vvhich our Lord Iesus in his appointed time bring vs. To whom, with the Father and Spirit of consolation, be all praise and glory for euer. Amen.
GODS HOVSE: OR, THE PLACE OF PRAYSES. PSALME. 66. 12. I will goe into thy House, with burnt offerings: I will pay thee my vowes. THE formerverse connexed with this, demonstrate with words of life Dauids Affliction Affection. His Affliction, to be ouer-rid∣den with Persecutors: his Affe∣ction, to blesse God for his deli∣uerance. Great misery, taken away by great mercy, re∣quires great thankefulnesse: I will goe into thy, &c. Before wee put this Song into parts, or deriue it into particulars, two generall things must be considered. The Matter The Maner the Substance the Forme The matter and substance of the verse is Thankèfulnesse: the manner and forme, Resolution. The whole fabricke
declares the former: the fashion of the building the latter. The Tenor of all is Praysing God: the key or tune it is set in Purpose: I will goe into thy house, I will pay thee my vowes. So that first I must intreat you to looke vpon a Solution, and a Resolution: a debt to be payd, and a purpose of heart to pay it. The Debt Is Thankefulnesse. This is the matter and substance of the wordes. God hauing first by affliction taught vs to know our selues, doth afterwards by deliuerance teach vs to know him. And when his gracious hand hath hel∣ped vs out of the low pitte, hee lookes that (like Israel, Exod. 15.) wee should stand vpon the shore, and blesse his name. Dauid that prayed to God de profundis; Psal. 103. 1. (out of the depths haue I called vnto thee) doth after praise him in excelsis, with the highest Organs and instruments of laud. Generall mercies require our continuall thankes; but new fauours new prayses. Psal. 98. 1. O Sing vnto the Lord a New Song, for he hath done maruellous things. There is a foure∣fold life belonging to man, and God is the keeper of all. His naturall, ciuill, spirituall, and eternall life. Eloudie man would take away our naturall life. Psal. 37. The wic∣ked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him. GOD Psal. 37. 32. keepes it. The slanderous world would blast our ciuill life, God blesseth our memory. The corrupted flesh would poyson our spirituall life, God Colos. 3. 3. hides it in Christ. The raging Deuill would kill our eternall life; God pre∣serues it in heauen. Vnworthy are wee of rest that night wherein we sleepe, or of the light of the Sunne that day wherein we rise, without praysing God for these mercies. If wee thinke not on him that made vs, vvee thinke not to vvhat purpose hee made vs. When I consider the workes of GOD, saith Augustine, I am wonder∣fully mooued to praise the Creator; Contra Fat. Manich. lib. 21. cap. 5. Qui prorsus ita
magnus est in operibus magnis, vt minor non sit in minimis: vvho is so great in his great workes, that hee is not lesse in his least. But when we consider his worke of Re∣demption; about which he was (not as about the Creati∣on, six dayes, but) aboue thirtie yeeres. Where non sua dedit, sed se; he gaue not his riches, but himselfe; and that non tam in Dominum, quàm in seruum et sacrificium: not to be a Lord, but a seruant, a sacrifice. We haue Adamantine hearts, if the bloud of this saluation cannot melt them in∣to praises. But speciall fauours require speciall thanks, vvhether they consist in Eximendo Exhibendo; either in redeeming vs from dangers, or heaping vpon vs benefites. Our Prophet in fiue instances, Psal. 107. ex∣emplifieth this dutie. Of Trauellers, Captiues, sick-men, Psalm. 107. sea-men, & others subiect to the manifold varieties of life. For Trauellers; Ver. 4. They wander in the Wildernesse in a so∣litary way: hungry and thirstie, their soule fainting in them. They cry vnto the Lord in their trouble, and he deliuers them out of their distresses. For Captiues; Ver. 10. They sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death; fast bound in affliction and yron. Their prayers find a way out of the prison to God, and God deliuers them out of the prison to liberty. For Sick, Ver. 17. Because of their transgression they are afflicted: their soule abhorreth all manner of meat, and they draw neere vnto the gates of death. The strength of their prayers re∣couers the strength of their bodies. For Mariners, Ver. 27. They reele to and fro, staggering like a drunken man; and are at their wits end. They by their prayers appease the vvrath of God, and hee appeaseth the wrath of the vvaues and winds. Now the burden of the Song to all these deliuerances is this; Ver. 8. 15. 21. 31. O that men vvould therfore praise the Lord for his goodnesse; and for his wonderfull works to the children of men. And because these foure dangers are short of the innume∣rable
calamities incident to mans life; therefore in the end of the Psalme, much misery is heaped vp, and the Lord is the scatterer & dissoluer of that heape: that all flesh might sing; Saluation is of the Lord. And because these mercies are infinite; so that vvhat Christian may not say with Dauid? Psal. 23. 6. Thy goodnesse hath followed mee all the dayes of my life. Therefore I infer with Paul, 1. Thes. 5. 18 In all things giue thanks. So our Psalmist, My mouth shall be filled with thy praise all the day long. What is meant by All the day, saith Augustine, but a praise without inter∣mission? As no houre slips by thee without occasion, let none slippe from thee without manifestation of gratitude. I will praise thee, saith he, O Lord, In prosperis, quia conso∣laris, in aduersis, quia corrigis: In a prosperous estate, be∣cause thou dost blesse me; in affliction, because thou doost correct me. Fecisti, refecisti, perfecisti: Thou madest mee when I was not, restoredst me when I vvas lost; sup∣plyest my wants, forgiuest my sinnes; and crownest my perseuerance. But as, Quò acerbior miseria, eò acceptior misericordia: the more grieuous the miserie, the more gra∣cious the mercy. So the richer benefite requires the har∣tier thanks. Great deliuerances should not haue small gra∣titude: vvhere much is giuen, there is not a little required. To tell you what God hath done for vs, thereby to excite thankfulnesse, would be to lose my selfe in the gates of my Text. I told you this was the ground and module of the Psalme. But I know, your curious eares care not so much for plaine-song; you expect I should runne vpon Diuisi∣on. Heare but the next generall point, and I come to your desire: reseruing what I haue more to say of this, to my farewell, and last application. I come from the Debt to be paid, to his Resolution to pay it. I will goe into thy house, I will pay, &c. Though he be not instantly Soluendo, he is Resoluendo. He is not like those Debters, that haue neither meanes, nor meaning to
pay. But though he wants actuall, he hath votall retribu∣tion. Though hee cannot so soone come to the place, where this payment is to be made; yet hee hath already paid it in his hert. I will goe, I will pay. Here then is the Debters Resolution. There is in the godly a purpose of heart to serue the Lord. This is the child of a sanctified spirit, borne not without the throbs and throwes of true penitence. Not a transient and perishing flower, like Ionah's Gourd, Filius noctis; oriens, moriens: but the sound fruit, which the sap of grace in the heart sends forth. Luke 15. VVhen the Prodigall Sonne came to himselfe, saith the Text; as if he had been formerly out of his wits: his first speech was, I will arise and goe to my Father: and will say vnto him; Fa∣ther, Luke 15. 18. I haue sinned. And what he purposed, he performed: he arose and went. I know, there are many that intend much, but doe no∣thing: and that earth is full of good purposes, but heauen onely full of good works: and that the tree gloriously lea∣ued with intentions, without fruit, was cursed: And that a lewd heart may be so farre sinitten and conuinced at a Sermon, as to will a forsaking of some sinne. VVhich thoughts are but swimming notions, and vanishing moti∣ons; embrions, or abortiue births. But this Resolution hath a stronger force: it is the effect of a mature and deliberate iudgement; wrought by Gods Spirit, grounded on a voluntary deuotion; not without true sanctification: though it cannot, without some inter∣position of time and meanes, come to performe that act which it intends. It is the harbinger of a holy life: the lit∣tle clowd, like a 1. King. 18. 44 hand, that Eliah's seruant saw, pointing to the future showres of deuotion. Well, this is but the beginning, and you know, many beginne, that doe not accomplish: but what shall become of them that neuer begin? If he doth little, that purposeth,
and performes not: what hope is there of them that vvill not purpose? It is hard to make an Vsnrer leaue his extor∣tion, the vncleane his lusts, the swearer his dishallowed speeches: when neither of them saith so much, as I vvill leaue them. The habite of godlinesse is farre off, when to vvill is not present: & we despaire of their performance, in whom cannot be wrought a purpose. But to you of whom there is more hope, that say, vve will praise the Lord; forget not to adde Dauids execution to Dauids intention. God loues the present tense better then the future: a Facto, more then a Faciam. Let him that is President ouer vs, be a precedent for vs. Hebr. 10.  Behold, I come: not I will come, but I do come, to Heb. 10. 7. doe y will, O GOD. You haue heard the matter and manner of the Song: the Substance is Gratitude; the Forme, a Resolution to giue it. To set it in some Diuision or Method. That euery present soule may beare his part; heere be three straines, or staires, and graduall ascents: vp which our contemplations must mount, with Dauids actions. 1. An entrance into Gods house: I will goe into thy house. It is well that Dauid will bring thither his praises, him∣selfe. But many enter Gods house, that haue no businesse there: that both come and returne empty-hearted: that neither bring to God deuotion, nor carry from God con∣solation. 2. Therefore the next straine giues his zeale; he vvill not come empty-handed; but with burnt offerings. Mani∣fold and manifest arguments of his harty affection. Mani∣fest, because burnt offerings; reall, visible, actuall, and ac∣complished works. Manifold, because not one singular oblation, but plurally offerings, vvithout pinching his deuotion. 3. But yet diuerse haue offered Sacrifices and burnt
sacrifices, that stunke like Balaams in Gods nosthrils: ten∣dring Bullocks and Goates, not their owne hearts. There∣fore the third straine affirmes, that Dauid will not onely offer beasts, but himselfe. I will pay thee my vowes. So that in his Gratitude is obseruable Quo Loco Modo Animo. In what place, Gods house: after what manner, vvith burnt offerings: with what mind, I will pay thee my vowes. His deuotion is without exception: all the labour is to worke our hearts to an imitation. I will goe into thy house. The first note hath two straines, Place, Entrance. The place he purposeth to enter, is described by the Property, Domus. Proprietary, Dominus. This house was not the Temple, for that was after built by Salomon: but the Tabernacle, or Sanctuary. GOD had his house in all ages; as the wise Creator of all things, he reserued to him a portion in all things; Non propter in∣digentiam, sed in re cognitionem: not that hee had need of them, but that he might be acknowledged in thē. Though he be Lord of all Nations in the world, because the Maker of all men, yet he reserued a particular number of men, & appropriated them to himselfe: and these he called Suum populum, Luke 1. 68. His people. Though thousands of Angels stand before him, and tenne thousand thousands of those glorious spirits mini∣ster vnto him: yet he culleth and calleth out some parti∣cular men to celebrate his seruice: sanctifying, or setting thē apart to that office: & these he calls Suos ministros; His Priests, his Ministers. Though he be a Spirit, immortall, most rich; and Lord
of all things: the earth is his and the fulnesse thereof; yea heauen and the glory thereof: Psal. 50. 12. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, &c. yet he reserueth to himselfe a certaine share of these inferiour things: and this hee calls Suam sortem: his portion: Mal. 3. 8. His tythes, his offerings. Though he be Eternall, first and last: without begin∣ning, without end: God of all times, and yet vnder no time: with whom a thousand yeares is but as one day: and euerlastingly to be honoured. Yet hee reserueth to him∣selfe a certaine time, wherein hee lookes for our generall worship: & this he cals Suum Diem; his day, Esa. 58. 13. his Sabbaths. Though hee be the Esa. 57. 15. High and Lofty One, that inhabi∣teth eternity, vvhose Name is Holy: though infinite and comprehended in no place. Yet he sets apart some speci∣all place, wherein his great name shall be called on: and this he calls Suam Domum; His house. So Math. 21. My house shall be called the house of prayer. Here, I will goe into Thy House. Math. 21. 13. God neuer left his Church destitute of a certain sacred place, wherein he would be worshipped. Adam had a place, wherein he should present himselfe to God, and God did present himselfe to him; Paradise. God appea∣red to Abraham in a place, and sanctified it: and there Gen. 12. 7. Abraham built an Altar; for it was holy. When hee commanded him to sacrifice his Sonne Isaac, hee ap∣pointed him a place; on Gen. 22. 1. 2. Chron. 3. 1. a mountaine. And on this very mountaine was afterwards Salomons Temple built. 2. Chron. 3. Iacob according to the seuerall pla∣ces hee dwelt in, built seuerall Altars to serue God on. The Israelites were translated out of Egypt for this very cause, that they might haue a place to sacrifice to the Lord. When they were come into Canaan, God commanded and directed Moses, to make a Taberna∣cle: which was but mobile Tabernaculum, to bee dissolued when Salomons glorious Temple was finished. Now all
these particular places were consecrated to the seruice of God; and called Loca Dei, Gods Places; as Dauid calls this Domum Dei, Gods House. This is the first note of the straine, the Place. The next is his Entrance; wherein obserue; 1. That Dauids first care is to visit Gods house. It is very likely that this Psalme was written by Dauid, eyther in exile vnder Saul, or in persecution by Absalon, or in some grieuous distresse: whereout being deliuered, hee first resolues to salute Gods House. Chrysostome in Opere imperfect. or whosoeuer was the Author of that booke; notes it the property of a good Sonne, when hee comes to towne, first to visite his Fathers house, and to performe the honour that is due to him. We finde this in▪ Christ. Math. 22. so soone as euer he came to Ierusalem, first he visits his Fathers house, He went into the Temple. What Mat. 21. 10. 12. the Sonne and Lord of Dauid did there, the same course doth the Seruant of his Sonne take heere: First, I will goe into thy House. Oh for one dramme of this respect of Gods house in these dayes. Shall that place haue a principall place in our affections? we would not then thinke one houre tedious in it, when many yeares delight vs in the Tents of Kedar. This was not Dauids opinion. Psal. 84. 10. One day in thy Court is better then a thousand. Nor grudge at euery penny that a Leuy taxeth to the Church: as if Tegumen parietibus im∣positum was enough: bare walls and a couer to keepe vs from raine: and aliquid ornatus was but superfluous; ex∣cept it be a cushion and a wainscot seate, for a Gentlemans better ease. The greatest preparation vsually against some solemne feast, is but a little fresh straw vnder the feete; the ordinary allowance for hogs in the stye, or horses in the stable. For other cost, let it be Domus opportuna volum, a cage of vncleane birds: and so it must bee so long as some sacrilegious persons are in it. It was part of the
Epitaph of King Edgar. Templa Deo, Templis Monachos, Monachis dedit agros. He gaue Temples to God, Ministers to those Temples, and maintenance to those Ministers. But the Epitaphs of too many in these dayes may well run in contrary termes. They take Tenths from good Ministers, good Ministers from the Churches, yea and some of them also the Chur∣ches from God. But here Quicquid tetigero, vlcus erit: that which I should touch is an vlcer: and I will spend no Physicke in immedicabile vulnus, vpon an incurable wound; but leaue it Enserecidendum Domini; to be cut off with the sword of Gods vengeance. 2. Obserue the reason why Dauid would goe into Gods house; and this hath a double degree. To giue him. 1. Praise. 2. Publike praise▪ 1. Praise. Might not Dauid praise God in any place? Yes, Dauid might and must blesse the Lord in any place, in euery place: but the place that is principally destin'd to this purpose, is Domus Dei; Gods House. The name which God imposed on his house, and by which, as it were, he Christned it; was Domus orationis, the house of prayer. As Christ, Math. 21. deriues it from Esa. 56. My house shall be called the house of prayer. Therefore those Math. 21. 13. Esa. 56. 7. houses were called in the Primitiue times, Dominica, the Lords houses; and Oratoria, houses of prayer, deuoted to the praise of God. I might heere take iust cause to taxe an error of our times. Many come to these holy places, and are so trans∣ported with a desire of hearing, that they forget the fer∣uencie of praying and praising God. The End is euer held more noble then the meanes, that conduce vnto it. Sin brought in ignorance, and ignorance takes away de∣uotion. The Word preached brings in knowledge, and knowledge rectifies deuotion. So that all our preaching is but to beget your praying, to instruct you to praise and
worship God. The most immediate & proper seruice and worship of God, is the end, and hearing but the meanes to that end. And the rule is true; Semper finis excellit id quod est ad finem: the end euer excells that which leads to the end. Th. 1. qu. 117 art. 1. Scientia non est qualitas actiua, sed principium quo aliquis dirigitur in operando. Knowledge is not an actiue qualitie, but onely a meanes to direct a man in working. Non tam audire, quàm obedire requirit Deus. God rec∣kons not so much of our audience, as of our obedience: not the hearers, but the Iam. 1. 25. dooers are blessed in their deed. In∣deed Christ saith, Blessed are they that heare the Word of God; but with this condition, that they keepe it. The wor∣ship of GOD is the fruit of hearing, shew me this fruit. Our Oratoria are turned into Auditoria, and we are con∣tent that God should speake earnestly to vs, but wee will not speake deuoutly to him. I hope that no man will so ignorantly and iniuriously vnderstand me, as if I spake a∣gainst hearing of Sermons frequently. God forbid: you must heare, and we must preach Acts. 6. The Apostles gaue themselues continually to prayer, and to the preaching of Acts 6. 4. the Word. Where yet Prayer is put in the first place. I complaine not that our Churches are Auditories, but that they are not Oratories: not that you come to Ser∣mons, (for Gods sake come faster) but that you neglect publique prayer. As if it were onely Gods part to blesse you, not yours to blesse God. And hereof I complaine with good company. De Incom∣preh. Dei na∣turae, Hom. 3. Chrysostome saith, that such a mul∣titude came to his Sermons, that there was scarce roome for a late commer: & those would all patiently attend the end of the Sermon: But when prayers were to be read, or Sacraments to be administred, the company was thinne, the seates empty. Uacua, desertaque Ecclesia reddebatur. Beloued, mistake not. It is not the onely exercise of a Christian to heare a Sermon: nor is that Sabbath well spent, that dispatcheth no other businesse for heauen. I will be bold to tell you, that in Heauen there shall be no
Sermons; and yet in Heauen there shall be Halleluiahs. And this same end, for which Dauid came to Gods house, shall remaine in glory; to praise the Lord. So that all Gods seruice is not to be narrowed vp in hearing; it hath greater latitude; there must be prayer, praise, adoration, and worship of God. Neither is it the scope of Christia∣nitie to knowe, but the scope of knowledge, is to be a good Christian. You are not Heathen, to aske Quid cre∣dendum, What must we belieue? nor Catechists to de∣mand Luke 3. 10. Quid faciendum, What must we doe? You know what to belieue, you know what to doe. Our preaching hath not so much need monere, as monere: though you al∣so need instruction, yet more need of exhortation: for you haue learnt more then euer you haue followed. Come then hither, both to heare God, and to praise God. As Dauid was not onely here a Praiser, but ver. 16. a Prea∣cher. Come and heare all ye that feare God, and I wil tell you what he hath done for my soule. 2. Which fitly brings mee to the further exemplyfy∣ing of this cause, mouing Dauid to enter into Gods house. Which was not onely to praise him, but to praise him publiquely. Otherwise, he might haue muttered his ori∣sons to himselfe: no, he desires that his mouth should be a trumpet of Gods glory; as frequently in the Psalmes; I will praise thee before the great congregations. There are some, that whatsoeuer seruice they doe to God, desire ma∣ny vvitnesses of it: others desire no witnesses at all. The former are hypocrites; who would haue all mens eyes take notice of their deuotion: as if they durst not trust God vvithout witnesse, for feare he should deny it. Such were the Pharises; they gaue no almes without the proclamation of a trumpet: and their prayers were at the corners of streets; such corners where diuerse streets met, & so more spectable to many passengers. To these Christ, Math. 6. Doe thy deuotion in secret; and hee that see in Math. 6. 4.
secret, shall reward thee openly. The other haue a little desire to serue GOD, but they would haue no witnesses at all. They depend vpon some great man, that will be angry with it. And these would faine haue God take notice of their deuotion, and no body else. So Nichodemus stole to Christ by night: and many a Papists seruant would come to Church, if hee were sure his Master might not know of it. For hee feares more to be turned out of his seruice, then out of Gods seruice. To these Christ, Luke 12. Be not afraid of them that can kill Luke 12. 4. the body, and no more; but feare him that hath power to cast into hell; yea I say vnto you, feare him. A man may better lose his Landlords fauour, then the Lords fauour: his Farme on earth, then his manor or mansion in heauen. Dauid was neither of these. His thankfulnesse shal not be hidden timore minantium; nor yet will hee manifest it amore laudantium. Neither for feare of Commanders, nor for loue of commenders. He is neither Timidus, nor Tu∣midus: not fearefull of frownes, nor luxurious of praises: but onely desires to manifest the integritie of his consci∣ence in the sight of God. It is the manner of the godly, not onely to ruminate in their minds Gods mercies, but to divulge them to the bettering of others. When vvee yeeld thus to the world a testimony of our faith, & thank∣fulnesse in Gods publique honour; we prouoke others to harken to religion, and inflame their hearts with a feruent desire to partake the like mercies. The fame of Alexan∣der gaue heart to Iulius Caesar, to be the more noble vvar∣riour. The freedome of our deuotion giues an edge to o∣thers. Sen. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 11. Beneficium qui dedit, taceat: narret qui accepit. Let him that giues a benefit, be silent: let him speake of it, that hath receiued it. There is that law of difference (saith that Philosopher) betwixt the dooer of a good turne, and the receiuer of it. Alter statim obliuisci debet. dati, alter accepti nunquam. The one ought quickly to forget what he hath
giuen: the other ought neuer to forget what hee hath re∣ceiued. We are the receiuers, and must not forget. God gaue the Law to Israel, and the Custome of the Saints ob∣serued it. Psal. 78. 4. What we haue heard and knowne, and our Fa∣thers haue told vs: we will not hide from our children, shew∣ing to the generations to come, the praises of the Lord. Indeed there was a time, when Christ forbad the pub∣lishing of his benefite. Mark. 1. to the Leper; See thou say Mark. 1. 44. nothing to any man of it. But he went out, and began to publish it much, & to blaze abroad the matter. I know, diuerse Di∣uines, by curious distinctions, haue gone about to excuse the matter; by making this an admonitory, not an obli∣gatory precept. But I subscribe to Caluin and Marlorat, who taxe it for an offence, and manifest breach of Christs commandement. And Ierome on that place sayes, that Non erat necesse vt sermone iactaret, quod corpore praefere∣bat. His tongue might be silent, for his whole body was turned into a tongue to publish it. The act was good, but not good at that time. Disobedient he was, be it gran∣ted: yet of all disobedient men commend me to him. Let not then any politicke or sinister respects tye vp our tongues, from blessing him that hath blessed vs. Suffocate not the fire of zeale in thy heart by silent lips, lest it proue key-cold. But say with our Prophet, Psal. 26. 12. My foot standeth in an euen place: in the congregations vvill I blesse the Lord. We perceiue now the motiue cause that brought Da∣uid into Gods house: I would take leaue from hence in a word, to instruct you with what minde you should come to this holy place. We are in substance inheritors of the same faith, which the Iewes held: & haue in stead of their Tabernacle, Sanctuary, Temple; Churches, places set a∣part for the Assembly of Gods Saints. Wherein wee re∣ceiue diuine Mysteries, and celebrate diuine Ministeries; which are said by Damascen; Orthod. Fid. lib. 1. cap. 16. Plus participare operationis & gratiae diuinae. There is nothing lost by the Gospell,
which the Law afforded; but rather all bettered. It is ob∣seruable that the building of that glorious Temple, vvas the maturity and consummation of Gods mercy to the Iewes. Infinite were his fauours betwixt their slauery in Egypt, and their peace in Israel. God did, as it were, at∣tend vpon them to supply their wants. They haue no guide: why, God himselfe is their guide, and goes before them in a pillar of fire. They haue no shelter: the Lord spreads a cloud ouer them for a Canopy. Are they at a stand, and want way? The Sea shall part and giue them passage, whiles the diuided waters are as walls vnto them. For sustenance, they lacke bread: heauen it selfe shall powre downe the food of Angels. Haue they no meat to their bread? A winde shall blow to them innu∣merable Quailes. Bread and flesh is not enough without drinke: behold, a hard rocke smitten with a little vvand shall powre out abundance of water. But what is all this, if they yet in the wildernesse shall vvant apparell? their garments shall not waxe olde on their backes. Doe they besiege? Iericho walls shall fall downe before them: for want of engines, hailestones shall braine their enemies: Lampes, and pitchers, and dreames shall get them victo∣rie. The Iosh. 10. 1. Sunne shall stand still in Gibeon, and the Moone in the valley of Aialon; to behold their conquests. Lacke they yet a Land to inhabite? the Lord will make good his promise against all difficulties, and giue them a land that flowes with milke and honey. But is all this yet short of our purpose, and their chiefe blessednesse? They want a House to celebrate his praise, that hath done all this for them: behold, the Lord giueth them a goodly Temple, neyther doth hee therein onely accept their offerings, but he also giues them his Oracles; euen vocall oracles between the Cherubins. I might easi∣ly paralell England to Israel in the circumference of all these blessings: but my center is their last and best, and whereof they most boasted: The Ier. 7. 4. Temple of the Lord,
and the Law of their God. To answere these wee haue the Houses of God, and the Gospell of Iesus Christ. We haue all, though all in a new manner. 2. Cor. 5. Old things 2. Cor. 5. 17. are passed away; behold, all things are become new. They had an Heb. 8. 13. Old Testament, we haue the New Testament. They had the Spirit, wee haue a new Spirit. They had Com∣mandements, we haue Nouum mandatum; the Ioh. 13. 34. New com∣mandement. They had an Inheritance, Canaan; we haue a new Inheritance promised. Vids nouum coelum, & nouam terram; Reu. 21. 1. I saw a new heauen, and a new earth. To con∣clude, they had their Temple, we haue our Churches: to which as they were brought by their Sabbath, so we by our Lords day: wherein as they had their Sacraments, so we haue our Sacraments. Wee must therefore beare the like affection to ours, as they did to that. We haue grea∣ter cause. There was the shadow, heere is the substance: there the figure, here the truth: there the sacrifices of beasts, heere of the Lambe of God, taking away the sinne of the vvorld. I finde my selfe here occasioned to enter a great sea of discourse; but you shall see, I will make but a short cut of it. It is Gods house you enter; a house vvhere the Lord is present; the place where his honour dwelleth. Let this teach vs to come. 1. With Reuerence. Leuit. 19. 30. Ye shall hallow my Sabbaths, and reuerence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord. The very menti∣on of this Reuerence, me thinkes, should strike our hearts with our selfe-knowne guiltinesse. How few looke to their feet, before they enter these holy dores? Eccl. 5. and Eccl. 5. 1. so they offer the Sacrifice of imprudent and impudent fooles. If they are to heare, they regard Quis, not Quid: any thing is good that some man speakes, the same in ano∣ther triuiall. If the man likes them not, nor shall the Ser∣mon. Many thus contend, like those two Germans in a Tauerne; One said he was of Doctor Martins religion, the other protested himselfe of Doctor Luthers religion:
and thus among their cups the litigation grew hote be∣tweene them: whereas indeed Martin and Luther was but one man. Others, when they come first into the Church, they swappe downe on their seates, clappe their hattes before their eyes, and scarce bow their knees; as if they came to blesse God, not to intreat God to blesse them. They vvould quake in the presence of an offended King; who are thus impudent faced in the house of God. But saith the Lord, whose Esa. 66. 2. Throne is the heauen, and the earth his footstoole; I will looke to him that trembleth at my vvord. So Iacob, Gen. 28. was afraid; and sayd, Hovv fearefull is this place! Gen. 28. 17. This is none other then the house of God, and this is the gate of heauen. Whereupon Bernard, Terribilis planè locus, &c. A fearefull place indeed, & worthy of all reuerence: which Saints inhabit, holy Angels frequent, and God himselfe graceth vvith his owne presence. As the first Adam was placed in Paradise to keepe it; so the se∣cond Adam is in the congregation of his Saints, to pre∣serue it. Therefore enter not without Reuerence. Psal. 5. 7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies; and in thy feare will I vvorship toward thy holy Temple. 2. With Ioy. None but a free-will offering is welcome to God. It is a common opinion in the world, that Reli∣gion doth dull a mans wits, and deiect his spirits: as if mirth and mischiefe were onely sworne brothers. But Gods word teacheth, and a good conscience findeth, that no man can be so ioyfull, as the faithfull: nor is there so merry a land, as the holy Land: no place of ioy like the Church. Let the wicked thinke, that they cannot laugh if they be tied to the Law of Grace, nor be merry if God be in the company. But the Christian knowes, there is no true ioy, but the good ioy: and if this be any where, it is in the Temple. Psal. 122. 1. I was glad when they said vnto me: Let vs goe into the house of the Lord. Indeed therefore we are not merry enough, because we are not enough Christians.
Can you wish more ioy to be receiued, then that Rom. 14 Peace of conscience, and ioy of the holy Ghost? Hilaris cum Rom. 14. 17. pondere virtus; a ioy that can neither be suppressed, nor ex∣pressed. Or more ioy to be communicated, then Colos. 3. in Psalmes, Hymnes, and spirituall songs, singing vvith Col. 3. 16. grace in your hearts to the Lord. Thinke, thinke, thy God is here. The Angels of heauen reioyce in his glorious presence, and crowne it as their cheefe felicity: and shall not poor man reioyce in his gracious presence; as it were, his most blessed society? yes; the Psal. 4. 6. 7. light of thy Counte∣nance, O Lord, shall put more gladnesse into our hearts; then into the worldlings their aboundance of corne and wine. Cast away then your dulnesse, and vnwillingnesse of heart; Come merrily and with a ioyfull soule into the house of God. 3. With Holinesse. It is holy ground; not by any inherent holinesse, but in regard of the religious vse. For that place, which was once Bethel, the House of GOD; proued afterwards Bethauen, the house of iniquity. But it is thus Gods Sanctuary, the habitation of his Sanctity: Procul hinc, procul este profani. Put off thy shooes; d' off thy carnall affections; the place vvhere thou standest is holy ground. wash thy hands, yea thy heart in innocency, before thou come neere to Gods Altar. Bee the Minister neuer so simple, neuer so sinfull; the word is holy, the action holy, the time holy, the place holy; ordained by the most Holy, to make vs holy; said a reuerend Diuine: Gods house is for godly exercises: they wrong it therefore that turne San∣ctuarium into Promptuarium, the Sanctuary into a Butte∣rie; and spirituall food into belly-cheere. And they much more, that peruert it to a place of Pastime; making the house of praise, a house of playes. And they most of all, that make it a house, not laudis, but fraudis: Math. 21. 13. My house is the house of prayer; but ye haue made it a dnne of theeues: robbing, if not men of their goods, yet God of the better
part, sincerity of conscience. What a horrid thing would it bee, Beloued; if you should depart from this Church, where you learne to keepe a good conscience, but into the market; and there practise deceit circumuentiō, oppression, swearing, drun∣kennesse! O doe not deriue the commencement of your sinnes from Gods house. What a mockery is this, and how odious in the sight of heauen, if you should begin your wickednesse with a Sermon as the Papists beginne their treasons with a masse: I taxe no knowne person; but for the facts and faults, Non ignota cano, I doe not speake of things vnknowne. I would to God your amended liues might bring me with shame againe hither, to recant and vnsay it. But it often so falls out, that as those conspirators met at the Capitol, so the Church is made the Communis Ter∣minus, where many wickednesses haue appointed to meete. 2. Cor. 6▪ 6. What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Begin not the day with God, to spend all the rest vvith Satan. Your tongues haue now blessed the Lord: let not the euening finde them redde with oathes, or black with curses. Let not that saying of Luther be verifyed by you; that In nomine Domini incipit omne malum; in the name of God begins all mischiefe. Whatsoeuer your morning Sacrifice pretend, looke to your afternoone. You haue done so much the worse, as you haue made a shew of good: and it had beene easier for your profane hearts, to haue missed this admonition. This Caueat, before I leaue Gods house, I thought to commend to your practise, when you leaue it. I haue held you too long in the Church, speaking of the Church. It was the most materiall point I propoun∣ded to my discourse: forgiue the prolixity; the breuity of the rest shall make amends. The first straine or staire was his entrance into GODS house: now hee is in,
what doth he? what bringeth hee? vve finde Burnt Offerings. I haue three disswasions from punctuall tractation of this point. 1. The poore remnant of the fugitiue time. See Serm. on Psal. 118. 27. 2. I haue liberally handled it on former occasions. 3. The necessity is not great of discoursing the Sacrifices of the Law, in these dayes of the Gospell wee haue the light; and therefore need not trouble our selues to call backe the shadowes. Sacrifices are of great Antiquity: not onely the Booke of God, but euen the Law of nature hath imprinted in mans heart, that Sacrifices must be offered. It is written in the conscience, that an homage was due to the superi∣our power, which is able to reuenge it selfe of dishonour and contempt done it; and to regratifie them with kind∣nesse that serued it. But Dauids Sacrifice was the earnest of a thankefull heart. I might amplifie it, and perhaps picke vp some good gleanings after others full carts. I could also obserue, that Dauid came not before God empty-handed; but brought with him some actuall testi∣mony of his deuoted affection; Burnt offerings. To the confusion of their faces, who will no longer serue God, if hee growes chargeable to them. If they may receiue from God good things, and pay him onely with good words, they are content to worship him. But if they can∣not bee in his fauour, but it must cost them the set∣ting on; they will saue their purses, though they lose their soules. If hee requires ought for his Church, poore Mi∣nisters, or poore members; they cry vvith Iudas, Ad quid perditio haec? why is this waste? They are onely so long rich in deuotion, as they may be rich by deuotion: and no longer. But for our selues, be we sure that the best Sacrifice we can giue to God, is obedience: not a dead beast, but a li∣uing soule. The Lord takes no delight in the bloud of brutish creatures; a spirit in bodies; the impassible in sa∣uours
arising from Altars. It is the minde, the life, the soule, the obedience, that he requires: 1. Sam. 15. 22. To obey is better then sacrifice. Let this be our burnt offering, our Holocaust: a sanctified Rom. 12. 1. 2. Body and Mind giuen vp to the Lord. First the heart. My Sonne, giue me thy heart. Is not the heart e∣nough? no, the hand also; Esa. 1. 16. wash the hands from bloud and pollution. Is not the hand enough? no, the foot also: Remoue thy foot from euill. Is not the foot enough? no, the lips also; Guard the dores of thy mouth; Psal. 34 13. Refrain thy tongue from euill. Is not the tongue enough? no, the eare also; Let him that hath eares to heare, heare. Is not the eare e∣nough? no, the eye also; Let thine eyes be toward the Lord. Is not all this sufficient? No, giue body and spirit. 2. Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought vvith a price: therfore glorifie GOD in your body, and in your spirit, which are GODS. When the eyes abhor lustfull obiects, the eares slanders, the foote erring paths, the hands wrong and violence, the tongue flattery and blasphemie, the heart pride and hy∣pocrisie: this is thy Holocaust; thy whole burnt offering. I will pay thee my vowes. The third and highest degree of this Song is, Uowes; I will pay thee my vowes. And here among vowes, I might sooner then with Burnt offerings, lose the time, your patience, and my selfe. This vow was no meritorious or supererogatory worke in Dauid. But though the Lavv generally binds him to Gods seruice, yet to some particu∣lar act of Gods seruice, he may newly binde himselfe by a vow. So Gen. 28. 20. 22. Iacob vowed a vow, saying; If God will be vvith me, &c. This stone that I haue set for a pillar, shall be Gods house; and of all that thou shalt giue me, I will surely giue the Tenth vnto thee. Our Prophet did vow performance of that duty, to which without vowing hee was obliged. Psal. 119. I haue vowed or sworne, and will performe it: that Psal. 119. 106. I will keepe thy righteous iudgements. There are many cautions in vowes, which I must now
vow to omitte. Onely Salomons rule excepted, Eccles. 5. When thou vowest a vow to God, deferre not to pay it; for hee Eccl. 5. 4. 6. hath no pleasure in fooles, pay that thou hast vowed. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sinne. Let nothing be vow∣ed that is not Penes vonentem, in the power of the vower: and then the thing being good, and thou enabled to per∣forme it, this vow must be kept. For thy vowes are a hea∣uy charge, Psalm. 56. Thy vowes are heauy vpon mee, O Psal. 56. 12. God. The Papists haue strange, and often impossible vowes; of Pouerty, Virginity, Pilgrimage. I will teach thee to make these vowes too, God enable thee to keepe them. If thou wilt vow pouertie, let it be in spirit. Vow thy selfe not in the world a begger, but a begger to Christ. Ma∣ny blessed Saints haue serued GOD with their wealth, and thought not that religion was only in them that beg∣ged. If thou wilt vow virginity, vow thy selfe a Virgin to Christ: whether thou be married or single, keepe the bed vndefiled; that 2. Cor. 11. 2. thou mayest be presented a pure Virgin to Christ. If thou wilt vow Pilgrimage, let it not be to our Lady of Loretto, or of Halle and Zichem, indeed not to our Lady, but to our Lord: vow thy selfe a Pilgrime to Christ: Loade not thy selfe with the luggage of this world, lest it hinder thy iourney; and cease not trauelling till thou come to thy Home; the place of peace and eter∣nall rest. These are lawfull, lawdible vowes: the Lord send vs all to make them, and to keepe them. You see, I am quickly got vp these two latter stayres: Some more speciall vse remaines onely to be made, and so giue way to conclusion. I will take from these three bran∣ches, a iust reproofe of three sorts of people: Refusers, In∣truders, Back-sliders. Refusers to come, being called. In∣truders, that come being not prepared. And Back-sliders, that make vowes, but not keepe them. The first say not, We will goe into thy house. The second say, We will goe into
thy house, but not with burnt offerings. The last deny not both the former: We will goe into thy house, and with burnt offerings; but non soluent vota; they will not pay their vowes. 1. Refusers or Recusants are of two sorts; Papists, and Separatists, or Schismatikes. 1. Papists; and they haue so much recourse ad trans∣marina Iudicia; to beyond-sea Iudgements; that they dare not come into Gods house, because of the Popes in∣terdiction. And the Popes haue so wrought and brought it about now, that they will not onely in abstracto be had in reuerence; but in concreto be feared with obseruation. Though at first thirty Bishops there successiuely yeelded their heads to the blocke for Christ: yet afterwards, by change of Bishops in that See, and of humors in those Bi∣shops, such alteration hath followed; that Rome is no li∣ker to what Rome was, then 1. Sam. 19. 13 Michals Image on a pillow of goates haire, was like Dauid. The cause therefore of their not communicating with vs, is awe of the Popes Su∣premacie. For some of their greatest Writers haue iusti∣fied our Communion booke, to containe all doctrine ne∣cessary to saluation. The not suffering them to come to Gods house, is then rather a point of Popish policie and state, then of Christian deuotion. But indeed they are the Satanicall Iesuites that set them afoote. The common people, like the Mare mortuum, a dead Sea, would be quiet enough, if these blustring windes did not put them into tumult. And so long as those dogges can barke against Gods house, the poore affrighted people dare not come there. So that England may haue their bodies, but Rome hath their hearts; and the danger is fearefull, lest Satan also come in for his share, and take possession of their soules. 2. Schismatikes; who, because their curious eyes (looking through the spectacles of opinion) spy some Morphew of corruption on the Churches face, will vtter∣ly
forsake it. There are some that refuse peaceable obedi∣ence, as the Poet made his Playes, to please the people; or as Simon Magus was Christned; for company. The Se∣paratists are peeuishly wretched: discontent driues them from God; and though they say, they flie for their con∣science, indeed they flie from their conscience: leauing all true deuotion behind them, and their wiues and children vpon the Parish. 2. Well, they are gone, and my discourse shall trauell no further after them: but fall vpon others neerer hand. There are some so farre from Refusers, that they are rather Intruders. They will come into Gods house, but they will bring no burnt offerings with them: no preparation of heart to receiue benefit in the Church. They come with∣out their wedding garment, and shall one day heare that fearefull and vnanswerable question; Friends, how came you in hither? These are the vtterly prophane, that come rather with a lame knowledge, then a blinde zeale. For some of them, good clothes carry them to Church: and they had rather men should note the fashion of their habites, then God the habite of their hearts. They can better brooke ten dis∣orders in their liues, then one in their locks. Others are the secure semi-atheisticall Cosmopolites; and these come too: and none take a truer measure of the Sermon: for their sleepe beginnes with the prayer before it, and wa∣kens iust at the Psalme after it. These thinke, that God may be serued well enough with looking on. And their vtmost dutie, but to bring their bodies a little further li∣uing, then they shall be brought dead: for then perhaps they shall come to the Church-yard, now they will bring them to Church. Deuotion and they are almost strangers, and so much as they know of it, they dishonour by their acquaintance. Their burnt offerings are nothing else, but a number of eyes at vtmost lift vp to heauen; their heart
hath another center. They bring as many sinnes vvith them euery day to Church, as they haue beene all their liues in committing. Their hands are not washed from a∣spersions of lust and bloud: their eyes are full of vvhore∣dome, their lips of slander, their affections of couetousnes, their wits of cheating, their soules of impiety. If there were no Saints in the Church, how could they hope, the roofe would not fall on their guilty heads! But I wil leaue them to the Lords reproofe. Iere. 7. Will ye steale, murther, com∣mit adultery, and sweare falsely: and come and stand before Iere. 7. 9. 11. mee in this house, staring mee in the face, as if you were innocent? Behold, euen I haue seene it, saith the Lord. 3. There is yet a last-sort; that will come into Gods house, and bring with them burnt offerings, a shew of ex∣ternall deuotion; but they will not pay their Vowes. Di∣stresse, vvarre, captiuitie, calamitie, famine, sicknes, brings downe the most elate and lofty spirits. It turnes the proud Gallants fether into a kerchefe, pulls the wine from the lippes of the drunkard; ties vp the tongue of the svvea∣rer, whom thunder could not adiure to silence: makes the Adulterer lothe the place of his sinne, the bed. And though the Vsurer stuffe his pillow with nothing but his bonds and morgages, softer and sweeter in his opinion then Downe or fethers; yet his head vvill not leaue a∣king. This misery doth so sting, terrifie, and put sense into the dead flesh of the nummed conscience; that (all world∣ly delights being found like plummes of lead, tied about a man while he is exposed in this Sea; so farre from help∣ing him to swimme, that they sinke him rather) the eye lookes about for another shore, and finds none but God. To this so long forgotten God, the heart beginnes to ad∣dresse a messenger, and that is Prayer. God (the vvicked see) must be called on, but they knowe not how. They haue beene so meere strangers to him, that they cannot
tell how to salute him. Like beggers that are blind, they are forced to beg, but they see not of whom. Or if their eyes are so farre open; Vident quasi è longinquo salutem, sed interiacente pelago: vident quò eundum, non quà: They see health a farre off, as it were beyond the Sea: they see whi∣ther they would goe, but not which way. If any inferior thing, or created proppe could vphold them, God should not be sollicited. If friends wil, if Phy∣sike will, if money will, if all the delicate obiects for any sense will ease or appease their griefe, they will not seek to heauen. Yea, if Beelzebub the God of Ekron can cure them, they will not trouble the GOD of Israel. But all lower pleasures to one thus sick, is but like a sweet harmo∣nie of musike to a deafe man. There is no hope of comfort but from aboue the clowds. Health & prosperity is but as a Coach to carry our desires to heauen, but sicknes is the post-horse. Onely this Sub poena can bring vs to put vp a supplication in the high Court of Requests and Mercie. Now loe, they pray, they beseech, they sigh, they weepe, they bleed, and lastly they vow. What vow they? Either some new act to be done, or some old act to be left vndone. Now the drunkard vowes abstinence, the lustfull vowes continence, the swearer vowes to leaue his blasphemy: the Incloser vowes to throwe open his taken in commons: the proud vow to leaue their gawdy vanitie: the vvorldling vowes to be charitable, and to relieue the poore. And perhaps at such a pinch or dead lift, one Vsurer in a thousand yeeres may vow to forsake his vsury, and to restore all that he hath so gotten. Now they say, Lord, remoue from me this mala∣dy, this extremity; and I will hereafter serue thee better, loue thee more, belieue thy Gospell, relieue thy poore, giue something to an Hospitall, or doe some such act as may testifie my thankfulnes. Well, God heares and grants; health comes, strength is recouered, the danger is ouer, they are well. Now vbi
vota? Where be their vowes? Alas, we rise from our beds of sicknes, and leaue our vowes behind vs. Aegrotus surgit, sed pia vota iacent. Physicians haue a rule among themselues, concerning their Patients: Take whiles they be in paine. For whatsoe∣uer they promise sick, when they are well, they vvill not performe it. So God had need to take what deuotion hee can get at our hands in our misery; for when prosperitie returnes, we forget our vowes. You haue often heard that old verse: Dmon languebat, tunc monachus esse volebat. Daemon connluit, daemon vt ante suit. And as wittily Englished: The Diuell was sicke, the diuell a Monke would be, The Diuell was well, the diuell of Monke was he. The morall of it sutes full to our present purpose. It is re∣ported of Constantinople, that a terrible Earthquake had o∣uer throwne many houses, slaine much people. Hereupon the remaining Inhabitants affrighted, fel deuoutly to their prayers and vowes: priuately in their chambers, publikely in their Churches: the poore were relieued, iustice admi∣nistred, their liues much amended. But afterwards when God held his hand, they held their tongues: hee forbore plaguing, and they forbore praying: the rod ceased, and their pietie withall; they forgot their vowes. When the Lord hath striken vs by famine; in with∣holding the raine frō vs; or in powring down too much too fast vpon vs: Or by a greeuous plague, turning our popular streets into a Desart: we straight growe penitent; Zeale carries vp our cryes to heauen; wee pray, wee sigh, we weepe. Sorrow sits in our eyes, deuotion on our lips, God hath at that time more hearty prayers in an houre, then ordinarily in a yeere. But as the Poet spake, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula manè. The Lord no sooner takes off the burden of misery; but we also shake of the burden off pietie; we forget our
vowes. O the mercy of God, that such forgetfulnesse should possesse Christian hearts! This was vnthankfull Israels fault, Psalm. 106. They soone forgot his workes: they forgate, yea soone: they made haste to forget: so the Psal. 106. 13. Originall is; They made haste, they forgate. Like men that in sleep shake death by the hand, but when they are awake will not know him. It is storied of a rich Merchant, that in a great storme at Sea, vowed to Iupiter if he would saue him and his ves∣sell, to giue him a Hecatombe. The storme ceaseth, and he bethinkes himselfe that a Hecatombe was vnreasona∣ble; he resolues on seuen Oxen. Another tempest comes, and now hee vowes againe the seuen at least. Deliuered then also, he thought that seuen were too many, and one Oxe vvould serue the turne. Yet another perill comes, and now he vowes solemnely to fall no lower: if he might be rescued, an Oxe Iupiter shall haue. Againe freed, the Oxe stickes in his stomacke, and hee would faine dravv his deuotion to a lower rate; a Sheepe vvas sufficient. But at last being set ashore, hee thought a Sheepe too much; and purposeth to carry to the Altar onely a few Dates. But by the way, he eates vp the Dates, and layes on the Altar onely the shels. After this rate doe many performe their vowes. They promise whole Hecatombes in sicke∣nesse; but they reduce them lower and lower still, as they grow vvell. He that vowed to build an Hospitall; to restore an Impropriation to the Church; to lay open his inclosures, and to serue God with an honest heart: brings all at last to a poore reckoning; and thinkes to please the Lord with his empty shells. There vvas some hope of this mans soules health, vvhiles his body was sicke: but as his body riseth to strength, his soule falls to vveake∣nesse. It is the reproach of Rome; No peny, no Pater noster: let it not be our reproach and reproofe too; No plague, no Pater-noster; no punishments, no prayers. Thy vowes
are Gods debts, and Gods debts must be payd. He vvill not (as men doe desperate debters) dismisse thee on a slight composition. No; Bern. Iustè exigitur ad soluendum, qui non cogitur ad vouendum. He is iustly required to pay, that vvas not compelled to vow. Aug. in Ep. ad Armentar. et Paulinum. Non talis eris, si non feceris quod vouisti, qualis mansisti, si nihil tale vouisses: Mi∣nor enim tunc esses, non peior. Thou remainest not the same hauing vowed, and not performed; as thou hadst beene, hadst thou not vowed. Thou hadst then been lesse, thou art now worse. Well then Beloued; if wee haue vowed a lawfull vow to the Lord, let vs pay it. Let it not be sayd of vs, that we doe Aliud sedentes, aliud stantes: one thing sitting in our chayre of sickenesse, another thing standing in our stati∣ons of health. The Lord doth not deliuer vs out of the bond of distresse, that we should deliuer our selues out of the bond of obedience. Gal. 6. 7. Be not deceiued, God is not mock∣ed: for whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he reape. The next blow of his hand will be heauier, because thou hast soone forgotten this. Who can blame iustice, if he strike vs with yet greater plagues; that haue on our deliuerance from the former, so mocked him with the falling fruites of our vowed deuotion? Come wee then whose hearts the mercy of God, and bloud of Iesus Christ hath softned; and say with our Psalmist; We vvill goe into thy house, O Lord, we will pay thee our vowes. You see all the parts of this Song: the whole comfort or harmony of all is Praising God. I haue shewed you Quo loco, in his house: Quo modo, with burnt offerings: Quo animo, paying our vowes. Time hath abridged this dis∣course, contrary to my promise and purpose. In a word, which of vs is not infinitely beholding to the Lord our God: for sending to vs many good things, & sending away frō vs many euill things? O where is our praise, where is our thankefulnesse? What shall we doe vnto
thee, O thou preseruer of men? What? but take the cup of saluation, and blesse the Name of the Lord? Psal. 100. 4. O let vs enter into his gates with thanksgiuing, and into his Courts vvith praise: let vs be thankefull vnto him, and blesse his Name. And let vs not bring our bodies onely, but our hearts; let our soules be thankfull. Mans body is closed vp within the Elements; his bloud within his body; his spirits in his bloud, his soule within his spirits; and the Lord resteth in his soule. Let then the soule praise the Lord: let vs not draw neere with our lippes, and leaue our hearts behind vs: but let vs giue the searcher of the hearts, a hartie praise. Ingratitude is the deuills Text; oathes, execrations, blaspemies, & lewd speeches are Commentaries vpon it. But thankfulnesse is the language of heauen; for it becommeth Saints to bee thankefull. As therefore we would giue testimonie to the world, and argument to our owne conscience, that vvee serue the Lord; let vs promise and performe the vvords of my Text: We will goe into thy house with burnt offerings: we will pay thee our vowes. The Lord giue thankfulnesse to vs, and accept it of vs; for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
MANS SEED-TIME AND HARVEST: OR, Lex Talionis. GALAT. 6. 7. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked: for whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. THESE words haue so neere alli∣ance to the former, that before wee speake personally of them, we must first finde out their Pe∣degree. To fetch it no higher, then from the beginning of this Chapter, the line of their Genea∣logie runnes thus. 1. Supportation of the weake, vers. 1. and 2. 2. Probation of our selues, vers. 4. 3. Communication of dueties to our Teachers, vers. 6. The first is an action of Charity: the second of Integrity: the third of Equity. This last is the Father of my Text: and it is fitte, that we being to speake of the childe, should first looke a little
into his Parentage. Patrique simillima proles. It is this. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that tea∣cheth in all good things. This, one would thinke, should stand like the Sunne, all men blessing it: yet Mammon hath suborned some dogges to barke against it. Will they say, Let him is one∣ly permissie? They shall finde it was imperatiue; Gen. 1. 3. Let there be light, and there was light. Though their sensible hearts want the obedience of these insensible creatures. Or will they except against Taught; as if they that vvill not be taught, were not bound? Indeed many are beter fed then taught; otherwise they would not deny foode to his body, that does not deny food to their soules. Or perhaps they will plead Indignitatem docentis, the vnwor∣thinesse of the Teacher. And what Paul shall be worthy if euery Barbarian may censure him? But non tollatur di∣uinum debium, propter humanam debilitatem. Let not God lose his right, for mans weakenesse. Mal. 3. 8. You haue robbed me, saith God; not my Ministers. Will not all this quarrelling serue? yet still Pauls pro∣position must haue some opposition. Though we must giue something to our Teachers, yet this charge doth not fetch in Tithes. This, this is the point: proue this, and you shall finde many a great mans soule, as his Impropri∣ations cannot be, in a damnable Lapse. I would say som∣thing of it; but me thinkes I heare my friends telling me, what Sadolet said to Erasmus. Erasmus would proue, that worshipping▪ of Images might well bee abolished. I grant (quoth Sadolet) thy opinion is good: but this point should not bee handled, because it vvill not bee granted. I am sure, Gods law giues tythes to his Church: but say they, that Law is abolished; repealed by a new Act of Parliament. Paul in his Epistle frees vs from the olde Law. Indeed Paul speaking of our Sanctification and Sal∣uation; notes our deliuerance from the Lusts of the Flesh,
and from the lists of the Law. From the Ceremoniall Law wholly, from the Morall onely so farre as it shall not con∣demne those in Christ. But who, saue an Aduocate of Mammon, will limit Tenths to Ceremony? God requires a portion of our Time, of our Goods: the Seuenth of our time, the Tenth of our goods: and wee haue those, that turne both into Ceremony. Such make the Sabbath it selfe a meere Ceremony. But bee not deceiued, God is not mocked. This same , In all good things, is of some latitude. Many will allow some of their goods, but they snarle at Pauls In omnibus. The Minister shall haue the Easter-booke, perhaps some other trifles: it may be (a∣gainst their wills) wooll and lambes: but shall the blacke coate carry away the Tith-shocke? The gumm'd Taffata Gentleman would fret out at this. They plead to their Vicar, We giue what the Law allowes. What their Law, not what the Gospell. And yet they hope not to be saued by the Law, but by the Gospell. The Apostle saith, Part of all; why then not the tenth part, vvhich God at the first commanded, and custome in all ages commended? That part once assigned of God, should preuent all arbitrary disposing of men. What Landlord leaues it to his Tenant, to pay him vvhat rent he list? If Mammon must set out Gods portion, he is sure to haue but a little. It was neuer well with the Church, since it vvas at the worlds finding. No man feares to sur∣fet, whiles he is at his enemies feeding. I thinke the purest and precisest Reformers (deformers I should say) of Religion, can hardly order this matter, better then God hath done. Euery plummet is not for this sound: nor euery line for this leuell: nor out of ma∣ny such blockes can a man carue Mercurie. The Canon Law saies, that Si Princeps causam inter partes audierit, & sententiam dixerit; lex est in omnibus similibus. If the Prince heare a cause betwixt parties, and giue a definitiue Sen∣tence,
that is a aw to decide all controuersies of the same nature. But vve haue the Prince of heauens Sentence for paying of Tithes; before the Law to Abraham, vnder the Law to the Iewes; therefore small reason that it should not hold vnder the Gospell among Christians. Be not de∣ceiued, God, &c. They were the Churches, why are they not? Plead what you will, God hath a grieuous Quare impedit against you. You say, they were taken away from idle drones, and fatte bellied Monkes. So Rapiuntur ab indgnis,  à dignis. From the vnworthy they were taken, and from the worthy they are detained. But to whom are they giuen? Possidebant Ppistae, possident Rapistae. Those kept some good hospitalitie with them, these keepe none. So that as Lib. 1. cap. 4. Cominus obserues vpon the battell of Montl∣chy: some lost their liuings for running away; and they were giuen to those that ranne ten mile further. Idlenesse lost, and oppression hath gained. But let me say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 11. Psal. 11. 3. The foundations are cast downe: but what hath the righteous done? The foundations of the Church, which shuld hold vp the Gospell, tenths & main∣tenance, are cast downe, because of superstitious abusers; but what hath the righteous done, that these things should be taken from them? Arondel. Ar. B. of Cnt. Se Fox. Marl. pag. 533. A Bishop comming to a Towne, because the Bells rang not, suspended the Organs. A strange kinde of reuenge, because the Bells rang not in the Steeple, to suspend the Organs in the Quire. So because those Bells, not of Aaron, but of Antichrist, did not ring to Gods glory: you haue suspended the Organs and meanes of liuing from them that take paines; and in your owne consciences preach to you the sincere Gospell of Christ. But be not deceiued, God is not mocked. Or perhaps you say, you must haue these Church-li∣uings for Hospitalities sake, that you may keepe the better houses. So you make the Cleargy poore, that you may make the poore rich.
I haue read, that the Sophy of Persia, beeing to send a great summe of money for an offering to Mahomet in Arabia, would send none of his owne coyne; for that he said was gotten by ill meanes: but exchanged it with English Merchants, because theirs was gotten honestly, and with a good conscience. So it may bee, you thinke that your owne vniust moneys, and extorted commings in by the ruine of your Tenants, is no good offering to GOD. But the Church-mans liuing comes honestly, and with a good conscience; and therefore you will take that, to offer your sacrifice of almes to God. But heerein you come short of the Persian: you doe not giue your owne Lordships and lands in exchange. Yet me thinkes, if spirituall liuings must be giuen to the poore, you might suffer the Church to giue her owne. I could neuer finde eyther in Albo Praetorum, or in Rubrica Martyrum, how the Laity was deputed to this stewardship. Sure they in∣trude themselues into this Office, and will be Gods Al∣moners, whether he will or no. If they will giue to the poore; let them giue that is theirs. Ambr. Dona quaerit, non spolia Deus. God expects and respects gifts of thine owne, not spoyles of others. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. But where is your Hospitality after all this? you can tell me; nay I can tell you. Bestowed amongst Silk-men, Mercers; yea, vpon Taylers, Players, Harlots; and other insatiable beggers of the same ranke. In the raign of Alex∣ander Seuerus, the Tipplers, & Alehouse-keepers complai∣ned against the Christians, that they had turned a place of ground to some religious vse, which belonged to them. But the very heathen Emperour could answere (vpon hearing the cause) that it vvas honest and fitte, God to be serued before Alehouses. Who would not iudge, that Tithes are fitter to be giuen to God, then to hounds, har∣lots, sycophants, inuenters of fashions, and such bawdes of pride and notorious iniquitie? This I will speake boldly, and iustifie; that Hospitality
was at the same time impropriated from the land, that spirituall liuings were impropriated from the Church. You haue not robbed Peter to pay Paul, but to pay Iudas. And hence misery sets her blacke foo into so many faire dores: all comes to beggery at last. They that swallow Churches, like dogs that eat knot-grasse, neuer thriue af∣ter it. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. I haue rubbed this sore enough, and conclude with that saying of Chry∣sostome: Chry. in Mal. 3. Moneo vt reddatis Deo sua, vt Deus  vo∣bis vestra. Restore to God his owne, that God may re∣store to you your owne. Thus as he that had pulled one of Salomons Curtaines, the rest would follow; though in the first there were worke enough for his admiration. So in this coherence, pardon me, if I haue beene somewhat plentifull. It was the induction to my Text: and the dore thus opened, let vs enter in to suruay the building. Be not, &c. The whole may be distinguished into a Caution. Reason. The caution, Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. The Rea∣son; For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall hee also reape. The Caution is partly Disswasiue: Be not deceiued. Perswasiue: God is not mocked. You may deceiue your selues, you cannot deceiue God. These two circumstances make against two defects Error. Be not deceiued. Hypocrisie. God is not mocked. The Disswasion: Be not deceiued. This is the voyce of a friend, studying Aut praeuenire errori, aut reuocare errantem; eyther to preuent a man, be∣fore he erres, or to recall him erring. A phrase often vsed by our Apostle, Ephes. 5. Let no man deceiue you vvith Ephes. 5. 6. vaine words. Nihil facilius est, quàm errare. There is no∣thing
easier, then to erre. There is no man but erres; sometime in via pedum; often in via morum. This pro∣uision then is necessary. . Deceits lye as thick vpon the earth, as the Grashoppers did in Egypt; a man can scarce set his foote besides them. But to preuent the deceiuings of sinne is our Apostles intention, Hebr. 3. Lest any of vs bee hardned, through the Heb. 3. 13. deceitfulnesse of sinne. Sinne is crafty, and full of delusion: there is no sinne but hath his couzonage. Vsury vvalkes in Alderman Thrifty's gowne. Pride gets the name of my Lady Decencie. Idolatry, as if it dwelt by ill neighbours, praiseth it selfe; and that for the purest Deuotion. Homi∣cide marcheth like a man of valour; and Lust professeth it selfe Natures Scholler. Couetousnesse is goodman Nabals husbandry: and Enclosing, Master Oppressors policie. We were wont to say, that blacke could neuer be coloured into vvhite: yet the deuill hath some Painters that vndertake it. Euills are neere neighbors to good. Er∣rore sub illo, Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit. By that meanes vertue hath borne the blame of vices faults: yea, and more then that; Vice hath had the credite of Vertues goodnes. But be not deceiued. When mens wits, and the deuils to helpe, haue found out the fairest pretexts for sinne; Gods iustice strikes off all, and leaues Sinne naked and punishable. Many preten∣ces haue been found out for many sinnes: besides distinc∣tions, mitigations, qualifications, extenuations, colours, questions, necessities, inconueniences, tolerations, igno∣rances. But when man hath done, God begins. One ar∣gument of Gods now, is stronger then all ours. Thou shalt not doe this. Goe study to perswade thy selfe, that thou mayest: yet at last GOD takes away all thy distinctions, when he poures his wrath on thy naked conscience. Then where is thy paint? If it preuaile not against the Sunne, what will it doe against the fire? God charged our first Parents, that they should not
cate of the forbidden fruite: If you doe, you shall dye. The deuill comes first with a flatte Negatiue; Gene. 3. 4. Non morimi∣ni: Ye shall not dye. Then with subtile promises; Yee shall be as Gods, knowing good and euill. But what is the euent? They eate, and they die; are instantly made mortall, and should haue died for euer, but for a Sauiour. GOD bids Saul slay all in Amalek, 1. Sam. 15. Smite Amalek, vtter∣ly destroy all that they haue, and spare them not. Yet Saul 1. Sam. 15. 3. spares Agag, and the fatte cattell. Why is this a fault? I spared the best of the cattell for Sacrifice to the Lord. Will not this serue? No: God reiects Saul from beeing King ouer Israel; who had reiected God from beeing King o∣uer Saul. Be not deceiued, God is not mked. Consider we here the examples of Uzzah, and Vz∣ziah. For 1. Chr. 13. 10. Vzzah; God had charged, that none but the consecrated Priests should touch the Ark. Uzzah see∣ing the Oxen shake the Arke, put forth his hand to stay it vp. Was this a sinne to stay the Arke of God from falling? Yes: God proues it; he layes him dead by the Arks side. For Vzziah, God had charged, Numb. 18. that none should inuade the Priests office. The stranger that com∣meth Num. 18. 7. nigh, shall be put to death. 2. Chr. 26. 18. Vzziah will come to the Altar with a Censor in his hand to offer Incense. Why, is this an offence to offer to the Lord? Yes: GOD makes it manifest; Vzziah is a Leper to his dying day. God had cō∣manded the Prophet sent to Bethel; 1. King. 13. 17 Thou shalt eate no bread, and drinke no water there. Well, he is going home∣wards; and an old Prophet ouer-takes him, & perswades him to refresh himselfe. No saies the other, I must not; For so was it charged me in the Word of the Lord; Thou shalt eate no bread, &c. But sayes the old Prophet; An Angell spake to me, saying, Bring him backe, that he may eate bread. Well, he goes: Is not a Prophets word? an Angels word authoritie enough? No, the Lord proues it; he giues a Li∣on leaue to slay him. Bee not deceiued, God is not mocked. The Iewes knew, that they ought not to despise their
Messias. He is come: Loe now, they study arguments a∣gainst him. Iohn 7. Wee know this man whence hee is: but Ioh. 7. 27. when Christ commeth, no man knoweth whence hee is. And Ver. 52. Search and looke; for out of Galilee ariseth no Prophet. Be these their cauills against Gods expresse charge? Hee an∣swers all, vvhen he leaues their house vnto them desolate. I hope I may take a little, sayes ehazi: but enough tooke him for it, a continuall Leproe. The euill Seruant hath his plea, Math. 25. I knew that thou wert a hard man, &c. Therefore I hid thy talent in the earth: loe, there thou hast Math. 25. 25. that is thine. But what followes, ver. 30? Cast yee that vn∣profitable seruant into vtter darknesse: there shall be weeping and gnashing of eeth. To come from example to application. It is Gods cō∣mand concerning Princes; Touch not mine Anointed. The Papists will touch them with the hand of death? VVhy, they haue warrant from the Pope. Gods Word saies not so, either in precept or precedent. If any King in Gods booke had beene deposed by a Priest, all the Schooles and Pulpits would haue rung of it: wee should haue had no rule with the Church of Rome. But it falls out happily; Ut quod praecepto non iubetur, etiam exemplo careat. That as it is not commanded by charge, so nor commended by examples. But will they still argue for this shedding of the bloud-royall? The gallhouse confutes them heere; but their worst confutation vvill be confusion hereafter. God sayes thou shalt not put thy money to vsury: thou hast found out many distinctions to satisfie thy consci∣ence, or rather thy couetousnesse. Gods word & thy will are at oddes. He sayes, Thou shalt not: thou sayest, thou may est. On these and these termes, Hell fire shall decide the question. Relieue the poore, saith the Lord. Thou suckest their blouds rather: but howsoeuer wilt giue no∣thing. Why, may we not doe with our owne vvhat wee list? Well, this same Ite maledict; Goe yee cursed, is a fearefull and vnanswerable argument. Thus flesh and
bloud speedes, when it will deale with God on termes of disputation. If Gods owne reason, Thou shalt not do this, be not stronger then all ours now; it shal be one day. Eph. 5. 6. Let no man deceiue you with vaine wordes: for, for these things, the wrath of God shall come vpon the children of disobedience. Be not deceiued. As euery particular Sinne hath the particular colour: so there are generall pretexts for generall sinnes; whereby many soules are deceiued. I find this doctrine, though plaine, so necessary, that I must be bold to pursue it. You may easily forgiue all good faults. There are seuen gene∣rall pleas for sinne. 1. Predestination is pleaded. If I be written to life, I may doe this: for many are saued that haue done vvorse. If not, were my life neuer so strict, hell appointed is not to be auoided. These men looke to the toppe of the Lad∣der, but not to the foote. God ordaines not men to iump to Heauen, but to climbe thither by prescribed degrees. Non per saltum, sed scansum. Qui ordinauit finem, ordina∣uit media ad finem. He that decreed the end, decreed also the meanes that conduce to it. If thou take liberty to sin, this is none of the way. Peter describes the rounds of this ladder, 2. Pet. 1. . faith, vertue, knowledge, tēperance, patience, godlines, charity. Thou rūnest a cōtrary course, in the wild paths of vnbeleefe, profanenes, ignorance, riot, impatience, impie∣tie, malice: this is none of the way. These are the rounds of a Ladder that goes downeward to hell. Gods predesti∣nation Augu. de Prae∣dest. Sanctorum. est multis causa standi, nemini labendi: helps many to stand, pusheth none downe. Looke thou to the vvay, let God alone with the end. Belieue, repent, amend, and thou hast Gods promise to be saued. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. 2. It is Gods will I should doe this vvickednesse: hee saw it, and might haue preuented it. It is vniust to damne a man for that he will him to doe.
Answ. This is a blasphemous and most sacrilegious uill. Where did God euer will thee to lie, to sweare, to oppresse, to adulterize? His will is his word: and where findest thou his word commanding sin? And shall Gods Sicut  memorta tua nō cogit  esse, quae sunt : Sic Deus praescientia sua non cogit a∣cienda, quae sunt futura. Aug. de lib . lib. 3. prescience make him guilty of thy euill? Then must thy memory make thee guilty of other mens euill. As thou by thy memory, dost not cause those things to haue been done, that are past: So God by his foreknowledge doth not cause those things to be done, which are to come. 3. Ignorance is pleaded; I knew not the deed to bee euill, or if euil, not so dangerous. Indeed Ignorance may make a sinne Minus, not Nullum; a lesse sinne, but not no sinne. 1. Tim. 1. 13. I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in vnbeleefe: saith our Apostle. And Aug. Peccata scientium peccatis ignorantium praepontur. The sinnes of them that know, are more haynous then the sins of them that know not. But if thou hadst no other sin, thy ignorance is enough to condemne thee; for thou art bound to know.  ea que sunt Domini nesciunt, a Domino nesciu. i Gregor. in . lib. 1. cap. 1. They that will not know the Lord, the Lord will not know them. But I speake to you that may know: your ignorance is affected. 1. Cor. 15 34. Some of you haue not the knowledge of God, I speake this to your shame. Be. in 11. gd. . Mul vt liberiùs pec∣carent, libenter ignorant. Many that they may sinne the more securely, are ignorant wilfully. Thus you may goe blindfold to hell. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. 4. A fourth saith; I haue many good deeds to weigh with my euils. Indeed I am an Vsurer, an Adulterer, a Swearer; but I keepe a good house, I giue almes; and I will doe more when I am dead. Indeed these are good workes; Bona accipientibus, non facientibus. Good to the receiuers, not to the Giuers. So a man may be borne for the good of many, not for his owne. They write that the Pyramides of Egypt was built for that great Pharaohs Tombe; but the Red Sea disappointed him. Many thinke by good workes to build vp a heauen for them∣selues,
but leading vnsanctified liues, hell preuents their purpose. And such a man, as robbes many hundreds to relieue some, may at last for his charity goe to the Deuill. The Papists indeed stand extremely for building Abbies, Colledges for Iesuites, and augmenting the reuenues of Monasteries, that Masses and Dirige's may bee sung for their soules: they giue full absolution to such a man, and seale him a generall acquittance of all his sinnes. They make the besotted Laity, especially some rich Burger be∣lieue, that without any more adoe, it is impossible for a man to bee damned that liues in such a Profession; and which is strange, here they equiuocate truely; so long as a man liues in it; but if he dyes in it, there is the danger. But wee know▪ the poison must be iustified, or else the worke is not sanctified. Be not deceiued, GOD is not mocked. 5. But say some, God is mercifull. Comfortable truth: else woe, woe to miserable man. But shall God shew mer∣cy to those that abuse his mercy? Hee will not be so mer∣cifull to thee, as to be vniust to himselfe. God will be iust, goe thou on and perish. God shewed mercy to the relen∣ting, not to the railing theefe. Wouldst thou haue him mercifull to thee, that art vnmercifull to him, to thy selfe? Misericordia amplectenti, non tergiuer santidatur. They that will lead a wicked life, sub spe misericordiae, in hope of mercy: shall meet with a fearefull death, sub terrore Iusti∣tiae, in the horror of Iustice. Kisse the mercy of God, abuse it not. Where is Praesumptio veniae, will follow Consump∣tio poen: a presuming of fauour shall bee punished with a consuming wrath. Be not deceiued, &c. 6. Others alledge; Christ died for our sinnes, and his satisfaction is of infinite price. This is the dore of hope, from which the profanest wretch is angry to be driuen. The most presumptuous sinner flatters his soule with this comfort: as if the gates of Heauen were now set open, and hee might enter with all his iniquities on his backe.
Indeed there is no want in Christ; but is there none in thee? In him is plenteous redemption; but how if in thee there bee scarce fayth? whatsoeuer Christ is, what ar thou? Io. 3. 16. God so loued the world, that hee gaue his onely be∣otten Sonne. Hee did not let, or lend, or sell, but giue: not an Angell, nor a seruant, but a Sonne: not ano∣thers, but his owne: not his adoptiue, but naturall, his begotten Sonne: not one of many, but his onely begot∣ten Sonne. Many degrees of loue: but what of all this? That whosoeuer beleeueth on him should not perish, but haue e∣uerlasting life. But thou hast no faith, therefore no priui∣ledge by this gift. Iohn 10. 11. I am the good shepheard, saith Christ. Why? I giue my life: but for whom? for my sheepe. Not for lustfull goates, or couetous hogs, or oppressing Ty∣gers. If thou be such, heere is no more mercy for thee, then if there were no Sauiour. If there be no carefull ob∣seruation of the Law, there is no conseruation by the Gospell. No good life, no good faith: no good faith, no Christ. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. 7. Well, yet Repentance makes all euen wheresoeuer it comes; or God is not so good as his word. Yes; God will be so good as his promise; but here's the doubt, whe∣ther thou wilt bee so good as thy purpose. Thou canst charge God no further then to forgiue thee, repenting; not to giue thee repentance sinning. Promisit Deus poeni∣tenti veniam, non peccanti poenitentiam. He hath made a pro∣mise to Repentance, not of Repentance. This is Gods tre∣sure. what is the reason, the malefactor went frō the crosse to heauen! Dedit poenitentiam, qui dedit & Paradisum. God gaue him repentance, that also gaue him Paradise. Art thou sure God will put this almes into thy polluted hand? It is dangerous ventring the soule on such an vncertainty. He that sins that he may repent, is like one that surfet that he may take Physicke. And whether this Physicke vvill worke on a dead heart, is a perillous feare. Alas! vvhat teares are in flint? what remorse in a benued consci∣ence?
Tutum est poenitenda non committere, certum non est commissa deflere. It is safe not to doe what thou mayst re∣pent: it is not certaine to repent what thou hast done. It is the fashion of many to send repentance afore to three∣score: but if they liue to those yeares, they doe not then ouertake it, but driue it before them still. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. You see now what trust is in colours: how easily you may deceiue your selues, how vnpossibly mocke GOD. Leaue then excuses to the wicked, that will be guilty and God shall not know of it. Bernard reckons vp their mi∣tigations. Non feci, &c. I haue not done it: or if I haue done, yet not done euill; or if euill, yet not very euill: or if very Non feci: si feci, non male seci: si male seci, non multùm male: si multùm male, nō mala intentione: si mala intētione, tamen aliena per∣suasione. Bern. Tract. de grad. Humil. grad. 8. euill, yet not with an euill mind: or if with an euill mind, yet by others euill perswasion. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. If we cry with that seruant; Haue patience, and I will pay thee all; the Lord may forbeare in mercy. But if wee wrangle, I owe nothing; and God is too hasty to call me from my pleasures; hee vvill require the vttermost far∣thing. I haue held you long in this Disswasiue part of the Caution. The Perswasiue was also much included in it, and therefore I will but touch it. God is not mocked. God is often in the Scripture called the Searcher of the heart. Iere. 17. The heart is deceitfull aboue all things, and Iere. 17. 9. desperately vvicked: who can knowe it? Who? Ego Domi∣nus; I the Lord know the heart. So Salomon in his prayer: 2. Chro. 6. 30. Thou onely knowest the hearts of all the children of men. So the Apostles about the election of one in Iudas roome, Acts 1. 24. Thou Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men. Now hee that knowes the heart, cannot be mocked. It is hard to be∣guile the eye of man looking on vs, how much more to deceiue the eye of God looking in vs? Therefore Quod
non audes facere aspiciente conseruo, hoc ne cogites inspiciente Deo. How vaine a thing then is it to be an Hypocrite? As if God had not a window into the heart, to discerne it. Hy∣pocrites, saith Augustine, haue De Temp. 215. Christianum nomen ad iu∣dicium, non ad remedium: The name of Christians to their condemnation, not comfort. Their words are like an Eccho, they answere Gods call, but neuer come at him. Good company they will admit, to better their credite, not their conscience. Like crafty Apothecaries, they haue one thing written in their papers and markes, another thing in their boxes. But because euery man is as hastie to condemne an Hypocrite, as Dauid was to condemne the Oppressor in the Parable, vvhen the 2. Sam. 12. 5. Tu es homo lyes in his owne bosome, I vvill touch two or three particu∣lars. If we looke into Popery, we shall find it vniuersally a professed study to mocke GOD. They make shew by their abundant prayers of an abundant zeale: when (as if God saw not the heart) they thinke the worke done is sufficient. Those Qui filo insertis numerant sua murmura baccis, keepe number and tale; no matter with what mind: no nor yet to whom; whether to this Angel, or that Saint; to our Lord, or to our Lady. Yea it is recorded that the Papists in Scotland (about Henry the 8. his time of Eng∣land) vsed to say the Lords Prayer to Saints. Insomuch Fox Martyrol. Pag. 1237. that when a little knowledge came into some mens hearts of this absurdity, there arose great Schisme. And one Fryer Toit was gotten to make a Sermon, that the Pa∣ter noster might be said to Saints. So were the people di∣uided, that it was a common question; To whom say you your Pater-noster? Call you these zealous prayers? Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. As much might be said for their vncleane Celibate. Their single life makes shew of great purenes, as if their
adulteries, Sodomitry, experimentall brothelry, vnmatch∣able vncleannesses were not knowne. They ostent their Chastitie, when Vrbs est iam tota Lupanar. What would they, but mocke God? No lesse for their fastings. How deadly a sinne is it to eate flesh on a Friday! yet is it no sinne with them to be drunke on a Friday. A poore labourer plowes all day, at night refresheth himselfe with a morsell of Bacon: hee is an Heretike. A gallant Gentleman hawkes all day, at night sits downe to his varietie of fishes, curious wines, pos∣sets, iunkets; O he's a good Catholike. An Hypocrite he is rather. Famam quaerunt abstinentiae in delicijs. They seeke the credite of temperance among full tables, ful pots. Famam quaerunt, but Famem fugiunt. They desire praise, but they refuse hunger. But God is not mocked. For our selues. If there be any here, (because my Text depends on that occasion) that robbes his Minister of temporal food, and yet makes shew to hunger after his spirituall food; though he may coozen man vnseene; eyther by his great∣nesse, or craftines: Let him know, that Gdo is not mocked. If there be any fraudulent Debter, that deceiues his bro∣ther of his goods, and then flatters his conscience that the merits of Christ shall acquit him: so packes all vpon Christ, let him pay it: let him know that God is not mocked. The bloud of Christ was not shed to pay mens debts, but Gods debts. It hath vertue enough, but no such directi∣on. Thou iniurest Christ to lay such reckonings on him. No, Vende, solue, viue de reliquo. 2. King. 4. 7. Sell that thou hast, pay that thou owest, liue of that thou reseruest. If there be any Vsurer, that deales altogether in letting out: that lets out his money to men, his time to Mam∣mon, his body to pining, his mind to repyning, his soule to Satan: Though hee comes to Church, and sits out a Sermon; let him knowe that his mind is then bound to his obligations; and he creepes into the Temple for the
same end, the Serpent crope into Paradise. Wretched men, that are bound to his mercy: for like a cōmon hack∣ney Iade, he will not beare them one houre past his day. But let him know, God is not mocked. If there be any Oppressor, that comes to Church in the shape of Knight or Gentleman: & thinks to couer all his exactions of his poore Tenants, all his vvringings of his neighbours; vvith going three or foure miles to a Ser∣mon: let him know, that God is not mocked. He preferres Mercy before Sacrifice; and would not haue thy profes∣sion countenance thy euill deeds, but thy good deeds cō∣mend thy profession. Baldwin an Archbishop of Canterbury bosted oftē, that he neuer eate flesh in his life. To whom a poore leane wi∣dow Act. and Mo∣num. Pag. 233. replied, that he said false; for he had eaten vp her flesh: He demaunds how: Shee replies, by taking a∣way her Cow. Neuer pretend your earnest zeale, fasting or praying, or trauelling to Sermons; when you deuoure widdowes houses, enclose Commons, and so eate vp the very flesh of the poore. If there be any that allowes sometimes the Church his body, when the Pope alwaies hath his heart; who though he be in Domo Dei; in Gods house; is Pro Domo Anti∣christi, is for Antichrists kitchin. Or that keepes a Lady at home, that will not come two furlongs to Church: whereas our Lady trauelld as farre as Ierusalem. Luke 2. Who must needs be a Papist, because her Grannam vvas Luk. 2. 41. so: and growes sicke if you but talke of the Communion. And all this to saue his Lands on earth, though he lose his Land in Paradise: Let him know, God is not mocked. If there be any here, that hath giuen no Religion yet a full perswaded place in his heart: but because he sees di∣uerse shadowes, resolues on no substance. And is like the Batte, that hath both wings and teeth, and so is neither a bird nor a beast. His mind being like a puffe of wind, be∣tweene two religions, as that betweene two dores, euer
whistling. Protestants, he sayes belieue well, Puritans say well, and Papists doe well: but till they all agree in one, he will be none of them all. To quite him in his owne fantasie; let him then take from the one good faith, from the other good words, and from the last good works, and he may be made a very good Christian. But vvhy then comes he to Church? By the meer command of the posi∣tiue Lavv: as hee comes to the Assises vvhen he is vvar∣ned of a Iurie. But let him not be deceiued: God is not mocked. If there be any luxurious, that serues God in the Tem∣ple, his flesh in the Chamber. Any couetous, that (as if his soule was diuisible) striues to serue two masters; though he doth it diuersly: God with his arte, the world with his heart. If any blasphemer that here sings Psalmes, and abroad howles oathes and curses. If any man among you seeme to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but de∣ceiueth Iam. 1. 26. his owne heart, this mans religion is in vaine. If any seem , whē they are , seruers of the Lord, vvhen they are obseruers of the time. Let them know to their horror, Non deluditur Deus, God is not mocked. Gold cannot hide a rotten post from GODS eye. If men will be Humiles sine despectu, and Pauperes fine de∣fectu; Bern. he sees it. Hypocrisie is like a burning feuer, which drinkes feruent heate out of cold drinke. The Hypocrite is nothing else but a player on this worlds stage: the vil∣laines part is his; and all his care is to play it handsomely and cleanly. He maliceth any man that would take his part from him; not vnlike to him that being requested to lend his clothes, to represent a part in a Comedie; answe∣red; no, he would haue no body play the foole in his clo∣thes but himselfe. Hee thinkes to coozen all the world with the opinion of his purity; but there is one aboue sees him. God is not mocked.
I haue ended the Caution; let vs come to the Reason. For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. where∣in obserue The Manner. Matter. In the Manner there is a two∣fold generality of the Thing. Person. There is a Whatsoeuer, and a Whosoeuer: for the vvhole speech is indefinite. The Person is indefinite. A Man, any man, Euery man. This is the first Generality. For Country, be he Iew or Gentile, Turke or Christian. For degree; high or low, Prince or subiect, the greatest Lord, and the basest Groome. For estate; be they rich or poore, the wealthiest Burger, and the wretchedst Begger. For Sexe, be they male or female. For condition; be they bond or free. What a man, any man, sowes, that, &c. The Thing is indefinite. Whatsoeuer. This is the other Generality. Be it good or euill, bles∣sing or cursing, charity or iniury, equity or iniquity, truth or hypocrisie, deceit or honesty. Whatsoeuer a man sow∣eth, &c. Euill is of the flesh: and vers. 8. Hee that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption. And chap. 5. 21. The workes of the flesh are manifest; adultery, &c. they which sow such seed, shall not inherit the kingdome of God. Good is of the Spirit: and he which soweth to the Spirit, shall of the spirit reape life euerlasting. chap. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit is loue, ioy, peace, &c. And To those that walke after Rom. 8. 1. this spirit, there is no condemnation. Whatsoeuer. There are no more sorts of men, but good and euill: nor more sorts of ends, then Poena et Praemum; Reward and punish∣ment. Therefore Whatsoeuer whosoeuer soweth, the same shall he also reape. You see the manner. In the matter we must also con∣sider two things.
A Seeding. Haruest. Whatsoeuer a man soweth in his Seed-time; that shall he also reape in his haruest. They that sowe grace, shall reape glory: they that sowe corrupti∣on, must reape confusion. To beginne with the wicked; he that sowes euill, shall reape euill: he that soweth malum culpae, the euill of sinne, shall reape malum poen, the euill of punishment. So Eli∣phaz told Iob that hee had seene, Iob 4 8. They that plow iniquity, and sow wickednesse, reape the same. And that eyther in Kinde or Qualitie. Proportion or Quantitie. In Kind, the very same that he did to others, shall be done to him; or in Propor∣tion, a measure answerable to it. So he shall reape vvhat he hath sowne in Quality or in Quantity: eyther in Por∣tion the same, or in proportion the like. In Kinde. The Prophet cursing Edom and Babel, saith thus, Psal. 137. O daughter of Babylon: happy shall he be that rewar∣deth thee, as thou hast serued vs. The originall is; That re∣compenseth Psal. 137. 8. to thee Thy Dede, which thou didst to vs. So Sion reioyceth ouer Edom, Obad. As thou hast done, it Obad. ver. 15. shall be done to thee: thy reward shall returne vpon thine owne head. So the Lord to Mount Seir, Ezek. 35. As thou Ezek. 35. 15. didst reioyce at the inheritance of the house of Israel when it was desolate: So will I doe vnto thee: thou shalt be deso∣late, O Mount Seir. Yea verse 14. When the whole earth reioyceth, I will make thee desolate. Prou. 1. Wisedome cryeth, Prou. 1. 15. fooles laugh: therefore saith she; I will also laugh at your calamiy: I will mocke when your feare commeth. This is verse 31. to bee filled with their owne deuices, to eate the fruite of their owne way; to reape of their owne sowing. Thus was Gods Law; Eye for eye, tooth for tooth; Lex talionis. Bloud for bloud. So bels bloud spilt on the earth, cryes for the bloud of Cain, that runs in his murtherous
veines. Nature is offended and must be pacified: and no pacification can wash the Lambe from bloud, but their bloud that shed it. Iustice must cause them that haue sow∣ed bloud, to reape bloud. The example of Adoni-bezek is most obseruable, Iudges 1. Iudah and Simeon warring against the Cananites, surprised Adoni-bezek; and cut off Iudges. 1. 7. his thumbes and his great toes. And Adoni-bezek said, Three score and ten Kings, hauing their thumbes and their great toes cut off, gathered their meate vnder my Table: as I haue done, so God hath requited me. Thus is wickednesse recompensed suo genere, in it owne kind. So often the transgressor is against the trans∣gressor: the theefe robs the theefe; Proditor is proditor. As in Rome many vnchristened Emperours, and many christ∣ned Popes; by bloud and treason got the Soueraignty, and by bloud and treason lost it. Euill men drinke of their owne brewing, are scourged with their owne rod, drowned in the pit which they digged for others. As Ha∣man was hanged on his owne Gallowes: Perillus tormen∣ted in his owne Engine. Nec enim lex iustior vll est; Quàm necis artifices arte perire sua. Thus they reape in kind. Now In Proportion, The Punishment is apted to the qualitie of the Sinne. Adam at first did eate in wantonnesse: Adam shall there∣fore eate in paine. He excuseth his offence with a bold forehead, therefore in the sweat of his forehead he shall eate his bread. The womans eye lusted, therefore in her eye teares. She longed then against Grace, she shall long now against Nature. She ouer-ruled her husband before, he shall ouer-rule her now. Man hath the preeminence: and her desire shall bee subiect to him. Should be, though in all it is not: but lightly when Eue ouer-rules Adam, the Deuill is in the businesse. To trace along the passages of holy Scriptures in this
point: about Proportion. The ambition of Babel-buil∣ders was punished with ridiculousnesse. Cha offending against naturall reuerence, was damned to seruitude. As it was but an easie iudgement vpon Hricus 5. Empe∣rour of Germanie; that had deposed his naturall Father, to haue no naturall Sonne. Sodome was burned with fire vnnaturall, that had burned with lusts vnnaturall. Lots wife abusing her sense, lost her sense: became a senselesse Pillar. She would looke backe, therefore she shall not looke forward: she turned before, therefore now shall not stirre. , ibi resit. Thus Absolons folly was the recompence of Dauids adultery. He had slaine Vriah with the sword, and the sword shall not depart from his house. Salomon deuides Gods Kingdome, his owne Kingdome shall be deuided. Because Pharaoh drowned the male children of the He∣brewes Exod. 1. 22. Exod. 14. in iuer, himselfe and his Aegyptian Host shall be drowned in a Red Sea. Diues would not giue Laza∣rus a crumme: Lazarus shall not bring Diues a droppe. Desider , qui non dedit micam. There is fit Pro∣portion, betwixt a crumme of bread and a droppe of wa∣ter. Aug. The tongue of that Rich man, that had consumed so much belly-cheere, and turned downe so many tunnes of wine; shall not now procure one pot of water, not a hand∣full, not a droppe. In his tongue he sinned, in his tongue hee is tormd. Iudas was the instrument of his Ma∣sters death, Iudas shall bee the instrument of his owne death. Insolent  vowed to enprison conque∣red Tamberlaine, in a cage of yron, and to carry him vp and downe the world in triumph. But Tamberlaine conquering that Turke, triumphed ouer him iust in the same fashion. Those two monsters of the age Pope Alex∣ander 6. and his darling Borgias, that had bathed their hands in so much bloud; were at last by the errour of a cup-bearer, poysoned themselues out of those very bot∣tles wherewith they would haue poisoned the Car∣dinalls.
Behold the Proportion; punishments respondent to the sinnes. Here is sufficient cause to make the wicked tremble; God hath proportioned out a iudgement for their sins. Man by his wickednesse, cuts out a garment of confusion for his owne backe. I know that this kind of punishing is not alwayes executed in this world. Gods temporall Iudgements are (like our Quarter Sessions) kept here and there. Some; much; yea most is reserued for another world. If all sinne were punished here, we should looke no further. But Esa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old: the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a streame of brimstone doth kindle it. If no sinne were punished here, man would not beleeue Gods power. But some is; Psa. 58. 11. So that a man shall say; Verily there is a reward for the righteous, Uerily there is a God that iudgeth in the earth. Thinke of that lower future place, ye wicked; and the heauy Proportion that must there be measured you. Here you haue sowne in your Seed-time, there you must reape your haruest. Let the Idolater thinke of this: hee hath thrust God out of his throne, God will thrust him out of his Kingdome. The drunkard that abuseth so uch wine, must there want a little water. The Vsurer shall be there bound faster with the bonds of torment, then hee hath formerly bound poore men with his obligations. The Couetous that had no pitie, shall not be pitied, Iam. 2. 13. Hee shall haue iudgement without mercy, that hath shewed no mer∣cy. The Lustfull shall burne with a new fire: The Malici∣ous shall finde no further cause of enuie. Uaeridentibus; they that laughed, shall now weepe; and that as Ra∣chel, for their ioyes neuer to bee comforted. Prou. 22. . Hee that soweth iniquity, shall reape vanity. I list not to enter discourse of those infernall horrors. I may say with the Poet; if I had a hundred tongues, and a voyce of yron; Non Omnia pnarum percurrere nomina pos.
I could not run through the names of those endlesse tor∣ments. It is a fearefull place: God send vs al neuer to know more of it, then by heresay. Where Spirits are the tor∣mentors, Damnation the fire; the breath of an offended God the bellowes; shrieking and gnashing of teeth the mu∣sike; the effect of impatient furie. And all these terrours perfected by their eternity, we commonly say in misery; If it were not for hope, the heart would burst: here is no hope and yet the heart must hold. The wretchednesse is, it cannot burst. Prosper. Poena gehennales torquent, non extorquent: puniunt, non finiunt corpora. It is called by Augustine, De Spiritu & A. cap. 56. Mors sine morte, sinis sine fine, defectus sine defectu. But some will say; Your Text speakes of Proportion: how can eternall vengeance bee proportionable to a mo∣mentany offence? Yes; first an infinite God is offended, and a finite man is the offender. Because he cannot be ca∣pable of an infinite wrath at once, he must haue it in eter∣nity: the short dimensions of his Essence, must haue a long extention of his punishment: what wants in place, must be supplied in time. Christ indeed suffered enough in a short time, because he was infinite: man cannot doe so, and therefore must be for euer in suffering. Secondly, he that delights in sinne, desires it may al∣wayes continue: and velle peccatum, est peccatum: so that an infinite desire, must needs haue an infinite punishment. Qui moritur sine poenitentia, si semper viueret, semper pec∣caret. He that dies without repentance, if he should euer liue, would euer sinne. So Gregor. It is Gods iust iudge∣ment, In moral. Vt nunquam mortus caret supplicio, qui nunquam vuus voluit carere peccato. That he dead should haue eter∣nall punishment, who liuing would haue beene eternally wicked. Vt nullus detur inquo terminus vltionis; qui quam∣d valui, habere noluit terminum criminis. That no end should be allowed to his vengeance, that would haue al∣lowed himselfe no end of wickednes. As the good man, if he should euer liue, would euer doe well. If thou wilt
therefore offend in aeterno tuo, God must punish i aeterno suo. Thy iniustice would put no date to thy sins; Gods Iustice shall set no date to thy sufferings. Hos. 10. 13. Thus ye haue plowed wickednesse, and ye haue reaped iniquity. You see the wickeds Seeding and Haruest: God keepe vs from sowing such seed, that we may neuer reape such a crop. The godly haue also their Seeding and their H∣uest. All their sowing may be distinguished Into Pietie, towards God. Charity, towards men. For Pietie. They sowe in Faith; and God will blesse that Seede: it shall grow vp to heauen, for it is sowne in the side of Iesus Christ who is in heauen. Ioh. 5. 4. He that beleeueth on God; there is the seed; shall haue euerlasting life: there is the Har∣uest. Qui credit quod non videt, videbit quod credit. Hee that beleeues what he doth not see; there's the Seed: shall one day see what he hath beleeued; there is the Haruest. They sow in obedience: this is also a blessed Seed, that will not faile to prosper wheresoeuer it is cast. Ioh. 15. 10. If ye keep my Commandements, there's the Seed: ye shall abide in my Loue; there's the Haruest. Rom. 6. Ye are the seruants to Ro 6. 22. God, and haue your fruite vnto holinesse; there's the sowing: and the end euerlasting life; there's the Reaping. Obedien∣tia in terris, regnabit in coelis. He that serues God on earth, and sowes the seed of Obedience; shall in heauen reape the haruest of a kingdome. They sowe in Repentance; and this seed must needes grow vp to blessednesse, Psalm. 126. They that sowe in teares, shall reape in ioy. Hee that goeth forth and weepeth, Psal. 16. 5. bearing precious seed; there's the sowing; shall doubtles come againe with reioycing, bringing his sheaues with him; there's the Haruest. Many Saints haue now reaped this croppe in heauen, that sowed their seed in teares. Dauid, Marie Magdalen, Peter; as if they had made the Prouerbe; No
comming to heauen with dry eyes. Thus nature and God differ in their proceedings. To haue a good crop on earth, we desire a faire Seed-time: but heere a wet time of sowing shall bring the best Haruest in the Barne of hea∣uen. Math. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourne; there's the seeding: for they shall be comforted; there's the Haruest. Lastly, they sowe in renouncing of the world, and ad∣herence to Christ; and they reape a great Haruest. Math. 19. 27. Be∣hold, saith Peter to Christ, we haue forsaken all and followed thee; there's the Seeding. What shall wee haue therefore? what? Ver. 28. 29. You shall sit on twelue thrones iudging the vvelue tribes of Israel: all that you haue lost shall bee centupled to you; and you shall inherit euerlasting life; ther's the Har∣uest. Hos. 10. 12. Sow to your selues in righteousnesse, and reape in mercy. For Charitie. He that sowes this seed, shall be sure of a plentifull crop. Math. 10. 42. Whosoeuer shall giue to drinke to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water onely, a little refreshing, in the name of a Disciple; verily I say vnto you, he shall in no wise lose his re∣ward. But if he that giueth a little shall be thus recompen∣ced; then 2. Cor. 9. 6. He that soweth bountifully, shall reape bountiful∣ly. Therefore sparse abroad with a full hand, like a Seeds∣man in a broad field, without feare. Doth any thinke he shall lose by his charitie? No worldling when he sowes his seed, thinkes hee shall lose his seed: he hopes for a∣mendment at haruest. Darest thou trust the ground, and not God? Sure God is a better pay-master then the earth: Grace doth giue a larger recompence then nature. Below thou may est receiue forty graines for one: but in heauen (by the promise of Christ) a hundreth fold: a measure heapen, and shaken, and thrust together, and yet run∣ning ouer. Psal. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considereth the poore: there's the Seeding: the Lord shall deliuer him in the time of trouble: there's the Haruest. Is this all? No; Math. 25. Ye fedde me when I was hungry, and gaue me drinke thirsty, comfor∣ted Math. 25. 35.
me in misery: there's the sowing. Veni beati, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you: there's the Haruest. I shut vp this point with the Apo∣stles Blessing. 2. Cor. 9. 10. Now hee that ministreth seede to the sower; both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousnesse. God send you a good Haruest. I conclude. Whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. O that this Text might be true vpon all vs at this time. The Lord hath sowne the seede of his Gospell, O that he might reape your soules to his glory. But shall we hope for that which the Prophets found not? Esa. 49. 4. I haue la∣boured in vaine, I haue spent my strength for nought, saith Esay. Nor the Apostles? I haue fished all night and caught nothing, saith Peter. No, nor Christ himselfe? who spake as neuer man spake. Yet himselfe telleth vs, Math. 13. that of foure sorts of ground, wherein the seed was sowne, three were barren, and returned no fruit. Alas! how much seed is sowne among thornes, rockes, and high-way grounds! you come to receiue this seed, but it fructifies not. You bring forth hedge-fruit, like the Heathen; scarce so good. We heare often, and as often forget. Yet still Beloued, this Text shall be true. God hath sowne, and he will reape: sowne his Word, and will reape his Glory. His glory eyther in your instruction or de∣struction, conuersion or conuiction, life or death. O why should that be to your horror, that is meant to your comforts. Turne not that to your desolation, which God sends to your consolation. Pray you then with me, euery one to the Lord, that this seed now sowne may bring forth fruit in vs all; in some thirty, in some sixty, in some a hundred fold: To the glory of his holy name: and the eternall sal∣uation of our soules, through Iesus Christ. Amen.
HEAVEN-GATE: OR, THE PASSAGE TO PARADISE. REVELAT. 22. 14. in fine. And may enter in through the Gates into the Citie. IF we supply these words with the first word of the verse; Blessed; wee shall make a perfect sentence of perfect comfort. Blessed are they that doe his commandements, that they may haueright to the tree of life, And may enter in through the gates into the Citie. In the whole there be Premises. Promises. The Premises qualifie vs; we must be such as are Blessed; and who are they? Qui praestant mandata; that doe his commandements. The Promises crowne vs, and these are two. 1. That wee may haue right to the tree of life; euen that which, Reu. 2. is in the middest of the Paradise of God. Reu. 2. 7. From whence the Angell with a flaming sword shall keep
all the reprobate. 2. Et per portas ingrediantur ciuitatem; And may enter in through the gates into the City. When with∣out shall be dogs, and scorners, &c. whosoeuer loueth and ma∣keth a lie. To the last words of the verse, I haue bound & boun∣ded my discourse. Wherein I finde three points readily offering themselues to be considered Motus, Motion. Enter in. Modus, Manner. Through the gates. Terminus. Place. Into the Citie. So there is a threefold cir∣cumstance. Quid. What, an Entrance, Qua. How, through the gates. Quò. Whither, into the Citie. The Motion. Enter in. They are blessed that enter in: Perseuerance onely makes happy. Our labours must not cease, till wee can (with Stephen) see these Gates open, and our Sauiour of∣fering to take vs by the hand, and welcome our entrance. We know who hath taught vs, that onely continuers to the end shall be saued. It is obseruable, that in the holy Spirits letters sent to those seuen Churches, in the second and third chapters of this Booke; all the promises runne to Perseue∣rers; Uincenti dabitur, To him that ouercomes shall it be gi∣uen. Nec paranti ad praliim, nec pugnanti ad sanguinem, multo minus tergiuersanti ad peccatum, sed vincenti ad vi∣ctoriam. Nor to him that prepares to fight, nor to him that resists to bloud, much lesse to him that shewes his back in cowardice; but to him that ouercomes to conquest. De∣mas seeing this warre, ranne away; fell backe to the secu∣rity of the world. Saul made himselfe ready to this bat∣tell, but he durst not fight, glory and lusts carried him a∣way. Iudas stood a bowt or two, but the High Priests mo∣ney made him giue ouer; and the Deuill tooke him cap∣tiue. But Paul fought out this combat euen to victorie; though Gal. 6. 17. he bore in his body the markes of the Lord Iesus. 2. Tim. 4. 7. I
haue fought a good fight, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith. Therefore now there is laid vp for me a crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge, shall giue mee. This is a good life, saith Bern. Mala pati, et bona face∣re; et fic vsque ad mortem perseuerare. To suffer euill, to doe good, and so to continue to the end. Some came into the Vineyard in the morning, some at noone, others later: none receiued the Penny, but they that stayed till night. Augustine affirmes this to be almost all the contents of the Lords Prayer; Aug de bon Perseuerantia. cap. 2. Hallowed be thy Name, thy kingdome come, thy will be done. Wherein wee desire that his Name may alwaies be sanctified, his Kingdome alwaies propaga∣ted, his will alwaies obeyed. Indeed this grace perfects all graces. Wee beleeue in vaine, if our faith hold not out to the end. Weeloue in vaine, if our charitie grow cold at last. We pray in vaine, if our zeale growes faint. VVee striue in vaine at the strait gate, if not till we enter. Venire adreligionem est vera deuo∣tio; sed non religiose viuere vera damnatio. To come to the truth of religion is true deuotion; not to liue religiously, is true damnation. Man is naturally like a horse that lo∣ueth short iourneyes; and there are few that hold out. Whence it comes, that the last are often first, and the first last. 1. Cor. 9. 2. Know ye not that they which runne in a race, run all; but one receiueth the prize? He that hath a good horse can goe faster vp a hill, then downe a hill. He that hath a good faith, doth as quickly ascend the Mount Sion, as the wic∣ked descend to the valley of Hinnon. If men would as strongly erect themselues vpwards, as they direct their courses downewards, they might goe to heauen with lesse trouble, then they doe goe to hell. But he that at euery sleppe, lookes at euery stoppe, and numbers his perils with his paces, either turnes aside faint∣ly, or turnes back cowardly. They that goe wandring & wondring on their iourney, are at the gates of Samaria,
when they should enter the gates of Ierusalem. God saith, I will not leaue yòu, Heb. 13. Will you then leaue GOD? Heb. 13. 5. One told Socrates, that he would faine goe to Olympus, but he distrusted his sufficiencie for the length of the iour∣ney. Socrates told him; Thou walkest euery day little or much, continue this walke forward thy way, and a few dayes shall bring thee to Olympus. Euery day euery man takes some paines; let him bestow that measure of paines in trauclling to heauen; and the further he goes, the more heart he gets; till at last he enter through the gates into the Citie. Bernard calls Perseuerance the onely daughter of the high∣est King, the perfection of vertues, the storehouse of good Perseuerantia est vnica summi Re∣gis filia, vitu∣tum consumma∣tio, totius boni re∣repositorium, vir∣tus sine qua nemo videbit Deum. Beru. works; a vertue without which no man shall see God. There is a last enemy to be destroyed, Death: we must hold out to the conquest euen of this last aduersary. Which if it con∣quer vs by the Sting of our Sinne, shal send vs to the dores of hell: if we conquer it by our Faith, it shal send vs to the gates of this Citie, Heauen. Lauda nauigantem cum perue∣nerit ad portum. All the voyage is lost through the peri∣lous Sea of this world, if we suffer shipwracke in the Ha∣uen; and lose our reward there, where we should land to receiue it. What get we, if we keepe Satan short of ruling vs with his force many houres, when at our last houre hee shall snatch our blisse from vs? The runner speeds all the way, but when he comes at the races end to the goale, he stretcheth forth his hand to catch the prize. Be sure of thy last step, to put forth the hand of faith then most strongly; Ne perdatur praemium tantis lobribus quaesitum; lest the re∣ward be lost, which thou with much labour hast aymed at. It is not enough Quaerere coelum, sed acquirere; non Christum sequi, sed consequi. To seeke heauen, but to find it; not to follow Christ, but to ouertake him, not to be brought to the gates, but to enter in. Math. 7. 22. Many will say to Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, haue we not prophecied in thy
Name? But Luk. 13. 25. the Master of the house is first risen, & hath shut to the doore. Either they come too soone, before they haue gotten faith and a good conscience; or too late, as those foolish Virgins, when the gate was shut. If then wee haue begun, let vs continue to entrance. Cuiusque casus tantò maioris est criminis, quantò prinsquam caderet, maior is Isidor. er at virtutis. Euery mans fault hath so much the more dis∣credite of scandall, as he before he fell had credite of ver∣tue. Let vs beware that we doe not slide; if slide, that we do not fall: if fall, that wee fall forward, not backward. Prou. 24. 16. The iust man often slips, and sometime falls. And this is dangerous; for if a man, whiles hee stands on his legges, can hardly grapple with the deuill: how shall he do when he is falne downe vnder his feete? But if they doe fall, they fall forward, as Ezek. 1. 28. Ezekiel; not backward, as 1. Sam. 4. Eli at the losse of the Arke: or they that came to surprise Christ, Iohn 18. Ioh. 18. 6. They went backward and fell to the ground. Cease not then thy godly endeuours; vntill Contingas portum, quò tibi ursus erat. Say we not like the woman to Esdras, whether in a vision, or otherwise, when he bade her goe into the Citie. 2. Esdr. 10. 18. That will I not doe: I will not goe into the Citie, but here I will die. It is a wretched sinne, saith August. after teares for sinne not to preserue innocence. Such a man is washed, but is not cleane. Quia cōmissa flere definit, et iterum flenda committit. He leaues weeping for faults done, and renues faults worthy of weeping. Think not thy selfe safe, till thou art got within the gates of the Ci∣tie. Behold thy Sauiour calling, thy Father blessing, the Spirit assisting, the Angels comforting, the Word direc∣ting, the glory inuiting, good men associating. Go cheer∣fully, till thou enter in through the gates into the Citie. The manner. Through the gates. Not singularly a Gate, but gates. For Chap. 21. the Citie is said to haue Reu. 21. 12. twelue gates. On the East three gates, on the North three, on the South three, and on the West three.
To declare that men shall come from all the corners of the World, Luk. 13. 29. from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South; and shall sit downe in the Kingdome of GOD. These Gates are not literally to be vnderstood, but mystically; Pro modo intrandi, for the maner of entrance. The gates are those passages, whereby we must enter this Citie. Heauen is often said to haue a Gate. Math. 7. 13. Striue to enter in at the strait Gate, saith Christ. Psal. 24. 7. Lift vp your heads, O yee Gates, and be ye lift vp yee euerlasting doores; saith the Psal∣mist. Gene. 28. 17. This is none other but the house of God, and this is the Gate of Heauen, saith Iacob. There must be Gates to a Ci∣tie: they that admit vs hither, are the Gates of Grace. So the analogie of the words inferre; dooing the commande∣ments is the way to haue right in the tree of Life: obedience and sanctification is the Gate to this Citis of saluation. In a vvord, The Gate is Grace. Citie Glory. The Temple had a gate called Acts 3. 2. Beautifull. Act. 3. But of poore beauty in regard of this Gate. Of the gates of the Sanctuary spake Dauid in diuerse Psalmes with loue and ioy. Psal. 100. 4. Enter into his gates with thanksgiuing, and into his courts with praise. This was Gods delight. Psal. 87. 2. The Lord lo∣ueth the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Iacob. This was Dauids election to be a Psal. 84. 10. Porter, or keeper of the gates of Gods house; rather then dwell in the Tents of wickednesse. This his Resolution; Psal. 122. 2. Our feete shall stand within thy gates, O Ierusalem. Salomon made two docres for the entring of the Oracle: they were made of 1. King. 6. 32. Oliue trees, and wrought vpon with the carnings of Cherubins. The Oliues promising fatnesse, and plenty of blessings; the Cherubins holinesse and eternitie. These are holy gates; let euery one pray with that royall Prophet, Ps. 118. 19. 20. Open to mee
the gates of righteousnesse: I will goe into them, & I wil praise the Lord. This is the Gate of the Lord, into which the righte∣ous shall enter. In briefe, we may distinguish the gates leading to this Citie, into two; Adoption and Sanctification. Both these meet in Christ, who is the onely gate or doore, vvhereby we enter Heauen. Iohn 10. 9. I am the doore, saith our Sauiour; Ia∣nua vitae, the gate of life: by mee if any enter in, hee shall be saued. Adoption Is the first Gate. Rom. 8. 15. We haue receiued the spirit of Adopti∣on. Without this passage no getting into Heauen. The in∣heritance of glory cannot be giuen to the children of dis∣obedience: they must first be conuerted, & adopted heires in Christ. The Grace of God is two-fold. There is Gra∣tia gratis agens; and Gratia gratum faciens. This second grace, which is of Adoption, is neuer in a reprobate: not by an absolute impossibilitie, but by an indisposition in him to receiue it. A sparke of fire falling vpon water, ice, snow, goes out: on wood, flaxe, or such apt matter, kin∣dles. Baptisme is the Sacrament of admission into the Congregation; of Insition and Initiation, whereby vve are matriculated, and receiued into the motherhood of the Church. Therefore the sacred Font is placed at the Church-doore, to insinuate and signifie our Entrance. So Adoption is the first doore or gate, whereby wee passe to the Citie of glory. This is our new Creation, whereat the Angels of hea∣uen reioyce. Luke 15. At the creation of Dukes or Earles, Luke 15. 10. there is great ioy among men: but at our new creation, Angels and Seraphins reioyce in the presence of GOD. Our Generation was A non esse, ad esse: from not being, to be. But our Regeneration is A malè esse, ad benè esse, from a being euill, to be well; and that for euer. Through this gate we must passe to enter the Citie; vvithout this,
death shall send vs to another place. No man ends this life well, except he be borne againe before he ends it. August. Now if you would be sure, that you are gone through this gate; call to mind what hath been your Repentance. The first signe of Regeneration is throbbes and throwes: you cannot be adopted to Christ without sensible paine, and compunction of heart for your sinnes. The Christian hath two Birthes, and they are two gates: hee can passe through none of them but with anguish. Both our first and second Birth begin with crying. Our first birth is a gate into this world: our second is a gate into the world to come. There is some paine in both. For this vvorld but little ioy after the paine; for the other, after short sorrow eternall glory. Sanctification Is the second gate. Make your calling and election sure, saith Peter by a holy life: 2. Pet. 1. 11 For so an Entrance shall be mi∣nistred vnto you abundantly, into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. But Reu. 21. 27. there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth; neither whatsoeuer worketh abomination, or maketh a lie. Therfore Paul prayes the 1. Thes. 5. 23. God of Peace to sanctifie vs wholly. Holinesse is the way to Happinesse; Grace the gate of Glory. But some may obiect frō that of Paul, that this Sanctification must be totall and perfect: but who can come so furnished to the gate? therefore who can enter the Citie? I answer; There is required onely Sanctificatio viae, non Patria; such a Sanctitie as the gate can afford, though farre short of that within the Citie. The Schoole distinguisheth vvell. It must be communiter in toto, & vniuersaliter in singulis partibus; but not totaliter et perfectè. This Sanctification must be communicated to the whole man, and vniuersal∣ly propagated to euery part: though it haue in no place of man a totall perfection. Indeed Nullum peccatum re∣tinendum est spe remissionis. No sinne is to be cherished in
hope of mercy. But wee must striue for euery grace vve haue not, and for the encrease of euery grace wee haue. Quaerendum quod deest bonum, indulgendum quod adest. Let vs make much of that we possesse, and still seek for more; Phi. 3. 14. striuing to the marke. And yet when all is done, Profe∣ctio haec, non Perfectio est: Wee haue made a good steppe forward, but are not come to our full home. But stil, Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. And Enter not into iudgement with vs. Now sith this gate stands in our owne Heart, giue me leaue to describe it: and that briefely, by The Properties. The properties are 2. It is Lovve. Parts. Little. Lowe. Heauen is well called a 2. Cor. 5. 1. Building not made with hands: for it differs both in Matter and Forme from earthly edi∣fices. For matter, it is Eternall, not momentany: for maner, fabricked without hands. Great Mannors on earth, haue large answerable Porches. Heauen must needes be spacious; when a little starre fixed in a farre lower Orbe, exceedes the earth in quantitie: yet hath it a lowe gate, not a lofty comming in. They must stoope then that will enter here. Luk. 1. 53. He hath filled the bungry with good things, and the rich hee hath sent empty away. The rich in their owne conceits, and proud of their owne worth, shall be sent empty from this gate. Zaccheus climes vp into a Sycamore tree to behold Iesus: but when Iesus beheld him got vp so high, he said, Come downe Zaccheus, Luke 19. Make haste, and come downe. Luke 19. 5. Whosoeuer will entertaine Iesus, must come down. The haughtie Nebuchadnezzar, that thinks with his head to knock out the starres in heauen, must stoope at this gate, or hee cannot enter. Be you neuer so lofty, you must
bend. Gods honour must be preferred before your ho∣nours. It is no discredite to your Worships to vvorship GOD. Little. Christ calls it a Luk. 13. 24. narrow gate. They must be little that enter; little in their owne eyes, slender in the opinion of themselues. Mark. 10. 15. Whosoeuer shall not receiue the kingdome of God as a little child, he shall not enter therin. Samuel to Saul; 1. Sam. 15. 17. When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the Head of the Tribes of Israel? When Iesse had made all his Sonnes passe before Samuel, he asked him if none re∣mained yet; Iesse answeres, Yes a little one tending the flockes. 1. Sam. 16. 11 Fetch that little one, saith Samuel: for wee will not sit downe till he come. That little one was hee. Sayes the Angell to Esdras, 2. Esdras 7. 2. Esd. 7. 7. A citie is built, and set vp∣on a broad field, full of all good things. Yet the Entrance thereof is narrow. This is spatiosa & speciosa Ciuitas; A citie beautifull and roomthy; yet it hath but a narrovv wicket, a little Gate. Alas, how will the surfeted Epicure do to enter: whose gluttonous body is so deformed, that it moues like a great Tunne vpon two pots? What hope hath an Impropria∣tor with foure or fiue Churches on his backe, to passe this little gate? The bribing Officer hath a swolne hand; it will not enter; and the gowtie Vsurer cannot thrust in his foote. The factious Schismaticke hath too bigge a head: the swearer such forked blasphemies in his mouth, that here is no entrance. Pride hath no more hope to get into the gates of that Citie aboue; then there is hope to cast it out the gates of this City below. Much good do't with earthly Courts: for it must not come into the Courts of Heauen. Thinke, O sinners; you cannot goe with these op∣pressions, with these oathes, frauds, bribes, vsuries; with these wickednesses into the gates of this Citie. You must
shift them off, or they will shut you out. You heare the Properties; the Parts are now to bee considered; and these are foure. The foundation, the two sides, and the roofe. The Foundation is Faith. One of the sides, Patience. The other, Innocence. The Roofe, Charitie. Faith Is the foundation. Coloss. 1. Be ye grounded and set∣led Colos. 1. 23. in the Faith. Credendo fundatur, saith Augustine. It is grounded in faith. All other graces are (as it were) built on this foundation. Credimus quōd speramus: quod credimus & speramus, diligimus: quod credimus, speramus, & diligi∣mus, operamur. What we hope; wee beleeue: what wee beleeue and hope, we loue: what we beleeue, hope, and loue; wee endeuour to attaine. So all is built on Faith. Hope on faith; Nulla spes increditi: it is impossible to hope for that wee beleeue not to be. Charity on faith: why should a man giue all to the poore, vnlesse hee belie∣ued an abundant recompence? Repentance on faith: why else suffer we contrition for sin, if we beleeued not remis∣sion of sinne? Temperance on faith: why forbeare wee the pleasing vanities of the world, but that we belieue the transcendent ioyes of eternity, whereof these harlots would robbe vs? Patience on faith: why would we en∣dure such calamities with willing quietnesse and subiecti∣on, if wee belieued not an euerlasting peace and rest to come? All obedience on faith; that God would accept it in Iesus Christ. If all bee built on faith, I may call it the basis and foundation of this Gate. Hebr. 11. . Without faith it is im∣possible to please God: for hee that commeth to God, must be∣lieue that he is, and that hee is a rewarder of them that dili∣gently seeke him. Faith is the passage-way to God: not one of that holy ensuing Legend, entred the City of life with∣out this. He that hath faith shall enter: yea hee is entred.
Iohn 5. Iohn 5. 24. He hath euerlasting life; and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death to life. Patience Is one of the Pillars. Hebr. 10. Hebr. 10. 36. Ye haue need of Pati∣ence: that when you haue done the will of God, yee might re∣ceiue the Promise. That when you haue suffered before the gates, ye may enter the Citie. There bee three Ene∣mies that assault the soule, before shee enter the gates; a Lyon, a Leopard, and a Foxe. The Lion is the Deuill, who 1. Pet. 5. 8. roareth with hideous cryes, and bloudy iawes. The Leopard is the world, which hath a gay spotted hide; but if it take vs within the clutches, it deuoures vs. The Foxe is our Concupiscence, bred in vs; which craftily Cant. 2. 15. spoyles our grapes, our young vines, our tender graces. Patience hath therfore an armed Souldier with her, called Christian Fortitude; to giue repulse to all these encoun∣ters. And what he cannot conquer feriendo, by smiting: she conquers ferendo, by suffering. Uincit etiam dum pati∣tur. She ouercomes, euen while shee suffers. Patience meekely beares wrongs done to our owne person: For∣titude encounters couragiously wrongs done to the Per∣son of Christ. She will not yeeld to sinne, though she die. She hath the spirit of Esther to withstand things that dis∣honour God; Esth. 4. 16. If I perish, I perish. Innocence Is the other Pillar. As Patience teacheth vs to beare wrongs, so Innocence to doe none. Patience giues vs a Shield, but Innocence denyes vs a sword. Our selues we may defend, others we must not offend. Innocence is such a vertue; Aug. Quae cùm alijs non nocet, nec sibi nocet. Which as it wrongs not others, so nor itselfe. Hee that hurts himselfe, is not innocent. The Prodigall is no mans foe, but his owne; saith the prouerbe: but because hee is his owne foe, he is not innocent. Sen. Triumphus Innocentiae est
non peccare vbi potest. It is the triumph of Innocence, not to offend, where it may. No testimony is more sweet to the conscience then this: Esa. 38. 3. Remember, O Lord, how I haue walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. So Iob: My heart shall not condemne me for my dayes. Blessed soule thus comfor∣ted: it smiles at the frownes of earth, and dares stand the thunder. Though there bee no Innocency, but reioy∣ceth to stand in the sight of Mercy: Yet thus in the middest of iniuries it cheeres it selfe: O Lord, thou knowest my innocence. The wicked Psal. 73. 6. couer themselues with violence as with a garment: therefore confusion shall couer them as a cloake. But Math. 5. 5. Blessed are the meeke: for they shall inherit the earth. That part of the earth they liue in shall afford them quiet: and their part in heauen hath no dis∣quiet in it. Si amouean, admouentur in locum, à quo non remouentur in aeternum. If they be mooued, they are mo∣ued to a place from whence they shall neuer be remoued. Psal. 26. 6. I will wash mine hands in Innocency: so will I compasse thine Altar, O Lord. If Innocence must leade vs to the Altar on earth; sure that must bee our gate to the glory of heauen. Charity Is the Roofe. Aug. Diligendo perficitur; lo makes vp the building. 1. Cor. 13. 13. Now abideth faith, hope, and charity: but the greatest of these is charity. It is a grace of the loueliest Coun∣tenance, and longest Continuance. For Countenance, it is amiable; all loue it. The poore respect not thy faith so much as thy charity. For Continuance; faith and hope takes their leaues of vs in death: but charity brings vs to heauen-dore, & vshers vs in to glory. Hugo de laud. Charitatis. I know not what to say more in thy praise, O charity; then vt Deum de coelo tra∣heres, & hominem ad coelum eleuares. Then that thou didst bring downe God from heauen to earth, and dost lift vp man from earth to heauen. Great is thy vertue, that by
thee God should be humbled to man, by thee man should be exalted to God. You haue the Gates described: Let vs draw a short con∣clusion from these two former circumstances; and then enter the Citie. The Summe. There is no entrance to the Citie but by the Gates: no passage to Glory, but by Grace. The Reu. 21. 12. wall of this Citie is said to be great and high. High; no climbing ouer: Great, no breaking through. So Christ saith; Math. 6. 20. No theefe can breake through and steale. Therefore through the gates, or no way. 1. Cor. 15. 50. Corruption doth not inherit incorruption. This corrupted man must bee regenerate, that hee may bee saued: must be sanctified, that he may be glorified. Ba∣bel-builders may offer faire for huen, but not come neer it: the Gyants of our time, I meane the monstrous sin∣ners, may imponere Pelion Ossae, lay rebellion vpon pre∣sumption, treason vpon rebellion, blasphemy vpon all: as if they would sinke heauen with their loud and lewd ordinance, and plucke God out of his Throne: but hell gapes in expectation of them. This Gate is kept, as the gate of Paradise, with a flaming sword of Iustice, to keepe out 1. Cor. 6. 9. Idolaters, Adulterers, theeues, couetous, drunkards, reuilers, extortioners, and other Reu. 22. 15. dogges of the same litter; from the kingdome of God. Some trust to open these gates with golden keyes; but bribery is rather a key to vnlocke the gates of hell. Let Rome sell what she list, and warrant it like the Seller in the Prouerbs; It is good, it is good. Yet it is naught; but were it good, God neuer promised to stand to the Popes bar∣gaines. Others haue dream't of no other gate, but their owne righteousnesse. Poore soules, they cannot finde the gate, because they stand in their owne light. Others thinke to passe through the gates of other mens merits: as well one bird may flie with another birds wings. For all
those hote promises of the workes of Saints for their rea∣dy money, they may blow their nailes in hell. Onely grace is the gate. Aug. Serm. 136. de Temp. Per portam Ecclesiae intramus ad portam Paradisi. Wee must bee true members of the Church, or the dore of life will be shut against vs. Heauen is a glorious place, therefore reserued for gracious men. Admittuntur ad spiritus iustorum, non nisi iusti. Heb. 12. 23. To those spirits of iust men made perfect must be admitted none, saue they that are iustified. Kings are there the Companie: none of base and ignoble liues can be accepted. Heauen is the great White Hall, the Court of the high King; none are entertained but Albi, such as are washed white in the bloud of Christ; and keepe white their owne innocence. Vngracious offenders looke for no dwelling in this glo∣ry. You that haue so little loue to the gates, are not wor∣thy the Citie. If you will not passe through the gates of holinesse in this life, you must not enter the Citie of hap∣pinesse in the life to come. Thus wee haue passed the gates: and are now come to The Citie. Now if I had beene with Paul rapt vp to the 2. Cor. 12. 2. third heauen; or had the Reu. 21. 17. Angels Reed, wherewith he measured the wall: I might say something to the description of this Citie. But how can darkenesse speake of that light? or the base Country of Earth describe the glorious Court of Heauen? Psal. 87. 9. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Glorious Cities haue beene, and are in the world. Rome was eminently famous; all her Citizens like so many kings: yet was it obserued, Illic homines more, that men did die there. But in this Citie, there is no dying. Mors non erit vltra. Reu. 21. 4. There shall be no more death. I will narrow vp my discourse, to consider in this City only 3. things. The Situation. Society. Glory.
The Situation. It is placed aboue, Gal. 4. Gal. 4. 26. Ierusalem which is aboue is free, the mother of vs all. Heauen is in excelsis. Psal. 87. 1. His founda∣tion is in the holy mountaines. So was Ierusalem seated on earth, to figure this Citie; built on the Quarrey of heauen, Dan. 2. On Saphyres, Emeralds, and Chrysolites, Reu. 21. There is a heauen now ouer our heads, but it shall Hebr. 1. 11. vvaxe olde as a garment. It is corruptible, and so combustible. This Citie is eternall; Mount Sion, neuer to bee moued: a kingdome neuer to be shaken. Wee are now vnder this lower heauen, then this shall be vnder vs. That which is our Canopy, shall be our Pauement. The Society. The King that rules there, is one Almighty God in three distinct persons. Hee made this City for himselfe. Psal. 16. 11. In his presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and pleasures at his right hand for euermore. If hee gaue such a house as this world is, to his enemies: what may we thinke, hath hee prouided for himselfe, and his friends? But will GOD dwell there alone? He is neuer alone: himselfe is to him∣selfe the best and most excellent company. Neuerthelesse he vouchsafes a dwelling here to some Citizens, and these are eyther Created so, Assumed, or Assigned. 1. Created Citizens are the blessed Angels; who from their first creation haue enioyed the freedom of this City. They stand alwaies in the presence of God: they can neuer lose their happinesse. 2. Assumed; those whose spirits are already in hea∣uen. Hebr. 12. There Hebr. 12. 23. are the spirits of iust men made per∣fect. They are already in soule taken vp, and made free Denisons of this Citie. 3. Assigned; the Elect that liue in the militant Church, waiting for the day of their bodies Redemption; crying still, Come, Lord Iesus, come quickly. These are Conscripti, Reu. 21. 27. written in the Lambes booke of life. Now though we are
not already in full possession; because our apprentiship of this life is not out; yet we are already Citizens. Eph. 2. 19. Ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow Citizens vvith the Saints; and of the houshold of God. And we haue three happy priuiledges of Citizens. 1. Libertas; Freedome from the Law; not from obe∣dience to it, but from the curse of it. Praestemus quod pos∣sumus: quod non possumus, non damnabit. Let vs keepe so much of it as we can: what wee cannot keepe, shall not eondemne vs. Liberty in the vse of these earthly things: heauen, earth, ayre, sea, with all their creatures, do vs ser∣uice. 1. Cor. 3. 22. Whether things present, or things to come, all are yours: and ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods. 2. Tutela Imperij; The Kings protection, Psalm. 91. Angelis mandauit. Psalm. 91. 11. Hee hath giuen his Angels charge ouer vs, to keepe vs in all our wayes. Is this all? No. vers. 4. Hee couers vs with his fethers, and vnder his wings doe wee trust: his truh is our shield and our buckler. Our dangers are many in some places, and some in all places: we haue Gods owne Guard royall to keepe vs. They Heb. 1. 14. are sent from God to minister for their sakes, which shall be heyres of saluation. I need not determine, whether euery particu∣lar person hath his particular Angell. Saint Augustine hath wel answered, Eirid, cap. 59. Quando hoc nesciatur sine crimine, non opus est vt definiatur cum discrimine. Since our ignorance is no fault, let vs not trouble our selues with curious dis∣cussion. Bernard directs vs a good vse of it. Quantam Bern. debet hoc tibi inferre reuerentiam, afferre deuotionem, con∣ferre fiduciam. The consideration of the guard of Angels about vs, should put into our mindes reuerence, into our hearts deuotion, into our soules confidence. 3. Defensio Legis, the defensiue protection of the Law. Christis our Aduocate. Rom. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that iustifieth. Wee are impleaded: Paul appeales to Caesar, wee to Christ. The Deuill accuseth vs, we are far remote: behold, our Coun∣sellor
is in heauen; that will not let our cause fall, or be o∣uerthrowne. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. If any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous. Thus are we Citizens in present, shall be more perfect∣ly at last. We haue now right to the Citie: wee shall then haue right in the City. Wee haue now a purchase of the possession, shall then haue a possession of the purchase. Ioh. 17. 24. Father; I will that they also whom thou hast giuen mee, bee with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. This is our Sauiours Will & Testament, and shall not be broken. The Company then addes to the glory of this City. We are loth to leaue this world for loue of a few friends, sub∣iect to mutual dislikes: but what then is the delight in the Society of Saints? where thy glorified selfe shall meet with thy glorified friends, and your loue shall be as euerlasting as your glory. There be those Angels that protected thee: those Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that by doctrine and example taught thee: yea there is that bles∣sed Sauior that redeemed thee. Often heere with grones and teares thou seekest him, whom thy soule loueth: loe, there he shall neuer be out of thy sight. The Glory. The glory? Non mihi si centum linguae. If I had a hun∣dred tongues, I was not able to discourse throughly the least dramme of that inestimable weight of glory. The eye hath seene much, the eare hath heard more, and the heart hath conceiued most of all. But 1. Cor. 2. 9. no eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor heart apprehended the things which God hath pre∣pared for them that loue him. Augustine after a stand; In Iohn Hom. 3. Deus habet quod exhibeat. God hath something to bestowe on you. If I say, wee shall be satiate, you will think of lo∣thing: if, wee shall not be satiate, you will thinke of hun∣ger. But Ibi nec fames, nec fastidium: there is neither hun∣ger, nor lothing. Sed Deus habet quod exhibeat. No soo∣ner is the soule within those gates, but she is glorious. Si∣milem
sibi reddit ingredientem. Heauen shall make them that enter it, like it selfe; glorious: As the ayre by the Sunnes brightnesse is transformed bright. Quanta falici tas, vbi nullum erit malum, nullum deerit bonum! How great is that blessednesse, where shall be no euill present, no good absent! This is a blessed Citie. Men are ambitious heere, and seeke to be free of great Cities: and not seldome buy it dearer then the Captaine bought his Burgeship. But no such honour as to be De∣nisons of this Citie: whereof once made free, how con∣temptibly they will looke at the vaine endeuors of world∣ly men! Thinke, Beloued, yea knowe; how sweet soe∣uer the gaines of this lower Citie be: it is yet far short of the gaines of heauen. And you will one day say; There is no Citie to the Citie of GOD. Where Reu. 21. 4. shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more paine. Death with all his Apparitors, that cite the whole vvorld to his Court, sorrow, crying, paine, shall be no more. Math. 10. 23. They shall persecute you from Citie to Citie, saith Christ: till at last we come to this Citie, and then out of their reach. O that this clay of ours should come to such honour! Well may we suffer it to endure the Worlds tyrannie, and to be afflicted by the Citizens thereof: alas, wee are but Prentises, and they will vse vs hardly till our yeres be out. When that day comes, we shall be free possessors of this Citie. You heare now the gate and the Citie, what should you doe but enter? Passe through the gate of grace; a holy & sanctified life; and you shall not faile of the City of glo∣rie. Whither once entred, you shall sing as it is in the Psalme, Sicut audiimus ita et vidimus. As we haue heard, so haue we seene in the Citie of our God. VVee see that now which was preached to vs; yea and tenne thousand times more then euer could be vttered. You shall say to Christ, as the Queene of Sheba to Salomon; 1. King. 10. 7. I heard much of thy glory; but behold, the one halfe was not told me. You saw Ie∣rusalem
before in a Mappe; now you shall walke through the streets, and obserue the towres and bulwarkes; fully contemplate the glorie. But my discourse shall giue way to your meditation. The ioyes are boundlesse, endlesse: the Lord make vs free of this Citie. Amen.
SPIRITVALL EYE-SALVE: OR, THE BENEFIT of Illumination. EPHES. 1. 18. The eyes of your vnderstanding beeing enlightned, that ou may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance is in the Saints. THE speciall grace that heere Paul prayes for his Ephesians, is Illu∣mination. wherein is described to vs an Eye. Obiect. The eye is spi∣rituall, the obiect celestiall. The Instrument isgracious, the spe∣ctacle glorious. The eye inlightned; there is the organ: the hope of Gods calling, and the rich inheritance of the glorified Saints; there is the obiect.
The Eye is described by the Situation. Qualification. The Site is the Understanding: the Qualification is In∣lightned. The Eye Is the most excellent organ of sense. Saint Augustine applies Seeing to all the senses. Heare and see, touch and see; and the Psalmist hath, Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Other senses discerne onely things neere them: this, remote and distant obiects. Some say the roundnesse of the Eye resembles the Vnity of the Deity; which is one and perfect: and the triangular sight, the Trinity of per∣sons. This is too curious: happy is that intellectuall eye, whose obiect is the blessed Vnity in Trinity, and Tri∣nity in Vnity; whose delight is good, yea God. In a cleare eye the looker sees his owne image: so God in a sanctified vnderstanding sees a limited resemblance of his infinite selfe. And as some Physicians say, that if loo∣king in a sicke mans eyes, they see their image, there is hope of life: but the want of this resultance is held an ar∣gument of instant death: whereby they giue themselues a prognosticke signe, whether the Patient will dye of that sicknesse, or recouer it; by the reflection of his eyes. But it is certaine, if Gods image be not in the vnderstanding, instat mors animae, the soule is in danger: if it shine there, there is comfort of life, yea life of comfort. Hence it is that the God of this world doth so striue to blind the minds of them that beleeue not; ne imago Dei▪ &c. that the light of 2. Cor. 4. 4. the glorious Gospell of Christ, who is the Image of GOD, should not shine vnto them. God hath set two liddes, to defend the corporall eye from annoyances. So hee hath giuen the vnderstanding duas palpeb; Faith and hope to shelter it. For the eye is not more tender to the body, then the vnderstanding is to the soule. And therefore Satan seekes by all meanes to
hurt it: eyther by offering it violent blowes, which the shield of Faith beares off; or by throwing dusts into it, (gifts blinde the eyes) which the other lidde of hope for better riches, keeps out. The Situation Of this spirituall eye is in the Soule. God framing mans soule, planted in it two faculties: the Superior, that is the Vnderstanding, which perceiueth and iudgeth: the Infe∣riour, that is the will, which being enformed of the other, accordingly followes or flies, chuseth or refuseth. The Scripture fauouring the simplest capacity, compares these two powers of the soule, to two knowne parts of the bo∣dy. The vnderstanding to the Eye; the Affections to the Foote: the eye directing, the foote walking. Euery man is naturally borne blinde and lame: as Zedekiah captiuated to the King of Babylon; first they put out his eyes, and then 2. King. 25. 7. they lamed his feete with fetters of brasse. So is euery man by nature; and therefore easily made a slaue to the king of infernall Babylon, if the mercy of Christ should not redeeme him. This consideration reacheth foorth to vs two vses: the one of Instruction, the other of Re∣prehension. 1. This teacheth vs to desire in the first place, the In∣lightning of our eyes; and then after, the strengthening of our feete. So that sweet Prophet ordereth his prayers, Psal. 25. First Shew me thy wayes, O Lord: teach mee thy paths. Then Lead me in thy truth. First, cleare my eyes, Psal. 25. 4. 5. then enable my feete, Psal. 119. Make mee to vnderstand Psal. 119. 27. 32 the way of thy precepts. And then I will runne the way of thy Commandements. Hee that would saile safely, must get a good Pilot, before good rowers. Swift horses without a skilfull waggoner, endanger more. Hee that labours for feet before he hath eyes, takes a preposterous course: for of the two, the lame is more likely to come to his iour∣neyes end, then the blind. Could hee runne as swift as
Hazael, and outstrip the young Hart on the mountaines; yet being blinde, he would hardly hitte the way to Hea∣uen. There is but one way thither; by-paths innu∣merable: it is a thousand to one against him, that he mis∣seth the right. If he be set into it, yet there are so many blockes, rubbes, obstacles put before him by the Deuill, and the world; that hee can no more goe into the true way, then he could discerne it from the false. But if a man hath eyes, there is hope he will creepe to heauen, though on lame feet. Hee sees where Ierusalem stands, and hath direction for the way; (as trauellers in scroles; from such a village to such a city, &c.) so the word of God pre∣scribes his iourney; From Faith to vertue, from vertue to knowledge, from knowledge to temperance, from temperance 2. Pet. 1. 5. to patience, &c. till hee comes to enter into the euerlasting Kingdome of our Lord Iesus Christ. Hence we see, there is Vers. 11. somwhat more hope of a vicious person, that hath a good vnderstanding; then of an vtterly darke and blind soule, though he walkes vpon zealous feete. Let them knovv, that they will come to heauen without eyes, when the wicked come out of hell without feet. Which lets vs see the kind loue of the Popish Clergie to their people, and how vnfainedly they desire their go∣ing to Heauen; when they pluck out their eyes, & send them thither. So they may grope for it, as the Sodomites did for the dore of Lots house. That which they call the Gen. 19. 11. Mother of Deuotion, Ignorance; Augustine calls Pessimā matrem, the worst Mother. Pessimae matris Ignorantiae, pes∣simae itidem duae filiae sunt: scilicet falfitas, et Dubietas: illa miserior, ista miser abilior: illa perniciosior, ista molestior. There are two euill daughters of the most euill Mother, Ignorance, Falshood and Doubting: the former is more miserable, the latter more pityable: that more pernicious, this more troublesome. Let them that plead so impetu∣ously, their Religion authenticall from the Fathers, (not cum Patribus reijcir) read the opinion of a great Father,
concerning a maine point of their doctrine, Ignorance. Chrysostome saies; Praecedit scientiae virtutis cltum: know∣ledge Chrys. in Polil. li. 3. Nemo potest fi∣deliter appetere quod ignorat: et malum nisi cog∣nitum sit, non ti∣metur. of vertue must euer goe before deuotion: For no man can earnestly affect the good he knowes not: and the euill whereof he is ignorant, hee feares not. So that true loue to good, and hatred to euill, cannot occurre to a heart nesci∣ent of them both. For Scientia conscientiam dirigit, con∣scientia scientiam perficit. Knowledge rectifies conscience, so well as conscience perfits knowledge. Con must euer be in composition: and so kindly vniting knowledge to deuotion, there ariseth Conscience. If they allow not then their people eyes, they may as well lame their feet; and so send them like the Syrian band, in stead of Dothan, to Samaria. They say, This is not the way to heauen, nor is this the Citie of life: follow me, & 2. King. 6. 19. I will bring you to the man (Iesus Christ) whom yee seeke. But he led them to Samaria. 2. This reprehends a common fashion of many Au∣ditors. When the Preacher beginnes to analyse his Text, and to open the points of doctrine, to informe the vn∣derstanding; they lend him very cold attention. That part of the Sermon is spent in slumber; as if it concern'd vs not. But when he comes to apply his conclusions, and to driue home the vse of his inferences by application; then they beginne to rouse vp themselues, and lend an eare of diligence. As if they had onely need to haue their hearts warmed, and not to haue their minds warned, & enlight∣ned with knowledge. But alas! no eyes, no saluation. Your affections are stirred in vaine, without a precedent illu∣mination of your soules. You must know to doe, before you can doe what you know. And indeed hee that at∣tends onely to exhortation, and not to instruction, seemes to build more vpon mans zeale, then Gods Word. Both doe well together: attend to the Doctrine, and suffer also the Word of exhortation; that you may haue both cleare
eyes, and sound feete: those which God hath ioyned to∣gether, let no man put asunder. I come from the Situation, to the Qualification Of this spirituall eye: enlightned. For this blessing the Apostle prayes to the Iam. 1. 17. Father of lights; from whom comes euery good and perfect gift: from him, and from him onely, comes this grace of Illumination. Mans mind is not one∣ly darke, but Eph. 5. 8. darknesse, till the Spirit of knowledge light on him, and lighten him. Though 2. King. 25. Zedekiah was in Ne∣buchadnezzars Court, that great Monarch, newly deli∣uerd of his monstrous ambition; to whom all the glories and pleasures of the world came a gossiping: yet hee saw none of this pompe and magnificence; his eyes vvere wanting. So blind Iudg. 16. Samson among the merry Phili∣stins, saw none of their rich apparrell, costly cheere, and glorious triumphs. When the naturall man comes into the Temple, among the Cōgregation of Gods Saints, his soule is not delighted with their prayers, praises, psalmes, and seruice: he sees no comfort, no pleasure, no content in their actions. True, he doth not, hee cannot; for his vnderstanding is not inlightned, to see the hope of their cal∣ling, and the glorious riches which the Spirit of grace and consolation sheds into them. Hee sees no whit into the awfull Maiestie of God, filling all with his glorious pre∣sence, and ruling all euents with his prouidence; euen dis∣posing euill to his glory. Nothing of the beautie, mercy, pitie of his Sauiour, sitting at the right hand of his Father: not his Highnesse being in heauen, nor yet his Nighnesse to his brethren on earth. Nothing of Heb. 12. 22. Mount Sion, the Citie of the liuing God, the celestiall Ierusalem; not of the company of innumerable Angels; nor of the generall assem∣bly, and company of the first borne which are written in Hea∣uen; not of God, the Iudge of all; nor of the spirits of iust men made perfect; nor of Iesus the Mediator of the new Te∣stament;
nor the bloud of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel. What more then a world of happinesse doth this mans eye not see! Hereupon wee call a meere foole a naturall. The worldlings haue esteemed, and misnamed Christi∣ans Gods fooles: but wee know them the fooles of the world. The greatest Philosopher is but a sot to the wea∣kest Christian: therefore Philosophy (vnbaptized vvith grace) is said to be monoculate, to haue but one eye, and that is of naturall Reason; a left eye of the soule. But the Christian hath two eyes: the left eye of Reason, whereby he may see into the secrets of nature, as farre as the Philo∣sopher: and the right eye of faith, which the other want∣ing cannot conceiue the mystery of godlinesse. This 1. Tim. 3. 16. my∣sterie to him, is but like a high candle to a blind man. God onely then must giue Salomon wisedome; and to his Father, a knowledge aboue his Teachers. Iam. 1. 5. If any of you lacke wisedome, let him aske of God. The first Character our forefathers taught vs, was Christs Crosse. Our first spel∣ling lesson; In the Name of the Father, &c. To teach vs, that euen all humane knowledge, much more diuine, is deriued from Gods fountaine. There are two reasons, why we must all begge of God for our selues, as Paul did for his Ephesians, this grace of Illumination. 1. Our spirituall blindnesse came vpon vs by Gods iust curse for our sinnes. As the Philistins put out Sam∣sons eyes, for his many mischiefes done them: so GOD on farre greater cause blinded Adam, and his perpetuall issue. He had pure and good knowledge; but because his ambition was appetere prohibitum, to desire that was for∣bidden: his punishment was perdere concessum, to lose that hee had. Now the same hand that layd on this penal∣tie, must take it off. The blind men in the Gospell, re∣couer'd not their sight till Christ came. They were as types to vs; to teach vs that only the Spirit of Christ can restore our spirituall eyes. Therefore of this Reue. 3. 18. Spirit are
we counselled to buy eye-salue, to annoint our eyes, that vvee may see. 2. This originall defect is encreased by actuall trans∣gressions. We were borne ignorant, wee haue made our selues blind; putting out euen that remaining sparke of nature. Wee Phil. 3. 19. mind earthly things: setting not onely our Colos. 3. 2. affections, but euen fixing our whole knowledge on this World. And it is impossible that mans eye should looke on earth and heauen also at one instant. It is a rule in Phi∣losophy; Nothing receiues any thing, but that is emptie of all other things of a contrary nature. The eare must be empty of all sounds, the taste of all sauours, the eye of all colours; before there can be entertainement giuen to a new obiect. The smell possessed with Rew, cannot sent the Rose: the taste infected with gall, imagines all mor∣sels bitter: and a greene glasse held before the eyes, presents all things looked on, greene. So if the soules eye be ta∣ken vp with the gawdy vanities of this py'd world, it can∣not discerne the things, that concerne euerlasting peace. The vnderstanding then must be with-drawn from earth, that it may contemplate heauen. This confutes their practices, that haue vowed a Monkish life, addicted to speculation & eying of heauen; yet are perpetually raking in the mudde of the earth to get money; with an impos∣sibilitie of reconciling these two opposite obiects to their eyes at once. In vaine they lift vp ceremoniall eyes of a forc'd deuotion; for the eye of their heart is fixed down∣wards: Vnlesse they haue squint-ey'd soules, that can looke two wayes at once. But I rather think, that like wa∣termen, they looke one way, and rowe another: for hee must needs be strangely squint-ey'd, that can at the same instant fasten one of his lights on the light of glory, & the other on the darknes of iniquitie. The riches aboue and below are remote things; Quorum dum aliud contempla∣tim aspicimus, aliud contemptim despicimus: vvhereof whiles we admire the one, we vilipend the other. This
blindnesse then being both hereditarie to our natures, (and hereditary diseases are not easily cured) and, augmented by our wilful disorders; can be taken away by no hand but Gods. Iohn 9. 32. Since the World beganne was it neuer heard, that any man (not man, but God) opened the eyes of one that was borne blind; and had encreased this caecitie by his owne accessiue and excessiue wickednesse. He that would desire inspection into others blindnes, had need of cleare eyes himselfe. Cast out the beame in thine owne eye, that thou maist pull out the mote in thy brothers; saith our Sauiour. Let vs take with vs then the eyes of grace, that wee haue; that we may the better looke into that blindnesse of nature, we had. There is in this blind eye diseases and defects. The diseases are double, so are the defects. The Diseases. 1. The Cataract, which is a thicknesse drawne ouer the eye, and bred of many causes: this especially, either from the rheume of vaine-glory, or the inflammation of malice. From this eye there is no reflection, or returning the owne beames, whereby a man may contemplate him∣selfe. But euen the optick nerues, and the visory spirits are corrupted: the memorie cannot reuolue, nor the mind present it selfe, what it is; nec in se descendere tentat. This darke mind is the vault, where Satan keepes his Semina∣rie, and sits hatching a blacke brood of lusts. The meanes to expell this disease, is to take Gods Law into thy hand and heart, and through that glasse to looke into thy selfe. Hagg. 1. Consider your owne wayes in your hearts, saith the Prophet. Teipsum Concute: tecum habita: te consule, dic tibi quis sis. Plumbe-deepe into thy owne brest: Isid. de sum. bon. lib. 1. Animi tui abyssum intra. A man offends lesse, by searching sinne with too deepe, then with too short an instrument. Though this
be, saith In meditat. Abselme, grauis angustia; a hard exigent. Si me inspicio, ipsum non tolero; si non inspicio, nescio. Si vi∣deo, horror; si non videro, mors est. If I looke into my selfe, I cannot indure my selfe; if I looke not, I cannot knovv my selfe. If I see my selfe, there is horror: if I see not, there is death. This inspection is difficult. Difficile est se nosse, sed beatum. It is a hard, but a happy thing to know ones selfe. Priuate sinnes are not easily spied out. Diffi∣cilius est inuenire, quàm interficere; as Casar said of the Scythians. It is harder to finde them out, then to roote them out. Innumerable sinnes are in a man; if not in actuall and ripe practice, yet in growing seeds. Qui indul∣get vno vitio, amicus est omnibus. Hee that is partially in∣dulgent to one sinne, is a friend to all. It is a paines well taken, to study thy selfe. How sweet a rest doth that night bring, whose sleepe is preuented with a recognition of our selues! De consid. Bernard teacheth man a three-fold consideration of himselfe: Quid, quis, qualis fit. What by nature, who in person, what kinde of man in conuersation. Which par∣ticulars when he casteth vp, he shall finde in summe; Him∣selfe a miserable sinner. Si cupis bonus fieri, primùm crede quòd malus fis. If thou wouldest be good, first know that thou art euill. Chrysostome amplifies this selfe knowledge, by teaching a man to consider; what he is in himselfe, dust Chrys. in tract. de symb. lib. 13. Quid Intra se Quid Infra se Quid Supra se Quid Cōtra se Quid Ante se Quid Post se. and ashes: what is within him; much wickednesse: what aboue him, an offended Iustice: what below him, a burning lake: what against him, Satan and sinne: what before him, vaine pleasure: what behinde him, infallible death. But alas! what is all this that hath beene said of the eye, if God enlighten not that mentall eye to see it? Hee must open our eyes, to behold the wonderfull things of his Law. Otherwise mans sight to these obiects, is but as oculus noctuae ad lumen solis. Spirituall ioyes he cannot perceiue; and what hee conceiues of death and hell, hee thinkes of them senselesly like a beast, or desperately like a Deuill. If
his conscience begins to wake, he sings her asleep againe. And as in some, the fuliginous vapours arising from the lower parts of the body, blinde the eyes: so in him the fu∣mous euaporations of the fleshes lusts, haue caused abso∣lute blindnesse. The spirit of God, with the sauing instru∣ment of grace, can onely take away this Cataract. 2. There is another disease, called the Pearle in the eye; a dangerous disease, and heereof are all worldlings sicke: for earthly riches is such a pearle in their eye, that they cannot see the pearle of the Gospell, which the wise Merchant sold all he had to purchase. By distrusting and distracting cares of the world, this intellectuall eye is not onely depraued, but depriued of light. Affectio mundi, infectio animi: our soules are affected, infected with this contagion. We are easily inclined, and declined from our supernall blisse, by doting loue of these transient delights. And vbi amor, ibi oculus: the eye followes the heart, with more diligence then a seruant his Master. Now it is no wonder if that eye be blinde, which the Deuill hath daw∣bed vp with the dirt of this world! Couetousnesse is an Ingrosser, whersoeuer it dwells: and as it would ingrosse the whole Vniuerse to it vnsatiate selfe, so it takes vp the whole soule, with all the affections and desires of it. It giues euery member and faculty presse-mony, and bindes all their contention to get riches. It leaues not so much as an eye for our selues, not a thought for God. Quicquid Gregor. in mor. de se intrinsecus agatur oblitus est animus, dum extrinsecus occupatur. Whiles the mind is externally busied, it forgets what is done in it selfe, what shall become of it selfe. This pearle then must be cut out of the worldlings eye, vvith the sharpe knife of repentance; otherwise he is likely ne∣uer to see heauen. For it may be well said to them, as the Philosopher answered to some, that asked him curious questions of the world; whether it had a soule, whether it were round, &c. Vos de mundo solliciti estis, & vestram immunditiem non catis. You are busie examiners concer∣ning
the world, but idle neglecters of your vnclean selues. These are the Diseases: there is also a double defect in this naturall Eye. 1. It perceiues onely naturall and externall things; qua ante pedes sunt; which lie at their feete, 2. Pet. 1. For It cannot see a farre off. It beholds only the barque or 2. Pet. 1. 9. rinde; but not the inward vertue. It can perceiue vvhat thy riches are, thy house adorned, thy lands tilled, thy grounds stocked: but not those spirituall blessings, and celestiall priuiledges, that belong to thee as thou art a Christian. It iudgeth the Cabinet by the Lether and co∣uer, not by the costly iewels in it. It may see Iobs outward affliction, not his inward consolation. If God swells their garners with plenteous fruits, and fills their bones with marrow, this they see: but the hope of Gods calling, the comforts of the Gospell, the sauing health of Iesus Christ, and the promises of eternall life, they not see. The world is their circumference; other things Nec capiunt, nec cupiunt; neque tenent manibus, nec cernunt oculis; they neyther comprehend nor couet; neither hold, nor behold them. A beast hath one kinde of eye, a naturall man two, a Christian three. The beast hath an eye of Sense, the na∣turall man of Sense and Reason, the Christian of Sense, of Reason, and of Faith. Each of these hath his seuerall ob∣iects, seuerall intentions. The eye of sense regards onely sensuall things: the eye of reason onely sensible and natu∣rall things: the eye of faith, spirituall, supernall, and su∣pernaturall things. The eye of sense doth not extend to intelligible things, and matters of discourse. Tell a bruit beast of Philoso∣phy, and the conclusions of nature, he vnderstands you not. The belly of Sense hath no eares for such instructi∣ons. Let it be fed, nourished, haue the appetite deligh∣ted: of further felicitie it hath neyther notion, nor
motion. Nec noscit, nec poscit. The eye of Reason sees further then that of Sense; and hath (more then common Sense) a rationall and discur∣siue apprehension of intelligible obiects. For the bodies of creatures, the bruites see them as well as man, and per∣haps some better: but in these bodies he perceiues hidden vertues, obiectuall to the scope of vnderstanding, which the beast cannot see. I confesse that many a man is defe∣ctiue in the graduall ascents of reason. Tell a rusticke or mechanicke that the Sun is greater then the whole earth, or that a little starre is larger then his car-wheele; and he derides thy boldnesse, and thinkes thou wouldst be admi∣red for telling alye. Though this by the eye of mature reason is discerned perfect truth. The eye of Faith sees further then both the former; for it lookes into the hope of our calling, and the glorious inheri∣tance of the Saints. The Christian hath not onely an eye of Sense cōmon with beasts; nor an eye of reason com∣mon with men; but also an eye of faith proper to his pro∣fession. Wherein he goes beyond the naturall man, fur∣ther then the naturall man goes beyond the beast. The vnregenerate liuesall his dayes in a mist: he cannot looke vp to heauen; in comparison whereof that world he sees, is but a base moale-hill; and himselfe is like a blind moale, digging in it. Yea in this very world, his owne proper element, how little doth he truely perceiue! There is no herbe or flower hee treads on, that he truely knowes. Yea he is a stranger at home, and is ignorant of what is in his owne bosome. But for things that concerne a better world, he hath no insight. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse vnto 1. Cor. 2. 14. him; neyther can hee know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Those things are incredible, impossible to him, which we build our faiths on. Happy then are their eyes that see these things. In matters of the world our sim∣plicity moues pity, or makes sport: let it content vs, that
these losses are requited by our spirituall knowledge, see∣ing further into better matters. That wherein we are ig∣norant, is transient & contemptible: that which we know, is glorious and eternall. The ignorance of the former shall not hinder our blessednesse; the knowledge of the other shall accomplish it. 2. The second defect in this eye is an in solid leuity: it is rouing, like Dinahs, and rauished abroad; but wants self∣inspection. Two things exceedingly mooue men; Cicero. de or. b. 3. Si∣militude and Example. When men iudge others very euil, they begin to think themselues good. Nothing doth soo∣ner blinde vs then comparisons. Hee that would mount to a high opinion of his owne worth, by comparing it to the base wickednesse of another; Sen. Perinde est, ac si quis ad clandos respiciens, sam miretur velocitatem: is like one that obseruing a Cripples lamenesse, wonders at himselfe that he is so swift. The curious man goes abroad, Bern. Et ex∣terius omnia confiderat; qui sic interna despicit: and is so in∣tentiue vpon forreigne businesses, that he forgets his owne. They are common questions; Quid ille fecit? What hath hee done? and Quid ille faciet? Ioh. 21. 21. What shall hee doe? But not What haue I done? not Acts 16. 30. What shall I doe that I might be saued? They are like Taylors, that haue taken measure of many men, neuer of them∣selues. Such a man doth not smite his owne bosom with the Publican, but breakes his neighbours head with the Pharise. It is good for a man to keepe his eyes at home, and set them about the domesticall businesse of his owne heart: lest at last Omnibus notus, ignotus mo∣ritur sibi; he that liued knowne to all, dyes in ignorance of himselfe. I cannot leaue this excellent Organ, the eye; till I haue shewed you two things. 1. The danger of spirituall blindnesse. 2. The meanes to cure it. Spirituall blindnes shall appeare the more perilous, if
we compare it with naturall. The bodies eye may be bet∣ter spared then the soules. As to want the eyes of Angels, is farre worse then to want the eyes of beasts. The want of corporal sight is often good, not euill: euil in the sense, good in the consequence. He may the better intend hea∣uenly things, that sees no earthly to drawe him away. Many a mans eye hath done him hurt. The sonnes of God Gene. 6. 2. saw the daughters of men. Dauid from the roofe of his Palace saw Bethshabe. Per oculorum beneficium intrat cor∣dis veneficium. The lightning of lust hath scorched the heart through those windowes. Malus oculus, malus ani∣mus. An euill eye makes an euill mind. The Apostle speakes of eyes full of adultery: it is a feareful thing to haue an eye great with whoredome. And there be eyes full of couetousnesse, lusting after the grounds and goods of o∣ther men: as Ahabs eye was full of Nabaoths vineyard. But non tutum est conspicere, quod non licitum est concupisce∣re. Let not thine eye be enamoured of that, which thy heart must not couet. You see therefore, that sometimes the losse of corporall sight doth the soule good: and the eye of faith sees the better, because the eye of flesh sees not at all. Besides, the bodily blind feeles and acknowledgeth his want of sight: but the spiritually thinks that none haue clearer eyes then himselfe. He that wants corporall eyes, blesseth them that see: this man derides & despiseth them. Their blindnesse is therefore more dangerous, Qui suam ignorant ignorantiam; that know not they are blind, as Laodi∣cea, Reue. 3. This conuiction Christ gaue to the Iewes. Reue. 3. 17. Iohn 9. 41. If yee were blind, yee should not haue sinne: but now yee say, We see, therefore your sinne remaineth. The blind in body is commonly led either by his seruant, or his wife, or his dogge: there may be yet some respect in these guides. But the blind in soule is led by the world, which should be his seruant, is his traytor: or by the flesh, which should be as a wife, is his harlot: or by the deuill, which is a dog
indeed, a crafty curre, not leading, but misleading him. He that is blind himselfe, and led by such blind, or rather blinding guides, how should he escape the rubs of trans∣gression, or the pitte of destruction! Now the meanes to cleare this Eye, is to get it a know∣ledge of God, of our selues. That the eye may be cured, this knowledge must be procured. Now God must be knowne by his Works. Word. Spirit. 1. By his Works. The booke of Nature teacheth the most vnlearned, that there is a Deitie. This may be called naturall Theologic. For Rom. 1. 20 his invisible things may be vnder∣stood by his visible workes. Praesentemque refert qualibet her∣ba Deum. Not a pile of grasse wee tread on, but tells vs there is a GOD. Iob 12. 7. &c. Aske the beasts and they will tell thee; the foules of the ayre the fishes in the Sea; the earth will de∣clare vnto thee, that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this. When an Eremite was found fault with, that hee wanted bookes; hee answered, that there could be no vvant of bookes, when Heauen and Earth stood before his eyes. Psal. 90. 1. The heauens declare the glory of GOD: and the firma∣ment sheweth his handy worke. Day vnto day vttereth speech: and night vnto night sheweth knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. All these crea∣tures speake GOD; in whom is the act of all powers, & from whom the power of all acts: whether thou haue a carnall affection, filled with vanitie; or a curious head, filled with varietie; or a Christian heart, filled with veri∣tie; despise not the paedagogie and manuduction of the World, leading thee to know God. 2. But this booke reads onely to vs, (that aske An sit) Deus est; that there is a God. If wee aske further, Quis sit, Who this God is, or how to be worshipped; it cannot expound it. It brings vs onely like that Act. 17. 23. Athenian Al∣tar,
Adignotum Deum; To the vnknowne God. Wee must turne ouer a new leafe, search another booke to take out this lesson. Search the Scriptures; for they giue this testimony. So Zachary. Zach. 8. 23. Tenne men out of all languages of the Nations shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Iew; saying, We will goe with you, for we haue heard that GOD is with you. In the former, the booke is the VVorld, the schoole Natures light; the scholer man, quatenus homo; as he is man. But here the Booke is the Scripture, the Schoole the light of grace, and the scholer Christian man, as he is a Christian. There was the eye of Reason exerci∣sed; here of faith. There was taught GOD in his crea∣tures; here God in his Christ. 3. But this Scripturall knowledge (common to the wicked) is not sufficient; there must be a spiritual know∣ledge: vvhereby, though he ses not more then is in the Word, yet he sees more then they, that see onely the letter of the Word. 1. Ioh. 2. 27. The annointing which you haue receiued, tea∣cheth you all things. Call wee then earnestly vpon the Spi∣rit of Illumination for this knowledge. For it is not ob∣tained per rationem, sed per orationem; not by reason, but by prayers. Eph. 3. 18. For this cause I how my knees to the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, &c. That you may be able to compre∣hend with all Saints, what is the bredth, and length, & depth, and height: & to know the loue of Christ, which passeth know∣ledge. Now we must learne to see our selues, and this selfe∣contemplation must be made by a Naturall glasse by a Morall glasse by a Spirituall glasse. 1. Naturally, by looking into the constitution & com∣position of our owne persons; as Paul distinguisheth vs into 1. Thes. 5. 23. Body, Soule, Spirit. For thy Body, it was not one∣ly Psal. 39. 15 fashioned beneath on the earth, but of the earth. Our
first Parents were made of the earth: of the earth vvas their meate: of their meat their bloud: of their bloud their seed: of the seed our bodies. Corrupta et corrumpen∣tia corpora; bodies corrupt of themselues, and corrupting the soules. For thy Soule, it is a reall, spirituall, inuisible, and indiuisible substance; diffused by God into thy bo∣dy. Who by placing this soule in thy flesh, hath set thee in the mid-way, betwixt the bodilesse Spirits aboue, and the mindlesse bodies belowe. This soule is preserued by neither element nor aliment, but by him onely that made her; and to whom, she resteth not, till she returnes. For thy Spirit, it is called vinculum and vehiculum, a bond and a Chariot. It is a bond to vnite a diuine and heauenly soule, to an earthly elementary body; both these ex∣tremes meete friendly by this Tertium, a firmamentall Spirit. It is called a Chariot, because it carrieth the soules faculties to all organs and parts of the body, and that with wonderfull speed. 2. Morally, by considering how frequently wee haue transgressed those vertues, to which the very Heathen gaue a strict obedience. Where is our iustice, temperance, patience? We haue idle designes, and idler desires; and giue vvay to all euill that may bee either thought or wrought: and what we dare not act, we dare like. Wee lothe (like fond sheepe) the good pastures of fit benefits, and bleat after the brouse of vanities. Like erring Pla∣nets, we keepe not the ecclyptike line of vertuous medi∣ocritie. As God hath all good in himselfe, all euill onely in knowledge: so we on the contrary, haue much good in knowledge, all euill in our selues. 3. Spirituall knowledge goes yet further; euen in me∣dullas, et penetralia cordis. It searcheth the heart; and if in that most inward Chamber, or in any cabinet thereof, it can finde an Idol, it brings it forth. It sees when the torrent of time beares thee downe the streame of custome; what faintnesse is in thy faith, what coldnes in thy zeale,
when the awe of man giues the fear of God a check-mate. It sounds the lowest depth of the Conscience; and spy∣eth blemishes in the face of whitest innocence. So it brings the best soule downe on her knees; teacheth her the necessity of humblenesse; and puts this prayer in her mouth; Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. We haue now done with the Organ of Seeing; the vnderstanding or Soules Eye: let vs come to the obiect to be seene, The hope of his calling; and the riches of the glory of Gods inheritance in the Saints. The Obiect Is cleare and transparent to a sanctified Eye. The Phi∣losophers propound sixe necessary occurrences to our perfect Seeing; and you shall see them all here met. 1. Firmenesse or good disposition of the Organ that seeth. A rolling eye beholds nothing perfectly. A Di∣nahs eye is the prologue to a rauished soule. This must be a composed eye, stedfastly setled on the diuine obiect: saying with Dauid, My heart is fixed, O Lord, my heart is fixed. The proposed glory is so infinite, that it may well take vp the whole eye; for it shall one day take vp the whole man. Enter thou, good seruant, into thy masters ioy: it is too great to enter into thee. This Obiect is so immense, that we cannot well looke besides it. 2. The Spectacle must be obiected to the sight: the eye cannot pierce into penetralia terrae, or sublimia coeli: nor can the vnderstanding see into these supernaturall ioyes, vnlesse the Lord obiect them to it. Hence it is that many neglectfully passe by ( lumine lumen) the light, for want of eyes to regard it. But God here produ∣ceth the wardrobe of his glory to the sanctified eyes; as if he said, Uenite & videte, Psal. 46. Come, and see. So Moses; Psal. 46. 8. Exod. 14. 13. Stand still, and see the saluation of God. So Christ to his Apostles. It is giuen to your eyes to see these things, to o∣thers but by parables.
3. That there be a proportionall distance betwixt the organ and the obiect: neither too neere, nor too far off. A bright thing held too neere the sight, confounds it: be it neuer so bright, if too farre off, it cannot discerne it. God hath sweetly ordered and compounded this diffe∣rence. Those euerlasting ioyes are not close by our eyes, lest the glory should swallow vs vp: for mortall eyes can∣not behold immortall things; nor our corruptible sight see stedfastly that eternall splendor. Who can see God, and liue? And though you say, it is the soule that sees; yet e∣uen this soule, whiles it is prisoned in this muddy vaile, or rather Iayle, the flesh, hath by reason of the others im∣potency and passiblenesse, a thicke cloud cast betweene it selfe and glory. 1. Cor. 13. 12. For now wee see through a glasse darkely: but then face to face. Now I know in part, then shall I know, euen as also I am knowne. The best eye vpon earth lookes but through a glasse, a lattice, an obscuring impediment. Now on the other side, lest this obiect should be too farre off, that the intellectuall eye could not reach it, behold, God hath giuen it the first fruits; Rom. 14. 17. Righteousnesse, peace of conscience, and ioy of the holy Ghost; a prelibation of glory. It sees the earnest of the Spirit, sealing vs vp to the day of redemption; a pledge of those ioyes, which otherwise no eye hath seene, no eare heard, nor heart on earth con∣ceiued. 4. It is required that the obiected matter be substan∣tiall; not altogether diaphanous & transparent, but massie, and of a solid being. Otherwise the sight cannot perceiue, nor the minde well conceiue, the nature which is so subtil & sublim'd: but intends it selfe still further, till it can ac∣quiescere in materiam visibilem; rest it selfe on some visi∣ble obiect. But this Obiect here proposed, is no empty Chimera, or imaginary, tralucent, ayery shadow, but substantiall: the hope of Gods calling, and a glorious inheri∣tance: which though natures dull eye cannot reach, faiths eye sees perfectly. For Hac est fides, credere quod non vides.
And the subiect of this spectacle is by demonstrati∣on prooued solid and substantiall: because▪ nothing but that can giue this intellectuall eye firme content and complacency. How go the affections of man in a rolling and ranging pace from one creature to another! now thy heart is set vpon wealth; thou wilt haue it, though thou digge for it in visceribus both matris & filiorum; in the bowels of the earth, and of the sonnes of the earth. Say wealth is come, thou art then for honor: thy riches are a ladder, whereby thou wouldest climbe to dignity. Dede∣cet diuitem esse ignobilem. Nobility gotten hath not set∣led thee: thou art trauersing new desires. Thy lust pre∣sents thee a beauteous paramour: vncleane desires now fill vp thy scene; and thou playest, like that Germane, many parts thy selfe; a golden Asse, a proud Lyon, a lux∣urious Goate. Wealth and greatnesse commands thy pleasure; thy lust is answered: then thou art for musike, and so actest a fourth part; thou art thine owne fidler. Now thy bloud is to be heated with delicates; thou must be indulgent to thy throat with lust-prouoking meates; and so playest yet another part, a Cater to vncleannesse. When all is done, Non contenta quies; non est sedata libido. When thou hast thus wandred, and beg'd of euery poore creature a scrap of comfort, yet thou art but claw∣ed, and cloyed with variety, with vanity; not contented. It is al but one little crumme to one halfe dead of hunger. Couldst thou passe ouer the vast Vniuerse, from the con∣uexe superficies of heauen, to the center of hell: yet the immense capacity, rapacity of thy desires will not be sa∣tisfied. Well then did Augustine confesse: Fecisti nos ad te, & Conf. lib. 1. cap. 1. inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te. O Lord, thou didst make vs for thee; and our heart cannot bee quiet till it rest in thee. Nothing but the Trinity of per∣sons in that one Deity, can fill the triangular concaue of
mans own heart. The fire flieth to his sphere, the stone falleth to his center, the riuers run to the sea, as to their end and rest; and are but violently detained in any other place. The needle touched with the Loadstone, stands euer trembling and quiuering, till it enioy the full aspect of the Northerne Pole. Thus the Lord is onely our Center; the very life of satisfaction; full of perfect and infallible com∣fort; and he alone can content the boundlesse apprehen∣sion of this intellectuall eye. All other are but shadowes and vanities, but this matter obiected in my Text, satis∣fies. The world cannot, but this can; the hope of Gods calling, and his glorious inheritance, &c. 5. Clearnesse of space betwixt the Organ and the obiect. For the interposition of some thicke and grosse body, preuents the faculty of the Eye. The quickest eye cannot see through hils; and a crasse cloud is able to hide the Sunne from vs at noone day. On necessity, that wee may behold with our vnderstandings eyes, this celestiall obiect; the hope of our calling; there must be a remouing of all thicke and impenetrable obstacles. 1. Some haue whole mountaines betwixt their eyes and heauen: the mountaines of vaineglory hinder their sight. They are rauished with the brauery of earth: they thinke there is no heauen but at Court; no further scope of ambition, then to be great in this world. If you tell them of the glory of Gods Inheritance giuen to his Saints, alas, they beleeue not your prattle: they cannot see it. They cannot indeed; for who can see through mountaines? 2. Others, to make surer preuention against their sight of heauen, haue rolled the whole earth betwixt that and their eyes. These are the couetous, who are rooting downe to the Center. If you tell them of this hope, &c. they answere, Non videmus nisi terram; wee see nothing but earth. Well may they say so: for what eyes can see through the vast and condensed body of the earth?
3. Others yet haue interiected such obscure and pit∣chy clouds, between their sight and this Sunne of glory, that they cannot see. Whether of errors, that darken the light of the truth: Or of affected ignorance, that blindes their owne eyes: Or of blasphemous Atheisme; they will see nothing, but what they doe see. 2. Pet. 3. 4. Where is the promise of his comming? Since the Fathers fell asleepe, all things con∣tinue as they were from the beginning of the creation. Nil noui video; I see no new thing: it was so, and it is so. Non a∣liud vidêre patres, aliudue nepotes Aspicient. Or of rude and crude impieies, which both bleare their owne eyes, and shadow heauens graces from them. Thus the Deuill deales with thē, as the Pharises seruants dealt with Christ: first they blinde him, and then buffet him, and bid bim prophecie Marke 14. 65 who smote him. First hee puts out their eyes with their owne iniquities, and then leades them about to make himself sport. They cannot see the way to blisse, they haue blinded themselues; interposed such clouds betwixt them and heauen, that this glorious light cannot shine vnto them. There must be then a clearer space: and this God grants to faith. Acts 7. 55. 56. Stephen full of the holy Ghost, looked vp stedfastly into heauen, and saw the glory of GOD, &c. Behold, I see the heauens open, and the Sonne of man stan∣ding on the right hand of God. Though this bee taken for more then a spirituall sight; yet hence we haue this com∣fort; that our eyes of Faith shall see God now in Grace, and our eyes of flesh heereafter in glory. 6. Lastly, the obiect must be stable and firme, for if it moue too swiftly, it dazeleth the eye, and cannot be tru∣ly (according to the perfect forme of it) beholden. An oare in the riuer often seems to the passengers as if it were broke by reason of the swift and violent motion of the water. An arrow cuts the ayre with such quicknesse, that we can scarce discerne it; which lying at the marke is ea∣sily seene. God hath therefore answered our desires, and fitted our vnderstandings with a stable obiect: which
Paul calls an exceeding & eternall waight of glory. A waight; substantiall and permanent: not a light transient matter, 2. Cor. 4. 17. nor a swift voluble nature; but waighty. Therefore let vs not looke on the things which are seene, but on the things Vers. 18. which are not seene: for the things which are seene are tempo∣rall; but the things which are not seene are eternall. It is here called an Inheritance, which none can take from vs: that subtle Lawyer Satan, shall neuer be able to picke ca∣uils against it. You must not expect, that I should enter into a parti∣cular resolution of our obiected comforts: I must reserue that to a more liberall time. Onely now let vs set them in our meditation, and settle our selues to attaine them. Contemne we, condemn we the foolish choice of world∣lings, in regard of our portion and better part, neuer to bee taken from vs. Why should I dislike my gold, because he preferres his copper? The least dramme of these ioyes shall outwaigh all the pleasures of earth. And as one tor∣ment in hell shall make the reprobate forget all earthly va∣nities: so the least drop of this pleasure shall take from vs the remembrance of our former miseries. Wee shall not thinke on our pouerty in this world, when we possesse those Riches: and forget our contemptible basenesse, when God shall giue vs that Glory of Saints. Hee shall not much remember the dayes of his life, because God an∣swereth Eccl. 5. 20. him in the ioy of his heart. God giue vs to see these things now in grace, that we hereafter may see them in glory. Amen.
THE COSMOPOLITE: OR, WORLDS FAVOVRITE. LVKE 12. 20. But God said vnto him; Thou foole, this night thy soule shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou hast prouided? THIS is the Couetous mans Scripture; and both (like an vnflattering glasse) presents his present condition, what he is: and (like a fatall booke) pre∣monstrates his future state, what hee shall bee. And because; as no man would be thought of others, or will thinke himselfe a worldling; so nor apply to himselfe the terrour of this Text: therefore this Scripture doth both indigitate and single him out, with a Tu es hmo; and when it hath set himselfe before himselfe, it tels him how he shall stand before the Tribunall of God: vvith a lost name, with a lost soule, with a lost world, with a lost
and neuer to be recouer'd heauen. We shall perceiue more plainly the Cosmopolites feare∣full iudgement, if we take a precursory view of the Para∣bles former passages. First we haue the Rich man, vers. 16. prospering in his wealth: not onely in the vsurious gaines, which his mo∣ney, Prosperity permitted to the wicked. fraud, oppression, or vniust dealing might get: but euen in those things which God by the hand of nature did reach forth to him. For his ground brought forth plen∣tifully. So deepe a draught haue the wicked often drunk in the common cup of blessings. Their Bull gendreth and faileth not: their Cow calueth and casteth not. They spend Iob 21. 10. their dayes in wealth. Yea, will you heare yet a larger exhi∣bition? They are not in trouble as other men, neyther are Psal. 73. 5. 7. they plagued like others. There they haue exemption from misery. Their eyes stand out for fatnesse: they haue more then heart could wish. There they haue accumulation of felicity. Secondly, we haue him caring what to doe, vers. 17. Care keepes wealth com∣pany. He had so much gaine, so much graine; that his roomes could not answere the capacity of his heart. What shall I doe, because I haue no roome, where to bestow my fruits? Care is the inseparable companion of aboundance. Vnâ recipiuntur diuitiae & solicitudo. They, to whom is giuen most wealth, are most giuen to carking, sharking, and so∣licitous thoughtfulnesse, with a little inuersion of our Sa∣uiours meaning; Where is much giuen, there is much, yea more required. Those hearts whom the world hath done most to satisfie, are least of all satisfied: still they require more, and perplexe themselues to get it. A reasonable man would thinke, that they who possesse abundant ri∣ches, should not be possessed with abundant cares. But care not for to morrow, saith Christ. Cuius enim diei spatium Chrys. in Math. 6. te visurum nescis, quam ob causam illius solicitudine torque∣ris? Why shouldst thou disquiet thy selfe with thought of prouisiō for that day, whose euening thou art not sure to see?
Thirdly, wee haue his resolution; which in his pur∣pose, hath a double succession (though no successe) for their disposed order and places. This will I doe, vers. 18. what? 1. I will pull downe my barnes, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. He thinks of no roome in visceribus pauperum, in the bowels of the poore: which the Lord hath proposed to him, a fit recep∣tacle of his superfluity. He mindes not to build an hospi∣tall, or to repaire a Church; eyther in cultum Christi, or culturam Christiani: to the worship of Christ, or educa∣tion of orphanes, or consolation of distressed soules: but onely respects Horreum suum, and Hordeum suum: his Barne and his barley. The want of roome troubles him: his haruest was so great, that he is crop-sicke. The sto∣make of his Barne is too little to hold that surfet of corne he intends it; and therfore in anger he will pull it downe, and make it answerable to his owne desires. 2. This hee takes as granted, and vpon the new building of his Barne, he builds his rest, ver. 19. Then I will say to my soule; Soule, thou hast much goods laid vp for many yeeres, take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merry. He dreames his belly full, and now his pipes goe: he sings requem, and lullabies his spi∣rit in the cradle of his barne. This sweet newes hee whis∣pers to his soule. Though he had wearied his body with incessant toyles, and made it a gally-slaue to his imperious affection: yet his soule had beene especially disquieted, and therefore hee promiseth his soule some ease. In this indulgent promise, there is a Preface, and a Solace. 1. The Preface assures his soule much goods, and many yeares; multas diuitias, multos annos. He knew that a scant and sparing proffer would not satisfie his boundlesse de∣sires: there must be shew of an abundant impletion. It is not enough to haue an ample rocke or distae of wealth, vnlesse a longeuall time be afforded to spinne it out. Phi∣loxenus his wish coupled with his pleasant viands a long throat, (Crane-like); to prorogue his delight: for short∣nesse
doth somewhat abate sweetnesse. Rex horae, a king of one houre can scarce warme his throne: it keeps a Christ∣mass-lord flat, that he knowes his end. If this man had bin his own Lord, how excellent an estate would hee haue as∣sured himselfe▪ His Farme should haue been so large, and his lease so long, that I doubt whether Adam in Paradise had a greater Lordship, or Metbushalem a longer life. The last of his desires is of the longest size: giue him much goods, and much time, abundance of ioyes, and abun∣dance of dayes; and you hitte or fitte the length of his foote. 2. The Solace is a daunce of foure paces; Take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merry. The full belly loues an easie Chaire; he must needs ioyne with his laborious surfets the vacation of sleepe. He hath taken great paines to bring death vpon him; and now standing at his dore, it heares him talke of ease. He promiseth himselfe that, which he trauells to destroy, life: and euen now ends what he threa∣tens to begin. So worldlings weary and weare out their liues to hoord wealth: and when wealth comes, & health goes, they would giue all for life. O fooles! in continu∣all quest of riches, to hunt themselues out of breath; and then be glad to restore all at once for recouerie. The next pace is, Eate: his bones must not onely be pleased, but his belly. It is somewhat yet, that this man resolues at last no more to pinch his guts: therefore what before he was in their debt, he will pay them with the vsury of surfets. He purposeth to make himselfe of a thinne starueling, a fatte Epicure; and so to translate Parcum into Porcum. The third pace is, Drinke: where gluttony is bid vvelcome, there is no shutting out of drunkennesse. You shall not take a Nabal, but he plyes his gobblet, as well as his tren∣cher. And this is a ready course to retire himselfe from his former vexation; to drowne his cares in Wine. The last pace is a Leualto; Be merry: When hee hath got iunkets in his belly, and vvines in his braine, what should he doe,
but leape, dance, reuell, be merry, be mad! After feasting, must follow iesting. Heere be all the foure passages: he sleepes care away, he eates care away, he drinks care away, and now he sings care away. His pipes be full, and they must needes squeak, though the name of the good, yea the name of GOD be dishonoured. But to such a mad∣merry scoffer might well be applied that verse, which was sounded in the eare of a great Rimer dying: Desine ludere temerè, nitere properè surgere, de puluere. Leaue playing, & fall to praying: it is but sorry iesting with death. Thus his dance was like Sardanapalus; Ede, bibe, lude: Eate, drinke, and be merry: but there is one thing marres all his sport; the bringing of his soule to iudgement. He pro∣miseth a merry life, and a long life; but death sayes nay to both. He gratifies his soule, & ratifies his state; but cou∣zens himselfe in all. It may be said of him, as King Iohn of the fatte Stagge dying; See how easily he hath liued, yet he neuer heard Masse. This was the sweet, but the sowre followes. Qui gaudebit cum mundo, non regnabit cum Hierom. Christo. He reioyceth with the World, but must not liue in glory with Christ. Thus farre the Rich man acts; now comes in Gods part: which turnes the nature of his play, from Comike purposes to Tragike euents. He behights all peace and ioy to himselfe; But God said; Thou foole, this night shall thy soule be taken from te, &c. The words containe an Agent, Patient, Passion, Question. The Agent is God; But God said. The Patient is the rich Foole. The Passion. This night shall thy soule be requi∣red of thee. The Question which God puts to him, to let him see his folly; Then whose shall those things be vvhich thou hast prouided?
The Agent, God. The Rich man was purposing great matters, but he rec∣koned without his host: he resolues thus and thus; But God said to him. Hence two obseruations. 1. That the purposes of men are abortiue, and neuer come to a happy birth, if God blesse not their conception. Man purposeth, and God disposeth. The horse is prepared to the battell, but the victory is of the Lord. It is a holy re∣seruation in all our purposes; Si Deo placuerit: If it shall please the Lord. Iam. 4. 13. Goe to now ye that say, To day or to mo∣row we will goe into such a Citie, and continue there a yeere, & buy and sell, and get gaine. Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morow. Ye ought to say, If the Lord will. For neither tongue can speake, nor foote moue, if the Lord shal ener∣uate them: as he did Luke 1. 22. Zaobaries tongue in the Temple, and 1. Kin. 13. 4. Ieroboams arme, when he would haue reached it out against the Prophet. In vaine man intends that, wherea∣gainst God contends. Sisera resolues on victory, GOD crosseth it with ouerthrow. Yet thinks Sisera, Iael vvill succour me, Iudg. 4. 17. For there is peace betweene Iabin King of Ha∣zor, and the house of Heber the Kenite. No, euen there he arme of the Lord is ready to encounter him; a draught of milke shall be his last draught, and the hand of a vvo∣man shall kill him, that hath escaped the hand of an Ar∣mie. The Iewes may say, We will flie away  swift horses. But God saith, Your Persecutors shall be swifter. Senacherib pur∣poseth to lick vp Israel as the Oxe grasse; and though he found the Land before him as an Eden, to leaue it behind him as Sodome; But God said, He shall goe home without his errand: An hooke in his nostrils shall reine him back. Esa. 14. 13. 15. The King of Babylon sayes in his heart, I will ascend into heauen, I will exalt my throne aboue the starres of God: and I will be like the most High. But God said, Thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. Hd made him∣selfe
so sure of Christ, that rather then to faile of cutting off the prophecied King, he slayes his owne sonne: Hee might so, but he shall not touch Gods Sonne. With what lauish promises do the Spanyards flatter themselues, when they baptised their Nauie with the name of Invnsible? England is their own, they are already grasping it (warme with gore) in their clutches. But God said, Destructi∣on shall inherite their hopes: and the remainder of ruine shall be onely left to testifie, vvhat they vvould haue done. Mens thoughts promise often to themselues, Multa magna; many things, great things: they are plotted, con∣triued, commenced; yet die like Ionah's Gourd, when we should expect their refreshing: Quia non fortit Deus, because God hath not blessed them. Ambition may reare turrets in emulation of heauen: and vaine-glory build Castles in the ayre; but the former shall haue no roofe, as the latter hath no foundation. Philip threatned the Lace∣demonians, that if he entred their Countrey, he would vt∣terly extinguish them. They wrote him no other an∣swere but Si, If: meaning, it was a condition well put in, for hee neuer was like to come there. Si S I non esset, perfectum quidlibet esset. But in the menaces of angry Ty∣rants, and purposes of hastie intenders, there is an If, an included cōdition, that infatuates all. Let our lesson hence be this. That our purposes may be sped with a happy successe, let vs intend in the Lord, for the Lord. 1. Let vs deriue authoritie of our intentions from his sacred Truth; which giues rules not onely to liue well, and to speake well, but euen ad bene cgitandum, to thinke well. It is a wicked purpose to fast till Paul be killed; to wreake malice, to sa∣tifie lust. Inauspicious and without speed are the intents, whose beginning is not from God. Let no purpose passe currant from thy heart, till God hath set on it his stampe and seale of approbation: Let his Word giue it a Fiat:
Whatsoeuer ye doe, yea or intend to doe, let both action of hand, and thought of heart be all to Gods glory. 2. Let vs in all our purposes reserue the first place for Gods helping hand. Iohn 15. 5. Without mee yee can doe nothing, saith Christ. But it is obiected that Paul spake peremptorily to his Corinthians. 1. Cor. 16. 5. I will come vnto you when I shall passe through Macedonia. And Dauid, Psal. 66. I will goe to the house of the Lord. I answere, Cor tenet, quod lingua tacet: they that had so much grace in their hearts, wanted not this grace; et noscere et poscere facultatem Domini, to know and desire the Lords permission. You shall neuer take men so well affected to good workes, that doe not implore Gods assistance. Though they doe not euer expresse in vvord, yet they neuer suppresse in thought, that reseruation; If it please God, as Paul doth afterwards in that place; 1. Cor. 16. 7. If the Lord permit. If any will dare to resolue too confidently, patronizing their temeritie from such patterns; as if their voluntates were potestates, let them know that like Tay∣lours, they haue measured others, but neuer tooke mea∣sure of themselues: that there is great difference betwixt a holy Propet or Apostle, and a profane Publican. 2. Obserue, that God now speakes so to the Coue∣tous, that he will be heard: he preacheth another kind of Sermon to him then euer he did before: a fatall, finall, fu∣nerall Sermon, a Text of Iudgement; This night shal they fetch away thy soule. For this is Gods Lecture, himselfe reades it; But God said. Hee had preached to the vvord∣ling often before; and those Sermons were of three sorts. 1. By his Word. But cares of the world choake this Seed: the heart goes after couetousnesse; euen whiles the flesh sits vnder the pulpit. This is the deuills three-wing'd arrow, (wealth, pride, voluptuousnesse) vvhereby hee nailes the very heart fast to the earth. It is his talent of lead, which he hangs on the feet of the soule, the affecti∣ons;
that keepes her from mounting vp into heauen: with the printed beauty of this filthy Harlot hee bewit∣cheth their mindes, steales their desires from Christ, and sends them a whoring to the hote Stewes of hell. Thus is Gods first Sermon quite lost. 2. By Iudgements on others, whose smart should a∣maze him. For God, when hee strikes others, vvarnes thee, Tua res agitur, &c. When the next house is on fire, thy cause is in question. God hath smitten Israel, that Iu∣dah might feare. Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Iudah offend. Hos. 4. 15. Ephraim is ioyned to Idols: let him alone. When the plague knocks at thy neighbours dore, it tells thee, I am not farre off. Gods iudgement on the Luk. 13. 5. Galile∣ans, and men in Sile is thus applied by Christ, to draw others to repentance, lest they likewise perish. But what if thousands fall on the worldlings right hand, & ten thou∣sands about him, he dreames of no danger: his own gold giues him more content, then all this terror. The Deuill hath hood-wink'd him with gaine; and so carries him quietly (like a hooded hawke) on his fist without baiting to hell. This Sermon is lost also. 3. By crosses on himselfe; and this Sermon comes a little neerer to him; for it concernes his feeling. The first was obiected to his eare, the second to his eye, this last to his sense. But as the first Sermon hee would not heare, the next not see, so this he will not feele: Ier. 5. 3. hee is stricken, but he hath not sorrowed. He imputes all to his ill lucke, that hee loseth the game of his worldly desires: he lookes no more vp to heauen, then if there was none. Psal. 10. 4. God is not in all his thoughts. All these Sermons are lost. But now God will be heard: He said; he spoke home; a word and a blow. He will be vnderstood, though not stood vnder. Uociferat, vulnerat: per dictum, per ictum. This is such a Sermon, as shall not passe without conside∣ration. So he preached to Pharaoh, by frogs, flies, locusts,
murraine, darknesse: but when neyther by Moses vocall, nor by these actuall lectures he would be melted, the last Sermon is a Red Sea, that drownes him and his armie. The Tree is bared, manured, watered, spared in expectan∣cie of fruits: but when none comes, the last sermon is the Axe: it must be Math. 3. 10. hewn downe and cast into the fire. This kinde of argument is vnanswerable, and cannot be eua∣ded. When God giues the Word, innumerable are the Prea∣chers: if the lower voyces will not be heard, death shall be fear'd. God knocks long by his Prophets, yea Reu. 3. 20. stands at the dore himselfe; we will not open. But when this Preacher comes, he opens the dore himselfe, and will not be denied entrance. Rom. 10. 21. All the day long haue I stretched forth my hands vnto thee; manum misericordiae, the hand of his mercy: it is not embraced. Now therefore he stretch∣eth out manum Iustitiae, the hand of his Iustice; and this cannot be auoided. All that long Day is past, and novv the worldlings Night comes. This night shall they require thy soule. The Rich man must heare this Sermon; there is no remedy. But GOD said. Wee are come from the Dooer, to The Sufferer, or Patient; And his title is, , Thou foole. What? If this had come from a poore Tenants mouth, it had beene held a petty kinde of blasphemy. Is the rich man onely held the wise man, at all parts; and doth God change his title with such a contradiction? Is the worlds gold become drosse? the rich Idoll a foole? It is euen a maxime in common ac∣ceptation; He is wise, that is rich. Diues and Sapiens are voces conuertibiles; Rich and wise are conuertible termes, imagin'd to signifie one thing. When the rich man speakes, all the people giue (bare-headed) silence and attention. As if no argument could euince such a necessity, as the chiefe Priests to Iudas; Tantum dabo: So much vvill I giue thee. Tantus valor in quatuor syllabis. Such force is Math. 26. 14.
there in foure syllables, and but two words. It is not on∣ly eloquence, but enchantment; and they that vse it, pre∣uaile like Sorcerers; vnlesse perhaps they light vpon (mul∣tis è millibus vnum) a Peter, Acts 8. 20. Thou and thy money be damned together. If he that can plead by the strongest arguments, be the wisest man, how doth God call the Rich man Foole? If a man should trauell through all conditions of the World, what gates would not open to the rich mans knocke! In the Church surely Religion should haue the stron∣gest force; yet riches thrusts in her head euen vnder Reli∣gions arme, and speakes her mind. Money once brought the greatest Preacher of the Gospell, euen the Author of the Gospell, Christ himselfe, to be iudged before an earth∣ly Tribunall. Now the Seruant is not greater then his Lord: no wonder if money playes the rex still, and dispo∣seth places to men of the greatest worldly (not the best heauenly) gifts. For a gift prospereth which way soeuer it go∣eth. It were somewhat tolerable, if money did only hin∣der vs from what we should haue; but it vvrings from vs also what we haue. In the Courts of Iustice, Law should rule: yet often money ouer-rules law and Court too. It is a lamentable complaint in the Prophecy of Esay: Esa. 59. 14. Iudgement is turned away backward, and Iustice standeth a farre off: for truth is fallen in the street; and equity cannot enter. If there must be contention, iudgement should goe forward; and is it turned backward? Iustice should lay a close eare to the cause of the distressed; and must it stand a farre off? Truth is fallen in the street. O the mercy of God! in the street? Had it fallen in the wildernesse, it had beene lesse strange; but in the street, where euery body passeth by, and no bo∣dy take it vp! miserable iniquity. Equity cannot enter; what, not equity? Are they not called Courts of Equity? and must that which giues them denomination, bee kept out? Now all this peruersion, euersion of Iustice is made
by money. This turneth Amos. 5. 7. Iudgement to wormewood, poi∣sons a good cause: or at least into vineger; as wine that stands long, becomes sowre. And you are beholding to that Lawyer, that will restituere rem, get you your right, though he doth it cunctando; by delayes. There is many one of whom that old verse may be inuerted, Talis homo nobis cunctando diminuit rem. In the warres valour beares a great stroke, yet not so great as money. That Macedonian Monarch was wont to say, He would neuer feare to surprise that City, whose gates were but wide enough for an asse laden with gold to enter. How many Forts, Castles, Cities, Kingdomes hath that blowne vp, before euer gunpowder was inuen∣ted! I need name no more. What quality beares vp so braue a head, but money giues it the checke-mate! It an∣swereth all things, saith Salomon. Eccl. 10. 19. A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but Money answereth all things. By all this it appears, that Riches is the greatest wis∣dome: but wee must take out a writte, Ad melius in∣quirendum. If wealth be witte, what meanes Christ here to call the Rich man Foole? yes, good reason. 1. Cor. 1. 20. God hath made foolish the wisedome of this world. If God calls him so, he gets lit∣tle to haue the world esteeme him otherwise. 2. Cor. 10. 18. Not hee that commendeth himselfe, nor whom the world commen∣deth, is approued, but whom the Lord commendeth. An ounce of credit with God, is worth a talent of mens prai∣ses. Frustra commendatur in terris, qui condemnatur in coe∣lis. The world commends, but God condemnes; which of these iudgements shall stand? I might heere inferre doctrinally, that all Couetous men be fooles: and that in his censure, that cannot deceiue, not be deceiued. but I should preuent the issue of this Text, to say and shew this now. I therefore content my selfe to say it now, to shew it anon. It may be cauill'd, that Follie is rather a defect in the vnderstanding, Couetousnes in the
affections. (For so they distinguish the soule, into the in∣tellectuall and affectionate part.) How then is this at∣tribution of foole, proper to the worldling? The truth is, that the offence of the will & affections doth mostly pro∣ceed from the former error of the mind. Our desire, feare, loue, hatred, reflecting on euill obiects, arise from the deceiued vnderstanding. So there is a double errour in the couetous mans mind, that makes him a foole. 1. He conceiues not the sufficiencie of Gods helpe; and therefore leaues him, that will neuer leaue his. Hee thinkes Gods treasury too empty to content him: he sees not his glory, and therefore will not trust him on bare promises. The good man sweetens his most bitter mise∣ries with this comfort: The Lord is the portion of mine in∣heritance. But all Gods wealth cannot satisfie him. O ni∣mis Psal. 16. 5. auarus est, cui Deus non sufficit: He is vnmeasurably couetous, whom God himselfe cannot satisfie. Heere is one argument of his folly. 2. Hauing left God, who (rested on) would not haue left him, hee adheres to the world which cannot helpe him. The minde of man, like the Elephant, must haue somewhat to leane vpon: and when the Oliue, Fig▪ tree, Vine are refused; he must put Iudg. 9. 15. his trust vnder the sha∣dow of the Bramble. When the Israelites had forsaken the King of Heauen, they make to themselues a Ier. 7. 18. Queene of heauen: Moses is gone, Exod. 31. 1. vp, make vs gods which shall goe before vs. Admiratur mundum, reijciens Dominum. He falls off from God, and falls in with the world. Here be both the parts of his folly: Ier. 2. 13. He hath committed two euils; for saken the fountaine of liuing waters, and hewed himselfe a broken cesterne. We see the Patient; let vs come to The Passion or suffering. This is the point of warre, which my Text sounds like a Trumpet, against all worldlings: This night shal thy soule be required of thee. Fauour them in this, and they thinke
all well; but in this of all they must not be fauoured. This suffering is aggrauated by foure circumstances Quid. What; the Soule A quo, of whom: of thee Quomodo, how: shall be required Qando, when; this night. What. The Soule, thy soule: not thy Barnes, nor thy croppe; neither the continent, nor content: not thy gods, which thou holdest deare; not thy body vvhich thou prizest dearer; but thy soule, which should bee to thee dea∣rest of all. Imagine the whole conuexe of heauen for thy Barne, (and that were one large enough) and all the riches of the world thy graine, (and that were crop suffi∣cient:) yet put all these into one ballance, and thy soule into the other; and thy soule out-waighes, out-values the world. What is the whole world worth to him that loseth his soule? The Soule is of a precious nature. One in substance like the Sunne, yet of diuers ope∣rations. It is confined in the body, not refined by the body, but is often most actiue, when her layler is most dull. Shee is a carefull hous-wife, disposing all well at home; conseruing all formes, and mustring them to her owne seruiceable vse. The senses discerne the out-side, the circumstance, the huske of things: she the inside, the vertue, the marrow; resoluing effects into causes; com∣pounding, comparing, contemplating things in their highest sublimity. Fire turnes coales into fire: the bo∣dy concocts meat into bloud; but the soule conuerts bo∣dy into spirits; reducing their purest formes within her dimensiue lines. In mans composition there is a shadow of the Trinity. For to make vp one man, there is an ele∣mentary body, a diuine soule, and a firmamentall spirit. Here is the difference: In God there are three persons in one essence, in vs three essences in one person. So in the Soule there is a trinity of powers, vegetable, sensitiue, ra∣tionall:
the former would onely be; the second be, and be well; the third be, be well, and befor euer well. O ex∣cellent nature, in whose cabinet ten thousand formes may sit at once; which giues agitation to the body, without whom it would fall downe a dead and inanimate lumpe of clay. This Soule shall be required. Thy Soule which vnderstands what delight is; and conceiues a tickling pleasure in these couetous desires. But to satisfie thy soule, thou wouldst not be so greedy of a∣bundance: for a little serues the body. If it haue food to sustaine it, garments to hide it, harbour to shelter it, li∣berty to refresh it, it is contented. And satietie of these things doth not (reficere, sed interficere) comfort, but con∣found it. Too much meat surfets the body, too much ap∣parell wearies it, too much wine drownes it: onely Quod conuenit, conseruat. It is then the soule that requires this plenitude, and therefore from this plenitude shall the Soule be required. Thy Soule, which is not made of a perishing nature, as the body; but of an euerlasting substance: And hath by the eternity therof a capablenes of moreioy, or moresorrow: it must be euer in heauen, or euerin hell. This night must this Soule receiue her doome; thy Soule shall be required. That Soule which shall be the bodies perpetuall com∣panion, sauing a short diuorce by the hand of death in the graue: but afterwards ordained to an euerlasting re-vni∣on. Whereas all worldly goods being once broken off by death, can neuer againe be recouered. The soule shall re∣turne to the body, but riches to neyther; and this Soule must be required. This is a losse, a crosse beyond all, that the worldlings imagination can giue being to. How differ the vvickeds thoughts dying, from their thoughts liuing! In the daies of their peace they forget to get for the soule any good. Eyther it must rest it selfe on these inferiour props, or des∣paire of refuge. The eye is not scanted of lustfull obiects,
the eare of melodious sounds, the palate of well rellishing viands. But the soules eye is not fastned on heauen, nor her eares on the Word of God: her taste sauours not the bread of life; she is neither brought to touch, nor to smell on Christs Vesture. Animas habent, quasi inanimata vi∣vunt: regarding their flesh, as that pamperd Romane did his; and their soules as he esteemed his horse: who being a spruce, neat, and fatte Epicure, & riding on a leane scrag∣ling Iade, was asked by the Censors the reason. His answer was, Ego curo meipsum, statius verò equum: I looke to my selfe, but my man to my horse. So these worldlings looke to their bodies, let who will take care of their soules. But when this night comes, with what a price would they purchase againe their Soules, so morgag'd to the de∣uill for a little vanitie! Now curare non volunt, then recu∣perare non valent. With what studious and artificiall cost is the body adorned, whiles the beggerly soule lyes in totterd ragges! The flesh is pleased with the purest flowre of the Wheat, and reddest bloud of the grape, the soule is famished. The body is allowed libertie, euen to licenti∣ousnesse, the Soule is vnder Satans locke and key, shack∣led with the fetters of ignorance and impietie. At this nights terrour, to what bondage, hunger, cold, calamitie, would they not subiect their bodies; to free their soules out of that friendlesse and endlesse prison! Why cannot men thinke of this before it be too late? It will sound harshly in thine eare, O thou riotous or auarous world∣ling, when this Passing-bell rings; Thy soule shall be requi∣red. If the Prince should confiscate thy goods, which thou louest so dearly, this newes would strike cold to thy heart: but here thy soule is confiscate. The deuill prizeth this most: he sayes, as the King of Sodome to Abraham, Da mihi animas, caetera sumetibi: Giue me the Soule, take the rest to thy selfe. Gene. 14. 21.
Of whom. Of thee; that hadst so prouided for thy soule in another place: for though earth be a dungeon in regard of hea∣uen, yet is it a Paradise in respect of hell. This world was his selected and affected home; and from thence shall death plucke him out by the eares. If this newes of the Soules requiring had come to a faithfull Christian, hee would haue welcommed it; and iudged it onely the voice of the Feast-maker, finding him in the humble roome of this base earth; Luk. 14. 10. Friend, sitte vp higher. Or that voice of heauen that spake to Iohn; Reu. 4. . Come vp hither. Sit no longer in the vale of teares, but ascend the mountaine of glory. A trumpet calling him to Mount Tabor, where he shall be transfigured for euer. This time would be to him, the non vltra of his ioyes and desires: he fought all his combate for this, that he might 1. Pet. 1. 9. receiue the end of his faith, the saluation of his soule. Hee is content to liue here till God call him; but his Phil. 1. 23. desire is to be dissol∣ued, and to be with Christ. Bonus vitam habet in patientia, mortem in desiderio. Hee is patient to liue, but vvilling to die. To him Eccl. 7. 1. the day of death is better then the day of his birth. Iob Iob 3. 3. cursed the day of his birth. And Ieremie said, Iere. 20. 14. Let not the day wherein my Mother bare me be blessed. But blessed is the houre of death: Reu. 14. 13. So saith the Spirit; blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labours. Both Philosophers and Poets could so commend the hap∣pinesse of this time, that they thought no good man tru∣ly happy till it saluted him. Dicique beatus Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet. The Ethnikes ignorant of a better life future, honour'd this with great solemnities, and kept prodigall feasts on their Birth-dayes; as Math. 14. 6. Herod when he was serued vvith the Baptists head for his second course. But the Christi∣ans were wont to celebrate the funeralls of the Martyrs; as if we did then onely begin truely to liue when we die.
For though the soule is gotten when man is made, yet it is (as it were) borne when he dies: his body beeing the wombe, and death the Midwife, that deliuers it to glori∣ous perfection. The good man may then well say, Ouid. Trist. 1. Eleg. 21. Mors mihi munus erit, with a Poet; or rather, Phil. 1. 21. Death shall be my aduantage, with an Apostle. His happiest houre is, when In manus tuas Domine, he can say, Into thy hands, Lord, I cōmend my soule. For Anima nō amittitur, sed praemittitur. But this Of thee is terrible. Thou that neuer preparedst for death; were at a league with hell, securely rocked asleep in the cradle of thy Barne, that didst put farre away from thee the euill day, & giuen it a charge de non instando: thou that cryedst Peace, peace, on thee shall come sudden destruc∣tion: thou that saidst Soule be merry, to sorrow shall Thy soule be required. Thou that neuer esteemedst thy soule so deare as thy wealth, but didst set that after thy stables, which might haue been equal to Angels; Thy soule. Thou that wert loth to heare of death, as hauing no hope of fu∣ture bliss; that wouldest not giue thy possession on earth, for thy expectation in heauen: as that French Cardinall, that said; He would not giue his part in Paris for his part in Paradise. Of thee shall a soule be required. This poynt is sharpe, and makes vp his miserie. Hovv. Required. The originall is , They shall require it. This is such a requiring, as cannot be withstood. GOD requires thy obedience, thou deniest it: the poore require thy cha∣ritie, thou deniest it: the World requires thy equitie, thou deniest it. But when thy soule shall be required, there must be no denying of that; it cannot be withheld. Who shall require this soule? Not God; he required it in thy life, to sanctifie it, and saue it, thou wouldest not harken to him; now hee vvill none of it. What should God doewith a drunken, pro∣fane, couetous, polluted, sensuall soule? He offerd it the Gospell, it would not belieue; the bloud of Christ, it
would not wash and be cleane: it is foule and nastie, God requires it not. Or if he require it, it is to iudge and con∣demne it, not to reserue and keepe it. Recusabit Deus iam oblatum, quod negabas illi requisitum. God will refuse thy soule now offred, which thou deniedst him vvhiles hee desired. Not heauen; those chrystalline walks are not for mud∣dy feete, nor shall lust-infected eyes looke within those holy dores. Reu. 21. 27. In no wise shall enter into that City any thing that defileth, or worketh abomination. There is a roome without for such, Chap. 22. 15. a black roome for blacke workes. What should a worldling doe in heauen? his heart so full of enuie and couetice, would not brooke an∣others felicitie. If there be no gold there, he cares not for comming at it. But he shal be fitted; for as he requires not heauen, so heauen requires not him. It will spare him no place; not that it wants roome to receiue him, but because his heart wants roome to desire it. 1. Cor. 6. 9. The vnrighteous shall not inherite the kingdome of God. But because this generall menace doth not terrifie him, read his particular name in the bill of inditement, ver. 10. Nor the Couetous. Heauen is for men of an heauenly conuersation. It was but Nebu∣chadnezzars Phil. 3. 20. dreame, Dan. 2. GOD will not set a golden head vpon earthen feet; giue the glory of heauen, to him that loues nothing but the basenesse of this world. The Angels require it not; those celestiall Porters, that carry the soules of the Saints, as they did the soule of Lazarus, into the bosome of Abraham, haue no commis∣sion for this mans soule. This rich man might be whee∣led and whirled in a Coach, or perhaps Pope-like, be borne on mens shoulders; but the poore begger, vvhose hope is in heauen though his body on earth, that could neither stand, goe, nor sitte, is now carried in the highest state, by the very Angels; when the other dying, hath no better attendance then deuils. And so if you aske, who then require his soule; sith
neither God, nor heauē, nor the blessed Angels wil receiue it; why, deuills: they that haue right to it by Gods iust decree, for his vniust obedience. Gods iustice so appoints it, for his sinnes haue so caused it, Sathan chalengeth his due, his officers require it. Thou hast offended, oh mise∣rable Cosmopolite, against thy great Soueraignes Law, Crowne, and Maiestie; now all thou hast is confiscate; thy goods, thy body, thy soule. Thou, whose whole de∣sires were set to scrape all together, shalt now find all scat∣tered asunder: thy close congestion meets with a vvide dispersion. Euery one claimes his owne: the vvorld thy riches, the wormes thy carkase, the deuill thy soule. Lust hath transported thine eyes, blasphemie thy tongue, pride thy foote, oppression thy hand, couetousnesse thy heart; now Satan requires thy soule. Not to giue it ease, rest, or supply to the defects of thy insatiate desires; no, dabit in cruciatum, he shal deliuer it ouer to torment. When. This night. In this darke Quando lie hid two fearefull extremities; Sadnesse, and Suddennesse. It is not onely said, In the night, but in This night. 1. In the Night; this aggrauates the horror of his iudgement. The night is a sad and vncomfortable time: therefore misery is compared to the Night, and ioy said to come in the Morning. Pray that your flight be not in the night, saith Christ to the Iewes; as if the dismall time would make desperate their sorow. The night presents to the fantasie, which then lies most patient of such impres∣sions, many deceiuing and affrightfull imaginations. Well then may a true (not fantasied) terror worke strongly on this wretches heart, whiles the night helps it forward. All sicknesse is generally stronger by night, then by day: this very circumstance of season then aggrauates his miserie; making at once his greefe stronger, himselfe vveaker. But what if wee looke further then the literall sense;
and conceiue by this night the darknesse of his soule? Such a blindnesse as he brings on himselfe, though the day of the Gospell be broke round about him. The cause of night to a man, is the interposition of the earth betwixt him and the Sunne. This worldling hath placed the earth, the thicke and grosse body of riches, betweene his eyes and the Sunne of righteousnesse. And so shine the Sunne neuer so cleare, it is still night with him. There is light enough without him, but there is darknesse too much within him. And then darkenesse must to darke∣nesse; inward to outward, as Christ calls it, vtter darke∣nesse. He would not see whiles he might, hee shall not see when he would. Though hee shall for euer haue fire e∣nough, yet it shall giue him no light: except it bee a little glimmering, to shew him the torments of others, and o∣thers the torments of himselfe. 2. This night, the sadnesse is yet encreased by the so∣dainnesse. It will be fearefull, not onely to bee surprised in the night, but in that night when hee doth not dreame of any such matter; when there is no feare, nor suspition of apprehension. His case is, as with a man that hauing rested with a pleasing slumber, and beene fedde with a golden dreame; suddenly waking findes his house fla∣ming about his eares, his wife and children dying in the fire, robbers ransacking his coffers, and transporting his goods, all louers forsaking, no friend pitying, when the very thrusting in of an arme might deliuer him. This rich man was long asleepe, and beene delighted with pre∣ty wanton dreames, of enlarged barnes, and plentifull har∣uests; (as all worldly pleasures are but waking dreames) now he starts vp on the hearing of this Soule-knell, and perceiues all was but a dreame; and that indeed hee is e∣uerlastingly wretched. The suddennes encreaseth the misery. The rich man hath no time to dispose his goods, how shall he doe with his soule? If in his health, wealth, peace, strength; suc∣coured
with all the helps of nature, of opportunity, prea∣ching of the Gospell, counsell of ministers, comfort of friends, he would not worke out his saluation: what shall hee doe when extreame pangs deny capablenesse to re∣ceiue them, and shortnesse of his time preuents their ap∣proaching to him? He hath a huge bottome of sinne to vnrauell by repentance, which he hath beene many years winding vp by disobedience: now a great worke, and a little time doe not well agree. This sudden call is feare∣full, This night shall thy soule be required. Yet before I part from this point, let me giue you two notes. 1. There is mercy in God, that it is hac nocte, this night; not this houre, not this moment. Hac nocte vvas suddaine, but hoc momento had beene more sudden; and that this larger exhibition of time is allowed, was Gods meere mercy, against the worldlings merit. He that spa∣red Niniueh many forties of yeares, will yet allow her forty daies. He that forbore this wretch many daies, re∣ceiuing Ionas 3. 4. no fruit worth his expectation, will yet adde a few houres. God in the midst of iustice remembers mer∣cie: much time he had receiued, and abused; yet he shall haue a little more. When the Lords hand is lifted vp to strike him, yet he giues him some lucida interualla moniti∣onis, warning before he lets it downe. But let not the worldling presume on this: sometimes, not an houre, not a minute is granted. Sword, Palsie, Apoplexie, Im∣postume makes quicke dispatch: and there is no space gi∣uen to cry for mercy. But what if a paucity of houres be permitted? ancient wounds are not cured in haste, the plaister must lie long vpon them. There was one man so saued, to take away desperation: and but one so saued, to Vnuslatio in fi∣ne poenituit: vnus quidem vt nulls desperet; solus autem, vt nullus praesumat. barre presumption. Conuersion at the eleuenth houre is a wonder, at the twelfth a miracle. All theeues doe not goe from the gallhouse to glory, because one did; no more then al Asses speak, because God opened the mouth of one. Flatter not thy selfe with hope of time. Nemo
sibi promittat, quod non promittit Euangelium. Let no man August. promise himselfe a larger patent, then the Gospell hath sea∣led to him. 2. The day of the wicked turnes at last to a night. Af∣ter the day of vanity, comes the night of iudgment. Now is the time, when the rich mans Sunne sets; his light and his delight is taken from him. His last sand is runne out; the clocke hath ended his latest minute, his night is come. His day of pleasure was short, his night of sorrow is euer∣lasting. Extremum gaudij luctus occupat. Vexation treads on the heeles of vanity. Mans life is compared to a Day. This day to some may be distinguished into twelue houres. The first giues vs natiuity; euen in this houre there is sin; an originall prauity, indisposition to good, pronenesse to euill. Secondly, Infancy; God now pro∣tects the cradle. Thirdly, Childhood; and now we learn to speake and to sweare together; the sap of iniquity be∣gins to put out. Fourthly, Tender age, wherein toyes and gawdes fill vp our scene. Fiftly, Youth: this is a mad∣ding, a gadding time. Remember not the sins of this time, Psalm. 25. 7. Iob 13. 26. prayes Dauid: their remembrance is bitter, sayes Iob. Sixt∣ly, Our high noone. God that could not be heard before for the loud noyse of vanity, now looks for audience, for obedience. Seuenthly, This is full of cares & crosses; the dugs of the world taste bitter; it is full time that this houre should weane vs. Eightly, Brings vs to a sense of mortality, we feele our bloud decaying. Ninthly, Our bodies goe crooked and stooping, to put vs in minde that they are going to their originall earth. Tenthly, We are euen as dying: we do dye by degrees: our senses first faile vs, our eyes are dimme like old Isaacs, our eares deafe, our taste dull: our grinders are done, our stilts vna∣ble to support vs. Eleuenthly, We are a burden to our selues, to our friends: we long for death, if any hope of a better life hath possessed our hearts. The twelfth houre
it comes. Which of these houres pass ouer vs without Gods mercies, without our voluntary vnthankfulnesse; vnlesse those first houres wherein our ignorance is vncapable of such obseruance? All thy day long haue I stretched out my Rom. 10. 21. hands vnto thee, saith God. If none of these houres re∣claime vs, our day is spent, and the night comes; that night wherein no man can worke; actiuely to comfort, Ioh. 9. 4. though passiuely he worke for euer in torment. I knovv, that God cuts many one short of most of these houres, and often shuts vp his day-light, before hee comes to his noone. But howsoeuer man passe from Infancy to child∣hood, from childhood to youth, from youth to age: yet senectutem nemo excedit; none can be more then olde. Though tam senex nemo, quin putet se annum posse viuere; no man is so old, but still he thinks hee may liue another yeare. And therefore lightly the older, the more coue∣tous; and Quò minus viae restat, eò plus viatici quritur: the lesse iourney men haue, the more prouision they make. God allowes this liberall time to some: but what ene∣mies are we to our selues, that of all these twelue houres, allow our selues not one! Many post off their conuersion from day to day, sending Religion afore them to thirty, and then putting it off to forty; and not pleased yet to o∣uertake it, promise it entertainment at threescore: at last death comes and allowes not one houre. In youth men resolue to allow themselues the time of age to serue God: in age they shuffle it off to sicknesse; when sicknes comes, care to dispose their goods, lothnesse to dye, hope to es∣cape martyrs that good thought; and their resolution still keepes before them the length of Gracious street at least. If wee haue but the lease of a Farme for twenty yeares, we make vse of the time and gather profit. But in this precious Farme of Time we are so ill husbands, that our Lease comes out, before we are one penniworth of grace the richer by it. Take heed; it is dangerous trifling
out thy good day, lest thou heare this message in the eue∣ning; This night shall thy soule be required of thee: Then whose shall those things be which thou hast pro∣uided? This is the Question. It were somewhat if thou mightest perpetually enioy them thy selfe: if thou couldst fetch downe eternity to them. As those in the 49. Psalme; whose inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for euer, and their dwelling Psal. 49. 11. places to all generations: they call their lands after their owne names. But there is a Quamdiù, and a Quousque. Hovv long! Hab. 2. How long? Thou that lodest thy selfe vvith thicke clay? How farre! Esa. 14. How farre? Thou that Hab. 2. 6. madest the earth to tremble, and didst shake the Kingdomes. Here is a Non vltra to both: thy power is confined, thy time is limited: both thy latitude and extention are brief'd vp; heeres thy period; a full stop in the midst of the sentence. . Whose shall those things bee which thou hast prouided? He that should read thy history (be∣ing ignorant of thy destiny) and finde so plentifull a hap∣pinesse in the first page of the booke: grounds so fertill, cattell so prospering, house so furnished, possibilities stro king thy hopes, hopes milking thy desires, desires dan∣cing to the tune of thy pleasures; promises of larger barnes, more opulent fruites; and all this with ease, yea with hearts-ease: Soule be merry: and comming now to the end of the page, but not of the sentence; turning o∣uer a new leafe, thinking there to reade the maturity and perfection of all, should finde a blanke, an abrupt period, an vnlook'd for stoppe, would surely imagine, that ey∣ther destiny was mistaken, or else some leaues were torne out of the booke. Such a Cuius erunt haec omnia would be a terrible dash in a story of happinesse so fairely written, and promising so good an Epilogue. But here is his end, you must read him no further: He, whom you haue seene Exod. 4. 13. this day, you shall see him againe no more for euer. Whose shall
these things be, O worldling? Were thy grounds as Eden, and thy house like the Court of Iehoiakim: yet dost thou thinke to raigne, because thou closest thy selfe in Cedar? no; Ier. 22. 15. aduenit finis tus; Thy end is come; Whose shall these things be? It were something yet, if thy children might enioy these riches. But there is a man that hath no child; yet is there no end of his labour, neyther is his eye satisfied vvith wealth. And he sayth not, For whom doe I trauell, and be∣reaue Eccl. 4. 8. my soule of this good? The prodigall would bee his owne heyre and Executor: but this couetous man be∣queaths neyther legacy to himselfe, nor to any knowne Inheritour. The other desires to see en end of all his sub∣stance: this man to see onely the beginning. Hee hunts the world full cry, yet hath no purpose to ouertake it: he liues behind his wealth, as the other liues beyond it. But suppose hee▪ hath children, and then though hee famish himselfe to feed them fatte; though he be damned, yet if his sonne may be made a Gentleman, there is some sa∣tisfaction. But this Cuius erunt is a scattering word, and of great vncertainty. Whose shall they be? perhaps not thy childrens. They say, Happy is that sonne, whose fa∣ther goes to the Deuill; but thou maist goe to the Deuill, and yet not make thy sonne happy. For men make heri∣tages, but God makes heyres. He will wash away the vn∣holy seed, and cut off the generation of the wicked. Salo∣mon had a thousand wiues and concubines, and conse∣quently many children; yet at last hee wants one of his seed to sit vpon the throne of Dauid, or to beare rule in Iudah: Ier. 22. 30. and S. Luke deriues Christ from Nathan the yonger bro∣ther. For thus saith God of Coniah, whom hee calls Luk. 3. 31. Coniah; cutting short at once his name, his life, his hope of posterity. Write this man childlesse. It often so fals out, that to a man exceeding wealthy, is denied a fuccessour of his owne loynes. Let him haue children, hee is not sure
those children shall possesse his riches. But those riches pe∣rish Eccl. 5. 14. by euill trauell: and he begetteth a sonne, and there is no∣thing in his hand. A scatterer succeedes a gatherer: auari heres dissipans: the father loued the world too well, and the sonne cares not for it. The sire was all for the rake, and the sonne is all for the pitchforke. So Whose shall these be? euen his that will one day pitty the poore. Hee will loue the poore so well, that he will not rest til he be poor with them for company. This is the portion of the wicked, Iob. 27. 13. 14. & the heritage which oppressors shall receiue of the Almighty. If their children be multiplied, it is for the sword, and their of∣spring shall not be satisfied with bread. Children are a great plea for Couetousnesse, for Op∣pression. Art thou couetous because thou hast children? Remember to make Christ one of thy children. If thou hast one, make him the second: if two, make him the third; if three, the fourth: how many soeuer thou hast, let Christ be one; let the poore haue a childes part. This is the way to get a blessing to all the rest: when Christ is made a brother to thy children, and hath a legacy bequea∣thed him; hee will blesse the portions of the other; the seed of the righteous shall not begge their bread. It is a sweet Psal. 37. 26. verse of the Psalme, worthy of obseruation, as it is full of comfort. The good man is euer mercifull, and lendeth, and his seed is blessed. The world thinkes, the more a man gi∣ueth away, the lesse should be left to his children: but the Lord witnesseth otherwise: let a man lend to the borrow∣er, giue to the begger, be mercifull to the distressed, and this is the way to make his Seed blessed. Charitable works doe not hinder the childrens wealth, but further it: what thou giuest to the poore, will be a sure vndecaying porti∣on to thy posterity. Duplicatum erit filijs iusti, quod iustus dedit filijs Dei. GOD will double that to thy children, which thou hast giuen to his children. Men flatter them∣selues, and couzen their consciences, with a tolerablenesse of vsury; when moneyes bee put out for their childrens
stocks. Alas, saith a man, I can leaue my children but a little: but by that they come to age of discretion to vse it, it will be iollily increased. I may be quickly gone, & when I am dead, they haue no skill to employ it; I will therfore safe-bind it for them, by good bonds with allowance of interest. God often in the Scriptures hath promised to be a Fa∣ther of the fatherlesse, and to prouide for those, whom the Parents faith haue left to his protection. By this promise did Christ commend himselfe to his Disciples, Ioh. 14. 18. I will not leaue you Orphanes: we translate it comfortlesse, the ori∣ginall is Orphans, or fatherlesse children. Psa. 146. 9. The Lord re∣lieueth the fatherlesse, and the widow. You may read 2. Kin. 4. that God would worke a miracle; rather then a poore vvidow, with her two fatherlesse children, should want. Hath God made himselfe their Guardian, and must their meanes be secured by vsurious contracts? Surely GOD hath iust reason to take this the most vnkindly of all the rest. Leaue not thy children the inheritance of thy sinne, turne not the prouidence of God from them by iniquitie, who hath promised to protect them, if cōmitted to him. Loe the wit of a worldly man! he takes thought to make his children rich, and yet takes the onely course to vndoe them. No casualtie shall fall vpon their stocks, (so they plot) by an act of God or man: but here certain losse falls presently vpon their soules; and a finall ruine shall impar∣tially at last consume their estates. For God will blast the stocks and branches, that are planted in the moorish and muddy ground of vsury. The dependance on God is a∣bandoned, and how iustly may the Lord forsake them, that forsake him! Neither is this sinne onely damnable to the Parents, but also dangerous to the children: who are by this meanes dyed in the very wooll of their youth, with the scarlet wickednes of Vsury. There was a Deuill, whom the Disciples of Christ could not cast out: and when Christ expelled him, the Mark. 9. 21.
spirit tare the man, and he fell on the ground wallowing and foaming. Christ then asked, How long is it agoe since this came vnto him? To which the Father answered; Of a child. If Vsury be hardly throwne out of the affections, the wonder is little; seeing that deuill hath possessed him of a child. The new morter, wherein Garlike hath beene stamped, will not a great while lose the smell. It is a feare∣full aduantage, that thou giuest Satan ouer thy children, when thou bringest them vp in Vsurie. As much might be said for Oppression; thy depopu∣lations pull downe the Countrey, that thou mayest build vp thy posteritie. Which way canst thou turne thine eyes from beholding the infatuation of such hopes? One generation is thus raised vp high; and the next comes downe as lowe, euen to contempt and beggerie. But perhaps if thou hast no children, yet thou hast a brother. Eccl. 4. 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second: yea, he hath neither child nor brother, yet is there no end of his labour. Say thou hast a brother, yet is not Christ thy bro∣ther in Heauen, dearer to thee then any sonne of thy mo∣ther? Is not he that hath adopted thee coheire to his eter∣nall purchase, an inheritance of glory, woorthy of some part of thy earthly possessions? Neuer brother did so much for thee as he hath done. Nature made a man thy brother in thy Parents bloud; hee made thee his brother by his owne bloud. Remember then his needy brethren, and in him thine. He is neerest in bloud, that is dearest in good: but if thou hast any faith, none did thee euer so much good as Christ. And to take away all plea from the hart of vncharitablenesse, Christ calls the poore his Bre∣thren, affirmes their releeuers Blessed, and inuites them to an euerlasting kingdome. Mat. 25. 40. In as much as ye haue done it to the least of these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto mee. But thou hast a brother in the flesh: wilt thou therefore co∣uet, extort, oppresse, and so goe to hell for thy brother? It is ill done in any to diuert amorem fratris, in odium sui;
the loue of his brother into hate against himselfe. Yet is not this all, but when thou hast purposed most for thy brother, God shall disappoint him of all. Whose shall these things be? no not thy brothers. Eccle. 2. 26. To the sinner the Lord giues trauaile, to gather and to heape vp: but at last hee be∣stowes that heape of treasure vpon him that is good before God. Thou bequeathest it to thy brother, but God dis∣poseh it to his children. But thou hast no brother; Yet thou hast kinred and friends; and to helpe thy Couzens to wealth, thou wilt couzen thy owne soule. Alas! it is a mysterie of knowledge, to discerne friends. Prou. 19. 4. Wealth ma∣keth many friends: they are friends to the wealth, not to the wealthy. They regard not Qualis sis, but Quantus: not how good thou art, but how great. They admire thee to thy face, but inwardly consider thee onely as a neces∣sary euill, yea a necessary deuill: and when thou dyest, are ready to sing thy soule a Dirige to hell. If thine eyes be euer opened, thou wilt hate such suborners of bastard thoughts to thy heart: as a recouered man, hauing drunke a lothsome potion in his sicknesse, doth euer after hate the very cruze it was brought him in. But say, thy friendes sticke truer to thee, and one holds thy aking head, another runnes for Physike, a third, by helping thee to change sides, seekes to mitigate thy paines; yet still thou com∣plainest of vnremedied torments. Oh then hadst thou not better make the God of comfort thy friend; vvho would neither be wanting in his presence, nor scanting in his consolations? Worldly friends are but like hote water, that when cold weather comes, are soonest frozen. Like Cuckooes, all Summer they will sing a scuruy note to thee, but they are gone in Iuly at furthest: sure enough before the fall. They flatter a rich man, as we feed beasts, till he be fat, and then feed on him. A true friend reprooues thee erring, though perhaps not suddenly. Iron is first heat, then beaten: first let him be heat with due and deserued praise for his good,
then coole and worke him with reprehension for his euil. As Nurses when their children are falne, first take them vp, and speake them faire; and chide or correct them af∣terwards. These friends loue not thy soules good, but thy bodies goods: let them not carry away thy hart from Christ. But if thou so resoluest, that these friends shall en∣ioy thy riches: yet God saith, Cuius erunt, whose shall they be? Thy kindred or friends shall not eate the grapes of thy planted vineyard: no, a stranger shall eate thereof. Eccl. 6. 2. God giueth not thee power to eate thereof; no nor him thou desi∣rest; but a stranger eateth it. Dabitur digniori, it shal be gi∣uen to one good in Gods sight. Perhaps to such a mans posterity, whom thou now scornest. The Iob 27. 17. wicked heape vp siluer as the dust, and prepare rayment as the clay. They may prepare it: but the iust shall put it on, & the innocent shal deuide the siluer. Now see thy follie, O couetous Churle, whose desires were all set on a Nunquam satis; Whose shall those things be? Not whom thou chusest, but whom God appointeth. Thy children are Gods charge, if thou wilt faithfully trust him with them: otherwise, couldst thou bind thy lands, and bequeath thy goods; settle thy whole estate, so sure as either strength of Law, or wit of Lawyers can deuise, yet Cuius erunt; whose shall these things be? Lo, now thou hast enough: thy head akes, thy conscience pricks, death requires thy body, Satan thy soule: couldst thou not wish that thy Barnes had beene lesse, and thy charitie more? That as GOD blessed thy store, so thou hadst returned some liberall testimonie of thankfulnesse to his Church & poore againe? Especially, when neither thy selfe, nor thy Assignes shall enioy these things. Whose shall they be? All these particulars suruaied, giue the couetous Cos∣mopolite three brands. He is branded in his Soule, in his riches, in his good name. In his Soule, Thy Soule shall be
fetched away. In his riches, Whose shall these things bee vvhich thou hast prouided? In his name, Thou fool. Whereupon we may iustly inferre this Conclusi∣on; as the Summe Of all: that abundant wealth can bring no good, ey∣ther to Soule, Body, or Name. Man is said to haue three liues; Spirituall, Corporall, and Ciuill, as the Lawyers call it: the life of his good name. Neyther to this, nor to the life of his Soule or Body, can multitude of riches conferre any good. This Text shall prooue it in all the parti∣culars. 1. To the Soule can opulency procure no benefit. All Christians know that good for the Soule is the passion and merits of Christ; faith to apprehend these; repen∣tance to mortifie sinnes: sanctification to giue vs celesti∣all liues; and saluation to glorifie our persons. But can any of these be bought with money? Thou and thy money perish together, that thinkest the gifts of God may be purcha∣sed Acts 8. 20. with money. God will not barter away his graces (as the Indians their gold) for thy gawdes and rattles. Hee wil not take the morgage of a Lordship for the debt thou owest him. The smoake of thy sacrifice smells neuer the sweeter, because thou art cloathed in silkes; or canst sit downe to tell thy Michaelmasse thousands. Thy adulte∣ries cannot be commuted for in heauen, nor thy vsuries be answered by a fine before the Tribunall of the highest. Thou mayest as soone and easily mount vp to heauen with wings of lead, as by feathers of wealth. Indeed they can doe a man as much good in distresse of conscience, as to haue his head bound with a wette cloth in a cold mor∣ning can cure the head-ach. If wealth could keepe a man from hell, how few rich men would be damned? But he is not sanctior quiditior; nor is saluation vendible to a full purse. The doctrine of Rome may affirme it; but the de∣cree
of God will not afford it. This Cosmopolite had barnes and barres, but these cannot hedge in his Soule; that is required. 2. To the body perhaps there is some more expectati∣on of good; but no more successe. Thou art anguished; will thy wealth purchase health? Sleepe is denied thy sen∣ses, and after many changed sides and places, thou canst finde no rest: goe now, empty thy coffers, and try what slumber the charmes and chimes of gold can ring thee. Thy stomake loathes meate; all thy riches are not suffici∣ent sawce, to get thee an appetite. Couldst thou drinke Cleopatra's draught, it will not ease thy head-ache. The Physician will take thy money, and giue thee Physike: but what Physike will giue thee infallible health? But the rich man hath a fire, when the poore sits cold: the rich an harbour, attendance, and delicate prouision, when the poore wants both house and home, meate and money, garments and company. For though riches ga∣ther many friends; the poore is separated from his neighbors. Prou. 19. 4. No part of my Sermon hath denied, but the competency of these earthly things is a blessing: neyther dare I infer, that the want of these is a curse; for the best haue wanted them, not the Sauiour of men himselfe excepted. But what is this to aboundance? Is not he as warme that goes in russet, as another that russles and ruffles in his silkes? Hath not the poore labourer as sound a sleepe on his flocke-bed, or pad of straw, as the Epicure on his downe∣bed, with his rich curtaines and couerings? Doth not Quiet lye oftner in Cottages, then in glorious mannors? The sleepe of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the aboundance of the rich will not suffer him to Eccl. 5. 12. sleepe. And for a good appetite, wee see the toyling ser∣uant feed sauourly of one homely dish, when his surfeted master lookes lothingly on his farre-fetch'd, and deare∣bought dainties: sitting downe to his second meale in a
quandary whether hee should eat of his best dish or no∣thing: his stomacke being such a coward, that it dares not fight with a chicken. This Gentleman enuies the hap∣pinesse of his poore Hinde, and would be content to change states with him, vpon condition he might change stomackes. It is not then the plenitude, but competency of these things, that affords euen the rich content. So that a mans estate should be like his garment, rather fitte then long: for too much troubles him; and the satiety of these earthly riches doth rather kill, then conserue the Body. 3. The name perhaps hath some hope of luxurious share in this abundance, and thinkes to bee swelled into a Co∣lossus; ouer-straddling the world. Indeed here's the Cen∣ter: for I perswade my self, few worldlings can propound to themselues any well-grounded expectation of good to their soules, or helpe to their bodies, by their accumula∣tion of treasures. Onely in his nomen potius quàm omen quaeritur; there is more hope of a great name, then of good content. And now for the Name; what's the euent? Come his riches ill, his credit is the Commons curse. Po∣pulus sibilat, the world railes at him liuing: and when he dyes, no man sayes, It is pitty; but It is pitty he died no sooner. They shall not lament for him, with Ah Lord, or Ah his glory. But hee shall bee buried with the buriall of an Ier. 22. 18. vers. 19. Asse; that hath liued the life of a Wolfe. His glorious Tombe erected by his enriched heyre, shall bee saluted with execrations: and the passengers by will say, Heere lyes the Deuils Promoter. Come his wealth well, yet what is Credit, or how may we define a good Name? Is it to haue a Pageant of crindges & faces acted to a taffaty Iacket? To be followed by a world of hang-byes; and howted at by the reeling multitude, like a bird of Para∣dise, stucke full of py'd fethers? To be dawb'd ouer with court-morter, flattery; and set vp as a Butte, for whores, panders, drunkards, cheaters, to shoot their commenda∣tions
at? To be licked with a sycophants rankling toung; and to haue poore men crouch to him, as little dogges vse to a great mastiffe? Is this a good name? Is this credit? Indeed these things may giue him a great sound: as the clapper doth to a bell; makes it haue a great sound, but the bell is hollow. They are empty gulls, whose credit is nothing else but a great noyse, forced by these lewd clap∣pers. A rich worldling is like a great Cannon, and flatte∣rers praises are the powder that charge him; whereupon he takes fire, and makes a great report; but instantly goes off, goes out in stench. Hee may thinke himselfe the bet∣ter, but no wise man, no good man doth: and the fame that is deriued from fooles, is infamy. That which I take to be a good Name, is this: Lauda∣ri a Lande dignis; to bee well esteemed of in Christian hearts; to finde reuerence in good mens soules. Bonum Sen. de Morib. est laudari, sed praestat esse laudabilem. It is a good thing to be praised, but it is a better to be praise-worthy. It is well that good men commend thee in their consciences, but it is better when thy good conscience can commend thee in it selfe. Happy is he, whose owne heart doth not con∣demne him. This credit wealth cannot procure, but grace: 1. Iohn 3. 21. not goods, but goodnesse. The poorest man seruing God with a faithfull heart, findes this approbation in san∣ctified affections, when golden asses goe without it. I confesse, many rich men haue had this credit, but they wil neuer thanke their riches for it. Their greatnesse neuer helped them to this name, but their goodnesse. They haue honoured the Lord, and those the Lord hath pro∣mised that he will honour. So that all the reputation which wealth can procure a man in Gods iudgement, is but Thou foole. In that parabolicall history, Luk. 16. mention is made of a rich man, but none of his name; as if it vvere vnworthy to stand in the Lords booke. Heere is all the credit of the wicked; their very memories shall rotte; and their great Name shall eyther not bee remembred, or
remembred with detestation. Loe now the benefit of worldly wealth; & the brands which disfigure the Soule, Body, Name of couetous men. For his Reputation, Follie challengeth it: for his riches, vncertainty deuoures it: for his Soule, Satan claimes it. Hee is gone in all respects; and now there is nothing left of him, but his infamy in the thoughts of men, his goods in the keeping of the world, his body in the prison of the graue, and his soule in the hand of hell. Abijt, he is gone: a tempest hath stole him away in the night; saith Iob. Iob 27. 19. The rich man shall lye downe, but he shall not be gathered: he ope∣neth his eyes, and he is not. Therefore it is said, Luk. 16. There was a certaine rich man; Chrysost. Erat, non est, there was, there is not, he is now gone. Psal. 37. 36. Luk. 16. 19. I haue seene the wicked in great power, and spreading himselfe like a greene Bay tree. Yet he passed away, and le be is not: yea I sought him, but hee could not be found. To conclude, it may yet bee obiected; that though much wealth can procure to soule, body, or name, no good; yet it may be an antidote to preuent some euill, or a medicine to rid them al of some maladie. The insufficien∣cy of such a promise in riches, is punctually also confuted in this Text. For neyther the Rich mans Soule, body, nor estate is secured by his abundance. Infernall spirits fetch his soule: temporall men possesse his wealth: eternall cen∣sures blast his good name: and the wormes prey vpon his carkasse. What euill then can riches eyther preuent or remoue from man? 1. Not from the soule: all euill to this, is eyther Poenae, or Culpae; of sinne, or of punishment for sinne. For Sinne, what vice is euacuated by riches? Is the wealthy man humbled by his abundance? no, he is rather swelled into a frothy pride; conceiting himselfe more then he is, or at least imagining, that he is eyther () or (,) the man or some body. And as pride is radix omnis
peccati; the root of all sinne; so riches is the root of pride, Diuitiarum vermis superbia, saith S. Augustine. When the summe of prosperity heates the dunghill of riches, there is engendred the snake of pride. Wealth is but a quill, to blow vp the bladder of high-mindednesse. Saint Paul knew this inseparable consequence, when hee char∣ged Timothy, to Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded. And doe we thinke that the heat 1. Tim. 6. 17. of malice will be slaked by riches? no, it is fired rather in∣to combustion; and now bursts forth into a flame, what before was forced to lye suppressed in the embers of te heart. Is any man the more continent for his abundance? No. Stat quaeuis multo meretrix mercabilis auro: whores are led to hell with golden threds. Riches is a warm nest, where lust securely sits to hatch all her vncleane brood. From fulnesse of bread, the Sodomites fall to vnnaturall wantonnesse. Ceres et Liber pinguescunt Venerem. Oppres∣sion is not abated by multiplication of riches; but rather Longiorem & magis strenuam reddit manum; giues it a lon∣ger and stronger arme. For as the poore cannot with∣stand, so the rich will not restraine the tyranny of great oppressors. They couet fields, and take them by violence: Mic. 2. 2. how? Because their hand hath power. For Punishment, what security is in money? Doth the Deuill balke a Lorldly house, as if hee were afraid to come in? Dares he not tempt a rich man to lewdnes? Let experience witnes, whether he dare not bring the highest Gallant both to sin & shame. Let his food be neuer so de∣licate, he will be a guest at his table; and perhaps thrust in one dish to his feast, drunkennes. Be his attendance neuer so complete, yet Satan will waite on him too. Wealth is no charme to coniure away the Deuill: such an amulet & the Popes holy-water, are both of a force. Inward vex∣ations forbeare not their stings, in awe of riches. An e∣uill conscience dares perplexe a Saul in his Throne, and a Iudas vvith his purse full of money. Can a silken sleeue
keepe a broken arme from aking? Then may full Barnes keepe an euill conscience from vexing. And doth hell fire fauour the Rich mans limbes more then the poores? Hath hee any seruant there, to fanne cold ayre vpon his tormented ioynts? Nay, the namelesse Diues goes from soft linen to sheetes of fire, from purple robes to flames Luke 16. of the same colour, purple flames: from delicate morsels, to want a droppe of water. Herod, though a King on earth, when he comes to that smokie vault, hath not a cu∣shion to sitte on, more then the meanest Parasite in his Court. So poore a defence are they for an oppressed Soule. 2. Nor from the body can riches remoue any plague. The lightning from heauen may consume vs, though we be clad in gold: the vapours of earth choke vs, though perfumes are still in our nostrills: and poison burst vs, though we haue the most virtuall Antidotes. What iudge∣ment is the poore subiect to, from which the rich is ex∣empted? Their feet do as soone stumble, and their bones are as quickly broken. Consumptions, Feuers, Gowtes, Dropsyes, Pleurisies, Palseys, Surfets; are houshold guests in rich mens families, and but meere strangers in cottages. They are the effects of superfluous fare and idlenes; and keepe their Ordinary at rich mens tables. Anguish lies oftner on a Downe-bed, then on a pallet: diseases waite vpon luxurie, as close as luxurie vpon wealth. These frogs dare leape into King Pharaohs chamber, and forbeare not the most sumptuous pallace. But money can buy medi∣cines: yet what sicke man would not wish, that hee had no money, on condition that he had no maladie. Labour and moderate diet are the poore mans friends, & preserue him from the acquaintance of Master Doctor, or the sur∣feted bills of his Apothecarie. Though our worldling heere promiseth out of his abundance, meat, drinke, and mirth: yet his bodie growes sicke, and his soule sadde: he was before carelesse, and hee is now curelesse: all his
vvealth cannot retaine his health, when God will take it away. 3. But what shall we say to the Estate? Euills to that are pouertie, hunger, thirst, wearinesse, seruillitie: Wee hope wealth can stop the invasion of these miseries. No∣thing lesse: it rather mounts a man, as a Wrastler does his combatant, that it may giue him the greater fall. Riches are but a sheeld of Waxe, against a sword of power. The larger state, the fairest marke for misfortune to shoote at. Eagles catch not after flies: nor will the Hercules of am∣bition lift vp his clubbe, but against these Giants. There is not in pouertie that matter, for a Great mans couetous fire to worke vpon. If Naboth had had no Vineyard to preiudice the command of Ahabs Lordship, hee had sa∣ued both his peace and life. Violent winds blow through a hollow willow, or ouer a poore shrubbe, and let them stand: whiles they rend a peeces Oaks and great Cedars, that oppose their great bodies to the furious blasts. The tempests of oppressing power meddle not with the con∣temptible quiet of poore Labourers, but shake vp rich men by the very rootes; that their blasted fortunes may be fit timber for their owne building. Who stands so like an eye-sore in the tyrannous ight of Ambition, as the wealthy? Imprisonment, restraint, banishment, confis∣cation, fining, and confining are Greatnesses Intelligen∣cers; instruments and staires to climbe vp by into rich mens possessions. Wealth hath foure hindrances from dooing good to the State. 1. God vsually punisheth our ouer-louing of riches with their losse. He thinks them vnworthy to be riualls with himselfe: for all height and strength of loue is his due. So that the ready way to lose wealth, is to loue it. Et delectatio perdet. 2. The greatnesse of state, or of affection to it, opens the way to ruine. A full and large saile giues vantage to a Tempest: this pulled downe, the danger of the gust, and
of shipwracke by it, is eluded: and it passeth by vvith onely waues, roring as if it was angry for being thus pre∣uented. He that walks on plaine ground, either doth not fall, or riseth againe with little hurt. He that climbes high towres, is in more danger of falling; and if he fall, of brea∣king his necke. 3. We see the most rich Worldlings liue the most mi∣serably; slaued to that vvealth, whereof they keepe the key vnder their girdles. Esuriunt in popina, as we say, they starue in a Cookes shoppe. A man would thinke, that if wealth could doe any good, it could surely do this good; keepe the owner from want, hunger, sorow, care: No, euen these euills riches doe not auoide, but rather force on him. Whereof is a man couetous, but of riches? when these riches come, you thinke he is cured of his couetous∣nesse: no, he is more couetous. Though he hath receiued desiderium animi, yet he keeps still animum desiderij. The desires of his mind granted, abolish not his mind of de∣sires. So a man might striue to extinguish the Lampe, by putting oyle into it; but this makes it burne more. And as it is with some, that thirstily drink harish and ill-brewed drinks, haue not their heate hereby allayed, but inflamed: So this vvorldlings hote eagernesse of riches is not coo∣led, but fired by his abundance. 4. That which makes a man easie to hit, makes also his wound greeuous. The Poet tells vs, that when Co∣drus his house burnes, (a little cottage in the Forrest) he Iuv. Satyr. 4. stands by and warmes himselfe at the flame: hee knowes that a fewe sticks, straw and clay, with a little labour, can rebuild him as good a Tabernacle. But if this accident light vpon the Vsurers house, distraction seizeth him withall: he cryes out of this Chamber, and that chest, of his Closet and Cabinet, of his bonds & morgages, mo∣ney and plate; and is so much the more impatient, as hee had more to lose. In a vvord, here is all the difference betwixt the rich
and poore: the poore man would be rich while he liues, and the rich would be poore when he dies. For it is small greefe to leaue hunger, cold distresse, bondage, hard lodging, and harder fare: but to forsake full Barnes, full purses, musike, wine, iunkets, soft beds, beautious vvo∣men, and these lust-tickling delights; and to goe vvith death to the Land of forgetfulnesse, this is the terrour. I end then as Paul concludes his counsell to rich men, Lay vp for your selues a good foundation against the 1. Tim. 6. 19. time to come, that you may lay hold on eternall Life.
THE BAD LEAVEN: OR, THE CONTAGION OF SINNE. GALAT. 5. 9. A little Leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe. THIS Epistle was written with St. Pauls owne hand: chap. 6. 11. Ye see how large a letter I haue written vnto you with my owne hand. It is for quality excellent, for quanti∣tie large. Hee wrote not so long an Epistle to any other Church with his owne hand. Indeed he wrote a letter to Philemon with his owne hand, vers. 19. I Paul haue written it with mine own hand: but it was short. He wrote longer Epistles to the Romanes and Corinthi∣ans, but not with his owne hand, but by Scribes. Wee haue cause therefore to regard it more: as his pains were
greater in writing, so let our diligence bee greater in ob∣seruing. The maine purpose of it is to discouer: 1. That ill coniunction of Moses and Christ, the ceremonies of the Law, with the sanctimony of the Gospell. 2. The free Grace and Iustification by the bloud of Christ without the workes of the Law. In this the Galatians had recei∣ued a beginning, but now had admitted a recidiuation. For this cause the Apostle chides, vers. 7. Yee did runne well: who did hinder you that you should not obey the Trueth? Where there is a Concession, and a Conuiction: a step; and a stop. The Concession or Step, ye did runne well. The Conuiction or Stop; Who did hinder you that you should not obey the truth? In the former he compares Christianity to a race: all men must first be viatores in this valley of teares, before they can be Assessres, and sit with Christ in his king∣dome of glory. Onely as it agrees with a Race in many things; as labor, it's no idle thing to be a Christian; short∣nesse, it is a Race, the perplexity is recompenced vvith the breuity: continuance, the runner must hold out the last steppe, if he will obtaine the prize. So there are some differences. 1. In other races many runne, onely one winnes the goale: but in this all that runne faithfully, shal raigne triumphantly. Though they cannot runne so fast as others, nor so farre as others; yet euen they that came at the eleuenth houre into the Vineyard, receiued they pen∣ny, so well as they that came at the third. For the Lord regards not Quantum, but ex quanto: not how much, but how well. What euer houre they are called, let them spend the aftertime in a zealous diligence. 2. In other ra∣ces one hinders another, but in this iourney one helpes a∣nother. The more the merrier: no enuy or grudging, ey∣ther in the way or the goale. Dispar gloria singulorum, sed communis latitia omnium. There may bee different glory of some, yet there is a common ioy of all. Euery
good man is a spurre to his brother. Peter and Iohn ranne to Christs Sepulcher: Iohn out-ran Peter vnto the graue, Peter out-went Iohn into the graue. But we run together vnto Christs Throne; some come before, some after, all meet in the Communion of Saints. 3. In other races the runner obtaines a prize that shall perish; all the runners heere get an incorruptible crowne. They runne for a lit∣tle prize, a little praise; we for eternall glory. Runne wee then cheerefully; behold, a kingdome lyes at the stake. God giue vs all eyes of faith to see it, and hearts of obedi∣ence to runne to it, through the power of Iesus Christ. In the latter the Apostle may seeme to put a superfluous question; Who did hinder you? For there are many aduer∣saries. As first Satan, the General of that damned crue that hinder our passage to heauen. Paul excuseth himselfe to the Thessalonians: 1. Thes. 2. 18. Zach. 3. 1. Wee would haue come vnto you once and againe, but Satan hindered vs. Zach. 3. Ioshua the high Priest stood before the Angell of the Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. Where God hath his Church, Sa∣tan hath his chappell. So also wicked men; such as haue taken the Deuils oath of Allegiance. What the Deuill cannot doe immediately by himselfe, hee does mediately by his Instruments. To erre Humanum, is the weakenes of a man; but to seduce diabolicum, is the part of a Deuill. It is ill to play the woman, worse to play the beast, worst of all to play the Deuill. But what speciall hinderers the Apostle meanes, wee shall haue precise occasion in some future passages to demonstrate. Onely I must not omit, that the Apostle giues a direct resolution by way of negation, vers. 8. This perswasion cometh not of him that calleth you. God is no wayes the Author of error and sin. He that wils the death of no sin∣ner, will not lead him into the wayes of destruction. In∣deed he suffes Satan to temptal, but to a diuerse purpose: the good to try them, the reprobate to destroy them. The temptations of the godly are for their instruction; of the
wicked for their destruction. Iames tells vs, that Iam. 1. 17. euery good gift comes downe from the Father of lights: is it euill? it commeth not from God. The Apostle telling the Ephe∣sians of lusts, blindnesse, wantonnesse, obstinacy; con∣cludes piercingly, Non sic didicistis Christum. Ephe. 4. 20. Yee haue not so learned Iesus Christ. Art thou peruerted? thou ne∣uer learnedst this of Christ. Iam. 1. 13. Let no man say when hee is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God tempteth no man. In him we liue, moue, and haue our being. A Gentile Poet sung it, a Christian Act. 17. 28. Apostle sanctified it, all the creatures in heauen and earth cry Amen vnto it. Life is his, whe∣ther we liue well or ill: motion is his, whether wee lift vp our hands to prayer or murder: but the prauity and corruption of these is none of his. Is any part of bo∣dy, or power of soule depraued? This commeth not from him that calleth vs. What is then the cause of sinne? I answere, properly nothing: it hath indeed a deficient cause, but no efficient cause. It is a defect, priuation, or orbity of that God made; the thing it self he neuer made. Will you aske what is the cause of sickenesse? I answere, the destitution of health. If what's the cause of darknes; the absence of the Sunne: if of blindnesse, the deficiency of seeing. What is the cause of silence? no cause: there are causes of speech, organs, ayre, &c. take away these, what followes but silence? you see the light: who euer saw darkenesse? you heare speech: who euer heard si∣lence? Man forsooke grace: sinne came in at the backe∣dore. It is a bastard brought into Gods house by stealth. Woe to them that shall roote their filthinesse in the deity. If they bee seduced, to cry, Iere. 4 10. Lord, thou hast deceiued vs. No, destruction is of thy selfe, O Israel; in mee is thy . We haue all gotten this sinne from Adam; Mulier quam tu, &c. The woman which Thou gauest me; as if GOD had giuen him a woman to tempt him. Haec est ruina maxima, Deum putare causam ruinae: This is the greatest destruction that can be, to charge God with the cause of
our destruction. No, O Father of heauen, be thou iusti∣fied, and the faces of all men ashamed. Let vs looke home to our owne flesh; from thence it commeth that destroy∣eth. Me, me, adsum qui feci. The Lord put not onely this confession in our mouthes, but this feeling in our hearts; that all our euill commeth from our selues, all our good from Iesus Christ. Of him that called you: He hath called you to liberty, will you intangle your selues in new bondage? who pit∣ties him that being redeemed from prison, wilfully recasts himselfe into it? Or that saued from the fire, will runne into it againe? Art thou Titio ereptus, and yet hast a mind to be burned? He hath called you not to the ceremonies, but to their Antitype; not to those legall Lambes, but to that Euangelicall Lambe of God, that taketh away the sins of the world. Will you be directed by Lampes, when the Sunne is risen? no, hee hath called you to the truth and comforts of the Gospell; obey that call: And then he that hath perswaded you to vertue, by calling you to grace, shall crowne you with eternall glory. Now one argument whereby the Apostle deterres them from blending Iudaisme with Christianity, is deri∣ued from the danger of corrupting the doctrine of the Gospell: A little Leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe. One ceremony of the legall rites obserued with an opinion of necessity, sowreth all that sweetnesse of redemption that commeth by Christ. This Diuine Aphorisme may thus logically be resolued; into a Predicate, Subiect, and Co∣pula. The Predicate, leauen: the Subiect, lumpe: the Co∣pula, leaueneth. Or thus there is a thing Actiue; Leauen. Factiue, sowreth Passiue, the lumpe. But because the whole speech is allegoricall, let vs first o∣pen the metaphor with the key of proper analogie; and then take out the treasure, such obseruations as may be na∣turally
deduced from it. Most properly our Apostle by leauen vnderstands false doctrine, and by lumpe the truth of the Gospell: so the sense is this; one heresie infects a masse of truth. Or if we restraine it to persons, by leauen he meaneth false Teachers, and by lumpe the Church of Galatia: and so a teacher of the bondage to the Law, sowres the liberty of the Gospell. verse 2. Behold, I Paul say vnto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you no∣thing. Or if yet we will looke vpon it with more generall view, we may by leauen vnderstand sinne, by lumpe man, by leauening Infection. Here are three respondences, and all worthily considerable. First taking leauen for false Doctrine, so we find in the new Testament foure sorts of leauens, Math. 16. Beware of the leauen of the Pharises, and of the Sadduces; there bee two of them; the Pharisaicall, and the Sadducean leauens. Math. 16. 6. Mark. 8. Beware of the leauen of Herod, there's the third. The fourth is my Text, the leauen of mingling Mosaicall Mark. 8. 15. ordinances with Christs Institutions. It will not bee a∣misse to take a transient view of these Leauens: for though former times had the originals, wee hae the Counter∣paines: we haue paralell leauens. 1. To begin with the Pharises; to these I may well li∣ken our Seminaries; one egge is not liker another. Euen a Iesuite wrote in good earnest, Non malè comparari Pha∣risaeos Catholicis; Papists are fitly compared to the Phari∣ses. Whether he spake it ignorantly or vnwittingly, or purposely; I am sure Caiphas neuer spoke truer when he meant it not. Shall we take a little paines to confer them? The Pharises had corrupted, yea in a manner annulled the Law of God by their Traditions: and for this Math. 15. 6. Christ complaines against them. Now for the Papists, this was one of their Tridentine decrees; With the same reuerence and deuotion doc we receiue and respect Traditions, that wee doe the bookes of the olde and new Testaments. Shut thine eyes and heare both speake, and then for a wager vvhich
is the Pharise, which the Seminary? Indeed to some tra∣ditions we giue locum, but locum suum; a place, but their owne place. They must neuer dare to take the wall of the Scripture. Again, the Pharises corrupted the good Text with their lewd Glosses. The law was, that no Leper might come into the Temple; their traditionall Glosse was, that if hee were let downe through the roofe, this was no offence. As that drunkard, that hauing for sworne going to a cer∣taine Tauerne, yet being carried thither euery day on mens shoulders, thought hee had not broken his oath. Their Sabbath dayes iourney was a thousand Cubits; their Glosse vnderstood this without the walls, and wal∣king all day through the city no sinne. The Papists are not behinde them in their foule interpretations, not sha∣ming to call that sacred Writ a nose of waxe, formable to any construction. Paul subscribes his two Epistles to the Thessalonians thus; Missa fuit ex Athenis; a Papist cryes out strait, Heres a plaine text for the Masse. Psal. 8. Omnia subiecisti pedibus eius; Thou hast put all things vn∣der Psal. 8. . his feete: This is spoken of the beasts subiection to man: their Glosse construes it of mens subiection to the Pope. So Esa. 49. They shall bow downe to thee with their face toward the earth, and licke vp the dust of thy feete. Here Esa. 49. 23. saith their Glosse, is a plaine proofe for kissing the Popes feet. Our Sauiour sayes; Mat. 18. 3. Except ye become as little chil∣dren, ye shall not enter the kingdome of heauen: Heereupon Saint Francis commands one Massaeus to tumble round on the earth like a little childe, that he might enter. If thy foot offend thee, saith Christ, out it off. Heereupon when the penitent confessed to S. Anthony that he had kicked his mother, he vrged him with that Text: the man went and cut off his foot, but S. Anthony (honestly to make him amends) set it on againe. Were these not goodly constructions? So the new elected Pope in his solemne Lateran Procession, must take copper money out of his
Chamberlaines lap, and scatter it among the people, say∣ing, Act. 3. 6. Siluer and gold haue I none, but such as I haue I giue vnto you. And is not this a probable truth, a praise-able bounty? Seuen yeares penance is enioyned to a deadly sinne; because Miriam was separated seuen dayes for her leprosie; and God saith to Ezekiel, chap. 4. I haue giuen thee a day for a yeare. Oh genuine and most neighbour∣ly concording of Scriptures! When Gods word sub∣iects Priests to Kings, their Glosse subiects Kings to Priests, at least to Popes. But as when they determined to kill the Emperor Henry the seuenth, that they might be sure to poyson him, they stucke not to poyson their owne God in the Sacrament. So purposing to teare the honour, and deface the maiesty of Kings, they first offer violence to the sacred word of God. In these damnable Glosses it is hard to decide; whether Pharise is beyond Papist, or Papist beyond Pharise. But Dum haec malè construunt, seipsos malè destruunt. Their euill construction of the Scriptures brings a worse destruction to them∣selues. They make that serue the turne of their policie, which God meant to serue the turne of his glory. The Pharises cleaued to the letter, but despised the Spirit: so do Papists. Hoc est corpus must bee materially there: for this they wrangle, fight, burne the contradi∣cters; yet few of them care to finde it spiritually there. Dabo claues, I will giue thee the keyes; therefore none can enter heauen except the Pope open the dores. Where∣as Peters two keyes, one of knowledge, the other of power, are fitted to two lockes, Ignorance, and Indura∣tion. But wee know who keepes the keyes, and lets in many thousands to heauen without the Popes leaue. Reu. 3. 7. These things saith hee that is holy and true, hee that hath the key of Dauid, he that openeth, and no man shutteth, that shutteth, and no man openeth. Some of the Rabbins af∣firmed that God requires two things concerning his law, Custodie and Worke: custody in heart, worke in exe∣cution.
The Pharises thought it enough to haue it in their frontlets, not in their hearts. So the Romist hath his opus operatum; prayers numbred on beades, fastings, pilgrimages, &c. and then cryes like Saul; 1. Sam. 15. 13 Blessed bee thou of the Lord; I haue performed the commandement of the Lord. The Pharises iustified themselues by their workes, and would not sticke to say of the Law, All this haue I kept from my youth. Doe not the Papists so? doe they not climbe to saluation by their owne works, & iustify them∣selues? Those thought it not only easie to fulfill the Law, but possible to doe more then they were bound to. They thought it not worth thanks to performe what they were bidden. Gods Law was too little for their holinesse. They plyed God with vnbidden oblations, gaue more then they needed, then was commanded. I pay tithes of all, said that Pharise: of all? it was more then he needed. If God would haue a Sabbath kept, they ouer-keepe it: let a house be on fire, that day they would not quench it. And what other is the boasting opinion of the Romanists? it is nothing with them to content God, they can earne him, supererogate of him. Yea these Iewish Papists haue done more then enough for themselues, many good vvorks to spare for others: this they call the Churches Treasure, & they sell them for ready money. But Christ taught vs all to say, We are vnprofitable seruants; intimating, that doe what we can, yet God is a loser by the best of vs. To omit the miserable penances of the Pharises, prick∣ing themselues with thornes, and wounding their flesh with whips; wherein it is not possible for a Papist to goe beyond them. If the misvsing, macerating, lacerating their owne bodies be a meanes to come into heauen, sure∣ly the Pharises should enter farre sooner then the Papists. Yet were those kept out, and shall these enter? Mat. 5. 20. Except your righteousnesse shall exceed the righteousnes of the Scribes and Pharises, ye shall not enter into the kingdome of Heauen.
The people were so besotted on them, that they thought if but two men should goe to heauen, the one must bee a Scribe, the other a Pharise. But here was strange newes; neyther of them both shall come there. So the Papists thinke, that if but two men be saued, one must be a Fry∣er, the other a Iesuite. Hee that should say, neyther of them both was likely to speed so well, should haue the whole multitude stare vpon him for such a Paradoxe. The Pharises brag'd much of Moses Chaire; iust so doe our Papists of Peters Chaire. The Pharises iusti∣fied it that there was no error in theirs: the Papists af∣firme that there's no possibility of error in theirs. The Pharises thundred against the poore people, Ioh. 7. 49. This peo∣ple who knoweth not the Law, are cursed. So the Pope thunders his curses and excommunications against vs: but (we blesse God) his thunder cannot reach vs. I would other places had no more cause to feare his thunder. Then would they answere him, as Gregory the fourth was an∣swered, when he purposed peremptorily to proceed against Lewys le Debonayre; the French Bishops answe∣red in flat termes; Si excommunicaturus veniret, excom∣municatus discederet: If he came to excommunicate, hee should be sent back excommunicated. The Pharises compassed Sea and Land to make Pro∣selytes; Mat. 23. 15. and when they had made one, they make him two∣fold more the child of hell then themselues. Doe not our Se∣minaries so? Yes they are Compassers too, like their grand Master. Iob. 2. much like those Circulatores, and Circum∣celliones, a limbe of the Donatists. They creepe into La∣dies houses, I had almost said into their Chambers: the Pursuiuant in modesty hath forborne the Gentlewomans bed, and missed him. Confession and Penance are the principall wheeles, whereupon the Engine of their poli∣cie runnes. By the first they find out mens secret incli∣nations; by the other they heape riches to their Tribe. They will not lead a Nouice into the maine at first, to
make him belieue the Popes infallibility of Iudgement, authoritie to decrowne Kings, to make Scripture no Scripture, and no Scripture Scripture, &c. This meat is too tough, it will not downe: therefore they court his af∣fections with pleasing delights, smooth semblances, and moderate constructions; as neare to the religion from which they would peruert him, as possibly may be affor∣ded. So by degrees they gaine him, God and the Truth loseth him. In their owne Countreys, places of free∣dome, they vizour their hearts, in England they vizour their faces too. The Pharises made difference of oathes. Mat. 23. 16. Whosoeuer shall sweare by the Temple, it is nothing: but whosoeuer shall sweare by the Gold of the Temple, hee is a debter. Ye fooles and blind: for whether is greater, the gold or the Temple that sanctifieth the gold? That was their doctrine, this was Christs reproofe. So the Papists haue their di∣stinctions betwixt a materiall and a formall oath: one to bind the conscience, the other not. Out of such an vn∣lucky copulation of fraud and malice, was that monstrous stigmatike Equiuocation engendred. A damned egge, not couered by any faire bird, but hatch'd as the Poets faine of O sprayes, with a thunderclap. A meere bastard, who∣soeuer was the Father, Iesuites keepe the child, and bring it vp as their onely darling. But they haue their Bulls of dispensation for it: fit, they should all speed, as some did once with their buls. Two Seminaries came into England with their two Bulls, but being apprehended, those two Bulls call'd in a third Bull, which was Bull the hangman, to dispatch them both. Lastly, the Pharises vsed to Mat. 23. 14. deuoure widowes houses, & for a pretence to make long prayer. It is euill to deuoure a mans house, worse to deuour a widowes house, worst of all when their lips seemed to pray, to be chewing that morsell. Ierusalem had neuer worse Pharises then Rome: these were meere bunglers to the Iesuites. The new Pha∣rises
haue made very Proselytes and Novices of the an∣cient.. A widowes cottage fill'd the pauch of an old Pha∣rise. Large Patrimonies and faire reuenues wil not stoppe the throte of the Iesuite. They deuoure the Land as Pharaohs leane kine, and yet looke hunger-starued still. You shall haue them first fall in with the wife, as the de∣uill did with Eue: but they couzen the husband of his in∣heritance, as the deuill couzoned Adam. Euen other Orders among them, cry shame vpon the Iesuites: they prole away all with a face of sad pietie and sterne mortifi∣cation. Forgiue my vnseasonable prolixitie; you see one dangerous Leven. 2. The next is the Leven of the Sadduces: heare their doctrine, Math. 22. They say there is no resurrection. Act. Math. 22. 23. Acts 23. 8. 23. The Sadduces say there is no resurrection, neither An∣gel, nor spirit. I would we had no matches for them, but we haue too many; that either deny futurum aliquid post mortem, that any further thing is to be done or suffered, or enioyed after death: or else affirme faeliciter fore vni∣uersis, that euery man shall be happy. They haue studied reasons against the Resurrection. The flesh turnes into rottennesse, rottennesse to dust, &c. But St. Aug. cuts them off with reason: Qui potuis formare nouum, non pote∣rit reperare mortuū? He that could make man of nothing, surely can reuiue him of a small thing. Facilius est restitu∣ere, quàm constituere: It is farre easier to repaire then to prepare. They tell vs, Eccl. 9. 4. It is better to a liuing dogge, then a dead Lion: which is true among beasts, like themselues: but among men a dead beast is better thē a liuing Atheist. Like dogs they barke at heauen, but they cannot bite it: it is out of their circumference. Though they build vp reasons and treasons like Babel; yet they prooue but Con∣fusion. They would pull God out of his Throne, if it were possible: but he is safe enough out of the reach of their malice, else it had gone ill with him before this. Their song is; 1. Cor. 15. 32. Let vs eate and drinke, (they thinke of no rec∣koning
to pay) for to morow we dye. They promise to mo∣row, yet kill themselues to day. This is their song, but the Holy Ghost addes the burden: Heb. 9. 27. After death com∣meth the Iudgement. It is appointed vnto men once to dye; to all men once, to Atheists twice, for there is a second death. Their first death makes way to their last Iudge∣ment. They are in some respect worse then the Deuill; he knowes and acknowledgeth a Deitie; these say, There is no God. Iam. 2. 19. The deuils belieue and tremble; these haue nei∣ther faith nor feare. The deuill quakes at the day of Iudgement; these deride it. Math. 8. 29. Art thou come hither to tor∣ment vs before thime? There's their terror. Where is the promise of his comming? For since the Fathers fell asleepe, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Crea∣tion. There's their derision. The deuils say, Acts 19. 15. Iesus vve know: these are like that doubting spirit, Si filius Dei, Mat. 4. 6. If thou be the Sonne of God; as if they made question whe∣ther he was so or not. Strange euen the father of sinnes commeth short of his sonnes: and there be Atheists vpon earth when as there are none in hell. But they professe some religion among vs; it may be so; but they fit and square it to their owne humors: as that Giant dealt with his guests, for all whom he had but one bed; if they were too short for it, he rack'd them out longer; if too long, he cut them shorter. But Insculptum est omnibus esse Deum: it is vvritten in all hearts by the pen of nature that there is a God. It is not possible to get out these indeleble characters. Say vvhat they will, they would giue much to be sure that the Scrip∣ture was not true. The discourse of reason confutes them. Iob 12. 7. Aske now the beasts, and they shall teach thee: the fowles of the ayre, and they shall tell thee. Who knoweth not in all these, that the hand of GOD hath wrought this? Prae∣sentemque refert qualibet herba Deum. The little pile of grasse tells vs, there is a God that made it. Besides, they haue a conscience within them, Gods deputy in the soule,
which will speak for the Maker and Master, and be heard too. Qui negat esse Deum, mihi negat, et tibi, non sibi. Hee that denies there is a God, denies it to me, and to thee, but neuer to himselfe. You may sooner pull his heart out of his brest, then this conception out of his heart. Thus is their leuen toss'd backe into their owne teeth: they will not now acknowledge this; they shall one day feele this. Oculos quos culpa clausit, poena aperiet: the eyes vvhich Atheisme hath shut, damnation shall open. This is a cur∣sed Leuen. 3. The next Leuen is that of the Herodians: heere crafty and dissembling hypocrits might be thought their fittest and most sutable paralells: because Christ calls He∣rod a Foxe. Luke 13. 32. Goe and tell that Foxe. But the Herodians were rather noted for profane fellowes; and so wee must seeke out other matches. Such as carry in their gestures a tepidity of religion, a loosenesse of life: that turne the grace of God into wantonnesse: and make that which brings saluation to all, a meanes of confusion to themselues. This disease is Interius, within: and quickly becomes Interitus, a violent destruction. Profest Atheists, and open Here∣tikes, are through the manifestation of their malice pre∣uented: these are bosome Serpents, that sting in silence. Aristotle saies, that Extreme is lesse hurtfull, which is neerest to the medium, and doth communicate with it in something. Prodigality is lesse noxious then Auarice, because it hath this cōmon with liberalitie, to giue: which the other hath not. Fiery zeale is dangerous: by this Paul Act. 22. 4. persecuted Christ, by this the Iewes Rom. 10. 2. crucified Christ. But profane coldnesse is worse, because it is fur∣ther from the meane, which is zeale in religion. By these wretches lewdnes among vs, the Romish ad∣uersaries take aduantage to slander our Religion. They say our Profession is a doctrine of liberty, that we preach for faith, and against works: but Wisedom is iustified of er children. Thus we preach, Rom. 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish vpon
euery soule of man that doth euill: but glory and peace to eue∣ry man that worketh good. And 1. Ioh. 3. 3. euery man that hath hope in Christ, purifieth himselfe. And this is Iam. 1. 27. Pure religion, and vndefiled before God; to visite the fatherlesse and widowes in their affliction, and to keepe our selues vnspotted from the World. Our faith is not an , imagined in the braine; but an , seene in our life. We teach that Iustifica∣tion and Sanctification are inseparable friends. If men wil not be reformed, wee conceale not from them Gods re∣nuntiation; Reu. 22. 11. If any man will be filthy, let him be filthy still. Our dissolute conuersation cannot annihilate the truth of our doctrine. Howsoeuer the Samaritan, not the Iewe, relieued the wounded man, yet the Iewes religion vvas true, and not the Samaritans. How polluted soeuer vvee are, yet their hands are not cleane enough to take vp stones against vs. If they reioyce and tryumph in mens wicked∣nesse, they professe imitation of the deuill in a cursed mirth. Good Christians haue learn'd to Ezek. 9. mourne for a∣bominations, not to laugh at them. To returne to those dissolute wretches; they sing not with the Church a Te∣nebo t Domine, Cant. 3. 4. I held him, and I would not let him goe: all their delight is in a Nunc dimittis, they are glad to be gone. It were not amisse if we were well ridde of them, being thus incorrigible. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Purge out therefore the old leuen, that ye may be a new lumpe. What leuen the Apostle there meanes, he declares ver. 13. Put away from among your selues that vvicked person. When Ionah was cast out of the Ship, the Sea ceased from her raging: when Zimri was slaine, the plague stayed: when Baal was destroyed, Is∣rael had peace. If these cursed Levens of Superstition, Atheisme, and Profanenesse were purged, how sweet a lumpe would the Church of England be! Wee cannot hope it, yet let vs pray for it; Miserere Deus, cleanse vs from these levens for the merits of thy Sonne our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ.
4. There is a fourth Leuen, to which Saint Paul hath principall respect in this place; and that is the mixing of Law with Gospell; I meane Ceremoniall and legall rites with the truth of Iesus Christ. This leven might well die in forgetfulnesse, and haue moulded away, if there had not beene a late generation of Thraskites to deuoure it as bread. They must abstaine from Swines flesh, and from bloud, and that vpon conscience to the Ceremoniall law. But he that thus abstaines from bloud and flesh, the flesh and bloud of Christ shall doe him no good. What is this but to licke vp the Galatians vomit? to swallow that hard and indigestible leven, which Saint Paul tooke so much paines about, to get out of their stomacks. But let it sleepe with them in the dust: it is dead and buried, let vs not dis∣quiet the graue to reuiue it. Now to the second way of considering these words, taking leven personally, for Leueners, false Teachers, in∣deed Heretikes: I will onely note two things, one of doc∣trine, another of discipline. For doctrine out of my Text, that they sowre the whole lumpe: for discipline, that therefore the Church should restraine and correct them. The leven of Heresie spreads farre. 2. Tim. 2. 17. Their word will eate as doth a canker; or a Gangrene. , is an Option, or Election, of , to make choice. A laudable word at first among Philosophers, taken for a right forme of learning. In Diuinitie it is a word of disgrace, and in∣tends a stubborne deuiation from the receiued Truth. It is more then Error. Aug. Errare possum, Haereticus esse non possum. I may erre, I cannot be an Heretike. Qui sua pestifer a dogmata defendere persistunt, hretici sunt. They that wilfully goe on to maintaine their pestilent opinions, are Heretikes. It hath the right property of a Gangrene, it frets as it goes; vires acquirit eundo: Heresies in the soule are like vlcera depascentia in the body, they eate vp the parts about them.
Of this God is the deficient cause, who suffers it. 1. In respect of the wicked, that their iust condemnation might not be hindered. 2. Thes. 2. 11 For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should bleeue a lye. 2. In regard of the faithfull, that their tentation might assure them Gods: 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be heresies, (or schismes) that they which are approued, may be made manifest among you. With this pre∣monition God prepared Israel, that when a false Prophet or Dreamer should come vnto them, Deut. 13. 3. God doth proue you, to know whether you will loue the Lord with all your heart. For this cause are Heresies, Tertul. Vt fides habendo tentationem, ha∣beret etiam probationem; that faith admitting a triall, might receiue an approuall. Of this Satan is the efficient cause: the father of lyes neuer lou'd the Father of Truth. Wicked and peruerse men are the instrumentall causes: they are so ouer-vvise, that the curdle of their wit procures a breaking out into faction. Cùm discipuli veritatis non erunt, magistri erroris sunt. Refusing to be the scholers of Truth, they become the Schoolemasters of errour. So the precedent cause in such, is selfe-loue, the cause that growes out of the other, and neerer to the maine effect (or rather defect) is discō∣tent. If the Church forget thēm in dealing her legacies of preferment, they will teare her bowels for it. If their mo∣ther pleaseth not their humours with an expected indul∣gence, they will be so bold as kick her sides. Pride steps in for a third cause: vnlesse I forget her place, for shee dis∣daines an inferiour roome; and yet of all sinnes, as none presumes higher, so none is thrust lower, euen Esay 14. 15. to the bottomlesse pit. Saint Iohn doth witnesse thus much of Diotrephes. Iohn 3. Epist. verse 9. I wrote vnto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loueth to haue the preheminence among them, receiueth vs not. He is called by Beda, Haeresiarcha superbus. Hypo∣crisie must needs be admitted for a fourth motiue to here∣sie. Applause must be had, if not by beeing good, yet by seeming so. Omnes haeretici sunt hypocrit, saith Ierom,
Euery heretike is an hypocrite. Like Vipers they neuer come to light, but with some rupture to the vvombe of their mother. Thus heresie creepes in at a little hole, but infects, in∣fests the whole house: like a plague that comes in at the windowes; and then propagates it selfe beyond all mea∣sure. Sene. Erroris non est finis: there is no termination of er∣rour. Therefore the onely way to refute heresies, is to fetch them backe to their originall. Hreses ad sua princi∣pia referre, est refellre. If you can reduce them to their first, you see their last. As if a man would dry vp a streame, he cannot do it in the maine; but goes first to the Spring∣head, stops vp that: the riuer will faile of it selfe. As in the bodily Gangrene the part affected grows tu∣mid and cadauerous, the colour fades and becomes blac∣kish: So in the spirituall, the mind growes tumid & swel∣ling: Colo. 2. 18. Vainely puft vp with a fleshly mind: the faire colour of profession gone: Phil. 3. 18. vvalking as enemies to the crosse of Christ. We know how the heresie of Arrius did spread, when totus orbis ingemuit factum se videns Arrianum: the whole world groned, feeling it selfe made (not Christian, but) Arrian. There was a long disputation about tvvo words; little differing in sound, much in sense, , and . The Arrians holding Christ like God in substance; the orthodoxe Christians holding him one with God in substance. O the world of inke and bloud that was spent about this! The Pope rose by degrees: first aboue Bishops, then aboue Patriarches, then aboue Councells, then aboue Kings, then aboue Scriptures, now last of all aboue GOD himselfe. So the Apostle speakes of Antichrist: 2. Thes. 2. 4. He exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God. From so poore a beginning he hath risen prettily for his time. Thus Popery crept vp in the darke: like a thiefe putting out the lights, that it might more securely rob the house. Whiles it broched opinions, that like to sweet wines pleased the palate, it led many liquorish affections
to hell; not vnlike the Butcher, who clawes the Oxe till he cuts his throate. Thus the leuen of heresie spreads. But the Church must take care lest it spread too far: Let them alone in quiet (yet what quiet can they haue that disturbe themselues?) and then 2. Tim. 3. 13. Euill men and seducers will waxe worse and worse, deceiuing and being deceiued. Augustine saies of Arius his schisme in Alexandria; Una scintilla fuit: That it was at first but a little sparke: but because not, Statim suppressa, totum orbem eius flamma po∣pulata est: the flame of it sindged the whole world, not being extinguished in time. The kindling fire is easily quenched: when it possesseth the Towne, it rageth and rangeth like a tyrannie, scorning the offers of suppres∣sion. Rom. 16. 17. Now therefore, I beseech you, brethren, marke them which cause diuisions and offences, contrary to the doc∣trine that yee haue learned, and auoide them. The malice of an heretike, Aug. Uel dolenda tanquam hominis, vel cauen∣da tanquam hostis, vel irridenda tanquam imprudentis: is either to be lamented, as a mans, or auoided, as a foes, or derided, as a fooles. When proud Marcion said to Poly∣carpus, Non me agnoscis? Dost thou not know me? Yes, replyed that good Saint; Agnosco te Primogenitam Sata∣nae: I acknowledge thee the deuils eldest sonne. If it proue an vncurable Gangrene, Ense recidendum, ne pars syncera rahatur; cut it off to saue the rest. Pereat vnus potius quàm vnitas. Better lose one of the whole, then the whole for one. It is Hippocrates maxime: Quae ferro non curantur, ignis curet: where the knife can do no good, fire must. How-euer heretikes escape fire temporall, let them beware fire eternall. For our-selues, blesse we God, that hath cleared the way of truth among vs; and thrust this leauen out of our coasts. Whiles the plague rode circuit in our streetes, wee prayed: when it ceased, wee praised God. No plague so dangerous as Heresie: whiles that ranged in our Church, as Syluius said of ruinated Constantinople, O miseram vrbis faciem! So wee of our
Church, O miseram Ecclesiae faciem! This leprosie gone, shee is now faire in the eyes of her Beloued: Christ now kisseth her lips, and for this, let vs kisse the feete of Ie∣sus Christ. A little leuen, leueneth the whole Lumpe. Now let vs resolue this Allegorie another way: and conceiue By Leuen, Sinne. Lump, Man. Leuening, Infection. In effect; a little sinne makes the whole man in bodie and soule, vnsauory to the Lord. For methode in pro∣ceeding; first, we will view the Metaphor, the Similitude of sin to leuen: then examine how a little of this can sowre the whole lumpe. The similitude holds in many respects, albeit one be here principally intended, the sowring qua∣lity; yet may the rest be iustly considered. 1. Leuen is not bread, but the corruption of that which maketh bread. Sinne is not a created quality, but the corruption of a created quality. God made not sinne: Who then? the deuill begot it on mans lust: Eccles. 7. 29. This I haue found, that God made man vpright: but they haue sought out many inuentions: Trickes enow to make themselues miserable. That which rottennesse is in the Apple, sowrenesse in the Wine, corruption in the flesh, such is sinne in the Soule: Fetida qudam qualitas, a thing neuer good since it tooke being, onely vsurpes the place of good, and occupies the seat where a happy and per∣fect quality stood. It is like a Iehoiakim that sits in the Throne of a Iosiah: as that bad son of so good a father 2. King. 23. 35 gaue the siluer and the gold of the Temple to Pharaoh Ne∣cho: so this, giues the endowments of nature, of reason, of affection, to the blacke Prince of darkenesse. Or as the Pope pretends, that hee sits in the chaire of Peter▪ yet what that blessed Saint attributed to Christ; Act. 3. 12. Why maruell yee at this? or why looke yee so earnestly on vs? as if
we by our owne power or holinesse had made this man to walk. Act. 4. 10. Be it knowne to you, that by the name of Iesus of Naza∣reth, whom yee crucified, this man now stands whole before you. This the Pope attributes to reliques and blockes: there is no disease, but he hath appointed some puppet to cure it. Prohpudor? quis, cui? Such is the practice of sin: the bounty of God Hos. 2. 8. giues corne, and wine and oile, multi∣plies siluer and gold; and euen these, sin giues to Baal. It is depranatio boni, and depriuatio boni: one is actiue, the other passiue: the latter a necessary consequent of the former. It depraues our power of obedience to God ac∣tually; it depriues vs of Gods good grace and blessing passiuely. The one is inseparable to the other: For hee that forfeits Bonum vnde, shall lose Bonum inde. They that spoyle that grace whence they might do good, shall lose that glory whence they expect good. The first breach of one Law tooke away all power to keepe any: and by it we are disabled to all. 2. The very same substance of meale that would make bread, by addition of salt becomes leuen: The ve∣ry same worke that might bee good and acceptable to God, by addition of our prauity becomes euill. Thus the best actions of an vniustified person, are so leuened with his owne corruption, that God abhorres them. Esay 1. 14. Your new Moones and your appointed Feasts my soule hateth: they are a trouble to me, I am weary to beare them; when ye make many prayers, I will not heare you. What is the rea∣son? Your hands are full of bloud. Euen sacrifices and sup∣plications (good seruices in their owne nature) are made displeasing by the leuen of sinne: Esay 66. 3. He that killeth an Oxe, is as if he slue a man; he that sacrificeth a Lambe, as if hee cut off a dogs neck. Sacrifices God commanded, and often commended: yet victimae impiorum: the oblations of the wicked are abominated. Non speciosalaus in ore peccatorum. Praise becommeth not the mouth of a sinner. Euery vnregenerate man Claudicat in rectis, halts in
the straitest path. Omnia naturalia bona polluta, omnia su∣pernaturalia amissa; His portion of naturall good is de∣filed; but of supernaturall good all share is vanished. Pec∣caui, was Dauids voice, after his sinfull Arithmeticke: the same was Iudas his voice, after his damned treason. Similis sonus, non sinus; there was the same sound, but not the same heart. Esau wept as much after the losse of the bles∣sing, as Peter after the denyall of his Master: Similes la∣crimae, non animae: like teares, but vnlike soules. The Pha∣rise went to Church so well as the Publican: but the Publican came home rather iustified then the Pharise. The Pharises threw bounteously into the Treasury: the poore widow two Mites: yet Christ commends the poo∣rer gift, for the richer charity. That worke which seemes the same, In identitate operis, yet differs much Ratione a∣gentis, in respect of the workers. Many Heathen excel∣led vs in morall vertues, yet the ignorance of Christ did shut heauen against them. Aug. Vae tibi, Aristoteles: laudaris vbi non es, & damnaris vbi es: Woe to thee, O Aristotle, who art commended where thou art not, and condem∣ned where thou art: yea euen in a iustified mans workes, though pure from the Spirit, yet passing through his hands, there is some tang of this leuen, enough to keepe them from being meritorious. Looke then well both to the iustification of thy person, and the sanctification of thy workes. Thou indeed confessest sinne to be damna∣ble, but it would grieue thee to go to hell for thy good deeds. Though a man should giue all his goods to the poore, yet wanting Faith and Loue, he may for his cha∣rity go to the deuill. Pray then, that thy defects may bee supplyed by Christ; Ephes. 5. 2. Who gaue himselfe a sacrifice for vs to God of a sweet smelling sauour: perfuming vs with the pleasant odour of his merits. 3. By Leuen sowred we make rellishable bread for the vse of man: so by the vngodly's most cursed sinnes God will aduance his glory. Will Pharaoh harden his heart?
I will get me honour vpon him, saith God. That Leuen of malice which so wred the soules of those Brethren against poore Ioseph, the Lord made vse of to his glory. From that vngracious practice hee raised a pedegree of blessings. Otherwise there had beene no prouision in Aegypt, no bread to spare for Israel, no wonders wrought by Moses, no Manna from heauen, no Law from Sinai, no possession of Canaan. So from the vnnaturallest murther that euer the Sunne beheld, yea, which the Sunne durst not looke vpon; God glorified himselfe in sauing vs. The Oppres∣sor impouerisheth the righteous; God sees and suffers: and from his villany effectuates their good, by taking a∣way those snares to saue their soules. The Lord will glo∣rifie himselfe in the vessels of destruction: and the grones in hell shall honour his Iustice, so well as the songs in hea∣uen honour his mercy. How much better is it to glorifie God in faithfulnesse, that will preserue thee: then in wick∣ednesse, which will destroy thee! 4. A man cannot Mat. 4. 4. Liue by bread only, much worse by Leuen. No man can liue for euer by his righteousnesse and good works, much lesse by his sinnes. Sinne is no nou∣rishment to the soule: vnles as some Mithridates-like haue so inured their bodies to poison, that Venenum nutrit; e∣uen venime doth batten them: so others their soules to sinne, that they cannot keepe life without it. And indeed we say of some things, that they nourish sicknesse, and feed death. Omne simile nutrit simile: inward corruption is fed & maintained by outward action. Couetice in Iudas is nourished by filching his masters money. Murder in Ioab is hartned and hardned with bloud. Theft is fatted with booties: pride with gay rags: vsury battens by extortion: Sacriledge by Church-robbing. Ambr. Pascitur Libido conui∣uijs, nutritur delicijs, vino accenditur, ebrietate flammatur. Banketting is the diet of lust, Wantonnesse her Nurse, Wine kindles a heate in her bloud, and Drunkennesse is the powder that sets her on fire. Thus sinne feeds vpon
this leuen: but with the same successe that Israel vpon quailes: they fatted their carkasses, but made them leane soules. Though this leuen passe the swallow, yet stickes in the stomach: sinne may be deuoured, but lies heauy on the conscience: Prou. 20. 17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but his mouth shall be filled with grauell. Iob 10. 15. It may be sweet in his mouth, but it is the gall of Aspes in his bowels. Putrid meate is apt to breed and feed wormes, so this Leuen the worme of conscience: when they once come to feele it worke, then ready to cry, This is my death: vnlesse God giue them a good vomite of repentance, to put it off their soules, and the sober dyet of sanctification to amend and rectifie their liues. 5. Lastly, Sinne and leuen are fitly compared for their sowrenesse. There is a Leuen sharpe and sowre, but sanatiue. Math. 13. 33. The Kingdome of heauen is like vnto leuen. But this leuen here is farre sowrer, yet hath nothing but death in it. It is sowre to God, sowre to Angels, sowre to Saints, sowre to the sinner. Sinne is sowrer then any Leuen. 1. Sowre to God, who hates nothing but sinne. He made man, and man made sinne: Hee loues his owne creature, but he hates mans creature. Sinne is sowrer to him then the deuill: For, Non odit peccatum Diaboli can∣sa, sed Diabolum peccati causa: He hates not sinne for the deuils sake, but the deuill for sinnes sake. It is so sowre to him, that for one sinne he plagued a world of men: how will he plague one man for a world of sinne! So sowre, that he could rellish no man for it, till hee had killed it in the sides of Iesus Christ. We are all so sowre, that but for this sweetning and perfume, we could neuer haue beene endured. The Scripture, for our vnderstanding, ascribes senses to God: and we finde euery sense displeased with sinne. 1. It is offensiue to his smelling: He tels the Iewes
that their sinnes did stinke in his nosthrils. So did the old World offend him, that he washed & sowsed in a de∣luge: and then after Noahs sacrifice, is said to Gen. 8. 21. Smell a sauour of rest. For this cause they had their Altar of In∣cense; and God commanded a Perfume to be made to him. Exod. 30. 34. The Lord said to Moses, Take vnto thee sweet spi∣ces, Stacte, and Onicha, and Galbanum, with pure frankin∣cense: and thou shalt make it a Perfume, pure and holy. Both signified that we all stunke by nature, and are onely perfu∣med by the Incense of Christs prayers and righteousnes. 2. It is offensiue to his Tasting: Esay 5. 2. I looked (after all my paines and kindnesse) for good grapes, and the Vine brought forth wilde grapes. When hee comes to taste the vintage of our sinnes, they are sowre grapes. Amos 5. 7. Yee turne iudgment into wormwood: Iustice is pleasant vnto the Lord, but iniurie bitter as wormewood. So the Iewes serued Christ, in stead of wine they gaue him vineger to drink. He turned their water into wine, they turne his wine in∣to vineger. Good workes of faith and obedience are that Cant. 7. 9. best wine, which we should giue our Beloued: that goeth downe sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak. But euill deeds are sowre to his palate. 3. It is offensiue to his Feeling: so sharp, that the Speare, Thornes, Whips, and Nailes, were blunt to it: Our ini∣quities were so heauy to his sense, that he plaines him∣selfe burdened vnder them, Amos 2. 13. as a Cart is pressed with sheaues. The Lord of heauen lay groueling on the earth: and as if he were cast into a furnace of his Fathers wrath, sweating drops of bloud. They are so harsh still to his feeling, that he challengeth Saul for wounding himselfe. Act. 9. 5. Why strikest thou me? Saul strikes at Damascus, Iesus Christ suffers in heauen. 4. It is offensiue to his Hearing. Gen. 16. 20. The cry of Sodome and Gomorrah is great, because their sinne is very grieuous. Our dissensions and quarrels are as iarring in Gods eares: as if diuers distracted Musicians should play vpon diuers
bad Instrument so many seuerall tunes at one time. The confusion of sinnes brought the confusion of languages: Gods eare could not endure the distraction of their harts, therefore their owne eares shall not distinguish the dis∣sonance of their voyces. The cry of bloud and oppressi∣on makes so grieuous a noyse to heauen, that vengeance must onely quiet it. Our murmurings, our oathes, blas∣phemies, slanders, are like the croking of frogs, howling of dogs, and hissing of serpents in Gods hearing. 5. It is offensiue to his Seeing. Ier. 2. 22. Though thou vvash thee with Nitre, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord. Our oppressions are like running vlcers, our adulteries as most sordid and filthy things. Esa. 64. 6. The Pro∣phet compares it to the most feculent defilement, & loth∣some turpitude, that can be vttered. Hab. 2. 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold euill: and canst not looke on iniquity. O let vs abhorre that filthinesse, which will turne the face of God from vs. Neyther are they displeasing onely to his senses, but grieuous to his minde. Esa. 7. 13. Is it a small thing for you to grieue men, but you will grieue God also? It is dange∣rous to anger him, that can anger all the veines of our hearts. It was the Prophet Esay's complaint of Israel: Esa. 63. 10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. Yea they are offen∣siue to his very soule. Esa. 1. 14. Your new Moones and appoin∣ted feasts, my soule hateth. This he protesteth against reci∣diuation, Heb. 10. 38. If any man draw back, my soule shal haue no pleasure in him. This is an emphaticall speech, and an argument of Gods hearty detestation. Psal. 11. 5. The wic∣ked, and him that loueth violence his soule hateth. There∣fore he is said to bend his Soule to reuenge. Ier. 5. 9. Shall not my soule be auenged on such a nation as this? 2. Sowre to the Angels: for if they Luk. 15. reioyce at our conuersion, then they grieue at our peruersion. How sowre is that sinne, which brings griefe vnto the thresholds of ioy! They blush at our falls, reioyce at our integrity. Hebr. 1. 14. Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth for them who
shall be the heyres of saluation? Let vs then feast them with integrity, not with the leauen of iniquity. 3. Sowre to the Saints: the Church is our Mother, and shee laments to see any childe of her wombe auerse from goodnes. Therefore as a louing Mother, whose husband was slaine for the safety of her selfe & children; if she sees any childe transgresse the rules, and breake her husbands Testament; she tels them of their Fathers kind∣nesse: she describes his deadly wounds and gastly lookes: and to make their facts more odious, shee sheweth some garment of his embrued with bloud. So the Church of∣ten offers to our considerations, how Christ her deare Loue and Lord was betrayed, condemned, crucified: tels vs, our sinnes haue done this; that they were the Iudas betraying, the Herod mocking, the Pilate condemning, the Longinus wounding, the band of Iewes re-crucifying Christ. Now as Ddo adiur'd departing Aeneas; Per ego te has lacrymas, &c. Per si quid vnquam Dulce fuit nobis, horum miserere laborum. So our Mother intreats vs, (yet intreating is too low a phrase for a Mother) per talem cru∣orem, per tantum amorem; by so precious bloud, and by so gracious loue, to sinne no more; at least to abhor such precipices of sinne; and forbeare (as it were) to choake him with such cursed Leauens. 4. Sowre to the sinner himselfe: for it euer leaues be∣hinde it a sting of conscience. It may taste pleasing and palatable at first, but Leuen is not sowrer at last. Perhaps our iudgements may be out of taste; as men in feuers: or Satan (that crafty Apothecary) hath mingled the potion cunningly: yet though saporem amisit, venenum retinet: poyson is poyson though it come in a golden cup. Esaus pottage went downe merrily, but the losse of his birth∣right was a bitter farewell. Whatsoeuer seruice sin doth vs, it shewes vs but an ill-fauoured tricke at the last. It brings vs to the dore of Terror, and then bids vs shift for our selues. It is like Lysimachus his draught of cold wa∣ter,
that refreshes him for a moment, and captiues him for euer. By Salomons rule, vexation is intailed to vanity A hedgehogge must dwell in Babylon: a pricking Consci∣ence Eccl. 1. in a prophane brest. Ier. 4. 18. Thy way an thy doings haue procured these things vnto thee: this is thy wickednes, because it is bitter, because it reacheth vnto thine heart. Salomon hath the like promotion: Eccl. 11. 9. Reioyce, O young man, in thy youth, &c. but know that for all these things God will bring thee into iudgement. The verse begins with pleasure, but ends with terror. Sinne will be sowre at the last. The Allegory thus opened, the speciall treasure or In∣struction remaines yet to bee drawne out. Wee perceiue what the Leuen signifies, and what the Lumpe. Now wee must consider the relation betwixt modicum and totum: a little Leuen, and the whole lumpe. A little Leauen leue∣neth the whole lumpe. A little sinne infecteth a great deale of righteousnesse. Iam. 2. 10. Whosoeuer shall keepe the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Hee hath broken Ttam Legem, though not Totum Legis. I speake not heere of the abso∣lutely (dissolutely) wicked: whose life is like Elreds raign; Praua in principio, peior in medio, pessima in vltimo: bad in the beginning, worse in the midst, worst of all in the end. But of those that haue some good measure of grace, and stand in the state of adoption: yet may admitte of Pauls prayer, 1. Thes. 5. 23. to be sanctified throughout. And vpon good rea∣son: for there is an vniuersall corruption, therfore should be an vniuersall sanctification. That young man, that pro∣fesseth himselfe to haue kept the Commandements; (and Christ began to loue him) yet there was a little leuen spoy∣led all, Couetousnesse. Vnum restat, one thing was vvan∣ting; Mat. 19. 21. Sell that thou hast, and giue to the poore. No, he was costiue, and could not abide such a purge. Herod, though he heard many Sermons of Iohns preaching gladly, (and it is some good thing to heare Sermons with ioy) yet the leuen of Herodias marred all. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in
the word, communicate vnto him that teacheth him in all his goods. This was the Apostles Canon; an ordinance that will kill where it lights; yet a world of arguments hath beene inuented to stoppe it vp. We will giue of charity; but any thing of duty? yes, of duty. Well, we will giue somewhat of duty: but part of all? yes, part of all. Put out this  and wee will compound with you: though we take away a talent of your duties, wee will returne a mite of beneuolence. I will tell you a tale: a Seignior came with his seruant to one of our Ladies Images: (no matter which, for they doe not scant her of number.) hee threw in an angell of gold; the humble picture in gratitude made a curtsie to him. The seruant obseruing, and wondring at her Ladi∣ships plausible carriage, purposed with himselfe to giue somewhat too, that he might haue a curtsie. So hee puts into the basen sixe pence, and withall takes out his masters angell: the Image makes curtsie and seemes to thanke him still. It is common with this City to take away the Cleargies angell, and to lay downe sixe pence in the stead: yet looke they for curtsie too, but I thinke no ho∣nest man will giue them thankes. This little leauen vndoes all goodnesse. Deut. 5. 33. You shall walke in all the wayes which the Lord your God commands you. All? put out in omnibus, in All, and wee vvill say something to it. But as Deus remittit omnia peccata, aut nulla. God forgiues all sinnes, or none: so we must faith∣fully resolue against all sinnes, or we repent of none. As is Gods remission, such must be our contrition. Euery man is an Adam, a good conscience his Paradise, lust the forbidden fruit: one lust is able to turne him out of all his comforts. Hast thou kept thy hands from iniury? yet if thy tongue haue offended, thou shalt bee iudged of thy idle words. Suppose thou hast preserued Castitatem linguae, sobriety of speech (yet Iam. 3. 2. if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man) but thy thoughts haue welcommed
a pleasing lust, those thoughts haue leuend thy soule. Eccles. 12. 14. For God will (not onely) bring euery worke into iudgement, but euery secret thought, whether it be good or euill. Men haue brought that opinion into a prouerbe; Thought is free: no, thy Thought is Gods bond-slaue. As thou canst not thinke a good thought but by his suggestion, so nor an e∣uill thought but by his permission. If but thy thought harbour this leuen, the whole lumpe is sowred. Actions men see, thy thoughts onely God and thy selfe. Ille liber inter accusatores, quem propria non accusat conscientia. That man needes feare no accusers, that is freed from the con∣demnation of his owne conscience. There are sixe mo∣tiues that inferre and inforce a caution of little sinnes. Little sinnes are dangerous; because they are Mortalia, they are deadly. Plurima, they are numerous. Insensibilia, not easily felt. Materialia maximorū; they are the materials or seeds of grosse sins. Maximas inficiunt virtutes, they le∣uen the best vertues. Facilius perdunt, they more cunning∣ly destroy the soule. 1. Minima mortalia; euen the least offence is mortall in it owne nature, culpable of transgression, and liable to malediction. Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sinne is death. It was a strange glosse of Haymo vpon that Text: Hoc non de omnibus pec∣catis intelligendum est, sed de criminalibus. This is not meant of all sinnes, but onely of such as are criminall: such (saith he) as S. Iohn speakes of; 1. Iohn 5. 16. There is a sinne vn∣to death, I say not that thou shouldst pray for it. So S. Pauls indefinite speech of all sinnes, he restraines to S. Iohns par∣ticular sense of one sinne; that sinne (which shall neuer be forgiuen) against the Holy Ghost. For otherwise if St. Iohn should intend it of all criminall sins, then it would
follow that we should not pray for heretikes, adulterers, homicides; which were directly crosse to the rule of cha∣ritie. Certainly Paul in that generall rule admitted of no exception; it is an Aphorisme wherein no sober iudge∣ment can find distinction. The Apostle thought of no veniall, when he called all mortall. The wages of sinne (not of this or that sinne, as sacriledge, robbery, blasphemy, &c. but of sinne, any sinne, euery sinne: though men deeme it triuiall, they shall find it mortall) is death. I know there is a iust distinction of sinnes, of greater & lesse. Puritie and equality of all transgressions is an idle dreame. It was a worse murder to kill Zachariah at the Altar, then Uriah in the field. To steale Sacra de Sacro, holy things out of a holy place, is worse theft then to steale profana de profano, common things out of a profane place. The difference of the punishments manifests a dif∣ference of the sinnes. As in heauen one starre excells ano∣ther starre in glory: so in hell, one firebrand exceeds ano∣ther in burning; though all feele the fire hote enough. Christ tells the Pharises, that they make their Proselite Mat. 23. 15. two-fold more the child of hell then themselues. Math. 11. 24 Tolerabi∣lius erit Sodomae: It shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of Iudgement, then for Capernaum: and yet the So∣domites were then in hell. They that deuoure widowes houses vnder the colour of long prayers, Luk. 20. 4. shall receiue greater damnation. As they haue been more wicked, they shall be more wretched. This distinction of sinnes vvee take vp and iustifie: yea we dare goe further, and say there are some sinnes mortall, and some veniall, but not in their owne nature. The difference is not ratione Peccatorum, sed Peccantium; not in respect of the sinnes, but of the Sinners. To the faithfull and penitent all sinnes are veni∣all: to the vnbeleeuers and impenitent, all sinnes are mor∣tall. It is misericordia remittentis, not natura transgressio∣nis; the mercy of the forgiuer, not the qualitie of the sin, that maketh it veniall. All transgressions are mortall in
themselues, and by repentance all veniall in Christ. The least sinne legally considered, is mortall: the greatest sin Euangelically considered, is pardonable. This difference we approoue: yea wee say, that small sinnes are more easily pardoned: and great sinnes, when they are remitted, are more hardly remitted. For certainly offenders are more or lesse punished, accoding to the qua∣litie of the offence. An eye with an eye, but bloud with bloud, and life with life. Yet still say we not, that a sinne is in it owne nature veniall. For euen the least is , 1. Ioh. 3. 4. the transgression of the Law. It is for the doctrine of Rome, to lessen sinne, and to extenuate punishment: and that for two reasons. First that they might please the peo∣ple with some liberty: and next, that hereby they might build vp their Purgatory. For they assigne mortall sinnes to hell, and veniall to that purging fire. They offer here∣in a double wrong, both to their owne modestie, and to Gods mercy. To their owne modestie, for they extenu∣ate their faults in sinning: to Gods mercy, for they dispa∣rage his goodnesse in forgiuing. They affirme that sinnes of omission, weakenesse, forgetfulnesse, and ignorance, be Praeter legem Dei, but not contra legem Dei: that they be Besides the Law of God, not Against the law of God. This doctrine, like the Prou. 5. 3. lippes of that strange woman, drop as an hony-combe, and are smooth as oyle. But their ver. 4. end is bitter as worme-wood, sharpe as a two-edged sword. This is a dangerous delusion; for hence they come so to neglect those lesse sinnes, that Peccata minima, be at last thought Nulla. As they haue certaine Orders among them, Fry∣ers Minorites, Fryers Minim's, and then Nullani, Nul∣lans. So sinne bates and dwindles, from a Minorite or lesse sinne to a Minim or least sinne, and from a Minim to a Nullan, to be no sinne at all. Thus Incipit esse licitum, quod folet esse publicum. The commonnesse takes away the haynousnesse: from being generally practised, it comes to be vniuersally allowed.
Euery sinne is committed against God, Psal. 51. 4. Against thee, thee onely haue I sinned. Looke vpon the infinite Maiestie offended, and by that iudge the quality of thy offence. There be sinnes of weaknesse, sinnes of ignorance, and sinnes of malice. Those of weakenesse, are said to be com∣mitted against God the Father, whose speciall attribute is Power. Those of Ignorance against God the Sonne, whose speciall attribute is wisedome. Those of malice against God the Holy Ghost, whose speciall attribute is loue. Whether then they be of weakenesse, of ignorance, or of malice, they offend either the Power of God, or the Wisedome of God, or the Loue of God: therefore acknowledge Se∣cundum magnitudinem Dei, magnitudinem peccati: confesse the least sinne great and bad, that hath offended a Maiestie so Great and Good. 2. Minima plurima, sinnes lesse haynous, are the most numerous. Many littles make a mickle. Small droppes of raine commonly cause the greatest flouds. Quò minus vi∣olentum, eò magis perpetuum: the lesse violence, the lon∣ger continuance. The drisling sleete, that falls as it were in a mist, fills the chanels, they swell the riuers, the ouerchar∣ged riuers send foorth their superfluous waters ouer the conteyning bankes: now the medowes are polluted, the Corne-fields spoyled, the Cattell drowned; yea euen houses, and townes, and inhabitants endangered; and firme continents buried vnder a deluge of waters. Many little sands gather'd to an heape, faile not to swallow a great Vessell. De paruis grandis aceruus erit. You haue Ea∣gles, Hawkes, Kites, and such great fowles of rapine, fly∣ing alwaies alone: but the sparrowes and pidgeons, that deuour the graine, by innumerable troupes. There were not more grieuous plagues to the Egyptians, then came by the contemptiblest creatures: as frogges, lice, flyes, lo∣custs: by reason of the monstrous swarmes, Exod. 10. 15. couering the face of the earth, and darkning the Land, and deuouring the fruit of the whole Country. Yea euen killing the people, that
there was no remedie found for their life. Thus great de∣struction ariseth from little causes: therefore, Non con∣temnenda quia parua, sed metuenda quia multa. Let vs not despise our sinnes because they are little, but feare them because they are many, saith Augustine. The smal drops of sinne, continually falling, haue drowned many soules. As they haue been our Armes to fight against GOD, so God will make them his Armies to confound vs. Timen∣da ruina multitudinis, etsi non magnitudinis. Let vs feare them for their number, though we slight them for their nature. A pace is but a little space of ground; yet a thousand paces make a mile, and many miles bring to hell. Si negli∣gis quia non pessima, caueas quia plurima. If they be not the worst, they are the most: and is it not all to one pur∣pose, vvhether one Goliah, or a thousand Philistims ouer∣come thee? The bird brings so many little strawes as makes vp her nest: the reprobate so many little sticks, as makes vp his owne burning pile. Augustine saith, there is in Sinne both weight and number. Et si non timeas quan∣do expendis, time quando numeras. Iudge them by tale, and not by waight. Put a wanton speech, a loose gesture into the balance, (though Christ found it heauy, & euery soule shall, for whom he did not beare it, yet) it is censured vix culpa, a little faulting, a little failing: so little, that vvere it lesse, it were nothing. But now leaue thy Geometry, & come to Arithmetike: beginne to number thy vvanton works, and vnchristian gestures, and carnall thoughts; now loe, they come in by troupes and heards, thicker then the frogges into Egypt, miraris numerum: thou standest amazed at their number, and now cryest, Miserere mei Deus; Lord haue mercy on me a most wretched sinner. Yet when thy recognition hath done the best, and thy memory represented those swarmes of sinnes to thy con∣science, thy view is as farre short, as will be thine answer: neither can extend ad millesimam, vel minimam partem.
Thou hast not seene one of a thousand. Psal. 19. 12. Who can vnder∣stand his errors? O Lord, cleanse thou mee from my secret faults. Thus it is not Trutina, but Scrutinū, that will teach thee the danger of these little sinnes. Thou didst neuer stale thy neighbours goods by breaking into his house, there∣fore pleadest not guiltie to that Law, Thou shalt not steale. Examine, thou shalt find past from thee so many couetous wishes, as make vp a robberie. Thou art no swearer, yet through the dore of thy lips haue scaped out so many idle words, as being put together will make vp a blasphemie. Thou neuer madest the member of Christ, a member of a harlot by vncleannesse: yet thou hast giuen indulgence to as many lustfull thoughts and desires, as beeing sum∣med, will make vp a great adultery. I feare that many who haue forborne the forbidden bed, haue yet by their lusts scatteringly and forgetfully admitted, framed vp an adultery as great as Dauids. Some that haue made a con∣science of grand oathes, and impudent blasphemies; yet haue eiaculated so many lowd, lewd, and false attestati∣ons, as haue conflated a blasphemy no lesse impious then Rabshakeh's. A tradesman disdaines to lye, abhorres to oppresse: yet hath vttered so many commodities of dissi∣mulations, concealements, false warrantings, cunning fraudes, as make vp an oppression equall to Ieconiah's. A Protestant abhominates sacriledge, and down-right rob∣bing the Church: yet hath so long been bold to make vse of this Impropriation: or if in a meaner condition, with his Compositions, Customes, detinies, legall alienations, leasses and fines, as make vp a sacriledge not inferiour to Achan's. Put my money to Interest? No, saith another, I defie all vsurious contracts: yet by his pawnes, morga∣ges, forfets, couznages, and such tricks knowne best to GOD his Iudge, the Deuill his Enginer, his Scriuener, and himselfe, he puts downe vnconuerted Zaccheus for vsury. Oh the incredible soules lost in the Labyrinth of
these vnsuspected, (and in their imagination iustifiable) sinners! 3. Minima Insensibilia; these little sinnes are not so ea∣sily felt, therefore most pernicious. If a man hath died his hand in bloud, irrequieta conscientia; a peacelesse consci∣ence haunts him with vnceslant vexation: let him hate his brother, this little murder he feeles not. The deuill like a roring Lyon is soone heard: forming himselfe to a foxe, his insinuation is not perceiued. Hee rores in monstrous iniquities, in treason, murder, sacriledge, oppression: these be thundring sinnes, that will waken the soule if it be not lethargiz'd. But creeping like a silent Foxe, he deuoures the grapes without disturbance. Cant. 2. 15. Take vs the Foxes, the little foxes: for they spoyle the Vines. If Satan hew at the tim∣ber, and knock at the foundation of the house, we heare the noise, and preserue the building. They are those small Teredines, little sinnes, that in sensibly eate it to dust, and it is ruined ere we are aware. So long as Sinne comes not in thunder, it neuer wakens men: if it doe not enter into Theomachie, and denounce open warre against GOD, they make but a tush of it. To abuse the good creature is nothing, so long as they are not drunke: to giue nothing to the poore is no sinne, so long as they take not from the poore: to sleepe out the Sermon is but a little drowsinesse, all is wel so long as they break not the Sabbath in absence from Church. These and such like are the common thoughts, and so triuiall an estimate they beare of these sinnes, that they thinke God should doe them wrong to call them to any reckoning for them. Thus they sowe sinnes, as that enemy did tares, here a little, and there a little: but growne vp, the whole fielde was ouergrowne with them. A sinne that cannot be com∣mitted, Sine grands corruptione sui, graui laesione proximi, magno contemptu Dei: without his owne notorious depra∣uation, his brothers greeuous oppression, Gods manifest contempt and prouocation; this quickly amazeth a man,
and he starts backe from the deuils first offer. If the deuill at first had come to Iudas, here's a hundred peeces, betray thy Master: none, he was not yet hardned enough in vil∣lany: let Satan first worke him to hypocrisie, then to co∣uetousnes, and lastly hee shall preuaile him with him for treason too. Hee might refuse a hundred peeces before, now he will take thirty. When that good Prophet wept vpon Hazael, he asked; Why weepeth my Lord? He answered, Because I 2. King. 8. 13. know the euil that thou wilt doe to the children of Israel. Their strong helds wilt thou set on fire, slay their young men with the sword, dash their children against the stones, and rip vp their women with child. He replyed, What, is thy seruant a dog, that I should doe this great thing? He thought it impossi∣ble, that the deuill should euer worke him to so horrid a mischiefe. But he did it: ambition brought him to a king∣dome, a kingdome brought him to tyrannie, tyrannie to insolence, insolence not onely to oppression of his owne, but to invasion of other Countreys: among which Israel felt the smart, in the burning of her Cities, and massacring her Inhabitants. Thus by degrees he was wrought to this selfe-incredited mischiefe: as impossible as at first he iud∣ged it, at last he performed it. Doubtlesse there be some that would shudder at the temptation to periurie: yet pe∣detentm, by insensible steppes they arriue at it: by lying they come to swearing, by swearing to forswearing. If the Vsurer had an oppressed mans widow, and orphanes lying and crying at his dores, perhaps shame, if not re∣morse, would seize on him: but let him exact, inhaunce, oppresse, excoriate the Common-wealth, and not heare it in a publique clamour, he neuer wincheth for the mat∣ter. A fact that lookes at the first blush horrid and intol∣lerable, is presently either auoided, or within some mo∣dest limits restrained: but another Dum paruum creditur, securius in vsu retinetur: the opinion of paruitie abates the opinion of prauitie: that which is weakely censured, is
strongly retained. Our officious lies, soothing adulati∣ons, amorous wishes, wanton songs, scoffing at Mini∣sters, censuring of Sermons; being reprooued, we laugh them out. But these laughing sinnes, will be one day found crying sinnes. And if we cry not to God for mer∣cy by repentance, they shal cry to God against vs for ven∣geance. 4. Minima materialia maximorum: little sinnes are the materaills of great sinnes. The seedes of all sinnes are na∣turally in vs: not so much as treason, homicide, periurie, but are in vs Quoad potentiam, yea Quoad naturam et pro∣pensionem: there is in our nature a procliuitie to them. Now the heart is so apt ground to produce and mature these Innata mala, inbred seeds to actualls, that without the preuenting Grace of GOD we cannot auoid them. Thou art a Christian, and fearest not that euer thou shouldst apostate into the deniall of thy Sauiour: yet let me say thou hast the materialls of this sinne within thee, timorousnesse and selfe-loue. Thou saiest, Sure I shall ne∣uer be a drunkard, that belluine folly shal neuer apprehend me: yet thou hast the materialls of this within thee, and that naturally and hereditarily from thy first Grandmo∣ther Eue: a sweet tooth in thy head, a liquourish appetite to delicate meates, and intoxicating wines. Thou canst not be a traitour, nor admit of conspiracie against thy Soueraigne, yet the materiall of this wicked∣nes is within thee. That which wee call Gunpowder, is made of the falt & fatter earth: in the ground are the ma∣terials, which when Art hath concocted, chym'd, pre∣par'd, charged, and discharged, it ouerturnes towres and townes, forts and cities. We were once too neere iustify∣ing by a wofull experience the violence of it: but the goodnesse of our good Lord Iesus auerted it. So in thy earth, thy heart, there is this salt and spumy matter, the minerall of treason; vnlesse the reason of a man, and Reli∣gion of a Christian keepe it from eruption. Thou art re∣solued
neuer to thinke highly of thine owne worth, yet thou hast the seed of pride within thee: thou art naturally (as Luther said) borne with a Pope in thy belly: there's the materiall, to be too well affected to thy owne doings It is impossible, thou thinkst, for thee to be made an vsu∣rer, now thou hast no money: yet thou hast the seede of vsury within thee; and Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit: all the sons of Adam loue earth too well. Who shall euer perswade thee to bow downe before an Idoll? yet a dainty feast perswades thee to worship thine owne belly: this is no Idolatry. It was but a little Cloud, that Eliahs seruant saw, 1. King. 18. 44. rising out of the sea like a mans hand: yet it portended a great showre. Sin seemes at first like a little cloud, but it prognosticates a deluge of ensuing wickednes. The carelesse Gallant by many trifles often fetch'd, runs so far in the Mercers bookes vnawares, that he cannot endure to heare of a reckoning. These little ar∣rerages, taken vp on trust, runs our soules so deepe into Gods debt, that if the bloud of Christ doe not pay it: though we be sold wife and children, and all we possesse; Math. 18. 25. non habenius vnde, we can neuer discharge it. 5. Minima peccata maximas in ficiunt virtutes: a little sinne infects a great deale of righteousnesse. The Leprosie infected the garments, and the very walls of the house; but Sinne hath infected wood and wooll, and wals, earth, ayre, beasts, plants, & planets: and stucke a scarre on the chrystall brow of nature it selfe. Rom. 8. 22. For wee know that the whole creation groneth, and trauelleth in paine together vntill now. If the great world grone for mans sinne, shall not the little world, man, grone for his owne sinne? Send a lit∣tle temptation in at the eare, or eye; it will not rest wor∣king, till it runne like poyson to the heart. Dauid let in a little leuen at his eye, it quickly wrought to his heart, gan∣grened to adultery, to bloud; hardly cured. A little Coliquintida spoyles all the broth: a spotte in the face blemisheth all the beauty. 2. King. 5. 1. Naaman the Syrian
is plentifully commended: He was captaine of the host, a great man with his master, and honorable, because the Lord by him had giuen deliuerance to Syria: he was also a mighty man of valour: but he was a Leper. This same But marres all; But he was a Leper. So in the soule, one vice disgraceth a great deale of vertue. When hee was cured and conuer∣ted by Elisha, first he's charitable, offers gold & garments, but he excepts bowing in the house of Rimmon: he is deuout, and begs earth for sacrifice, but excepts Rimmon: he is re∣ligious, and promiseth to offer to none but the Lord, but he excepts Rimmon. This little leuen, this But Rimmon, sowred all. Eccl. 10. 1. Dead flies cause the oyntment of the Apotheca∣ry to send forth a stinking sauour. The Apothecaries vncti∣on is a thing praised in the Scriptures, compounded of many excellent simples, made (not so much for medicine, as) for Odour: yet the flies of death putrifie it. So doth a little folly him that is in reputation for Wisedome and Honor. When one commended Alexander for his noble acts, and famous atchieuements; another obiected against him, that he killed Calisthenes. He was valiant, and successefull in the warres: true, but he kill'd Calisthenes. Hee ouer∣came the great Darius: so, but he kill'd Calisthenes. Hee made himselfe master of the world: grant it, but still hee killed Calisthenes. His meaning was, that this one vniust fact poysoned all his valorous deeds. Beware of sinne, which may thus leuen the whole lumpe of our soule. In∣deed we must all sinne, and euery sinne sowres: but to the faithfull and repentant Christian it shall not be damnable. Rom. 8. 1. There is no damnation to them that are in Iesus Christ. There is in al corruption, to most affliction, to none dam∣nation, that are in Christ. Our leuen hath sowred vs, but we are made sweet againe by the all-perfuming bloud of our blessed Sauiour. 6. Minima peccata facilius destruunt: the least sins are the most fatall to mens destruction. Anima est tota in toto: so that if the toe akes, the head feeles, the eye lets fall a
teare, the very heart mournes. So let but the eye lust, the soule is in danger to be lost. Mors per fenestras, faith the Prophet. Ier. 9. 21. Death comes in at the windowes, then enters into the Palaces, to cut off the children without, and the young men  the streets. Is it but an vncleane thought? Mors in illâ; as the children of the Prophets cryed Mors in ollâ: there is death in it, and for it. A dramme of poyson diffuseth it selfe to all parts, till it strangle the vitall spirits, and turne out the soule from her Tenement. Iam. 3. 5. How great a matter a little fire kindleth! It is all one whether a man bee killed with the pricke of a little thorne, or with the he wing of a broad sword, so he bee killed. Wee haue seene a whole arme impostumated with a little pricke in the finger: if Satan can but wound our heele, (as the Poets faigne of Achilles) he vvill make shift to kill vs there; euen from the heele to send death to the heart. Therefore Christ cals Hatred murder, a wanton eye adultery: besides the possibility of act, they are the same in the intention of heart. The hornet is a little flye, yet it stings deadly. I know that heauier sinnes shall haue a heauier waight of punishment: yet is the least heauy enough to sinke the soule to the bottomlesse pitte. Greater fury of iniquity shall haue the hotter fire, but O let vs neuer feele the heat of one. A little leake sinkes a great vessell. Pope Mar∣celline being accused for Idolatry, answered for himselfe; I did but cast a few graines of Incense into the fire; that was little or nothing. Yes, it was manifest offering to I∣dols, is that nothing? Christ would not obey Satan in his minimis: hee would not answer his desire in the smallest sute he could request; Mat. 43. of turning stones into bread, euen vvhiles hee was so hungry as forty daies fasting could make him. Teaohing vs to deny Satan in his best moti∣ons; lest custome of hauing them granted make him so impudent, as to take no repulse in his greatest tempta∣tions. This is the Deuils method of working, as it is in the first
Psalme: Blessed is the man that hath not walked, &c. First he gets a man to walke a turne or two with him in sinne, as it were to conferre and debate the matter. After some walking, lest he should be weary, he preuailes with him to stand in the way of sinners; after admission of the thought, to commission of the act. Lastly, hee perswades him for his ease to fit downe in the seate of the scornefull; falling to despise God, and deride all goodnesse. Thus hee brings him from walking to standing, from standing to sitting stil: and this is limen inferni, the very threshold of hell. Wee iudge of sinne, as of the Sunne; little because far off: yet indeed it is bigger then the earth. The neerer wee come to the sense of iniquity, the greater it appeares. Was it such a sinne for Adam to eate a forbidden Apple? Yes, the greatnes is remonstrable in the euent, it brought de∣struction vpon himselfe and his posterity. Is it such a haynous offence for Dauid to know the number of his people? Doe not Princes make good their Muster-books by such a Quare, and numeration? The plague witnessed the greatnesse of it, and himselfe cryes, Peccaui, 2. Sam. 24. 17 I haue done wickedly. Looke on the least sin in Satans false glasse, and it seemes contemptible: behold it in the true glasse of Gods Law, and it appeares abhominable. The Deuill stands betwixt wicked men and their sinnes all their life: but placeth their sinnes betwixt heauen and themselues in death: writes them in Text letters on the Curtaines, that their amazed soules cannot chuse but read them. Thus he that led them liuing by sin to presumption; now driues them dying by sinne to desperation. Satan seemes modest, and will bee contented vvith a little, when hee can get no more: he will play at small game, before he sit out. Wilt thou not cut throats? yet quarrell and appoint fields: not so, yet hate thine ene∣mies: not professe hatred, yet watch occasions to hinder his good: if thou wilt not iniure his estate, yet at least scandalize his good name. He will take little, rather then
nothing. The Israelites in the Desart had no rich and cost∣ly sacrifices to offer to Num. 25. 2. Baal Peor. They had not such store of beasts, but the oblations to God tooke them vp. I cannot see what they should haue fit for this sacrifice to Baal, except Manna and water: (too good for the Deuill) but hee s content with this. Yet it is euident that they committed Idolatry. 1. Cor. 10. 7. Neyther be yee Idolaters, as were some of them: as it is written, The people sate downe to eate and drinke, and rose vp to play. Rather then want their cu∣stome, Satan will take such as they had. Will Naaman worship God? yet let him worship Rimmon too: no, hee will not doe so, yet let him bow to Rimmon: no, nor so much: yet let him 2. Kin. 5. 18. bow before Rimmon: the Deuill is glad of this, where he can get no more. Thus Pharaoh minceth and limits with Moses concerning the dismission of Is∣rael. Gods charge was; Let my people goe three daies iour∣ney in the wildernesse, to celebrate a feast to the Lord. Now Exod. 8. and 10. chap. marke how Pharaoh would compound it. First Sacrifice to God in this land: no, saith Moses, wee must goe into the wildernesse. Then saith Pharaoh, If there be no remedy, Goe, and goe to the wildernesse, and sacrifice to your God; but goe not farre: nay, wee must goe three dayes iourney. Then Pharaoh; Goe ye the men, but leaue your children behinde you: nay we must goe old and young, sons and daughters. Then Pharaoh; Goe ye men, women, and children, so farre as your feet can measure in three dayes: but your flocks and your heards shall be stayd: nay, we will not leaue a hoofe behinde vs. So when the Deuill perceiues no remedy, hee falls to indenting with niggardly grants and allowances. Somwhat hath some sauor; giue him at least a thought, a word, a looke (as Lots wife) and it something pleaseth him. Among the Heathen they vsed to ioyne together Epula and Sacrificia: with solemne sacrifices to their gods, solemne bankets among themselues. So the Apostle de∣liuers the custome of the Moabites, 1. Cor. 10. 7. In the
midst of their Idolatry, they sate downe to eate & drinke. So the Psalmist writes of that cursed commixtion of Israel with Moab; that they had Idolatrous feasts. Psal. 106. 28. They ioy∣ned themselues to Baal-Peor: and did eate the sacrifices of the dead. One nation had a custome in these superstious feasts, to sacrifice to their Idol Capita, some Noble mens heads according as it fell to their lots, together with their hearts and their liuers. It came to the turne of the Kings speciall fauourite, thus to lose his life: the King resoluing both to keep the custome, yet to saue his friend, obiected that God was no murderer, nor delighted in the bloud of men. That if he were a God, he was certainely good, and goodnesse stood not in the desire of his owne crea∣tures destruction. Therefore in stead of the mans head, he offered the head of an onyon: and for bloud, heart, and liuers of men, all these of birds or beasts. The Deuill must be pleased with this: hee saw that this little homage was some acknowledgement of his soueraignty. Satan can hold a mans soule in by a little, as a bird that hangs in the net by a claw. Perhaps shame & feare keepes some from eruption into scandalous things: the appea∣rance is vizarded, the affection is not mortified. Like an Eunuch, he doth not beget palpable & grosse turpitudes: yet hath a lust, itch, and concupiscence: this little serues the Deuils turne. Satan would keepe away the light of the Truth from a man; well, he is so seated that hee will haue it; by knowledge he seemes to cast out Satan. Yet if he can but insinuate into his affection, this little cord will pull him in againe with ease. Must he lose the Sconce of thy vnderstanding? Let him hold the Cittadell of thy desires: this little gate will let him in at his pleasure. I draw to conclusion; let this teach vs all to make a scrutiny in our soules, and seriously to repent of this lit∣tle leuen. Little in quantity, great in quality: little in esti∣mation, powerfull in operation. Little in the sight of men, iudging, by outward appearance, great in the sight
of God iudging in truth. Lot said of the City of Zoar; Gen. 19. 20. Is it not a little one? and my soule shall liue: thou sayest of thy sinne; Is it not a little one, and why should my soule die? A little Posterne opened, may betray the greatest City. Ionathan tasted but 1. Sam. 14. 43 a little honey on the top of his wand, and hardly he escaped death for it. A little leauen makes the head heauy, and the heart sicke. Eschevv this little, if thou wouldst be great in heauen. Mat. 5. 19. For whosoeuer shall breake one of these least Commandements, hee shall bee called least in the kingdome of heauen. Minimus, that is in∣deed Nullus: the least there, because he shall not be there at all. Let no tang of corruption come to thy least part, if thou desirest to preserue body and soule 1. Thes. 5. 23. blamelesse to the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ. Repentance must be to all dead workes: sanctification takes liberty in no sinne. Nullum peccatum retinendum spe remissionis. No euill must be reserued vnder the hope of forgiuenesse. God gaue a Law, but no dispensation for any breach of it: his Generall rules haue no excepti∣ons, vnlesse it please the Diuine Oracle to dispense vvith it. Thou shalt not worship an Idoll: no, not to saue my life? Not to saue life, as those three seruants of God pro∣fessed to Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 3. 18. If the God wee serue will not deliuer vs, yet we will not serue thy gods, nor worship thy gol∣den image. Thou sayest, Minimum est, it is little: but in minimis fidelem esse, magnum est: to be faithfull in a little, is no little vertue. Luk. 19. 17. Well done, good seruant: thou had beene faithfull in a little, therfore I will make thee ruler ouer much. Hee that is not carefull in a little, is not to bee trusted for more. If any man will corrupt his conscience for a pound, what would he doe for a thousand? If Iudas will sell his Master for thirty pence, about some 22. shillings of our money; what would he haue sold for the Treasury? God neuer gaue a Non obstante for sinne. The Pope indeed giues Buls and Indulgences, & Pardons for cursed works before their perpetration: but God neuer allowes leaue
to doe ill. The Pope sayes, Kill an hereticall King. God sayes, Touch him not: woe to that soule who takes the Popes word, before the Lords word. God charged a Prophet, that 1. King. 13. 9. he should eate no bread, nor drinke water in Bethel. Another Prophet came; saying, Vers. 8. An Angell spake to me (blessed Angels speake truth: nay more, hee spake) by the word of the Lord. Bring him backe, that hee may eate bread, and drinke water. He did so, but marke the euent: returning home, Vers. 24. a Lyon slew him by the way. Be∣leeue not a man, beleeue not a Pope, beleeue not a Pro∣phet, beleeue not an Angell against the word of the Lord. Let vs refuse iniquity in what extenuation of quanti∣tie, or colour of qualitie soeuer it be offerd vs. For sinne is like a bemired dog; if it fawnes on vs, it foules vs. And the least sinne is like a little leake in a shippe, which if it be not stopped, will sinke the whole vessell. The French∣men haue a military Prouerbe; The losse of a nayle, the losse of an Army. The want of a nayle looseth the shooe, the losse of a shooe troubles the horse, the horse indange∣reth the rider, the rider breaking his ranke molests the company, so farre as to hazard the whole Army. From slender and regardlesse beginnings, grow out these fatall and destructiue effects. The dores are shut, the theefe can∣not enter: a little boy is put in at the window, and he o∣pens the dore for the great thiefe; so the house is robbed. A charme is cast in at the window, eye, or eare; that quickly vnlocks the dore of the heart, till all the roomes be ransak't, not a peece of vertue, or one gemme of grace left. Pompey marching to the warres, requested to lodge his Army in a certaine Citie, by whose borders he must needs passe: the Gouernour answered that he would not trou∣ble his Citie with so numerous and dangerous a guest. Pompey then desired but entertainement and reliefe for his sicke souldiours, who were perishing for want of suc∣cour: the Gouernour thought, sicke men could do them
no mischiefe; this was granted, they admitted. Being there a while, they recouered their health, opened the gates to the rest, so became strong enough to take the Ci∣tie. If Satan cannot get leaue for his whole Army of lusts, yet he begs hard for his weake ones, as sinnes of infirmi∣tie: but those sickly souldiours soone get strength to sur∣prise the soule. The trees of the Forrest held a solemne Parliament, wherin they consulted of the innumerable wrongs which the Axe had done them: therefore made an Act, that no tree should hereafter lend the Axe a helme, on paine of being cut downe. The Axe trauels vp & downe the For∣rest, begs wood of the Cedar, Oke, Ash, Elme, euen to the Poplar; not one would lend him a chip. At last he de∣sired so much as would serue him to cut downe the bryers and bushes; alledging that those shrubs did suck away the iuyce of the ground, hinder the growth, and obscure the glory of the faire and goodly Trees. Hereon they were content to afford him so much; when he had gotten his helme, he cut downe themselues too. These be the subtle reaches of sinne; giue it but a little aduantage, on the faire promises to remooue thy troubles; and it will cut downe thy soule also. Therefore Obsta principijs: trust it not in the least. Consider a sinne (as indeed it is) a crucifying of Christ; wilt thou say, I may crucifie Christ a little? I may scourge his flesh, wound his side, pierce his heart a little? What man loues the Lord Iesus, who would either say it, or doe it? Consider thy falling into sinne, a hurling of thy selfe downe from some high pinacle: wilt thou say, I may breake my necke a little? Consider it a casting thy selfe in∣to vnquenchable fire; wilt thou say, I may burne my soule and body a little! As suffering wee thinke the least misery too great, so sinning let vs thinke the least iniqui∣tie too great. So auoiding also little sinnes, we shall finde great fauour with Iesus Christ. Amen.
FAITHS ENCOV∣RAGEMENT. LVKE 17. 19. And he said vnto him, Arise, goe thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. THESE words were spoken by our Sauiour Christ to the peni∣tent and faithfull Leper. For in∣duction I will obserue two re∣markeable circumstances, pre∣ceding my Text. First, that Christ did mend him, and then commend him: hee did purge him, and praise him. 1. Hee mended him, curing first his body, then his soule. His body of the Leprosie, a disease not more loth∣some to endure, then hard to cure. The difficulty of hea∣ling it, appeares by the answere of the King of Israel, vpon the receit of the King of Syria's letters: 2. King. 5. 7. Am I God, to kill and make aliue, that this man doth send vnto me, to recouer a man of his Leprosie? intimating that onely God is able to cure the Leprosie. His soule of the spiri∣tuall
Leprosie: and this was the perfection of health. For this cure the Prophet so earnestly prayes; Sana ani∣mam; Psal. 41. 4. Lord, be mercifull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue sinned against thee. This is a supernaturall cure, fit onely for the great Physician of soules to performe: the more difficult, Quo minus in natura sit, quod profit: because na∣ture hath no influence in her starres, no minerals in her earth, no herbes in her garden, that can heale it. 2 Hee commends him: of all the ten cleansed, verse 18. there are none found that returned to giue glory to God, saue this stranger. God had his Tythe there, whence he might least expect it. Now what doth Christ commend him for? For his thankefulnesse, for his humility, for his faith: why these graces were Christs owne; doth hee praise him for that himselfe had giuen him? Yes, this is Gods custome; Sua dona coronat; hee crownes his owne graces, hee rewards his owne gifts. Which teacheth how wee should vnderstand Reward in the Scripture. Mat. 20. 8. Call the labourers, and giue them their hire. Mat. 10. 42. Whosoeuer giues a cup of cold water to a Disciple, shall not lose his re∣ward. This hire and reward, is not the stipend of our la∣bours, but of Gods loue. He giues vs the good of grace, and then rewards it with the good of glory. It is a re∣ward Secundum quid, a gift simpliciter. Compare eternall life to the worke, looking no farther, it is a reward. Mat. 5. 12. Reioyce and be glad, for great is your reward in heauen. But examine the Originall from whence it proceedes, then it is the gift of God. Rom. 6. 23. Eternall life is the gift of God through Iesus Christ. He is said to Exod. 20. 6. Shew mercy to them that keep his Commandeents: the very keeping the Com∣mandements is not merit, it hath neede of mercy. Loe thus the Lord giues grace, then praiseth it, blesseth it, rewards it. Christ cloatheth his Spouse with his owne Psal. 45. 8. garments, the smell of Myrrhe, Alloes, and Cassia; A white robe of his perfect righteousnesse imputed; with his golden merits, and inestimable Iewels of graces; and
then praiseth her; Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all faire, my Loue: there is no spot in thee. When God made the world, with all crea∣tures in it, he beheld it, and Euge bonum; behold, it is ex∣ceeding good: so when hee makes a Christian (Maiorem, meliorem mundo) and hath furnished him with competent graces, hee turnes backe and lookes vpon his owne workemanship; Ecce bonum, it is exceeding good: hee forbeares not to commend it. Now what doth hee specially commend in this con∣uerted Leper? his praysing of God. The Leper pray∣seth God, God praiseth the Leper. He prayseth in his praysing two things; the Rightnesse, and the Rarenesse. 1. The Rightnesse, that he gaue praise to God; directed it thither where it was onely due. He returned to giue glory to God: non mihi sed Deo, saith Christ: not to me, but to God. Perhaps his knowledge was not yet so farre en∣lightned, as to know him that cured him, to be God: therefore bestowed his praise where hee was sure it should be accepted, where onely it is deserued; on God. I seeke not my owne praise, saith Iesus, but mittentis, the praise of him that sent me. Ioh. 8. 54. If I honour my selfe, my honour is nothing. 2. The Rarenesse, and that in two respects. 1. That hee alone of tenne, blessed God, God had but his Tenth: it is much if the tenth soule goe to heauen. The godly are so rare, that they are set vp Esay 8. 18. for markes, and signes and wonders; as if the world stood amazed at them. 2. That hee onely was the Stranger; a Sama∣ritan. Many great vertues were found among the Samari∣tans; Faith, Charity. Thankfulnesse: First, Faith; Iohn. 4. 39. Many of the Samaritans of that Citie beleeued on him. Secondly, Charity; It was the Samaritan that tooke compassion on the man wounded between Ierusalem and Iericho. The Priest and the Leuite passed by him without pitie, but the Samaritan Luke 10. 34. bound vp his wounds. Thirdly, Gratitude exemplified in this Samaritan Leper: none of the Iewes
gaue God praise for their healing, but only the Samari∣tan. It was strange that in Gentiles should be found such vertue, where it was least looked for. Mat. 8. 10. Verily I say vnto you, I haue not found so great faith, no not in Israel. The least informed did proue the best reformed. Samaritan was held a word of reproach amongst the Iewes; as ap∣peares by their malicious imputation to Christ. Ioh. 8. 48. Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a Diuell? They were esteemed as dogges: Mat. 15. 26. It is not meete to take the chil∣drens bread, and to cast it to dogs. And at the first promul∣gation of the Gospell, the Apostles receiued a mani∣fest prohibition; Mat. 10. 5. Goe not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not. It was there∣fore rare to reape such fruites out of the wild Forrest, cursed like the mountaines of Gilboa; 2. Sam. 1. 21. Let there be no dew, neither raine vpon you, nor fields of offerings. To be good in good company is little wonder: for Angels to be good in heauen, Adam in Paradise, Iudas in Christs Colledge, had been no admirable matter: to apostate in these pla∣ces so exemplary of goodnesse, was intolerable weake∣nesse. But for Abraham to be good in Chalde, Noah in the old world, Lot in Sodome: for a man now to be hum∣ble in Spaine, continent in France, chaste in Venice, so∣ber in Germany, temperate in England; this is the com∣mendation. Such a one is a Lilly in a Forrest of thornes, a handfull of wheate in a field of cockle. Let me not here omit two things, worthy my insertion, and your obseruation. 1. Gods iudgement and mans do not concurre: the Samaritans were condemned of the Iewes, yet here nine Iewes are condemned by one Samaritan. They that seeme best to the world, are often the worst to God: they that are best to God, seeme worst to the world. When the Moone is lightest to the earth, she is darkest to heauen: when she is lightest to heauen, she is darkest to the earth. So often men most glorious to the world,
are obscurest to the diuine approbation: others obscure to the worlds acknowledgement, are principally re∣spected in Gods fauor. Man would haue cleared the Pha∣rise, and condemned the Publican, when they both ap∣peared in the Temple together; the one as it were in the Quire, the other in the Belfrey. But Christs iudgemēt is, that the Publicane Luke 1. 14. departed rather iustified. The Iewes thought, that if but 2. men in the world were saued, the one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharise: But Christ saith, neither of them both shall come there. Luke 13. 28. You shall see others in the Kingdome of heauen, and you your selues thrust out. Some like the Moone are greater or lesse by the Sunne of mens estimation. Samuel was mistaken 1. Sam. 16. in Eliab, Abinadab and Shammah: for the Lord had chosen Dauid. Isaac preferred Esau, but God preferred Iacob: and made the father giue the blessing to that sonne, to whom he least meant it. All this iustifies that, Esay 55. 8. my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your wayes my wayes, aith the Lord. 2. Learne we here from Christ, to giue men their due praise to them that deserue praise. God akes of vi∣ces with commination, of vertues wit endation. Let vs speake of others sinnes with griefe, of their good workes with praise and ioy. Of others sinnes with griefe: so did S. Paul. Phil. 3. 18. Many walke, of whom I haue told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies of the crosse of Christ. So Dauid: Psal. 119. 136 Riuers of waters ru downe mine eyes, because men keepe not thy Law. Our Sauiour wept ouer apostate Ierusalem: he wept ouer the people, be∣holding them as scattered sheep without a shepheard. Who can forbeare weeping to see soules muffled & misse-led by ignorance: like the babes of Niniuch, not able to dis∣tinguish the right hand from the left? Alas, there are innu∣merable soules, that know not their owne estate; O pi∣tie them. Because thou wilt not heare this, my soule shall weepe in secret for thy pride.
But let vs mention others vertues and good actions with praise. It is the argument of a sullen and proud disposition, not to commend them that do well. Yet there is no ointment so sweet, but there will bee some Eccl. 10. 1. dead flies to corrupt it. There bee certaine dogs that will barke at the Moone: Critickes, that spend the lar∣ger part of their time seeking knots in a bulrush. The Snow is not so white, but there is an Anaxagoras to make it blacke. It was Gods commendation of Iob, that, Iob 1. 8. there was none like him in the earth: he had no fellow, yet the deuill pickes quarrels, and inuenteth slanders against him. Traducers of their brethren, I call not Da∣mones, but Damonis agunt: I do not say they are deuils, but they do the worke of deuils. This mischiefe of deprauing, hath also infected the Church: Many a Preacher thinkes his owne glory e∣clipsed, if the next Orbe be lightned with a brighter Starre. Hence they fall to faulting and inueighing; as if there were no way to build vp their owne credites, but by the ruins of anothers disgrace. God doth other∣wise; Luk. 16. 8. The Lord commended the vniust Steward, because he had done wisely. Though he had many faults, yet Christ praiseth him for what was worthy praise: his po∣licy. S. Paul found grosse errours in the Corinthians; 1. Cor. 11. 17. In this I praise you not, that you come together, not for the bet∣ter, but for the worse. But wherein they did well, he com∣mends them, ver. 2. I praise you brethren, that you remem∣ber me in all things. Thus Ezekiel commends Daniel, a Prophet of his owne time, and thought it not any dero∣gation from himselfe. Ezek. 28. 3. Behold, Art thou wiser then Da∣niel? As Salomon saith of beggers: A poore man oppres∣sing Prou. 28. 3. the poore, is like a sweeping raine which leaueth no food behind it. So a Minister disparaging a Minister, is a breach, whereby the deuill comes out; and many soules go into hell. Now to the words: Arise, go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole.
The verse may be distinguished into a Pasport, and a Certificate. Arise, go thy way, there is the Pasport: Thy faith hath made thee whole, there is the Certificate. Hee giues him first a Dismission, leaue to depart: then a Te∣stimonie, or Assurance, both to certifie the Church ac∣tually, that he was cleansed of his leprosie; but especi∣ally to certifie his owne conscience that he was conuer∣ted, and that the faith of his soule brought health to his body. In the Pasport, or Dismission, there are two words considerable: Surge and Vade; Arise, Goe: Surge ad incipiendum, vade ad perficiendum. First, let vs speake of them secundum sonum, then secundum sensum. First, according to the Historie, then according to Mysterie. Allegories are tolerable when they be profitable: Nor can it be much from the Text, by occasion of those two words spoken to the eares of the Lepers body, to in∣struct your soules how to Arise from the Seate of Cu∣stome, the couch of sinne: and to Goe on in the way of saluation. Arise. The Leper casts himselfe downe, and Christ bids him arise. Humility is the Gentleman Vsher to Glory. God (that sends away the rich empty from his gates) loues to Luke 1. 53. fill the hungry with good things. The ayre pas∣seth by the full vessell, and onely filleth that is emptie. This is the difference betweene the poore and beggers: both agree in not hauing, differ in crauing. The proud are Pauperes Spiritus, the humble are, pauperes spiritu: Math. 5. 3. Blessed are (not the poore spirits, but) the poore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of heauen. Such as felt their wants, sought, and besought God for supply. Luk. 3. 5. Euery Valley shall be filled, and euery Mountaine be brought low. The lowly minde shall be exalted, the high-towring ambitious shall be throwne downe. How should God say to the Marchant that glories in his wealth, to the Vsurer that admireth his moneyes, to the Gallant, that
wonders that his good cloathes do not preferre him: Arise! alas, they are vp already, they were neuer down. A dwarfe in a great throng seeming low on his knees, was bidden by the Prince to stand vp: alas, he was be∣fore at his highest. God cannot be so mistaken, as to encourage their standing vp, who neuer yet had the manners to cast themselues downe. Descendite vt ascen∣datis ad Deum: cecidistis enim ascendendo contra eu. Aug. Descend, that yee may rise vp to God: for you haue fallen by rising vp against God. He that is a Mounte∣banke, must leuell himselfe euen with the ground: if humblenesse hath once throwne him downe, and brought him on his knees, he shall heare the Patron and patterne of humblenesse, comforting him with a Surge; Arise. The guest that sets himselfe downe at the lower end of the Table, shall heare the Feast-maker kindly re∣moue him; Luke 14. 10. Friend, sit vp higher. If Hester fall at A∣suerus feete, hee will take her by the hand, and bid her arise. When Luk. 5. 8, 10. Peter fell downe at Iesus knees, saying, De∣part from me, I am a sinfull man, O Lord: He present∣ly was raised vp with; Feare not, from henceforth thou shalt catch men. Zacheus is gotten vp on high to see Ie∣sus; see him hee may with his eye of flesh: but he must descend, that hee may see him with his eye of faith. Luk. 19. 5. Come downe, Zacheus; this day is saluation come to thy house: Descend to the ground, that thou maist be rai∣sed aboue the clouds. Pride euen in good things, Non ditio, sed perditio; is no argument of possession, but de∣struction. The haughtie-minded lookes alwaies be∣yond the marke, and offers to shoote further then hee lookes; but euer falls two bowes short, humility and discretion: who is heard to say with Paul, 1. Tim. 1. 15. Quorum ego sum primus; I am the chiefe of sinners: such an hum∣ble confession scarce heard of: But Christ had giuen him a Surge, on his former humbling: Arise, and beare
my name before Gentiles and Kings, &c. Let vs all thus cast our selues downe in humility, that the Lord may say to vs in mercy, Arise. Ge. This was the word of Dismission, wherewith Christ sends him away. Though he were healed, therein had his hearts desire; what could he expect more of Christ? why is he not gone? No, he has not yet his Vade, hee will not go till he is bidden. Hee found such sweet∣nesse in the Lord Iesus, that could you blame him though he were loth to depart? From another mans house, we say, after some small tarrying, Let vs saue our credites, and go before we are bidden: but from the Lord let vs not depart without a dismission. The hearts of the people were so set on Christ, that hee was faine to send them often away, Mat. 14. 22. Hee sent the mul∣titudes Mark. 6. 45. away, Math. 15. 39. Hee sent the people away. As Simeon, that Swanne, which sung his owne funerall: Nunc dimittis; Lord, now thou lettest thy seruant depart in peace. This makes to the shame of their faces, that without other cause then of wearinesse, waywardnesse, or wan∣tonnesse, will not tarry for their Discedite, but depart the Church without the blessing: they will not stay till Christ bids them Goe. They venture therein wret∣chedly and dangerously, if they could so conceiue it, to depart without the Peace of God. It is an vsuall com∣plaint of man in distresse; Quare direliquisti me, Domine? Why hast thou forsaken me, O Lord? God iustly an∣sweres, Quare direliquisti me, Home? Why didst thou forsake me first, O man? Would you needs depart when you should not? you therefore shall depart when you would not. Discedite, Math. 7. 23. Depart, indeed a wofull re∣iection. Math. 25. 41. Depart from me, yee cursed: why cursed? good reason, you would not tarry for a blessing. Thus is God euen with the wicked, Recedistis à me, recedam à vobis:
You left me, I therefore leaue you. Will you go with∣out bidding? Abite, get you gone. He that will goe in∣to captiuity, let him go. Deus prior in amore, posterior in odio. God loued vs before we loued him, hee doth not actu∣ally hate vs, till we first hate him. Nunquam deserit, ni∣si cum deseritur: Hee forsakes not vs, till wee forsake him: no man can take Christ from thy soule, vnlesse thou take thy soule from Christ. God complaines of the Iewes, that they had left him: Ier. 2. 13. My people haue for∣saken mee. Forsake thee, O Lord, liuing Father of mer∣cies, and God of all comfort? Ier. 18. 14. Will a man forsake the snow of Lebanon, and the old flowing waters that come from the Rockes? If any will do so, then heare the curse: Ier. 17. 13. O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall bee ashamed, and they that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because they haue forsaken the Lord, the fountaine of liuing waters. But let them that cleaue to the Lord, heare the blessing, Heb. 13. 5. I will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee. Let vs hang on the mouth of God for decision of all our doubts, direction of all our waies: like the Cen∣turions seruants, Math. 8. 9. Going when he bids vs, comming when he cals vs, doing what he commands vs. At his Word let vs arise and goe on earth; at his Call wee shall arise and goe to heauen. Hee that obeyes the surge in grace, shall haue the surge in Glory: Hee that goes in the wayes of Holinesse, shall go into the courts of Happi∣nesse. Hee Psal. 126. 6. that goeth forth weeping, bearing with him precious seed, shall come againe reioycing, and bring his sheaues with him. Math. 25. They that haue done well, shall goe into euerlasting life. Thus much of these two words, as they belonged to that person, the Leper: Now let vs vsefully apply them to our selues. First, let vs obserue from this Arise, 1. It is Christ that giues the Surge which reuiueth vs: we can neuer stirre from the seate of impietie, till
hee bids vs Arise. Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father draw him. The Spirit of Christ must draw vs out of the black and mirie pit of iniquity; as Ier. 38. 13. Ebed∣melech drew Ieremy out of the dungeon: We cannot arise of our selues; Nature hath no foote, that can make one true step toward heauen: Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: not fleshly in the concrete, but flesh in the abstract. We cannot speake, vnlesse he open our lips. God sayes to the Prophet, Esay 40. 6. Cry. What shall I cry? the Spirit must giue the word; All flesh is grasse, &c. Wee cannot stand, vnlesse hee giues vs feet: Ezek. 2. 1. Sonne of man, stand vpon thy feete: alas, he cannot, but ver. 2. The Spi∣rit entred into me, and set me vpon my feete. We cannot see except hee giues vs eyes. Intelligite, insipientes, Bee wise, O yee fooles: Alas, they cannot: but Da mihi in∣tellectum, do thou, O Lord, giue them wisedome. Rom. 12. 2. Bee yee not conformed to this world, but transformed by the re∣newing of your minde, that you may proue, &c. There are first two verbes Passiue, then an Actiue: to shew that we are double so much Patients, as we are Agents. Be∣ing moued, we moue. Acta fit actiua voluntas: when God hath enclined our will to good, that will can then incline vs to performe goodnesse. If we cannot speake without lips from him, nor walke without affections from him, nor see, except hee giue vs eyes; then neither can we arise except he takes vs by the hand: as Peter tooke the Act. 3. 7. Creeple, and lift him vp, and immediately his feete and ancle bones receiued strength. If the spirit of our Lord Iesus giue vs a Surge, our lame soules shall grow strong and liuely in the nerues of graces, we shall Arise and walke; leaping, and singing, and praising God. 2 We must arise, for wee are naturally downe. By nature a man 1. Ioh. 5. 19. lyeth in wickednesse: Rom. 6. 4. by grace he riseth to newnesse of life. Nature and Religion are two oppo∣sites: I meane by nature, corrupted nature; and by
Religion, true Religion: for otherwise, the accepting of some Religion, is ingraffed to euery Nature. It is Na∣ture, to Eph. 2. 1. bee dead in sinnes: it is Religion, to be Rom. 6. 2. dead to sinne. It is Nature, to be Tit. 1. 16. Reprobate to euery good worke: Religion, to be Tit. 3. 1. ready to euery good worke. It is nature, to be a Louer of ones selfe, 2. Tim. 3. 2. Religi∣on, to deny ones selfe, Luk. 9. 23. It is nature for a man to Phil. 2. 21. seeke onely his owne profite: Religion, to Gal. 5. 13. Serue others by loue. Nature esteemes 1. Cor. 1. 21. Preaching, folly: Religion, the power of God to saluation. There are two lights in man as in heauen, Reason and Faith: Reason, like Sara, is still asking; How can this bee? Faith, like Abraham, not disputes, but beleeues. There is no validity in Morall vertues: Ciuill mens good workes are a meere carkase, without the soule of Faith. They are like that Romane, that hauing fortunately slaine his three enemies, the Curiatij: comming home in triumph, and beholding all the people welcome him with acclamations, onely his sister weepe, because hee had slaine her loue: hee embittered his victories with the murder of his owne sister. Carnall men may doe glorious deeds, flourish with braue atchieuements: but they marre all, by killing their owne sister, the deare soule. Thus we are downe by Nature, Grace can one∣ly helpe vs vp, and make vs arise. If you aske how Na∣ture hath deiected vs: how we came originally thus de∣praued: I answer, We know not so well how we came by it, as we are sure we haue it. Nihil ad prdicandum notius, nihil ad intelligendum secretius: Nothing is more Aug. certainely true to be preached, nothing more secretly hard to be vnderstood. Therefore, as in case of a Town on fire, let vs not busily enquire how it came, but care∣fully endeuour to put it out. A Traueller passing by, and seeing a man fallen into a deep pit, began to won∣der how he sell in: to whom the other replyed; Tu co∣gita quomodo hinc me liberes, non quomodo huc ceciderim
quaeras: Do thou, good friend, rather study how to helpe me out, then stand questioning how I came in. Pray to Christ for this Surge: Libera nos Domine, wee are naturally downe, do thou, O Lord, graciously raise vs vp. 3. Wee must Arise before we can Goe. First arise, then goe thy way, saith Christ. Hee that is downe, may creep like a serpent, cannot go like a man. Thou art to sight with cruell enemies; Not flesh and bloud, but Eph. 6. 12. Principalities and Powers, wicked spirits in high places: Thou wilt performe it poorely whiles thou art along on the ground: The flesh will insult ouer thee with vn∣denyed lusts. Quicquid suggeritur, caeteris aggeritur: there is not a sinfull motion suggested, but it is instantly em∣braced, and added to that miserable dunghill of ini∣quity. And is not this wretched, to haue Chams curse vpon thee, to be a slaue to slaues? The world will hold thy head vnder his girdle, whiles he tramples on thy heart: thou shalt eate no other food then he giues thee; he will feed thee with bribes, vsuries, iniuries, periuries, blasphemies, homicides, turpitudes: none of these must be refused. The deuill will tyrannize ouer thee: thou canst hardly grapple with that great Red Dragon, when thou art mounted like Saint George on the backe of faith; Alas, how shouldst thou resist him, being downe vnder his feet? Arise therefore, and Eph. 6. 13. take the whole armour of God, that you may both Stand, and With∣stand. Arise, lest God comming, and finding thee downe, strike thee lower. From him that hath not, shall bee taken away that he seemed to haue. Pauper vbique tacet, is a Pro∣uerbe more plentifully true in a mysticall, then tempo∣rall pouerty. We say, Qui iacet in terris, non habet vnde cadat: hee that lies on the ground, hath no lower a descent to fall to: yes, there is a lower place. Iudas found a lower fall then the earth, when hee departed
In locum suum, Act. 1. 25. into his owne place. Such was that great Monarchs fall, Esay 14. 12. How art thou fallen from heauen, O Lucifer? how art thou cut downe to the ground? This was a great descent, from heauen to earth. But, ver. 15. Thou shalt be brought downe to hell, to the sides of the pit: This was a greater descent, from heauen to hell. Wee esteeme it a great fall (ceremonially) from a Throne to a Prison: and the deuill meant it a great fall (locally) from the Pinacle to the ground: But there is Abyssus inferna, a lower precipice. Dauid beginnes a Psalme of prayer, De profundis; Psal. 130. Out of the depths haue I cryed vn∣to thee, O Lord. But there is a depth of depths; and out of that deepe there is no rising. Arise now, lest you fall into that deepe then. Arise, for if thou wilt not, thou shalt be raised. Si non surrexeris volenter, suscitaberis violenter. If thou re∣fuse to rise willingly, thou shalt be rowsed against thy will. If thou wilt not heare the first Surge, which is the Ministers voice; thou shalt heare the last Surge, which is the Arch-angels voyce. Dicis, Surgam, thou saist, I will rise; but when! Modo Domine, modò: Anon Lord, all in time. Will not this be a silly excuse at the day of Iudgement, I will rise anon? Thou must rise 1. Cor. 15. 52. in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpe. Though thou cry to the Reu. 6. 16. Mountaines, Fall on me, and to the Rockes, Hide me: yet Nulla euasio, thou must arise and appeare. There are two voices that sound out this Surge: one Euangelicall, and that is of mercy; yet we drowne this, as Italians do thunder; by Drums, Bels, Cannons. The other Angelicall, and that is of Iustice, a voice vnpossible to be auoided. This is that last Ser∣mon, that all the world shall heare: Arise ye dead, and come to iudgement. Arise; let vs now raise vp our selues from corruption of soule, that we may one day be raised from corrupti∣on of body; They that will not rise, their soules must,
must, and carry their bodies to iudgement. This vvorld was made for man, not man for this world: therfore they take a wrong course that lye downe there. He that lyes downe when he should arise and goe, shall rise and goe, when he would lie downe. He that sleepes in the cradle of securitie all his life, sinnes soundly without starting: when he once starts and wakes, he must neuer sleepe a∣gaine. The deuill and mischiefe are euer watching: and shal man, whom they watch to hurt, sleepe? Hee that would deceiue the deuill, had need to rise betimes. The Lyon is said to sleepe with one eye open, the Hare vvith both: the worldling with both eyes of his soule shut. He neuer riseth till he goes to bed: his soule wakens not, till his body falls asleepe on his death-bed: then perhaps he lookes vp. As sometimes they that haue been blind many yeeres, at the approching of death haue seene: (whereof Physicians giue many reasons) so the death-bed opens the eyes of the soule. Indeed at that time there is possibilitie of waking, but hazard of rising. That poore winter-fruit wil hardly rellish with God. Miserum incipete viuere, cum definendum est. It is wretched for a man then to begin his life, when hee must end it. It is at the best but morosa et morbosa panitentia; a wearish and sick repentance: wheras God requires a Rom. 12. 1. quicke and liuely sacrifice; this is as sick as the person that makes it. This indeed is not a Conuersi∣on, but a Reuersion, or meere refuse. To raise the secure from their vnseasonable, vnreasona∣ble sleepe, God doth ring them a peale of fiue Bells. 1. The first Bell is Conscience: this is the trebble, and doth somewhat trouble: especially if the hand of GOD pulls it. Many thinke of their consciences, as ill Debtors doe of their Creditors; they are loth to talke with them. Indeed God is the Creditor, and Conscience the Seriant, that will meet them at euery turne. It makes a syllogisti∣call conclusion in the mind: Reason, like Dauid, drawes the sword, and Conscience, like Nathan, knocks him on
the brest with the hilts. Dauid made the Proposition, The man that hath done this, shall dnee the death: Nathan the As∣sumption, 2. Sam. 12. Thou art the man: Conscience the Conclusion, Therefore thou must die. If you heare not, yea feele not the sound of this bell, suspect your deadnesse of heart: for that Citie is in danger, where the Alarme-bell rings not. 2. The second Bell is the Stint, or certaine to all the rest; Uox Euangelij, the voice of the Gospell. This Bell of Aaron is so perpetually rung amongst vs, that as a knell in a great mortalitie, (quia frequens, non terrens) so cōmon that no man regards it. Indeed, if some particular clapper ring melodiously to the eare, we come to please that ra∣ther then the soule. Luxurient wits thinke the Scripture∣phrase grosse: nothing delights them but a painted and meretricious eloquence. There are some that vvill not heare this Bell at all: like Ieroboam, they will not trauell to Ierusalem for a Sermon, but content themselues with a Calfe at home. Others looke that the Preachers tongue should incessantly walke, but let their own hearts lie still. Thus often our Lecturer shall preach, we will giue the hearing when we list. Thus many Ministers come to a Parish with their bones full of marrow, veynes full of bloud: but all is soone spent, and the people neuer the better. We ring, but you doe not rise. 3. The third Bell is the Meane; and this is Suspiria gemitusque morientium; the cryes & grones of the dying. Anothers Passing-bell is thy warning-bell. Death snatch∣eth here and there about vs, thousands on our left, tenne thousands on our right: yet as if we had a Supersedeas, or Protection against it, we neither relent nor repent. Our securitie is argued of the more madnesse, because we haue so common motions and monitions of death. Yet None∣rimus memores esse necesse mori. How horrible is it to be drunke in a charnell house? As Christ spake, Let the dead bury the dead: So we bring to the Church dead bodies with deader soules.
Forma, fauor populi, feruor inuenilis, opesque, Surripuere tibi noscere quid sit homo. We confesse our selues mortall, yet we liue as if death had no quarrell against vs. This Bell is the Meane, but it is too meane to wake vs. 4. The fourth Bell is the Counter-tenor: vox paupe∣rum, the cry of the poore. This bell rings loud, either to vs for mercy, or against vs for crueltie. Let vs know, that if it cannot waken vs, it shal waken God aganst vs. Iam. 5. 4. Their cryes are entred into the eares of the Lord of Sabbaoth. Set not thy soule in danger of the peoples curse: by inhaun∣cings, ingrossings, oppressions, &c. But thou sayest they are wicked men that will curse, and God will not heare the wishes of the wicked. I answere, it is often seene that the curse of the vndone waster, lights vpon the head of the vndooing Vsurer. The imprecation of one euill man may fall vpon another: God so suffers it, not because he cursed thee, but because thou hast deserued this curse. Let this Bell make Oppressors arise to shew mercy, that God may rise to shewe them mercy. Otherwise the poore man is ready to pray, Psal. 7. 6. Arise, O Lord, in thine anger; lift vp thy selfe, because of the rage of our enemies: awake for vs to the iudgement thou hast commanded. Yea, though they pray not for it, God will doe it. Psal. 12. 5. For the oppression of the poore, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord. I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at it. If this Bel sound mournfully to thee for bread to the hun∣gry, arise to this sound, as that neighbor rose at midnight Luke 11. 8. to relieue his importunate friend. If it cannot waken thy couetous soule to shew mercy to Christ tempore suo, in his time of need; nor will Christ arise to shew mercy to thee tempore tuo, in thy time of need. 5. The last Bell is the Tenor, the Bow-bell; able to waken all the Citie. But though that materiall Bell can teach vs when it is time to goe to bedde, yet this mysticall bell cannot teach vs the time to arise. This is the abuse of
the creatures: Iam. 5. 3. Haba. 2. The rust of the gold cryes against the hoor∣der: the stone out of the wall against the Oppressor: the corne and wine against the Epicure. This is a roring and a groning Bell. Rom. 8. 22. The whole creature grones, and trauells in paine vnder vs. This is the creatures ordinary Sermon: Accipe, redde, caue; vse vs without abusing; return thank∣fulnesse without dissembling; or looke for vengeance without sparing. They seeme to cry vnto vs: We desire not to be spared, but not to be abused: Necessitati subser∣uire non recusamus, sed luxui: we would satisfie your na∣turall necessity, not intemperate riot. We are the nocent creatures, that cause their innocencie to become misera∣ble. And but that the Diuine prouidence restraines them, it is maruell that they break not their league with vs; and with their hornes, and hoofes, and other artillery of na∣ture make warre vpon vs, as their vnrighteous and tyran∣nicall Lords. Let some of these Bells waken vs: lest as God once pro∣tested against Israel, that seeing they would not when it was offered, therefore they should neuer enter into his rest: Hebr. 3. so a renuntiation come out against vs; If any will be filthy, let them be filthy still: if they will not arise, they shal lie still Reuc. 22. for euer. If this peale cannot effect it, yet God hath foure things more to rouze vs. 1. A Goad, that pricks the skin, and smarts the flesh; Affliction: he hath Crosses and Curses; those gall, these deepely wound: they are able to make any but a Pharaoh arise. It was affliction that waken'd Dauid: It is good for me that I was troubled. The Leprosie brought Naaman to the Prophet; the Prophet brought him to God. It is strange, if bloudy sides put not sense into vs. Yet such was the obduracy of Israel; Iere. 5. 3. Thou hast stricken them, but they haue not sorrowed: thou hast consumed them, yet they refused to returne. Insensible hearts! Esay 9. 13. The people tur∣neth not to him that smiteth them: neyther doe they seeke the Lord of Hosts. Hast thou beene wounded, and wilt thou
not be wakened? beware lest God speake to thy soule, as in another sense Christ did to Peter; Mark. 14. 41. Sleepe on now, and take thy rest. 2. Hee hath to rouze vs Thunder of heauier Iudge∣ments: perhaps the light scratches which some aduerse thornes make, are slightly reckoned; scarce change coun∣tenance for them. But he sleepes soundly, whom thun∣der cannot wake. Humanas motura tonitrua mentes. When God thundred that menace in the cares of Niniueh, it wa∣ked them. Let Absolon fire Ioabs barley fields, and he shal make him rise. Shake the foundations of the Prison, and 2. Sam. 14. Acts 16. the sterne layler will rise a conuerted Christian; Sirs, what shall I doe to be saued? This thundring of iudgements should cleanse our ayre, awaken our sleepy mindes, purge our vncleane hearts. Amos 3. 8. If the Lyon roare, who will not feare? If the Lord thunder, what man will not be afraid? 3. He hath an Ordnance to shoot off, Death. Statutum est omnibus mori. It is a Statute-Law of heauen, an Ordi∣nance from the Court of Iustice, Euery man shall die. When this Canon is discharged at thy paper-walls, then let thy soule rise, or neuer. The shooting off this Ordi∣nance made Belshazzar stagger before hee was drunke. Dan. 5. 6. His knees smote one against another, when that fatall hand wrote his destiny on the wall. Indeed most doe slumber on the Couch of health, they are quiet, no sicknesse stirs them: they are at a couenant with the graue: Sed cito fini∣tam datur istam cernere vitam. Praeceps mortis iter: Death makes a headlong progresse. This Ordinance carries death in the mouth: it is an euen hand that shootes; one that will neuer misse the marke: let this rouze vs. 4. God hath a Trumpet to sound. 1. Thes. 4. 16. The Lord shall descend from heauen with a shout, with the voyce of the Arch∣angell, and with the Trumpe of God. Altisona, grandisona Tuba: the lowdest Instrument of warre; euery eare shall heare it. As it was in the dayes of Noah, and Lot; Luk. 17. 30. So shall it be in the day when the Sonne of man is reuealed. From ea∣ting
and drinking, building and planting, buying and sel∣ling, marrying and dancing, shall this Trumpe call them. It shall fetch the Drunkard from his Ale-bench, the Har∣lot from her luxurious bed, the Epicure from his riotous table, the Vsurer from his Charnell house of mens bones, and beasts skins, his study: now Surgendum est vndeque; there must be an vniuersall rising. Well, let vs waken be∣fore this last Trumpets last summons, lest then wee rise onely to iudgement, and bee iudged to lie downe againe in torments. God long expects our rising; Quantò diu∣tius nos expectat vt emendemus, tantò districtius iudicabit si Bern. neglexerimus. With how much patience he waits for our neglected conuersion; with so much vengeance hee will punish our continued rebellion. The Lord of his mercy, giue vs the first resurrection to Grace, that we may enioy the Rising to Glory. Arise, and Goe. Being got vp, it is not fit we should stand still, we must be going. The maine worke was to raise vs; now we are vp, I hope an easie matter will set vs a going. And to helpe forward our iourney, let our meditations take along with them these three furtherances; the Necessity, the Conue∣niency, the End. The Necessity, we must goe: the Con∣ueniency, how we must goe: the End, whither we must goe. 1. The Necessity, all that haue hope of heauen, must be going. The seruants of God vnder the Law, Exod. 12. 11. the sonnes of God vnder the Gospell, Ephes. 6. 15. are commanded to haue their Feet shod: to vvitnesse their preparation of Going. God doth not onely charge Eliah with a Surge, 1. King. 19. 5. Arise; but also with a Vade, ver. 7. Goe. The sitting bird is easily shot; so long as shee is flying in the ayre, the murdering piece is not leuelled at her. There were two principall occasions of Dauids sinne, Otium & Oculus: Idlenesse and his Eye. The one giues Satan o∣portunity, the other conueniency to iniect his temptati∣on.
Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus. Dauid, hast thou nothing to doe? Come, walke with mee on thy Palace roofe, I will shew thee beauty; a snare able to take a Saint. It is necessary therefore to be going; for so we are not so fair a mark for Satan. Adam, so long as he was at his work in the Garden, vvas safe enough: when he became lazie, and fell a dallying with Eue, Satan shot him. It vvas Ie∣romes counsell to Rusticus; Be euer doing, vt quando dia∣bolus veniat, inueniat occupatum: that when the Deuill comes with his businesse, he may find thee at thine owne businesse. So thou shalt answere him knocking at thy dore; I am busie; I haue no time to talke, with you, Sa∣tan. Do you think the Deuill could be so sure to meet his friends at the Theater, Tauerne, Brothell-house; but that mistresse Idlenesse sends them thither? Yea by this he takes a worldling by the hand at Church: well mette; you are so full of businesse all the weeke, that you breake your sleepes, cannot take your rest: come, heere be two Sermons on the Sunday, sleepe out them. The Sabbath seemes tedious to some, they haue nothing to doe? No∣thing? Alas, they know not a Sabbaths dayes worke. To pray, to heare, to reade, to meditate, to conferre, to visit, to pray againe: is all this nothing? Because they labour not in their worldly calling, they thinke there needes no labour about their Christian calling: the working out their saluation they holde no paines; indeede they take no paines about it. If they did performe these duties, they should find the right spending the Sabbath, not Nullum laborem, sed alium: not no labour, but a∣nother kinde of labour then euer they conceiued. And this not Opus taedij, sed gaudij. Thinke on that sweete vi∣cissitude of workes and comforts; And Breue videbitur tempus tantis variet atibus occupatum: that time must needs seem short, that is spent in such variety of delights. It was the principall of those three faults, whereof Cato profes∣sed himselfe to haue so seriously repented. One was, pas∣sing
by water, when he might goe by land: another was, trusting a secret to a woman: but the maine one was, spen∣ding an houre vnprofitably. How many houres, not on∣ly on common dayes, but euen vpon the holy Sabbath, that concernes the businesse of our soules, haue vvee vnprofitably lauished, and yet neuer heartilie repented them? 2. The Conueniencie; if we Goe, we must haue feete. All our Preaching is to beate the bush, put you from your couerts, and set you a going: but now Quitus pedi∣bus? on vvhat feet must you goe? The Foot is the Affec∣tion or Appetite, saith S. Augustine. Eô feror, quocun{que} feror: that carries me, vvhither soeuer I goe. The foote moues the body, the affection moues the soule. The re∣generate soule hath three principall faculties, as the natu∣rall body hath three semblable members: the eye, hand, and foote. In the soule the Eye is Knowledge, the Hand is Faith, the Foote is Obedience. The soule without know∣ledge is like Bartimeus, blind: without faith, like the man with a vvithered hand: vvithout obedience, like Me∣phibosheth, lame. True Christians are not Monopodes, one-footed: the Apostle speaks in the plural number, of their feet. Ephes. 6. 15. Stand, hauing your Feete shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Hee meant not corporall feet: the soule must therefore haue spirituall feete, like the bodies, for Number, Nature. For Number, the body hath two feet, so hath the Soule: Affection and Action, desiring and doing. The former, that puts forward the soule, is a hopefull affecti∣on. One said, Hope is a foote; Pes Spes: but hope is ra∣ther a nerue that strengthens the motion of this foot, then the foot it selfe. The latter is Action, or operatiue obedi∣ence; that rightly walkes in the blessed way of holinesse. Psal. 40. 8. I desire to doe thy will, O my God; there's the foot of affe∣ction.
Psal. 119. 32. I will runne the way of thy Commandements; ther's the foot of action. Vers. 40. I haue longed after thy precepts; there is the foote of desiring: Vers. 59. I turned my feet vnto thy testimo∣nies; there's the foot of obeying. For nature, they are fitly compared to feet, and that Ratione Situs for Placing Transitus Passing. For Site or placing, the feete are the lower parts of the body, so are affections of the soule. The head is the directer, the foote the carrier: the feet helpe the head, the head guides the feete. The vnderstanding and affection, are like the blinde man and the lame: the lame hath eyes but no feet; the blinde hath feete but no eyes. But whiles the blinde carries the lame, and the lame directs the blind, both may come to their iourneyes end. The vnderstan∣ding sees well, but of it selfe cannot goe; the Affection is able to goe, but of it selfe cannot see: let the one direct well, the other walke after that direction, and they vvill bring the soule to heauen. For Transition or Passing, as the feete corporally, so these spiritually, mooue and conduct the man from place to place. Indeed none can come to the Iohn 6. 44. Sonne, vnlesse the Father draw him: but when he hath giuen vs feet, he looks we should goe. Hee that hath eares to heare, let him heare: he that hath hands, let him worke: hee that hath feet, let him goe. Hence is that exhortation; Iam. 4. 8. Draw neer to God, & he will draw neer to you. In this foot-manship there is Ter∣minus à quo recedimus, Terminus ad quem accedimus, motus per quem procedimus: From the waies of darknes, from the wages of darknes: to the fruition of light, to the counersa∣tion in light. From darknes exterior, interiour, inferiour. Outward; this land is full of darknes, fraught operibus tene∣brarum, with the works of darknesse. Inward, Eph. 4. 18. Hauing the vnderstanding darkned, being alienated frō the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, & because of the blind∣nes of their heart. Outer darkenesse, that which Christ cals
Mat. 22. 13. : or lower darkenesse. Iude vers. 6. Hee hath reserued the Lost angels in euer lasting chaines vnder darke∣nesse. Vnto light externall, internall, eternall. Outward Light; Psal. 119. 105. Thy word is a lampe vnto my feet, and a light vnto my path. Inward light; Psal. 51. 6. In the hidden parts thou shalt make mee to know wisedom. Euerlasting Light, Dan. 12. 3. They shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and as the starres for euer and euer. Blessed feet that carry vs to Iohn 1. 8. That light which lightneth euery man that commeth into the world: and to the beames of that Sunne, which Luk. 1. 79. giues light to them that sit in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death: happy feet, they shall bee guided into the way of peace. Looke to thy foote wheresoeuer thou treadest: beware the gardens of temporall pleasures: Est aliquid quod in ipsis flori angat. It is worse going on fertile ground, then on ba: the smooth wayes of prosperity are slippery, in rough fflic∣tions we may take sure footing. Let your feet bee od, saith Paul; your affections restrained: barre lust of her vaine obiects, turne her from earth to heauen. Set her a trauelling, not after riches, but graces. Keepe the foot of desire still going, but put it in the right way, direct it to euerlasting blessednes. And this is 3. The End, whither we must goe, to perfection. Thou hast done well, yet goe on still. Nihil praesumitur actum, dum superest aliquid ad agendū: nothing is said to be done, whiles any part remaines to doe. No man can goe too far in goodnesse. Nimis iustus, et nimis sapiens potes esse, non nimis bonus. Thou maiest be too iust, thou maist be too wise, but thou canst neuer be too good. Summae religio∣nis est, imitari quem colis. It is a true height of religion, to be a follower of that God, of whom thou art a worship∣per. Come so nigh to God as possibly thou canst, in imi∣tation, not of his power, wisedome, maiestie, but of his mercie. 1. Pet. 1. 16. Be holy, as the Lord is holy. Luk. 6. 36. Be merciful, as your heauenly Father is mercifull. The going on forward to this perfection, shall not displease him, but crowne thee. Giue
not ouer this going, vntill with Saint Paul thou haue quite 2. Tim. 4. 7. finished thy course. Aime at perfection, shoot at this marke, though thou cannot reach it. When the wrastling Angel said to Ia∣cob, Gen. 32. 26. Let me goe, for the day breaketh; he answered, I will not let thee goe except thou blesse me: happy perseuerance! Cant. 3. 4. When I caught him whom my soule loued, I held him, and would not let him goe. O sweet Iesus, who would let thee goe? Qui tenes tenentem, apprehendentem fortificus, fortifi∣catum Bern. confirmas, confirmatum perficis, perfectum coronas. Thou that holdest him that holdeth thee, that strengthe∣nest him that trusteth thee, confirmest whom thou hast strengthened, perfectest whom thou hast confirmed, and crownest whom thou hast perfected. In the behalfe of this continuance, the Holy Ghost giues those exhortati∣ons; Hold fast, Stand fast. Reu. 3. 11. Hold that thou hast, that no man take thy crowne. The same to the Church of Thyati∣ra; Tene quod habes, Reu. 2. 25. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made vs free. It is an ill hearing, Vers. 7. Ye (not doe, but) did runne well. The Prophet in his threnes weepes, that Lam. 4. 5. they which were brought vp in scarlet, em∣brace dunghils. It is iust matter of lamentation, when soules which haue beene clad with zeale, as with scarlet, constantly forward for the glory of God, fall to such Apo∣stacie, as with Demas to embrace the dūghil of this world, and with an auarous hausture to lick vp the mudde of cor∣ruption. Ioseph had a coat reaching downe to his feete: our re∣ligion must be such a garment, neither too scant to couer, nor too short to continue ad vltimum, to the last day of our temporary breath. Reu. 2. 10. Be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life: this crowne is promi∣sed to a good beginning, but performed to a good en∣ding. Striue to Eph. 3. 18. comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height. If we can com∣prehend with the Saints, not onely the height of hope,
the depth of faith, the breadth of charity, but also the length of continuance, we are blessed for euer. Euen the tired horse, when he comes neere home, mends his pace: be good alwaies, vvithout wearinesse; but best at last: that the neerer thou commest to the end of thy dayes, the neerer thou mayest be to the end of thy hopes, the salua∣tion of thy soule. Omnis coelestis Curia nos expectat, deside∣remus eam quanto possumus desiderio. The whole Court of Bern. heauen waites for vs, let vs long for that blessed society with a hearty affection. The Saints looke for our com∣ming, desiring to haue the number of the elect fulfilled: the Angels blush when they see vs stumble, grieue when vve fall, clappe their vvings vvith ioy when vve goe cheerefully forward: our Sauiour Christ stands on the battlements of heauen, and with the hand of helpe and comfort wafteth vs to him. When a noble Soul∣dier in a forraine Land hath atchieued braue designes, wonne honourable victories, subdued dangerous ad∣uersaries; and with worthy Chiualry hath renowned his King and Country: home he comes, the King sends for him to Court, and there in open audience of his No∣ble Courtiers, giues him words of grace, commendeth and (vvhich is rarely more) rewardeth his Valour, heapes dignities, preferments, and places of honour on him. So shall Christ at the last day, to all those Soul∣diers that haue valiantly combated and conquered his e∣nemies; in the sight of heauen and earth, audience of men and Angels, giue victorious wreathes, crownes and garlands, Reuel. 7. 9. long white robes, to witnesse their innocency, and Palmes in their hands, to expresse their victory: and finally he shall giue them a glorious kingdome to enioy for euer and euer. Now yet further to encourage our going, let vs thinke vpon our company. Foure sweet associates go with vs in our Iourny; good Christians, good Angels, good works, our most good Sauiour Iesus Christ.
1. Good Christians accompany vs euen to our death. If thou go to the Temple, they will go with thee. Esay 2. 3. Many people shall say, Come and let us go vp to the Moun∣taine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob. If thou say, Nehem. 2. 17. Come, let vs build vp the walles of Ierusalem: they will answer, Ver. 18. Let vs rise vp and build. So when Ioshua protested to Israel; do what you will, Iosh. 24. 15. but as for mee and my house, we will serue the Lord: they ecchoed to him; Ver. 16. 18. God forbid that we should for sake the Lord, to serue other gods: we also will serue the Lord. Thou canst not say with Elias, Rom. 11. 3. I am left alone; there be seuen thousand, and thousand thosands, that neuer bowed their knee to Baal. 2. Good Angels beare vs company, to death in our guarding, after death in our carrying vp to heauen. Angelis mandauit; Psal. 91. 11. He hath giuen his Angels charge over vs: There are malicious deuils against vs, but there are powerfull Angels with vs. That great Maiestie whom wee all adore, hath giuen them this commission. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heires of saluation? An Angell counsels Ha∣gar Gen. 16. to returne to her Mistresse; an Angell accompanies Iacob in his iourney; an Angell feeds Elias; an Angell 1. King. 19. pluckes Lot out of Sodome. Gaudent Angeli te conuer∣sum Gen. 48. Origen. illorum sociari consortijs. The Angels reioyce at our conuersion, that so their number might haue a completion. 3. Good workes beare vs company: Good Angels associate vs, to deliuer their charge; good workes to receiue their reward. Though none of our actions bee meritorious, yet are none transient, none lost. They are gone before vs to the Courts of ioy; and when wee come, they shall welcome our entrance. Virtutis miseris dulce sodalitium. What misery soeuer perplexeth our voyage, vertue, and a good conscience are excellent company.
4. Lastly, Iesus Christ beares vs company. Hee is both Via and Conuiator; Ioh. 14. 6. the way, and companion in the way. When the two Disciples went to Emaus, Luk. 24. 15. Ie∣sus himselfe drew neere, and went with them. If any man go to Emaus, which Bernard interpreteth to be Thirsting after good aduice; he shall be sure of Christs company. If any man Math. 5. 41. entreate Iesus to goe a mile, he will go with him twaine. None can complaine the want of compa∣ny, whiles his Sauiour goes along with him. 1. Ioh. 1. 3. Truely our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Sonne Iesus Christ. There we finde two Persons of the blessed Tri∣nity, our Associates, the Father and the Sonne: now the Holy Ghost is not wanting. 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of the Lord Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the communion (or fellowship) of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. Goe we then comfortably forward, and Psal. 107. 30. God will bring vs to our desired Hauen. But Pauci intrant, pauciores ambulant, paucissimi pernt. Few enter the way, fewer walke in the way, fewest of all come to the end of the way; their saluation. Men thinke the way to heauen broader then it is: But Math. 7. 14. straite is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth vnto life, and few there bee that finde it. All say, they are going to glory, but the greater number take the wrong way. A man somewhat thicke-sighted, when he is to passe ouer a narrow bridge, puts on spectacles to make it seeme broader: but so his eyes beguile his feete, and he fals into the brooke. Thus are many drowned in the whirle-poole of sinne, by viewing the passage to heauen onely with the Spectacles of flesh and bloud: They thinke the bridge broad, so topple in. Happy eyes that well guide the feete, and happy feet that neuer rest going, till they enter the gates of heauen. Thus much for the Pasport: now we come to The Certificate. Thy faith hath made thee whole. Wherein Christ doth
comfort and encourage the Leper. First, he comforts him, that his faith was the meanes to restore health to his body: then thereby hee encourageth him that this faith encreased, would also bring saluation to his soule. I might here obserue, that as faith is onely percei∣ued of God, so it is principally commended of God. The Leper glorified God, and that with a loud voyce; there was his thankfulnesse: he fell downe at Christs feet, there was his humblenesse. The eares of men heard his gratitude, the eyes of men saw his humility: but they neither heard, nor saw his faith. But how then, saith Saint Iames, Iam. 2. 18. Shew mee thy faith? Himselfe answeres, By thy workes. It cannot be seene in habitu, in the very being; yet may easily be knowne in habente, that such a person hath it. No man can see the winde as it is in the proper essence; yet by the full sailes of the ship one may perceiue which way the winde stands. The sap of the tree is not visible, yet by the testimony of leaues and fruites we know it to be in the tree: Now Christ sees not as man sees: man lookes vpon the externall witnesses of his gratitude and humility, but Christ to that sap of faith in the heart, which sent forth those fruits. Thy faith hath saued thee. The words distribute themselues into two princi∣pall and essentiall parts: The Meanes, Thy faith. Effects, Hath made thee whole. The meanes is partly Demonstratiue; Faith; partly Relatiue, Thy faith. The Quality and the Propriety: the Quality of the meanes, it is Faith; the Propriety, it is (not anothers, but) Thy faith. Faith. This is the demonstratiue quality of the meanes of his healing. But what was this Faith? 1. There is a
faith that beleeues veritatem historiae, the truth of Gods word: This we call an Historicall Faith; but it was not this faith. Act. 26. 27. King Agrippa, beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know that thou beleeuest. 2. There is a faith that beleeues Certitudinem Promissi, the certainety of Gods promises: that verily is perswaded, God will bee so good as his word: that he will not breake his couenant with Israel, nor Psal. 89. 33. suffer his faithfulnesse to faile vnto Dauid: yet applyes not this to it selfe: but it was not this faith. 3. There is a faith that beleeues Potestatem Dicentis, the Maiestie and Omnipotencie of him that speakes: so the deuill, that God is able to turne Math. 4. 3. Stones into brd: so the Pa∣pist, that he can turne bread into flesh, and cause one circumscribed body to supply millions of remote places at once: But it was not this faith. 4. There is a faith be∣leeues se moturam Montes, that it is able to 1. Cor. 13. 2. remoue Mountaines: a miraculous faith; which, though it were specially giuen to the Apostles, Mark. 16. 17. In my name shall they cast out deuils, take vp Serpents, cure the sicke by im∣position of hands; say to a Tree, Luk. 17. 6. Pluck thy selfe vp by the rootes, and plant thy selfe in the sea, and it shall obey them: yet reprobates also had it; for euen they that are cast out with a Discedite à me, plead this; Math. 7. 22. In thy name haue we cast out deuils, and done many wonderfull workes. But it was not this faith. 5. There is a faith that be∣leeues to go to heauen, though it bend the course di∣rectly to hell: that thinks to arriue at the Ierusalem of blessednesse, through the Samaria of prophanenesse: a presumption: but it was not this faith. 6. There is a faith that beleeues a mans owne mercy in Iesus Christ, and liues a life worthy of this hope, and becomming such a prosession: and it was this faith that our Sa∣uiour commendeth. When Samuel came to anoint one of the sonnes of Iesse, Eliab was presented to him, and he said, 1. Sam. 16. 6. Sure∣ly the Lords Anointed is before him. He was deceiued,
hee might haue a goodly countenance and a high stature: but it was not he: Then passed by Abinadab; nor is this he: then Shammah; nor is this hee: Then seuen of his sonnes were presented; The Lord hath chosen none of thse. Be here all, saith Samuel? Iesse answered, No, the yongest is behind, and he keepeth the sheepe. Then said Sa∣muel, Send and fetch him, for we will not sit downe till he come. When he was come, he Ver. 12. was ruddy, and withall of a beautifull countenance, and goodly to looke on: And the Lord said, Arise, and anoint him, for this is he. If wee should make such a quest for the principall Grace: Tem∣perance is a sober and matronly vertue, but not shee: Humility in the lowest is respected of the Highest, but not she: Wisedome is a heauenly grace, similisque cre∣anti, like the Maker, but not shee: Patience a sweet and comfortable vertue, that lookes cheerefully on troubles, when her brest is red with the bloud of sufferance, her cheekes are white with the purenesse of innocence, yet not shee: Iustice hath a hand spot∣lesse as the brow of heauen, a heart transparant as Christall, a countenance able to daunt temptation it selfe, yet not she: Charity is a louely vertue, little in∣nocents hang at her brests, Angels kisse her cheekes; Cant. 4. 3. Her lips are like a threed of scarlet, and her speech is comely, her Temples are like a Pomegranate within her lookes; all the ends of the earth call her blessed: yet not shee. Lastly Faith appeares, beautified with the robe of her Sauiours righteousnesse, adorned with the iew∣els of his graces, and shining in that fairenesse which hee gaue her: Iam Regina venit, now comes the Queene of Graces: This is she. Now as Faith excells all other graces, so there is a spe∣ciall degree of faith that excells all other degrees. For eue∣ry faith, is not a sauing faith. The King of Syria comman∣ded his Captaines, y Fight neither with small nor great, saue p 1. King. 22. 31 onely with the King of Israel. How should they know him?
By his Princely attire, and royall deportment. Perhaps they met with many glorious personages, slew heere and there one; none of them was the King of Israel. Setting vpon Iehoshaphat, they said, Surely this is the King of Israel; no, it was not. One drew a bow at a venture, smote a man in his Charet, and that was the King of Israel. The faith that belieues Gods Word to be true, is a good faith, but not Illa fides, that sauing Faith. The faith that beleeues Christ to be the worlds Sauiour, is a true faith, but not that faith. The faith that belieues many men shall be saued, is vera fides, non illa fides, a true faith, but not that faith. The faith that beleeues a mans owne soule redeemed, iustified, saued by the merits of Iesus Christ; not without vvorks answerable to this beliefe: this is that faith. That was the King of Israel, and this is the Queene of Isra: all the o∣ther be but her attendants. There is Fides Sentiends, Assentiendi, and Appropriandi: a man may haue the first, and not the second: he may haue the first and second, and yet not the third: but if he haue the third degree, he hath all the former. Some know the truth, but doe not consent to it: some know it, and assent to it, yet beleeue not their owne part: they that belieue their own mercy, haue all the rest. As meat digested turnes to iuyce in the stomake, to bloud in the liuer, to spirits in the heart: so faith is in the braine knowledge, in the rea∣son assent, in the heart application. As the child in the wombe hath first a vegetatiue life, then a sensitiue, last a rationall. So faith, as meere knowledge, hath but a vegeta∣tion: as allowance, but sense: onely the applying and ap∣portioning the merites of Christ to the owne soule by it, this is the rationall, the very life of it. But thus we may better exemplifie this Similitude. The vegetatiue soule is the soule of plants, and it is a true soule in the kind, though it haue neither sense nor reason. The sensitiue soule is the soule of beasts, a true soule; includes vegetation, but is voide of reason. The rationall soule is
the soule of man, a distinct soule by it selfe, comprehends both vegetation and sense, hauing added to them the per∣fection of reason. So there are three kindes or degrees of Faith. 1. To belieue there is a God; this is the faith of Pagans, and it is a true faith, though it neither belieue the Word of God, nor mercy from God. 2. To belieue that what God sayes is true: this is the faith of deuils and re∣probates, and a true faith; including the faith of Pagans, and going beyond it; yet it apprehends no mercy. 3. To belieue on God, to rely vpon his mercy in Christ, and to affie their owne reconciliation; this is the faith of the E∣lect; comprehends both the former, yet is a distinct faith by it selfe. This faith onely saues; and it hath two properties. 1. It is a repenting faith: for Repentance is Faiths Vsher, & deawes all her way with teares. Repentance reades the Law and weepes. Faith reads the Gospell and comforts. Both haue seueral bookes in their hands; Poenitentia intu∣etur Mosem, Fides Christum. Repentance lookes on the rigorous brow of Moses, Faith beholds the sweet counte∣nance of Christ Iesus. 2. It is a working faith: if it worke not, it is dead: and a dead faith no more saues, then a pain∣ted fire warmes. Faith is a great Psal. 45. 14. Queene, her cloathing is of wrought gold: the virgins her companions that follow her, are good deeds: Omnis fidelis tantum credit, quan∣tum Greg. sperat & amat: & quantum credit, sperat, & amat; tantum operatur. A Christian so farre beleeues, as he hopes and loues: and so farre as he belieues, hopes and loues, he workes. Now as Moses is said to Hebr. 11. 27. see him that is invisi∣ble, because he saw his back-parts: and as when we see the members of the body mouing to their seuerall functions, we know there is a soule within, albeit vnseene: so faith cannot be so invisible, but the fruites of a good life will declare it. Thus by degrees you see what is the right sauing faith. As a Lapidary that shewes the buyer an orient pearle; and
hauing a little fed his eye with that, outpleaseth him with a Saphyre; yet out-values that with some Ruby or Chry∣solite: wherwith rauished, he doth lastly amaze him with a sparkling Diamond transcending all. Or as Drapers shew diuers cloathes of excellent colours, yet at last for a Master-piece exceed all wih a piece of Scarlet. So there are diuers vertues like Iewels, but the most precious Iew∣ell of all is Faith: And there are diuers degrees of faith, as diuers coloured cloathes; but the sauing faith is arrayed in the Scarlet robe, hath dipped and died her selfe in the bloud of her Sauiour Iesus: yet is she white, pure white as the snow of Lebanon: so are all that be washed in that red fountaine. Reu. 7. 14. They haue washed their robes, and made them white in the bloud of the Lambe. Thy Faith. This is the property of that faith that healed him; his owne faith. But how could Christ call it His faith, when as faith is Gods gift? It is indeed Datum, so well as man∣datum. Commanded, 1. Iohn 3. 23. This is his Commandement, that we should beleeue on the name of his Sonne Iesus Christ. So also giuen, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is giuen in the behalfe of Christ to be∣leeue on him. And Iohn 6. 29. This is the worke (so well as the will) of God, that ye belieue on him whom he hath sent. But this is not giuen without meanes, as the woman of Tekoah said to Dauid; 2. Sam. 14. 14. GOD doth deuise meanes. What's that? Rom. 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing. Now when God hath giuen a man Faith, he calls it his; Thy faith; for what is freer then gift? So the Prophet calls it their own mercy; Ion. 2. 8. They that wait on lying vanities, for sake their owne mercy. As the water in the Cesterne is said to be the Cesternes, though it haue it from the fountaine. But yet how doth Christ call it his faith? had he a faith by himselfe? Eph. 4. 5. There is one faith: therefore not more his, then others. In regard of the Obiect vpon whom our faith reflects, there is but one faith: in regard of the sub∣iect wherein faith resides, euery one must haue his owne
faith. There is no saluation by a common faith: but as all true beleeuers haue one and the same faith, so euery true beleeuer hath a singular and indiuiduall faith of his owne. Thy faith: thine for two reasons; to distin∣guish his Person from common men. Faith from common Faiths. 1. To distinguish his person from others: the Nine had not this Faith. They beleeued not, but thou belee∣uest. Thy faith; this declares him to be out of the com∣mon road. Exod. 23. 2. Thoushalt not follow a multitude to doe euill: that Bllua multorum capitum must not lead thee. Some were deuoted to Christ, but Mark. 2. 4. they could not come nigh him for the prease. It was the multitude that Luk. 18. 39. rebuked the blind mans prayers. As a riuer leades a man through sweet me∣dowes, greene woods, fertile pastures, fruit-loden fields; by glorious buildings, strong Forts, famous Cities; yet at last brings him to the salt Sea: So the streame of this world carries along through rich commodities, voluptu∣ous delights, stately dignities, all possible content to flesh and bloud: but after all this brings a man to death, after death to iudgement, after iudgement to hell. Heare one of the Romists authenticall pleas for their Church falls to the ground, vniuersality. They pleade Antiquity; so a homicide may deriue his murder from Cain. They plead vnity: so Pharises, Sadduces, Hero∣dians combined against Christ. They plead vniuersality: yet of the ten Lepers but one was thankfull. The way to hell hath the greatest store of passengers: Company is good, but it is better to goe the right way alone, then the broad with multitudes. It is thought probably, that at this day Mahometisme hath more vnder it then Christia∣nity; though wee put Protestant, and Papist, and Puri∣tan, and Separatist, and Arminian; and all in the scale to boote: and that meere Paganisme is larger then both. Where many ioyne in the Truth, there is the Church:
not for the many's sake, but for the Truths sake. Saint In Psal. 3 9. Augustine teacheth vs to take Religion, not by tale, but by waight. Numbers make not a thing good, but the waight of truth. Some are so manerly, that they will not goe one steppe before a great man; no not to heauen. Many say with Hushai, 2. Sam. 16. 18 Whom the people, and all the men of Israel chuse, his will I be. But they leaue out one princi∣pall thing, which Hushai there put in as the prime ingre∣dient; Whom the Lord chuseth: they leaue out the Lord. But Ioshua was of another minde: Iosh. 24. 15. Chuse youwhat gods so∣euer you will serue; I and my house will serue the Lord. The Inferiour Orbes haue a motion of their owne, contra∣ry to the greater: good men are moued by Gods Spirit, not by the Planetary motions of popular greatnesse. Let vs prize righteousnes highly, because it is seldom found. The pebles of the world are common, but the pearles of graces rare. The vulgar streame will bring no vessell to the land of peace. 2. To distinguish his faith from the common faith. Thine; another kinde then the Pharises faith. To belieue the Word, but traditions withal, vera fides, non pura fides; is a true, but not a pure faith. To beleeue the Maior of the Gospell, not the Minor, Vera, non sana fides; is a true, not a sound faith. To belieue a mans own saluation, how debauchedly soeuer he liues, nec vera, pura, sana, nec omnino fides; is neyther a true, pure, sound faith, nor in∣deed a faith at all: but a dangerous presumption. To be∣lieue thy owne reconciliation by the merits of Christ, and to strengthen this by a desire of pleasing God; is a true, found, sauing faith: and this is Fides tua, Thy Faith. Whosoeuer vvill goe to heauen, must haue a faith of his owne. In Gedeons Campe euery souldier had his own pitcher: among Salomons men of valour, euery one wore his owne sword: and these were they that got the victo∣ries. The fiue wise Virgins had euery one oyle in her owne
lampe: and onely these enter in with the Bridegroome. Anothers eating of dainty meate makes thee neuer the fatter. Indeed many haue sped the better for other mens faith: so the Centurions seruant was healed for his ma∣sters sake. Mat. 8. 13. As thou hast beleeued, so be it done vnto thee. But for the saluation of the reprobates; Ier. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, saith the Lord, yet my minde could not be toward, such people. Ezek. 14. 14. Though Noah, Daniel, and Iob interceded, yet they should deliuer but their owne soules by their righteousnesse. Pious mens faith may often saue o∣thers from temporall calamities: but it must be their own faith that saues them from eternall vengeance. Lut was wont to say, There is great Diuinity in Pronounes. Thy faith. One bird shall as soone flie with another birds fea∣thers, as thy soule mount to heauen by the wings of ano∣thers faith. It is true faith, and thy faith: true with other mens faith, but inherent in thy owne person that saues thee. True, not an empty faith; Nuda fides, nulla fides. De fide & oper. c. 23. Inseparabilis est bona vita â fide, imò verò ea ipsa est bona vita, saith Augustine. A good life is inseparable from a good faith; yea a good faith is a good life. So Irenaeus; To belieue, is to doe Gods will. Thine, therefore vve say Credo, not Credimus; I belieue, not we belieue. Euery man must professe, and be accountant for his owne faith. Thus much of the Meanes; now to The Effect. Hath made thee whole, or saued thee: It may be read eyther way; It hath saued thee, or It hath salued thee. First, of them both ioyntly, then seuerally. Faith is the meanes to bring health to body, comfort to soule, saluation to both. I call it but the meanes; for some haue giuen it more. Because the Apostle saith, that Abraham obtained the promise Rom. 4. 13. Through the righteous∣nesse of faith: therefore say they, Fides ipsa Iustitia; Faith is righteousnesse it selfe. But let S. Paul answere them, and expound himselfe: I desire to Phil. 3. 9. be found in Christ, not
hauing mine owne righteousnesse, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, (whose is that?) the righteousnesse which is (not of vs, but) of GOD by Faith. Thus faith is said to saue vs, not of it selfe: the hand feeds the mouth, yet no man thinkes that the mouth eates the hand, onely as the hand conueyes meat to the body, so faith saluation to the soule. Wee say the Ring stancheth bloud, when indeed it is not the Ring, but the stone in it. There are many that make faith an almighty Idoll; it shal saue: but thus they make themselues idle, and trust all vp∣on nothing. That faith is a meritorious cause of iustifica∣tion; this a doctrine that may come in time to trample Christs bloud vnder feet. Now these speeches rightly vnderstood; Faith adop∣teth, faith iustifieth, faith saueth; are not derogatory to the glory of God, nor contradictory to these speeches, Christ adopteth, Christ iustifieth, Christ saueth. One thing may bee spoken of diuers particulars in a different sense. God the Father adopteth, the Sonne adopteth, the holy Spirit adopteth, Faith adopteth: all these are true, and without contrariety. They be not as the young men that came out of the two armies before Ioab and Abner: 2. Sam. 2. 16. euery one thrust his sword into his fellowes side, and fell down together. But like Dauids Psal. 133. 1. Brethren, dwelling together in peace. God the Father adopteth as the Fountaine of adop∣tion; God the Sonne as the Conduit; God the holy Ghost as the Cesterne; Faith as the Cocke whereby it runnes into our hearts. Faith brings iustification, not by any speciall excellen∣cy it hath in it selfe, but onely by that place and office which God hath assigned it: it is the condition on our parts. So the Apostle instructed the Iailour, Acts 16. 31. Belieue n the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saued, and thy house. Gods ordinance giues that thing the blessing, which it hath not in the owne nature. If Naaman had gone of his owne head, and washed himselfe seuen times in Iordan,
he had not been healed: it was Gods command that gaue those waters such purging vertue. If the Israelites stung with these fiery serpents in the Desart, had of their owne deuising set vp a brazen Serpent, they had not beene cu∣red: it was neyther the materiall brasse, nor the serpen∣tine forme, but the direction of God which effected it. It was not the Statue, but the Statute, that gaue the vertue. So Faith for it owne merit brings none to heauen, but for the promise which the God of Grace and Truth had made to it. In common speech wee say of such a man; His Lease maintaines him: is there any absurdity in these words? No man conceiues it to bee a parchment lined vvith a few words, accompanied with a vvaxen Labell, that thus maintaines him: but that House or Land, or rents so conueyed to him. So Faith saueth: I ascribe not this to the Instrument, but to Iesus Christ whom it apprehends, and that inheritance by this meanes con∣ueyed. But now wouldest thou know thy selfe thus interes∣sed? looke to thy faith, this is thy proofe. If a rich man die, and bequeath all his riches and possessions to the next of bloud; many may challenge it, but he that hath the best proofe carries it. To Christs Legacy thou layest claime, looke to thy proofe: it is not, Mat. 7. 22. Lord, Lord, I haue prophecied in thy Name: nor, Luk. 13. 26. We haue feasted in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets: but Mark. 9. 24. I be∣leeue, Lord, helpe my vnbeleefe; and then thou shalt heare, Bee it vnto thee according to thy faith. And this a little faith doth, if it bee true. There is a faith like a graine of mustard seede; small, but true: little, but bite it, and there is heate in it: faith warmes where euer it goes. In a word, this is not the faith of explication, but of Application, that is dignified with the honor of this con∣ueyance. Hath made thee whole. Faith brings health to the bo∣dy.
There was a Math. 9. 20. woman vexed with an vncomforta∣ble disease twelue yeres, Mark. 5. 26. shee suffered many things of Physi∣cians; some torturing her with one medicine, some with another, none did her good, but much hurt, Luke 8. 43. Shee had spent all her liuing vpon them, and heerein, saith Erasmus, was bis misera: her sicknesse brought her to weakenesse, weakenesse to Physike, Physike to beggery, beggery to contempt. Thus was shee anguished in body, vexed in mind, beggerd in estate, despised in place, yet faith hea∣led her. Her wealth was gone, Physicians giuen her ouer, her faith did not forsake her, Math. 9. 22. Daughter, be of good com∣fort, thy faith hath made thee whole. There was a vvoman bowed downe with a spirit of infirmity Luke 13. 11. eighteene yeeres; yet loosed: there was a man bedrid Iohn 5. 5. eight and thity yeeres, a long and miserable time, when besides his corporall di∣stresse, he might perhaps conceiue from that, Eccl. 38. 15. He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the Physician; that God had cast him away, yet Christ restored him. Perhaps this Leprosie was not so old, yet as hard to cure; yet faith is able to doe it; Thy faith hath made thee whole. But it was not properly his faith, but Christs ver∣tue that cured him: why then doth not Christ say, Mea virtus, and not Tua ides: My vertue, not thy faith hath made thee whole? True it is, his vertue onely cures, but this is apprehended by mans faith. When that diseased woman had touched him, Mark. 5. 30. Iesus knew in himselfe that vertue had gone out of him, and hee turned him about in the prease, and said, Who touched my clothes? Yet speaking to the woman, he mentioneth not his vertue, but her faith; Mark. 5. 34. Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. Faith in respect of the Obiect, is called in Scripture, Gala. 3. 22. The faith of Iesus Christ: in respect of the subiect vvherein it is inherent, it is my faith, and thy faith. Thy faith hath made thee whole. Hath saued thee: made whole, not thy body only, that's
but part, the worst part: but thy soule also, Totum te, thy whole selfe: saued thee. The other nine had whole bodies, this tenth was made whole in soule too; saued. The ri∣chest Iewell Christ left to his Church, is Saluation. Rom. 10. 1. My herts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saued. Not their opulencie, not their dignitie, not their prosperitie, was Saint Pauls wish; but their Saluation. If the deuils would confesse to vs the truth, they would sy, The best thing of all is to be saued. That rich man would faine send this newes out of hell; Luke 16. 18. Let Lazarus testisi to my brethren, lest they also come into this place of torment. The tetimony of saluation was blessed newes, from the mouth of him that giues Saluation, Iesus Christ. The vessell of mans soule is continually in a Tempest, vntill Christ enter the Shippe, and then follovves the calme of peace. It is remarkeable, that God giues the best gifts at last. Christ gaue this Leper Ver. 14. health: bonum, this was good: For Vita non est viuere, sed valere: It is more comfortable to die quickly, then to liue sickly. He gaue him a good name, Ver. 18. that he returned to giue glory to God; melius; this was better. But now lastly he giues him saluation, Ver. 19. Thy faith hath saued thee; Optimum this is best of all. Vltima op∣tima. Hath God giuen thee wealth, blesse him for it: hath hee giuen to thee health, blesse him for it: hath hee gi∣uen thee good reputation, blesse him for it: hath he giuen thee children, friends, peaceable dayes; blesse him for all these. But hath hee giuen thee Faith? especially blesse him for this: hee hath giuen thee vvith it, what we beseech his mercy to giue vs all, Saluation in Iesus Christ. I conclude, there is a faith powerfull to iustifie the soule by the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ: but it neuer dwelt in a bosome that lodgeth with it lust and dissolute∣nesse. Gala▪ 2. 7. If while we seeke to be iustified by Christ, we our selues
are found sinners, is therefore Christ the Minister of sinne? God forbid. Which verse may not vnfitly bee distingui∣shed into foure particulars. Quòd sit, Si sit, An sit, Ab∣sit. There is a Concession, a Supposition, a Question, a Detestation. 1. The Concession, Quòd sit; that is so: he takes it granted that all true Christians seeke their one∣ly Iustification by Christ. 2. The Supposition Si sit; if it bee so, that in the meane time wee are found sinners. 3. The Question or discussion, An sit; is it so? is Christ therefore the Minister of sinne? 4. The Detestation, Absit, God forbid. Where let vs behold what the Gospell acquireth for vs, and requireth of vs. It brings vs liberty: the Law gende∣reth to bondage: and that, saith Aquinas, Quantum ad Affectum, and Quantum ad Effectum. 1. The Law be∣gets an affection of feare, the Gospell of Loue. Rom. 8. 15. Ye haue not receiued the spirit of bondage againe to feare, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Breuissima & a∣pertissima durum▪ Testamentrum differentia, Tior & Aug. Amor. There is a short and easie difference betwixt the olde Testament and the new; Feare, and Loue. 2. The Law brought forth onely seruants, the Gospell sonnes. Gal. 4. 26. Ierusalem aboue is free, which is the mother of vs all. Li∣bera, quòd liberata, free because shee is freed. For Iohn 8. 36. if the Sonne make you free, you shall be free indeed. This it brings to vs, it also challengeth something of vs; Gal. 5. 13. that wee vse not our liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by loue serue one another. All things are free to vs by faith, yet all things seruiceable by charity. Vt simul stet seruitus libertatis, & libertas seruitutis: that the seruice of Luther. liberty, and liberty of seruice, might stand together. A Christian for his Faith is Lord of all, for his loue seruant to all. That therefore we might not abuse our freedome, nor turne the grace of God into wantonnesse; the Apo∣stle, after the reines giuen, puls vs in with the Curbe: though iustified by Christ, take heed that wee bee not
found sinners: a checke to ouer-iocund loosenesse, a corre∣ctiue not so much libertatis, as liberatorum; of our free∣dome, as of our selues being freed. In vaine wee pleade that Christ hath made vs Saints, if our owne euill liues proue vs sinners. Indeed, as God couenants by the Gos∣pell to remit our sinnes, so wee must condition by the law to amend our liues. For that faith to which the pro∣mise of Iustification and eternall life is made, is a faith that can neuer be separated from charity. Wheresoeuer it is, there is loue ioyned with it, bringing forth the Phil. 1. 11. fruits of righteousnesse, which are by Iesus Christ vnto the glory and praise of God. This is that faith to which 2. Cor. 1. 20. all the promises of God are yea and Amen in Christ to the glory of God by vs. The Lord that hath made them Yea and Amen in his neuer-failing mercies, make them also Yea and Amen in our euer-beleeuing hearts, through our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen.
THE SAINTS MEETING, OR Progresse to Glory. Ephes. 4. 13. Till we all meete in the vnitie of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, vnto a perfect man, vnto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. THe first word of the Text, is a gate to let in our considerations, to con∣template this goodly citie which in∣deed is likeIerusalem, a citie of  Psal. 122. 4 of the Lord, vnto the : to giue thankes vnto the name of the Lord. And when we are in, let vs number and ponder the towers & powers of it: for euery pinne and pinnacle shall afford vs com∣fort. But we must first passe by this Portall; Vntill: and this very entrance will giue vs two obseruations. 1. Teacheth vs, that God hath ordained the Ministery of the Gospell to last to the end of the world. Christ hath giuen Apostles, Prophets, Euangelistes, Teachers: To perfect the Saints, and to edifie his bodie: to continue Till we all meete in the vnitie of faith &c. So was his promise after his Charge. Math. 28. His charge, Goe teach all na∣tions: his promise; Loe I am with you alway, vnto the end Mat. last chap. last verse. of the world. God will send Shepheardes, till euerie lost
sheepe be brought to the folds of peace. The Ministers voyce shall sound, till it bee ouertaken by the Archan∣gels Trumpe. The ministration of the Law had an end; but there is none to the ministration of the Gospell, be∣fore the end of the world. Hereof may be giuen a dou∣ble excellency to the Gospell: and prelation aboue the Law. It is more Gratious. Glorious. 1. The Gospell is more gratious. 2. Cor. 3. 6. God hath made vs able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giueth life. The proper office of the Law was to threaten, terrifie, con∣demne. Lex non damnans est ficta & pictalex, sayth Lu∣ther. That law that doth not condemne, is a fained and a painted law. But the power of the Gospell is to con∣uert, and saue. Esa. 61. 1. The Lord hath annointed me, (sayth the Prophet in the person of Christ) to preach good tydings vnto the meeke, to bind vp the broken-hearted, to proclaime libertie to the capties, and the acceptable yeare of the Lord, to comfort all that mourne. The law was called the Mini∣stration of death; but the Gospell, like Iohn Baptist points vs to Christ a Sauiour; Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, tking away the sinne of the world. The law menaced death; but the Gospell assures vs; Rom. 8. 1. There is no damnation to them which are in Christ. When the law, like a sterne Seriant, arresteth thee; Pay that thou owest; the Gospell produ∣ceth an acquitance, ealed in the bloud of Iesus; and sayes to thy faith, All is payed. Quod lex operum minan∣do impert, lex fidei credendo impetrt. What the law of Aug. workes commanded threatning, the new law of fayth obtaineth by beleeuing. 2. The Gospell is also more glorious: and that both in regard of the Countenance, and Continuance. For beautie more glorious: because it is more honourable to be the messenger of mercie and life, then to be the minister of terrour and death. A deathsman is accoun∣ted
base, but their feete are beautifull that bring tydings of peace and pardon. 2. Cor. 3. 9. If the ministration of condemnation be glorie, much more doth the ministration of righteousnes ex∣ceede in glorie. For Continuance; Moses glory is done away; but the glory of Moses his Lord remaines for e∣uer. Ioh. 1. 17. The law was giuen by Moses, but grace and truth came by Christ Iesus. The type is vanished, banished; but the substance abideth euer. 1. Cor. 13. 10 When that which is perfect comes, that which is in part is done away. There was a second Te∣stament to succeed the first; but after the second shall succeed none. So that if any man shall wilfully and fi∣nally euacuate to himselfe the vertue of this new Coue∣nant, Heb. 10. 26. there remaineth no more sacrifice for his sinnes. Ther∣fore the Apostle concludes; 2. Cor. 3. 11. If that which is done away, was glorious; much more that which remaineth is glorious. The bloud of Christ doth mystically run fresh to the end of the world; therefore the Gospell must be preached, that this bloud may be applied. The Gospell is that Star that must bring vs to Christ: therfore shall shine till our soules come to him in glory. The very subiect of the Gospell is euerlasting life: therfore it shall not leaue vs, till it hath brought vs thither. 2 This Vntill giues matter of exhortation; instructing vs to waite with patience for this blessed tyme; to be content to stay for Gods Vntill. It is a sweet mixture of ioy in trouble, the certaine hope of future ase. Thou art captiued, thou shalt be freed: thou art persecuted, shalt triumph: thou art fought against, shalt raigne: thou art derided, but thou shalt shine in glory. Onely quietly expect this Vntill. Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. But Vntill this re∣compense of reward comes, ye haue neede of patience. Labour not a violent extrication of thy selfe; abide and waite Till we all meete in the vnitie of fayth, &c. We are got through the gate, let vs now enter the Ci∣tie:
werein we shall find fie principall Passages or Streets What; there shall be a ting. Who; We, yea we All; all the Saints. Wherin; In Vnitie; that vnitie; . Whereof; Of the Faith & knowledge of Gods Sonne. Whereunto; To a perfect man, Vnto the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. What; Meee. The meeting of friends is eer comfortable. Act. 28. 15. When the brethrn heard of vs, they came to meete vs as farre as Ap∣pi forum: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God and toke courage. They haue sullen and tetricall spirits, whom the sight of good friends cannot cheare. Fraternum verè . Psal. 133. 1. Ec qum bonum, &c. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in vnitie▪ Some things are good but not pleasant; as af∣flictions; they are not sweet yet protable Psal. 119. 71. It was good for me that I haue bee afflicted▪ that I might learne th sta∣tutes. Other things are pleasant but not good: The wic∣ked take delight in sinne, which sayeth the soule. But this is both Bonum, and Iuundum; good and pleasant also. There is a threefold meeting of the godly. 1 In this life, with their soules in their bodies. 2 After death, of their soules without bodies. 3 At the last day, of both together in glory. 1. In this life; and here the communis terminus of their meeting is Gods house. Where alwayes Christ himselfe is one of the number. Math. 18. 20. Wheresoeuer two or three of you be gathered together in my name▪ I will be in the midst of you. But to haue his blessed societie, we must not only bring our bodyes, but our minds with them. Quomodo erit Christus in medio nostrum, i nobiscum non erimus? How should Christ be with vs if we be not with our selues?
Plus valet consonantia voluntatum qum vocum. The har∣monie Bern. of our voyces is not so pleasing to God, as of our hearts. This is the happiest meeting in this world. The denyall of this comfort made the soule of Dauid sicke, Psal. 42. 2. 10 cast downe & disquieted within him. And his reui∣uall was, that he might Psal. 43. 4. goe vnto the altar of God, vnto God his exceeding ioy. Indeede the vngodly thinke not thus: they are more delighted with the tabernacles of Meshek and the tauernes of Kder. In the 2. of Luke, when Io∣seph Luk. 2. 44. & Mary had lost Iesus, comming from Ierusalem; they sought him among their kinsfolke and acquaintance. But they found him not till they came to Ierusalem; & there he was in the Temple. The children of God, when they seeke Christ, find him not in the world, among their kinred & friends in the flesh; but in Domo Dei, in the house of God. It is dangerous to be absent from these holy meetings, least we misse of our Sauiours companie. God did not promise to meete thee here; thou vsurer at the Banke, thou drunkard at the alehouse, thou slug∣gard on thy vnseasonable couch; but at the Church. Christ comes to appeare to vs, and we are gone; some about our farmes of couetousnes, others about carnall pleasures. In vaine we seeke God if not in his right Vbi, where he hath promised to be found. Fugienti bonum consortium, obuenit corruptum & corrumpens sodalitium. He that eschewes Christian meetings, shall be met with∣all, either by the Deuill when he is lazy, or by the De∣uils friends when he is busie. 2. When death shall manumit and set free our soules from the prison of the body, there shalbe a second meet∣ing. Many haue come from east & from west, farre remote in place, and haue met with Abraham and Isaac, and the holy Patriarches, which liued long before them in this world, in the kingdome of heauen. So already in Heb. 12. 23. Mount Sion are the Spirits of iust men made perfect. The purer part is then glorified, and meets with the triumphant
Church in blisse. This meeting exceeds the former in comfort. 1. In respect that our miseries are past, our conflict is ended, & teares are wiped from our eyes. The very release from calamitie is not a litle felicitie. So Austin meditates of this place negatiuely. De symb. lib. 3. Non est ibi mors, non luctus: &c. There is no death nor dearth, no pining nor repining, no sorrow nor sadnes, neither teares nor feares, defect nor lothing. No glory is had on earth without grudging & emulation; in this place there is no enuie. Idem de vita aeterna. Non erit aliqua inuidia disparis clarita∣tis, quum regnabit in omnibus vnitas charitatis. None sall malice anothers glorious clearnesse, when in all shall be one gratious dearenesse. God shall then giue rest to our desires. In our first meeting we haue Desiderium quietis: in this second Quietem desiderij. Here we haue a desire of rest, there we shall haue rest of desire. 2. In regard, that we shall see God; behold him whose glory filleth all in all. This is great happinesse: for Psal. 16. 11. in his presence is the fullnesse of ioy, & at his right hand are pleasures for euer. We shall not only Heb. 12. 24. meete with the spirits of iust men made perfect, but also with him that made them iust and per∣fect; Iesus the mediatour of the new couenant: euen God himselfe. 3 Our last meeting, which is called the Generall assembly and Church of the first borne written in heauen is the great meeting, at the end of the world. When our re-vnited bodies & soules shall possesse perfect glory, and raigne with our Sauiour for euer. When as no mountayne or rocke shall shelter the wicked from doome & terrour; so no corruption detayne one bone or dust of vs from glory. 1. Thes. 4. 17 We shal be caught vp together in the cloudes, to meet the Lord in the ayre, and so shall we be euer with the Lord. Who; We. There is a time when the elect shall meete in one v∣niuersalitie. Though now weare scattered all ouer the broad face of the earth; dispersed and distressed; yet
we shall meet. There is now a Communion of Saints 1. As of all the members with the Head; all haue inter∣est in Christ. For he is not a garden flower, priuate to few; but the Cant. 2. 1. Rose of Sharon, and the Lillie of the valleys; common to the reach of all faythfull hands. So Iude calls this our Iud. ver. 3. common saluation. 2. So of one member with another: euen of the Church triumphant with this militant. They sing Hosanna's for vs, & we Hallelu∣ia's for them: they pray to God for vs, we prayse God for them. For the excellent graces they had on earth, and for their present glory in heauen. We meete now in our affections, to solace one another, and serue our God: there is a mutuall sympathie betweene the parts. 1. Cor. 12. If one member suffer, all suffer with it. But this meeting shalbe voyd of passion, and therfore needlesse of com∣passion; though loue shall remaine for euer. This Instruction is full of comfort. We part here with our parents, children, kinred, friends: death breakes off our societie; yet there shall be a day of meeting. 1. Thes. 4. 18 Comfort one another with these wordes. Hast thou lost a wife, brother, child; you shall one day meete: though not with a carnall distinction of sexe, or corrupt relati∣on which earth afforded. No man carries earth to hea∣uen with him: the same body but transfigured, purified, glorified. There shall be loue hereafter, not the offals of it. A wife shall be knowne, not as a wife; there is no marriage, but the Lambes. Thou shalt reioyce in thy glorified brother, not as thy brother according to the flesh, but as glorified. It is enough, that this meeting shall affoord more ioy, then we haue knowledge to expresse. This giues thee consolation dying; with griefe thou leauest those, thou dearely louest. Yet first thou art go∣ing to one, whose loue is greater then Ionathans; that gaue his life to redeeme thee. And well pondering the matter, thou art content to forsake all, to desire a disso∣lution,
that thou mayest be with Christ. Yet this is not all; thou shalt againe meet those, whom thou now de∣partest from; and that with greater ioy, then thou hast left in present sorow. This comforts vs all: if it be a pleasure for friends to meet on earth, where Satan is still scattering his trou∣bles of dissention; what is it to meete in heauen, where our peace is free from distraction, from destruction! where if there be any memorie of past things, meminisse iunabit; it shall rather delight vs, to thinke of the mise∣ries gone, and without feare of returning. It is some de∣light to the merchant, to sitte by a quiet fire, and dis∣course the escaped perills of wrackes and stormes. Re∣moue then your eyes from this earth; whether you be rich, for whom it is more hard; or poore, for whom it is easier: and know, it is better liuing in heauen toge∣ther, then on earth together. So then run your race, that in the end you may meet with this blessed societie; the Congregation of Saints in glory. We, yea All we. In this world we must neuer looke to see an vniuer∣sall Church; but at that generall day we shall All meete. In heauen there are none but good: in hell none but bad, on earth both good and bad, mingled together. I confesse, that the Church militant is the Suburbes of heauen, yea called the Kingdome of heauen; because the King of heauen gouernes it by his celestiall lawes; but still it is but heauen vpon earth. In Gods floore there is chaffe mixed with the wheat: in his field cockle with corne: in his net rubbish with fish: in his house ves∣sells of wrath with those of honour. The Church is like the moone, somtimes increasing, somtimes decreasing: but when it is at the full, not without some spottes. Now this mixture of the vngodly is suffred for two causes; either that themselues may be conuerted, or that others by them may be excercised. Omnis malus aut ideo Aug.
viuit vt corrigatur: aut ideo vt per illum bonus excerceatur. 1. For their owne emendation, that they may be con∣uerted to embrace that good, which they haue hated. So Saul a persecutor becomes Paul a professor. Mary Magdalen, turpissima meretrix fit sanctissima mulier; a putrified sinner, a purified Saint. Zacheus, that had made many rich men poore, will now make many poore men rich; when he had payed euery man his owne; (and that now he iudged their owne, which he had fraudulently got from them) Luk. 19. 8. Behold halfe my goods I giue to the poore. The theefe after a long lewd life, hath a short happy death; and goes from the Crosse to Pa∣radise. If these had bene rooted vp at the first, Gods Garner had wanted much good wheat. He that is now cockle, may proue good corne. 2. For the excercise of the godly. For the reprobate doe not onely fill vp the measure of their sinnes; that so not 2. Thes, 2. 11. beleeuing the truth, they might be damned for their vnrighteousnes; making their condemnation both iust and great. But they serue also for instruments to exer∣cise the faith and patience of the Saints. Babilon is a flaile to bruise the nations, at last it selfe shall be thresh∣ed. They are but the rubbish, where with the vessells of honour are scowred: the vessell made bright; the scowring stuffe is throwne to the dunghill. They are Apothecaries to make vs bitter potions, for the recoue∣rie of our spirituall health: but so that they cannot put in one dramme more then their allowance: and when they come to be payd for their bills, they find the sum totall their owne vengance. They are like shepheards dogges, that serue to hunt the lambes of Christ to the sheepfolds of peace, but their teeth are beaten out, that they cannot worry vs. Frmit lupus, tremit agnus; the wolfe rageth, and the Lambe quaketh, but Luk. 12. 32. feare not lit∣tle flocke; he is greater that is with you, then all they that are against you. Illorum malitia, est vera militia: their
malice is your warfare; but Rom. 8. 37. in all you shall conquer. They shall make you better, not worse. Hence let vs learne. 1. Not to flie from the Church, because there are some wicked men in it. Non propter malos boni sunt deserend, sed propter bonos mali sunt tolerandi. Forsake not the good Aug. because of the euill, but suffer the euill because of the good. when we can brooke no imperfection in the Church, know then Aduersus A∣nabaptist. art. 2 Diabolum nos tumeacere superbia, that the Deuill doth blow vs vp with pride; sayth Cal∣uin. I hold the Church, saith Augustin; full of both wheat and chaffe: I better whom I can, whom I cannot I suffer. Fugio paleam, ne hoc sine non aream, ne nihil sim. I auoid the chaffe, least I become chaffe: I keepe the floore, least I become nothing. Iam. 3. 2. We sinne all in many things: and many in all things: let vs flie from all sinnes, not from all sinners; for 1. Cor. 5. 10. then we must goe out of the world; out of our selues. But I beleeue the holy ca∣tholicke Church; I beleeue it, though through the sha∣dowe of infirmities I cannot see it. Intelligit fides, quae non vides. If it was perspicuous to sence, there was no place to faith, no vse or excercise of beleeuing. But here 2. Cor. 5. 7. we walke by faith, not by sight. All the glory of the Kings daughter is Intus, within. Psal. 45. shee is glorious within. wretched are they that forsake her, and when they speake of her, blesse themselues that they are fled Psal. 45. 14. out of Babel. Blind fooles, that will not know Ierusa∣lem from Babel. Their fault is the more hainous for two causes. 1. They seemed our most zealous professors: and a lewd seruant is easilyer brook'd then an vnduti∣full sonne. 2. They know so much, that their owne conscience tells them; Ignorance cannot excuse their separation. An ignorant iniurie is in more hope, both of amends and mercie. All their hote vrging, was our purging; not from our vices, but our good order: which when they could not effect, they purged them∣selues out of our companie. And their very malice
did vs good; for I am sure, we haue beene euer since the cleaner. They send vs word of many vnreformed, vncensu∣red euills among vs, for which they separate. It cannot be denyed, it cannot be auoided, but that among so many millions of men there will be some lepers: but what? must their vncleannes needs infect all? Aug. Ep. 48. Certè nullius crimen inficit nescientem. Let me not partici∣pate of their sinne, not shunne the Church because they are in it. yea, I am commanded to come, though they be there. If a man will come vnworthy, the sinne is his: but if I come not because he comes, the sinne is mine. God sayes to the wicked guest, How cammest thou in hither? not to the prepared, How came you in with such a guest? His fault cannot dispense with my dutie: nor shall my dutie be charged with his fault. But our euills are innumerable; I would to God they were lesse: yet I am sure the Gospell is faire, though our liues be fowle: Our profession is good, though many mens conuersation be full of euill. And yet the number of our euills is somewhat abated by their absence: we cannot complaine of all euills, whiles we want them. To the vncleane, they say; all things are euill; yet they are content to take some euill from vs. They will eate victualls, yea and eate them vp; as if for anger, rather then hunger. They will purse vp our moneys; take ad∣vantages of their forfeted bonds; and plead a proui∣dence in it; their owne prouidence they meane: and so, though not pray with vs, yet pray vpon vs. If all our things be euill, I perceaue they loue some of our euill. Let them goe: they from vs, not vs from our selues. But rather 2. Seeing there are wolues among the Lambes, let vs be wise to saue our selues, and patient to suffer others. The good are for thy comfort, the wicked for thy ex∣cercise: let thy life be good, to the consolation of the
one, and conuiction of the other. Greg. Mor. 1 Non valdè laudabile est, bonum esse cum bonis, sed bonum esse cum malis. For as it is a wretched fault not to be good among the good: so it is a worthy prayse to be good among the euill. Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine, that others may glorifie God for your good; and be 1. Pet. 3. 16. ashamed of their owne euill. You are the light of the world; if there be any dimnesse in your shining, the whole Countrey is full of snuffers. In the Temple were 1. King. 7. 50 golden snuffers; we haue not many of those, to make vs burne brighter: but base stinking ones, that would ra∣ther put vs out. 3. Let vs abhorre wicked societies, knowing that they shall be conuented againe in hell. There must be some acquaintance with them, must be no familiarity. A meare commerce with them is not vtterly in it selfe vnlawfull, but dangerous. Factum licitum prohibetur, propter vicinitatem illiciti. Thou hadst better lose a good bargaine at a worldlings hand, then purchase some of his wickednesse. The second Chariot of Egypt taught Ioseph to sware by the life of Pharah. Let them see thy good life, heare thy gratious words: thy true detestati∣on, and wise reprehension of their wickednesse. Gods seruants would haue all serue their master, that they might haue the more companie with them to heauen. But let thy Psal. 16. 3. delight be with the Saints on earth, and with those that excell in vertue. Let vs meete now in synceri∣tie, that herafter we may meete in glory. Psal. 119. 63. I am a com∣panion of all them that feare thee, and keepe thy precepts. Death may breake off for a while this gratious meeting, but our glorious second meeting shall triumph ouer death: it shall be Generall; it shall be eternall. Wherin; In the vnitie. A perfect vnitie is not to be expected in this life; it is enough to enioy it in heauen. Indeed the Church is euer but one. There are threescore Cant. 6. 8. Queenes, and foure∣score concubines, and virgins without number: My doue, my
vndefiled is but one, shee is the onely one of her mother. Though a kingdome haue in it many shires, more Cit∣ties, and innumerable Townes; yet is it selfe but one; because one King gouernes it, by one law. So the Church though vniuersally dispersed, is one kingdome; because it is ruled by one Christ, and professeth one faith Ephe. 4. 5. There is one bodie, one spirit, one Lord, one faith. So much Vnitie now. But that vnitie which is on earth may be offended, in regard of the partes subiectuall to it. What familie hath not complained of distraction? What fraternitie not of dissention? What man hath euer beene at one with himselfe? 1. Cor. 11. 19 There must be diuisions, sayth Paul: are and must be, by a kind of necessitie. But there is a two∣folde necessitie. One absolute and simple: God must be iust; a necessitie of infallibilitie. The other exhypo∣thesi, or of consequence; as this, there must be heresies. Satan will be an aduersarie, man will be proued; a ne∣cessitie vpon presupposition of Satans malice, & mans wickednesse. But woe vnto them by whom offences come: we know not the hurt, we bring by our diuisions. Zach. 8. 19 Thus sayth the Lord of Hostes. Zach. 8. Loue the truth, and peace. Some loue peace well, but they care not for truth. These are secure worldlings: let them alone in their sinnes, and you would not wish quieter men. Pacem quaerunt, Pietatem fugiunt: they seeke peace, but they flie righte∣ousnesse: as if they would disvnite those things which God hath ioyned together, righteousnesse and peace. Righteousnesse and peace shall kisse each other. Others loue truth well, but not peace. Let them fabricke a Church out of their own braines, or rather a discipline to man∣age it; and they will keepe within verges of the maine truth. They cannot be content to haue good milke, but they must chuse their spoone to eate it with. They are wanton children, and worthy the rod of correction: let them be whipt, onely discipline may mend them.
I would our eyes could see, what hurt the breach of vnitie doth vs. Scilurus his arrowes taken singly out of the sheafe, are broken with the least finger: the whole vnseuered bundle feares no stresse. We haue made our selues weaker, by dispersing our forces. Euen the en∣couraged Atheist walkes to Church in the lane of our diuisions; and is still no lesse an Atheist, then the deuill was a deuill when he Iob 1. 6. stood among the sonnes of God. It is the nature of our controuersies to fight peremptorily at both ends, whiles truth and pietie is left in the mid∣dle, and neglected. Whiles men haue contended about the body of Religion, some haue thought it quite dead: as no doubt Moses body was, when the Iude ver. 9. Archangell dis∣puted with the Deuill about it. As one sayd of his Dona∣tists; Betwixt our Optat. cont. Parm. Licet, and your Non licet, many soules stagger: and excuse their irresolution by our want of peace. Indeed this is euentually one good effect of many controuerted poynts; the way is cleansed for others, though not for themselues. Theeues falling out, true men come by their goods. Two flints beaten to∣gether, sparkles out fire: and by the wrastling of two poisons, the health is preserued. So are some vnited to the truth, by these diuisions of peace. But others are more vnsetled: they condemne all for the dissension of some: our comfort is, God doth not so. The diui∣sions of a few, and that about the huske of Religion, Ceremonie; cannot redound to the condemnation of a whole Church. In Gods iudgement it shall not; we must care little, if in theirs. Doe not we know, that Sa∣tan by his good will, would allowe vs neither Truth nor Peace? but if we must haue one, will he not labour to detaine the other? If he can keepe vs from Truth, he cares not much to allow vs peace. The wicked haue securitie, the deuill lets them alone. What fowler sets his ginnes for tame birds, that will come gently to his hand? But if we embrace the truth, then haue at our
peace. Shall the Prince of darknesse bee quiet, when his Captiues breake loose from him? The good are soonest tempted. Inuidia fertur in magnos. It was the king of Syria his command to his 32. captaines; 1. King. 22. 31. Fight neither with small nor great, saue only with the King of Isra∣ell. It is the Deuils charge to his souldiers; fight against none, but the godly, that fight against mee. Dauid was safe among his sheepe, and Moses leading a priuate life. No man layes snares for his owne birds; nor the De∣uil for such as 2. Tim. 2. 26. are taken captiue by him at his will. But pax conscientiae is bellum Satanae: and this iust warre is better then an vniust peace. Let all this giue condemnation to peace-haters, and commendation to peace-louers. There are some quite gone, not diuerse but aduerse to vs; with these warre, and no peace: for they haue no peace with Christ. Si∣newes cut in sunder can neuer be knitte, nor can there be Integralis vnitas in solutione continui. They will be gone, let them goe. I would we were as well ridde of all those, whose soules hate vnitie. The Christians of of the first age were nether Albinians, nor Nigrians: Tertull. the report of faction was scarce heard. Athanasius, on whose shoulder our mother the Church leaned, in her sharpest persecution to take her rest; reioyced, that though the aduersary hate was violent, the loue of bre∣thren was sound. Peter was commanded to put vp his sword, euen when Christ was at his elbow, to heale the greatest wound he could make: why doe we smite and hurt, that haue not such meanes of cure? King Richard the holy warriour hauing taken a Bishop in coate-armour, in the field; was requested by the Pope (calling him his Sonne) to release him. The King sent not him, but his coate to the Pope; and asked him; An haec esset Filij sui tunica? whether this was his sonnes coate: alluding to the coate of Ioseph, which his bre∣thren brought to their Father. The ashamed Pope an∣swers;
Nec  his Sonnes  vndertakes, wit  consci∣ence prepares, scrup , and Peace suffers. And now  hey ,   vnum, but ; not to  out  ake their malice on, but to dissolue and vndoe the vnited strength of all. her the scer must stoope to the mi∣ter, or no peace. Betweene the rootes of Iudah and Leui, by Moses law, the separations and distances were  de, that neither need to crosse anothers walke, nor  clipse anothers dignitie. The rod of Mose was once  ser∣pent, to giue terrour:  of  was preser∣ued; not in campo , in a  of wae and sediti∣on; but Testimony tabernaculo; sprowng forth greene leaues of Truth, and sweet blossomes of Peace. Well let our enemies cry; Non Pacem petimus Superi, date gentibus iram. Our voyce be for Peace. Nulla salus bello, Pacem te poscimus omnes▪ Peace was that last and rich Iewell, which Christ de∣parting to his Father, leaft his Spouse for a legacie. Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you. This Peace be with vs for euer. Ioh. 14. 27. Whereof. This vnitie hath a double reference. 1. to Faith. 2. to Knowledge. And the Obiect to both these, is the Sonne of God. Of the faith. Faith is taken 2. wayes: either passiuely, or actiuely Vel pro o Quo creditur. Quod creditur. Either for that whereby a man beleeues, or for that which a man beleeues. So it is vsed both for the instrument that ap∣prehends,
and for the obiect that is apprehended. If we take it for the former, we may say there is al∣so an vnitie of faith; but by distinction. Faith is one Ra∣tione obiecti, non ratione subiecti: One in respect of the Obiect on which it rests, not one n respect of the Sub∣iect in which it resides. Euerie man hath his owne faith; euerie faith resteth on Christ. The iust shall liue by his owne faith. Nulla fides pro te, nisi quae in te. Euery man must see with his owne eyes, reach with his owne hand, haue Math. 25. 9. oile ready in his owne Lampe, that he may enter in with the Bride-groome. He must labour in the vine∣yard himselfe, that would haue the peny: he shal not haue anothers pay. It is a happie perfection of faith, when we shall all beleeue in one Christ, after one manner. Not one with a Grecian faith, another with a Romane, a third with an Arrian, a fourth with an Anabaptisti∣call; but all meete in the vnitie of one holy Catholicke faith. But if we rather take it Pro obiecto quod creditur, for Christ in whom we haue beleeued, we shall all meete in the vnitie of those ioyes & comforts which we haue faithfully expected. Some beleeued before the law, some vnder the law, others vnder the Gospell: all shall meete in the vnitie of faith: 1. Pet. 1. 9. Receiuing the end of their faith, the saluation of their soules. Whether some beleeued in Christ to come, or others in Christ alreadie come, or we in Christ come and gone to glory: Venturus & venit, di∣uersa sunt verba, eadem fides; To come, or come, are di∣uerse wordes, but there is but one faith. Ephe. 4. 5. One Lord, one Faith. Now since faith must bring vs to our Beloued, and by that we shal come to the Son of God, how precious should it be vnto vs! Let the great worldlings possesse their preposterous wishes; Epicurus his pleasure, Alex∣ander his honour, Midas his gold. Be our delight, de∣sire, prayer, O Lord ncrease our faith: I beleeue, Lord
helpe my vnbeliefe. There is nothing more honourable, more rich, more pleasant, then to be a true beleeuer: for against this no euill on earth, no deuill in hell shalbe euer able to preuaile. Of the knowledge. That knowledge which we nowe haue is shallow in all of vs, and dissonant in some of vs. There is but one way to know God, that is by Iesus Christ: and but one way to know Christ, and that is by the Gospell. Yet there are many that goe about to know him by other wayes; they will know him by traditions, images, reue∣lations, miracles, deceiueable fables. But the Saints shall meete in the vnitie of the knowledge of the Son of God: there shall be vnion and perfection in their knowledge at that day. But it is obiected, that Paul sayth; 1. Cor. 13. 8. knowledge shall va∣nish away. The manner, not the matter of our present knowledge shall vanish: we shall not know by schooles, tutors, or arts in heauen: so the manner of knowing ceaseth. But the matter remaines: for Ioh. 17. 3. this is eternall life to know God. Now we know Christ in some manner & measure here; but through a window or lattesse. Cant. 2. 9. My beloued looketh forth at the window, shewing himselfe through the lattesse. Thus the Apostle 1. Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a glasse darkely, but then face to face. When a man sees a mappe of Ierusalem, wherein is presented the Towers and Bul∣warkes, he presently conceiues what manner of Citie it is: but imperfectly; as a man that onely reades the description of forraine Countryes: but when he comes thither, beholds all the streets, pallaces, beautie, and glory, he esteemes his former knowledge poore, in re∣spect of his present satisfaction. We are now pilgrims, and know no more of our celestiall Countrey, then we can see through the spectacles of faith, in the glasse of the Scriptures. In this mappe we read Ierusalem aboue
described to vs: a citie of gold, whose Reu. 21. 18. wals are Iasper, and her foundations Christall. We read, that this 1. Cor. 15. 54. cor∣ruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortall immorta∣litie. That there is blessednesse in the fountaine; ioyes in shew beautifull, in sense wonderfull, in waight exces∣siue, in dignitie without comparison, and in continu∣ance without end. And that in Christ we are chosen before all worlds, to be Burgesses of this incorporation. But when we shall haue white garments put on our backes, and palmes in our hands; and Reu. 3. 21. shall sit with him in his throne, feasting at his table of glory: we shall then say as that noble Queene to Salomon: 1. Kin. 10. 7. It was a true re∣port of thy glory, O king; that I heard before; but now loe I see, one halfe was not told me. As worldlings about a purchase, enquire what seat, what delight, what com∣modities are appertinent to it; except like that foole in the Gospell, they will buy first, and see afterwardes. So we may sweetly consult of our future happinesse, without curiositie, without presumption: like those that neuer yet were at home, now after much heare-say trauelling thitherwardes, we aske in the way; what peace, what delight, what content will be found there: and how much the benefit of our standing house trans∣cends our progresse! There are three things buyed about Christ; Faith, Hope, and sight. By the two former we now liue with∣out the latter: by the latter we shall then liue without the former. 2. Cor. 5. 7. Now we liue by faith, not by sight: then we shall liue by sight, not by faith. But for our faith, the world would tread vs downe: for 1. Ioh. 5. 4. this is the victorie that ouercomes the world, euen our faith, But for our 1. Cor. 15. 19. hope, we were of all men most miserable: the worldlings were far happyer. When these two haue done their offices, sight comes in. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. We are now the sonnes of God, it doth not appeare yet what wee shall be: but wee know, that when hee shall ap∣peare, wee shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is.
Here is the benefite of sight. These three are like 3. members of the body, the hand, foote, eye. Faith, like the Hand, layes vnremoued hold on Christ, Hope, like the Foote, walkes toward him in an holy expectation, patiently enduring all wrongs, in hope of sweet issue. Sight, which belongs to the Eye, shall fully apprehend him, when it is gloryfied. In this bright knowledge we shall all meete. Our present knowledge shall be excelled by our fu∣ture, in 5. differences. 1. In qualitie: this is an abstracted knowledge of Christ absent, that a plenary knowledge of Christ pre∣sent. Ex abstractiua fit intuitiua notitia. The light of a lampe vanisheth, when the glorious sunne appeareth. Melanct. If our knowledge were mundus eruditionis, a world of learning, yet is it but eruditio mundi, the learning of the world; of narrow bounds in regard of the knowledge in heauen. 2. In quantitie; euen that we know now, shall be known then in a greater measure. The orbes, elements, planets, plants; the herbes of the field, parts of our own bodyes we know now; but alas weakly in regard of that perfection which this future life shall giue vs. In∣deed the Christian, for his owne sauing health, knowes so much as is able to make him euerlastingly blessed: for he knowes Christ his Sauiour, and that is eternall life. But then he shall know him in a higher measure, and perfectly see those things, now vnconceaueable. Paul 2. Cor. 12. 4. heard vnspeakable words in his rapture aboue, which be∣low he confesseth not possible for man to vtter. 3. In perfection or maturitie. Our knowledge heere growes from degree: there it shall be one and the same, receauing or requiring no augmentation. Psal. 84. 7. They goe from strength to strength: how long? till they appeare before God in Sion.
4. In continuance. Earthly knowledge is momenta∣ny, all skill in tongs and arts is like the authors, mor∣tall, and shall come to an end. The most famous Ar∣tists haue often either mette with a derogate name, or beene buried in obliuion. The study of Christ is onely eternall, and shall not be abrogated, but perfected: we shall know then, as we are knowne. 5. In vnitie; various, dissonant, and not seldome re∣pugnant is humane knowledge: indeed not worthy the name of knowledge; for it is Opinion. Man is contrary to man, yea man to himselfe: this same vnum sentire 1. Pet. 3. 8. to be of one minde, is difficult, if not impossible to be found. Though wee ayme our knowledge at one marke, yet some shoote on the right hand, some on the left; some short, & others shoote ouer; hauing a 1. Cor. 8. 1. know∣ledge that puffeth vp. Whose learning hath in it some poyson, if it be let goe without the true correctiue of it. But at this expected day, we shall all meete in an vnitie of knowledge. Of the Sonne of God. That eternall Sonne of God, who in the fulnesse of time became for vs the Sonne of man, shall then be more clearly knowne to vs. We now beleeue his truth of perfection, we shall then see his perfection of truth. We shall brightly apprehend the vnconceiueable my∣sterie of him: who is Filius Dei sine matre, filius hominis sine patre: the Sonne of God without mother, the sonne of man without father. If any aske, whether our knowledge shall extend no further then to Christ our Sauiour. There is no doubt, but as we know our elder brother set in his throne a∣boue all the powers of heauen, so we shall also knowe the rest of our fraternitie. Loue is a grace that neuer fades, and therefore shall haue knowledge to make way before it. We shall loue the Saints, I may inferre wee
shall know them. Math. 17. 4. Peter knew Moses and Elias on the Mount, whom yet before he neuer saw: why then should we not know them in heauen! and if them, why not other of our glorified friends! If nothing but that which is earthly, and sauours of corruption shall cease, and fall off like Eliah's mantle; then knowledge must needs remaine, being a diuine grace, pure and euerla∣sting as the soule. But seeke we to know the Sonne of God here to be our Sauiour; and without doubt here∣after we shall know him to be our glorifier. Whereunto. To a perfect man. Before hee speakes in the plurall number of a multitude, We shall All meete: noweby a sweete kind of Solaecisme he compacts it into the sin∣gular; all into one. We shall All meete to a perfect man. Here lie three notes, not to be balked. 1. This shewes what the vnitie of the Saints shall be; one man. Here they are sometimes sayd to haue Act. 4. 32. one heart, one soule; there they shall be one man. That not a carnall, corruptible, sinfull man, for he may dissent from himselfe, but a perfect man. Not materially, for there shall bee distinct bodies and soules still; as here, but metaphorically in regard of the neuer-iarring har∣monie. Oh sweete musicke, where the symphonie shall exceedingly delight vs, without diuision, without frets. 2. The whole Church is compared to a man: we haue often read it compared to a body, here to a man. As in other places to a 1. Cor. 12. 27 Ephe. 4. 16. Body, cuius Cap est Christus; whose Head is Christ; so our Apostle here. ver. 16. speaketh of our growing to the Head which is Christ. So in this place to a Man, cuius anima est Christus, whose soule is Christ. Now the soule in the body encreaseth not aug∣mentatiuely, but secundum vigorem, transfusing into the bodie her vertuall powers & operations more strong∣ly. Christ is euer the same. Heb. 13. Iesus Christ yester∣day, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and the same for euer. In this soule there is no mutation; but the Col. 2. 19. body encreaseth with the encrease of God. For as Christ encreaseth the strength of his grace in vs, so we grow to perfection. 3. Full perfection is onely reserued for heauen, and not granted till we meete in glory; then shall the Church be one perfect man. We may be now Aug. in Ioh. 80. mundi, saith Aug. cleane, yet still mundandi, to be cleansed. Not so perfect, but still glad of mercie. Our puritie is not in facto, but in fieri; inchoate; not finished though begunne. All our righteousnes consists in the not imputation of our sinnes. Psal. 32. 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquitie. Summa perfectio imperfectionis confessio. Our greatest cleannesse is the free acknowledging our vile∣nesse. The other immunitie shall be when there are no passions in men, no lusts capable of sinne: nowe it is well if wee liue without scandall: without eruption, though not without corruption. Non sine culpaed sine querela. And so the commendation of Luk. 1. 6. Zacharie must be vnderstood; which calleth him righteous, walking in all the commaundements of the Lord, blamelesse. He liued blamelesse in the worlds eye, not in the Lords. Psal. 130. 3. If thou shouldest marke iniquitie, O Lord, who shall stand? Especi∣ally when his eye of iustice onely shall looke vpon it. Aug. Con∣fess. lib. 9. cap. 13. Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutiatur. Woe to the most commendable life of man, if mercie bee remooued when it is examined. It is e∣nough to proue Zacharie a sinner, in that hee was a Priest. For it was imposed on the Priest first Heb. 7. 27. to offer for his owne sinnes, and then the sinnes of the people: which had beene needlesse, if the Priest had not beene guiltie of sinne, and liable to condemnation. The iustification of Dauid seemes to rise higher Psal. Psal. 17. 3. 17. Thou hast tryed me, and shalt find nothing. What! hath God tryed him, the searcher of the hearts, that sees in∣to all the inward cabbins, and hidden concaues of the
soule! and shall he find nothing! not great impieties, not lesse infirmities? nothing! This phrase seemes generall, yet is not totally exclusiue; nothing against Saul, no tre∣cherie or iniustice against the Lords annointed. So it is by Euthymius, and must bee restrictiuely considered. Otherwise Dauid had many sinnes: originall, Psal. 51. 5. I was conceiued in sinne: actuall and publicke, in slaying not a Philistine, but an Israelite, an Israelite his subiect, his honest and worthy subiect; and that by the sword of the vncircumcised; and yet more by a wile, sending for him home, and making him drunke. And to ripen this blister, he adulterizeth with his wife: he hath had many wiues, robbes his poore neighbour of his singular com∣fort, onely wife. These were apparant, vniustifiable impieties; which makes him fall to a Psalme of mercy. Haue mercy vpon me, O Lord, haue mercy vpon me: heale my soule, for I haue sinned against thee. These were knowne to the world; no doubt diuers o∣thers were knowne to his owne heart; and yet more, which neither the world nor his owne heart knew: Psal. 19. 5. who can tell how oft he offendeth? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. Yet in the matter of Saule, thou canst find nothing. As Bishop Latimer once said in his Ser∣mon before King Edw. 6. For sedition, me thinkes for ought I know, if I may so speake, I should not need Christ. Dauid was no traitour, but Dauid was an adul∣terer. He was in many personall faults an offender: but as a subiect he was a good subiect; as a King, an excel∣lent Prince. No lesse is the praise of Iob; Iob. 2. 3 a perfect and vpright man; none like him in the earth. Which yet is not to be taken for a positiue, but comparatiue commendation. There was none like him in that part of the earth: and he was perfect in regard of those vitious times. Heare himselfe speake; Iob. 9. 2. How shall a man be iust with God? and ver. 28. I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent.
Let then the Pelagian drinke neuer so deepe in this iusti∣fying cup of their owne righteousnes; and let the Pa∣pist as deeply pledge him: yet perfection is reserued for another world, when we shall meete to a perfect man. Here we may haue it partially, there gradually: here so much as belongs Ad viam, to our way. Phil. 3. Let vs, as many as are perfect, be thus minded: there onely Phil. 3. 15. that is proper Ad patriam, to our countrey: ver. 12. not as though we were already perfect; but following after, &c. Let vs, 1. be humble in acknowledging our owne wants and sinnes; who cannot to God contending with vs, Iob 9. 3. answere one of a thousand. De quadrup. debito. Nec millessimae, nec minimae parti, sayth Bern. 2. Labour to perfection, Phil. 3. 13. in forgetting those things which are behind, and reading forth vnto those things which are before. 3. Comfort our endeuouring hearts with this sweete encouragement; we shall one day meete to a perfect man. To the measure of the stature The word , before translated Age, is now bet∣ter by our New, and according to Beza, Stature. If any will here ground, that in heauen we shall liue in that measure of Christs age and stature, wherein he dyed, I subscribe not, but am silent. It is not safe wading with∣out a bottome. Onely thus much: there shall be nothing wanting to make our glory perfect: and whether you conceaue the 33 yeare of a mans age, to be the beauty and compleat perfection, I dispute not. This implies a spirituall stature, whereunto euery Saint must grow. Whence inferre. 1. That we must grow vp so fast as we can in this life; 2. Pet. 1. 5. ioyning to faith vertue, to vertue knowledge, &c. We must encrease our talents, enlarge our graces, shoote vp in talenesse, grow vp to this stature. For Gods familie ad∣mits no dwarfes: stunted profession was neuer found. If the sappe of grace be in a plant, it will shoote out in
boughes of good wordes, and fruit of good workes; alwayes expected the winter of an afflicted conscience. If a table and consumption take our graces, they had neuer good lungs, the true breath of Gods Spirit in them. 2. God will so ripen our Christian endeuours, that though we come short on earth, we shall haue a full measure in heauen. We haue a great measure of com∣fort here, but withall a large proportion of distresse: there we shall haue a full measure, heapen and shaken, and thrust together, and yet running ouer; without the least bitternesse to distast it. This is a high and a happie measure. Regard not what measure of outward things thou hast, so thou get this measure. Trouble not thy selfe with many things, this one is sufficient, the better part, the greater measure, neuer to be lost or lessned. Open both thine eyes of Reason and Faith, and see first the litle helpe that lyes in great worldly riches. Ier. 17. 11. As the partrich sitteth on eggs and hatcheth them not: so he that getteth rich∣es and not by right shall leaue them in the  of his dayes, and at his end shall be a fe. A bird that steales young ones from other birds, and tenderly nourisheth them, is mocked for her motherly kindnes when they are fligge. Euen now shee had many running after her, by and by they giue her the slip, & are all gone: pleasures, delights, riches are hatched and brooded by the wic∣ked as their owne. But when God, at whose com∣mand they are, calls them away, they take them to their heeles; like fugitiues they are gone, and no officer can bring them backe. The rich man may shut vp his wealth for a season; but as a bird in a cage, if it spye a hole open, it is gone, and flyes farre enough beyond recouerie; towring like an Prou. 23. 5. Eagle, euen vp toward hea∣uen. were thy measure neuer so ample, as full as his Barnes. Luke. 12. yet but a night, a peece of a night, &
all is gone. Iob. 8. 13. 14. The first borne of death shall deuoure his strength, sayth Bildad: and it shall bring him to the King of terrors. what helpe is in weaknes? neuer talke of helping thee with fine floure, and the best grapes, & the richest excrements of wormes, silken garments: thou wilt one day say, this is no succour. No: that is succour which will help thee in anguish of thy soule, and distresse of thy consience; calme the trou∣bles of thy spirit, and heale the wounds of thy broken heart, when the horrour of death, and terrours, of sinne, sharpened with a keene edge of Gods Iustice shall be∣seege thee: now let the thing be praysed that can helpe thee. No measure of earthly things can giue thee ease; but this measure of grace, that shall bring thee to the full measure of glory. Grow thou as high in this world as Ionas gourd: a worme shall smite thee, and thou shalt wither. Grow vp to this stature of Christ, so fast as thou mayest, and so farre as thou canst: and what is here wanting to thy holy endeuours, God shall make vp with his happy mercies. Of the fullnes of Christ. Adulti Christi. It is not meant the full growth of Christ in the flesh: which was as other children. Luk. 2. The child grew, Luk. 2. 40. and waxed stronger. We reade him a babe sucking, at 12. yeares old disputing, at 30. preaching, and about 33. dying. His encreasing was not habitualiter, sed effectu∣aliter. But here we must consider Christ as Head of his Body the Church; and so said to haue mensuram statu∣rae adultae, the measure of full stature, when his body is Perfected: now some predestinated members of this Body are yet vnborne; which must concurre to the perfection, and making vp of this stature of the fullnesse of Christ. Whence we haue a sweet and comfortable ob∣seruation offred vs. Till the church be fully gathered together, there is Obseru. in some sort a want to the perfection of Christ. But we
must consider Christ two wayes; Personally, and misti∣cally. Personall or abstractiuely in himselfe, he is not onely perfect, but perfection it selfe. Colos. 1. For it plea∣sed the Father, that in him should all fullnesse dwell. And. Colos. 1. 19. 2. 9. chap. 2. In him dwelleth (not passeth by) the fullnesse (not a good reasonable measure; and this not onely a sufficient fullnes, but) all the fullnesse (not of any cre∣ated nature, but) of the Godhead (and that not fantasti∣cally, but) bodily. Mistically, or in relation to his Bodie the Church: 1. Cor. 12. 27. now ye are the bodie of Christ, and members in perticular. And Christs will is, that Ioh. 17. 24. where he is, his members may be there also. So that till the whole Bodie be gathered to the Head, the head is in some sort not perfect. And in this sence may that Cant. 3. be vnder∣stood. Behold King Solomon with the Crowne, wherewith Cant. 3. 11. his mother crowned him in the day of his espousalls. where the Church is sayed to set a Crowne on Christs head; as if his full and perfect coronation were not come till the day of his espousalls and marriage in heauen, when his whole Church shall be crowned together with him. Time was that the other Ioh. 20. 6. Disciple out ranne Peter to the Sepulcher, and Peter out went that other Disciple into the sepulcher: but at this day, 1. Thes. 4. 15 they that are aliue shall not preuent them that sleepe. For Heb. 11. 40. God hath prouided better for vs, that they without vs should not be made perfect. We shall all goe together to glory. What a treasure of ioy and comfort is heere opened vs! Our Sauiour so loues vs, that he thinkes not him∣selfe perfect without vs. Psal. 144. 3. What is man, O Lord, or the sonne of man, that thou soreckonest of him? Thou hast Saints the spirits of iust, blessed and obedient Angells, thy owne infinite selfe to delight thee; Quid opus vermicu∣lo? What need hast thou of a worme? What am I, O Sauiour, that thou shouldest not thinke thy selfe per∣fect without me? Well may this sweeten all our pouer∣tie, miserie, disgrace and ignominie, that the world
casts vpon vs. A great Gallant blusheth to see thee take acquaintance of him, lookes vpon thee betwixt scorne and anger, thinkes himselfe disparaged by thy compa∣nie: be content, the God of heauen and earth thinkes himselfe not perfect without thee. He that can breake thy contemners to pieces, respecteth thee. Thou art vnworthy of the fauour of Iesus Christ, if thou canst not content thy selfe with it, without the worlds. What a terrour shal this be to the wicked, to see those men crowned Kings with Christ, to whom they dis∣dained to giue notice in the world. Diues lookes with pitifull eyes on glorified Lazarus, who once lay at his gates without the releese of crummes. It shall be no small aggravation to the vngodly's torments, to say of the Saint, Wisd. 5. 3. 5. This was he whom we had some times in derision, and a proverbe of reproch. We fooles accounted his life mad∣nesse, and his end without honour. Now he is numbred a mong the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints. I conclude. Euery Saint shall enioy this full measure of glorie: there shall be no scanting, no limitation. None shall complaine of lacke: there is the fountaine, drinke thy fill; there is the heape, take as much as thou wilt. There shall be in all an equalitie, though not of quantitie, yet of proportion: which ariseth not from the obiect, wherein is plenitude; but from the subiect, which is not alike capable. A vessell throwne into the sea can be but full; another is but full, though it containe a greater measure. Euery one shall possesse this fulnesse; and be∣ing full there is no want, therefore no enuie. But let vs take no thought, who shall sit highest in this kingdome, with the sonnes of Zebedee: it is enough that we shall be crowned kings. Trouble not thy selfe for order, onely striue for admission. We cannot desire to be more then blessed. Let vs get into the Citie of glory, and let God appoint vs a roome.
Here we see the great difference betwixt this life and the next. In this life we grow vp to our full Stature; and then we decrease till we decease; we decline and die. In the other, we come at first to a perfect stature, and so continue for euer. We are here subiect to sorrowes and sinnes; the first grieuous to vs as we are men, the other as we are good men: loe we shall one day be freed, bee perfect. It is a sweete meditation that fell from a reuerend Diuine; that many vegetable & brute creatures doe exceede men in length of dayes, and in happinesse in their kind; as not wanting the thing they desire. The Oake, the Rauen, the Storke, the Stagge fill vp many yeares, in regard of whom man dies in the minoritie of child-hood. This made the Philosophers call Nature a Stepdame to man, to the rest a true mo∣ther. For shee giues him least time, that could make best vse of his time; and least pleasure, that could best ap∣prehend it, and take comfort in it. But here diuinitie teacheth & reacheth a large recompence from our God. Other creatures liue long, and then perish to nothing; man dies soone here, that hereafter he may liue for euer. This shortnesse is recompenced with eternitie. Dost thou blame Nature, O Philosopher, for cutting thee so short that thou canst not get knowledge! Open thine eyes: perfect knowledge is not to be had here, though thy dayes were double to Methushalems. Aboue it is. Blesse God then rather for thy liues shortnes: for the sooner thou diest, the sooner thou shalt come to thy de∣sired knowledge. The best here is short of the least there. Let no man blame God for making him too soone happie. Say rather with the Psalmist; My soule is a thirst for the liuing God: O when shall I come to appeare in the glorious presence of the Lord? who would not for∣sake a prison for a pallace, a tabernacle for a Citie, a sea of daungers for a firme land of blisse; the life of men for the life of Angels? In the bed of this ioy let me re∣pose
your soules for this time; meditating of that eter∣nall glory, whereof you shall haue a perfect and full mea∣sure, thinking that the full coronation of your Sauiour carries for you; and lifting vp your eyes of sorrow from the valley of teares, to the mount Sion of blessednesse, whereon the Lambe of GOD standeth to gather his Saints about him to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of his owne fulnesse. To which place himselfe for his owne merits and mercies sake in due time bring vs. Amen. PRESVMPTION running into DESPAIRE. Reuel. 6. 16. They sayd to the mountaines and rockes, Fall on vs, and hide vs from the face of him that sitteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe. THis verse may be di∣stinguished into Errour. Terrour. The errour of the reprobate, the ter∣rour of the Iudge. Their errour is manifested in their Inuocation: in which wee may ob∣serue To what; Mountaines & rocks. For what To fall on them. To hide them. Thus their amazed errour and ignorance is expressed in their Prayer. For the terrour, the Iudge is descri∣bed
by his Omniscience; from the face of him that sitteth on the Throne. Omnipotence; from the wrath of the Lambe. Euery circumstance serues to aggrauate their follie, and desperate feare. 1. They feare God, but too late. 2. They open their lippes to confesse the inuincible power of Christ: before they were either dumbe in si∣lence, or blasphemous in contumelies. 3. They pray to the Mountaines and rockes, which heare not. 4. To fall on them, which they dare not. 5. To hide them, which they cannot. 6. They begge to bee concealed from him that is all eye; from the face of him that sittes in the Throne. 7. To bee protected from him that is all power; from the wrath of the Lambe. Before we come to their Errour, and matter of their inuocation, let vs examine two things. What they were. did. The Persons. Thus amated with errour, and amazed with terrour, are described in the precedent verse. The Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe captaines, and the mightie men, the bond, and the free, hidde themselues in the dennes and rockes of the mountaines. The greatnesse of man, when it comes to encounter with Obser. God, is weakenes and vanitie. Is the reprobate a king? the crowne on his head is not thunder-proofe: lift he his scepter neuer so high, there is a scepter of iustice shall smite it downe. Is he Great in his countrey, that (as they write of the Sea about the castle of Mina) the currant goes euer with the wind of his will: be he neuer so high, there is one higher then he, and the highest of all regardeth it: and Eccle. 8. 5. will subiect it. Is he Rich? were he the eldest sonne of Mammon, and sole heire to all the vsurers in the world, can his
gold saue him? Is vengeance afraid to strike his vessell, because his sailes be of silke, and it is ballaced with re∣fined aure? Shall he buy out his damnation with coine? No; the Samuell of heauen will neuer take bribes. Is he a Chiefe Captaine? Be his lookes neuer so sterne, his speech neuer so imperious, impetuous; he may com∣mand here, and goe without. Were he Generall of Xerxes armie, yet he shall find the words of the Psalme truth: Man is not saued by the multitude of an Heast. Is hee mightie? were hee as Alexander thought him∣selfe, till he saw his owne bloud, the Sonne of Iupiter Hammon; yet woe to man when he shall wrastle with his maker. Proud worme, hee may dare to lift vp his head, but shall quickly be troden into slime. When the Lord of hoastes is angry, whose wrath shakes the earth, and burnes to the bottome of hell; who shall proudly without confusion looke him in the face? Silly Giant of men, that thou shouldst dare to grapple, to parle, yea so much as to looke at God! Loe greatnes! Time was, when if a friend in the Court shall say to thee, as Elisha to the Shunamite. What is to be done for 2. King. 4. 13. thee? Wouldst thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Cap∣taine of the hoast; It would haue seemed as high a grati∣fying, and ratifying of his loue to thee; as thou couldst haue desired, or he expressed. What fauour will it be at this day, to be spoken for to all the Kinges of the earth, great men, rich men, mighty Captains? Alas they haue need to be spoken for themselues. The greatest Potentate, if reprobate, hath now his honour laid in the dust; & from a publicke Throne, he creepes into a hole. As ambitious Herod receiued his pride and glory (with derogation to God; Vox Dei.) in a Theater: so now his shame & confusion is in the sight of the whole world; of good and bad Angels, of good and bad men. Zenacherib in his ruffe could once say; Esa. 37. 13. Where is the King of Hamath, and the King of Arphad; the King of the Citie of Sephar∣vaim,
Zena, and Iuah? But now where is the King of Ashr? Thus Iob. 12. 19. 21. Godleadeth Princes away spoiled, and o∣uerthroweth the mighty. For their wickednes hee powreth contempt vpon Princes. Then shall be manifest the vnre∣sistable power, and vnblameable iustice of God: Esa. 40. 22. 23. Who sitteth vpon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants there∣of are as grashoppers: stretching out the heauens as a cur∣taine, & spreading them as a tent to dwell in. He bringeth the Princes to nothing, and maketh the Iudges of the earth as vanitie. What priuiledge then doth these inferior authori∣ties bring with them? That the bondman should thus striue to be free: the freeman to be mightie: the mightie to be a chiefe Captaine: the chiefe Captaine to be rich: the rich to be great: the great to be Kings: till in their opinion nil restat quod praestat, nothing remaines to be aspired to. Whereas to these men, Omnia in praesenti par∣ua, in fine nulla, post finem mala: all is for the present lit∣tle: for Vt Luna, sic sublunaria: as the moone it felfe, so all things vnder it are subiect to ecclipses and changes. In the end they are nothing; death when the game is done, shuffling King and Pawne into one bagge. Af∣ter the end found euill things; for & perduntur & per∣dunt: they are both lost themselues, and make lost their owners. These so popular wonders, the terror of slaues, and mirror of fooles, on whom the eye of the world was fixed with admiration; are glad to hide themselues in holes. where are you, ye great men; that were so am∣bitions of fame, and made humane praise stand in com∣petition with conscience; as if it were the better mis∣tres and worthy of more seruants? alas, glad to be shrow∣ded in holes. your Greatnes now wisheth it selfe so litle, that it might not be seene. You insatiate couetous, that neuer ceased ioyning house to house, land to land; and possessing whole countryes, yet whined for lacke of
elbow-roome: loe, you shall at this day be glad of a hole; a darke hollow caue in a rocke for your parlour: or more glad if you might be dissolued into nothing. They said. We haue described the Persons, What they were: let vs see what they did. They said: They open their lips to confesse the invincible and inevitable power of Christ. whence derive we two obseruations. 1. The sense of present miserie takes away Atheisme. Before their mouthes were either shut by silence, or opened by blasphemies; possessed either with a dumbe or a roring deuill. God was not in all their thoughtes: or Psal. 10. 4. if in their thoughts, not in their lips: or if in their lips, but to his dishonour; not named but in their oathes. Now loe, they speake, and make a desperate acknow∣ledgment of that power, they erst derided. The day of iudgment, when it comes, shall find no Atheist. What those degenerate creatures would not beleeue, they shall see: they would not acknowledge their maker, they shall find their Iudge: and cry to the mountaines, Fall one vs, &c. Consider this, Psal. 50. 22. ye that forget God, lest you be torne in pieces when there is none to deliuer you. You may forget him during your short pleasure, you shall remember him for euer in torture. Proceed to Psal. 139. 20 speake of him wic∣kedly, and like enemies to take his Name in vaine; you shall one day fall low before his footestoole, not with a voluntary but enforced reuerence. You that haue de∣nied God on earth, the first voice that shall come from your lips, shall be a hopelesse acknowledgment of his maiestie. 2. The saying that comes from them is desperate: whence note, that in Gods iust punishment Desperation is the reward of Presumption. They that erst feared two Presumption running into Despaire. little shall now feare too much. Before they thought
not of Gods Iustice, now they shall not conceiue his Mercie. Consciences, that are without remorse, are not without horror. It is the kindnes which presumptuous sinne doth the heart to make it at last despaire of for∣giuenes. They say. Behold, God accuseth not, they accuse themselues. God loues to haue a sinner accuse himselfe: and there∣fore sets his deputie in the brest of man: which though it be a neuter when the act is doing, is an ad∣uersary afterwards. The conscience is like the poise of a clocke: the poise being downe, all motion cea∣seth, the wheeles stirre not: wound vp, all is set on going. Whiles conscience is downe, there is no noise or moouing in the heart; all is quiet: but when it is wound vp by the iustice of God, it sets all the wheeles on working: tongue to confesse, eyes to weepe, hands to wring, brest to be beaten, heart to ake, voice to cry; and that, where mercie steps not in, a fatall cry; to the hils, Fall on vs, and hide vs. Sinne, and iudgment for sinne, make the most cru∣ell men cowardly. Tyrants whose frownes haue beene death; oppressors that haue made their poore Te∣nants quake at their lookes; now tremble themselues: & would change firmnes with an aspine leafe. They that care not for the act of sinne, shall care for the pu∣nishment. Tumidi faciendo, timidi patiendo. Nero that could not be tired in cutting throtes, is soone weary of his owne torment. They that haue made others weepe, shall desperately howle themselues. Cain, that durst kill the fourth part of the world at a blow, euen his owne brother; dares afterwards not looke a man in the face, lest he Gen. 4. 14. should be slayne. Who durst be more impudent∣ly bold with God then Iudas, when he betrayed his onely Sonne to murderers? yet after the treason who more cowardly then Iudas? he becomes his owne hangman. The curse that followes sinne makes Pre∣sumption
it selfe to shudder. But what madnes is it, not to complaine till too late. If our foresight were but halfe as sharpe as our sense, we should not dare to sinne. The issue of wickednes would appeare a thou∣sand times more horrible, then the act is pleasant. Let this teach vs now to thinke of the Iustice of God as well as his mercie, that herafter we may thinke of his mercie as well as his Iustice. The mercie of God is a∣bused to encourage lewdnes: and wretched men by Christs merits are emboldned to committe that, for which he dyed: but so men may runne with mercie in their mouthes to hell. They that in life will giue no obedience to the law, shall in death haue no benefite by by the Gospell. When they gaue themselues ouer to lying swaring, coueting &c. they were wont to cry, Mercie, mercie: now loe, they feele what those sinnes are, and cry nothing but Iustice, Iustice; they cannot thinke on mercie. They that haue abused mercie, must be quitted with vengance. The good now sing; With thee, O Lord, is mercie; therefore thou shalt be feared. The reprobates sing at last, with thee O Lord, is iudg∣ment; with thee is storme and tempest, indignation & wrath, confusion and vengence, and therefore art thou feared. These necessary occurrences, thus considered; let vs passe to their Inuocation, wherein is exemplified their Error. Here we must obserue To what, For what, they call. To what. They are Mountaines and rockes; vnreasonable, yea insensible creatures: whence we may deduce two in∣ferences; a negatiue, and an affirmatiue. 1. Negatiuely; it is cleare, that they haue no ac∣quaintance with God, therefore know not how to di∣rect their prayers vnto him. If their trust had beene in
God, they needed not to fly to the Maines. So Dauid sweetly. Psal. 11. Ia the Lord put I my trust: how Pal. 11. 1. then say you to my soule, Flie as a bird to your mountaine? It is Gods charge. Psal. 50. 15. Call vpon me in the day of trouble: and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. But, Rom. 10. How shall they call on him, in whom they haue not Rom. 10. 14. beleeued? Or beleeue in him they haue not knowne? and how should they know him but by his word? Alas those mutuall passages, and entercourse of meanes they haue euer barred themselues. They would neither suf∣fer God to trouble them by his word, nor would they offer to trouble him by their prayers. Psal. 14. 4. They will not call vpon him, nor will they heare him calling vpon them. Therefore as those that neuer were in the companie of God, they know not how to addresse themselues to him; but rather to rockes and mountaines. As extremity discerneth friends; Verè amat, qui miserum amat: so it distinguisheth a man in himselfe. A suddaine distur∣bance giues a great try all of a Christians disposition. For as in a naturall man at such an affrightment, all the bloud runs to the heart, to guard the part that is prin∣cipall: so in a good man at such an instance, all the pow∣ers and faculties run to the soule, to saue that which is principall. The bloud and spirits striue to saue the life of the bodie: faith & hope to saue the life of the soule. So that at the suddaine assault of some daunger, a man shall best iudge of his owne heart. It may bee at other times a dissembler; for mans heart is false, who can know it? yet at such time it will manifest it selfe, and cannot deceiue. If God hath beene our familiar friend, and accusto∣med helper; danger doth not sooner salute vs, then we salute him by our prayers. The first thought of our hearts is Iesus Christ: the first voyce of our lips is Pe∣ters on the sea in such an extremitie; Math. 14. 30. Lord saue mee:
our faith is reposed on his wonted mercy and protecti∣on; Wee know whom we haue beleeued. Daniell cals on GOD, ere hee fals to the Lions; this stoppes their mouthes. The wicked in such miserie, are either heauie and heartlesse, as Nabal; whose 1. Sa. 25. 37. heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone. Or desperate as Iulian, throwing his bloud vp into the ayre, with a blasphemous con∣fession. Or sottish, as these here; running to the moun∣taines, vnprofitable, vnpossible helpes. When the blow of vengeance strikes the couetous, he runs to his counting house; if his bagges can giue him no succour, he is distracted. If any broken reed bee their confi∣dence, in these ouerwhelming woes, they catch drow∣ning hold of that; so they and their hopes perish toge∣ther. There are some whose tongues are so poysoned with blasphemie, that in an vnexpected accident, the very first breath of their lips is a curse, or an oath. As if they would sweare away destruction, which euery vngodly speech drawes on neerer. If these men hadde beene acquainted with God in faire weather, they would not forget him in a storme. But they that will haue no familiaritie with God in peace, shall haue him to seeke in extremitie. When therefore some sudden perill hath threatned thee with terrour, note seriously how thou art affected. Though the danger came vnlook'd for, let it not passe vnthought of: but as thou blessest God for deliuery, so examine the good or ill disposednesse of thine owne heart. If thou find thy selfe couragious and heauenly minded, on thy confidence in God; take at once assu∣rance of thy faith and Gods mercie. Hee that nowe stood by thee, will neuer leaue thee. If otherwise, la∣ment thy sinnes which darken thy soules way to the mercie-seate; and beseech Iesus Christ to store thy heart with better comforts. If thy treasure be in heauen,
and thy soule hath beene vsed to trauell often thither; when danger comes, it knowes the way so well, that it cannot misse it. 2. Affirmatiuely this presents a soule amazed with feare and follie. They call to the Mountaines, that can neither heare nor answere. When the world was de∣stroyed with water, men climbed vp to the tops of the Mountaines: when it shall be dissolued with fire, they will desire the holes of the rockes, and to lie vnder the hils. The mountaines are but swellings of the earth, and the rockes are surd things; that haue no eares: can they heare? or if they heare, can they answere? or if they an∣swere, can they saue? when the graues must vomite vp their dead, shall the rockes conceale the liuing? Those fiue Kings could not be hid in the caue of Iosh. 10. 17. Makkedah from Ioshua; and shall any caue hide from Iesus? Whiles guilt and feare consult of refuge, how vaine shifts they imagine! Adam would hide his disobedience in the bushes: Saul his rebellion in the crowd of the people. So the hood-wink'd foole seeing no body, thinkes no body sees him. Helplesse euasions! when 1. Kin. 1. 50. Adoniah heard the trumpets sounding at Salomons co∣ronation, he quaked and fled to the hornes of the Altar. When the vngodly shall heare the Archangels Trumpe proclaiming the coronation of Christ, they haue no Sanctuarie, (they neuer loued it in all their liues) but flie to the rockes and mountaines. The graue is a darke and priuatiue place: yet as a pri∣soner that comes out of a sordid and stinking dungeon, into the open ayre for his triall in a desperate cause, had rather keepe the prison still. So these reprobates newly raysed from the earth, cry to it to receiue them againe; glad to remaine (though not on the face of it with plea∣sure) in the bowels of it with rottenesse and solitude; rather then in the open light to come before the iudge∣ment seat of Christ. The graue is a drowne-bed to hell.
They suddainly start out of their sleepe, and meet with gastly amasednesse at the mouth of their sepulchers: be∣holding on the one side sins accusing, on another side hellish fiends vexing; an anguish'd conscience burning within, heauen & earth without; aboue them the coun∣tenance of an angry Iudge, below them a lake of vn∣quenchable fire; round about howling and bitter la∣mentations: no maruell then if at the worlds end they be at their wittes end; and cry to the mountaines, Fall on vs. Let all this declare to men the vanitie of their world∣ly hopes. God is the Preseruer of men, not hils & rocks. The rich man is brought in vpon a Premunire, can his gold acquit him in this Starre-chamber? The Epicure thinkes to drowne sorrow in lustie wines: the oppres∣sor mistrusts not the power of his owne hand: the proud refugeth his troubled heart in his trunkes: the lustfull in his punkes: what is this but running to rockes and mountaines? Thus madly doe men commit two er∣rors. Ier. 2. They forsake the creator which would neuer forsake them; and adhere to the creatures, which can Ier. 2. 13. neuer helpe them. O Lord; the hope of Israell; all that for∣sake thee shall be ashamed; and all that dept from thee shall Ier. 17. 13. be written in the earth. Nowe at this day perhaps they would seeke to the Lord: but they are answered; Go to the gods whom ye haue serued. Loe then of these gods they shall be wearie; as in the 2. of Esay. where these Esa. 2. 20. very words of my Text are deliuerd. ver. 19. They shall goe into the holes of the rockes, &c. it is immediatly ad∣ded; In that day a man shall cast his Idols of siluer, and his Idols of gold, which he made for himselfe to worship,  the moules and to the battes. Euen the spirituall Idolater, the Couetous, shall throw his Images, golden or siluer shrines for the Diana of his auarice; his damned coyne to combustion, with a vae, Woe vnto it, it hath lost my soule. As the sicke stomacke lothes the meate, whereof
it surfetted. Well, let vs leaue inuocation to these Rockes, world∣ly refuges: and remember that there is one to be called on, who is onely able to defend vs: a spirituall, holy and happy Rocke, Iesus Christ. Dauid often cals God his Psal. 18. 2. and 28. 1. Rocke and his refuge. A rocke that beares vp the pillars of the world. Deut. 32. 31. Their Rocke is not as our Rocke, e∣uen our enemies themselues being iudges. He that builds his house of assurance on this Math. 7. 24. rocke, shall stand immoue∣able to wind or weather: he needs not the shelter of mountaines; for he shall stand like Psal. 125. 1. Mount Sion, that a hideth fast for euer. They that despise him, shall find him a Rocke also: Math. 21. 44 if they fall on it they shall be broken: if it fall on them, it will grind them to powder. He is a Stone, the Stone, the Psal. 118. 22 head-stone of the corner; cut out of the Quarrey of heauen Dan. 2. 45. without hands. Of whome we are made 1. Pet. 2. 5. liuing stones. He is strong without all things: all things weake without him: trust in him, and you shall haue no need to flie to rockes and mountaines. For What The benefit that they would haue the Rockes and the Mountaines doe them, is to Fall on them, & hide them. Whence we deriue three obseruations. 1. Despaire is euer wishing for death: often impatiently snatching at it in this world; but when the last day comes, so greedily longing for it; that to be sure of it, they desire the mountaines to dispatch them. Death by the wicked is now most feared; death at the last shall be the thing most wished: They shall desire death, and shall not find it. They that sit in the warme nest of riches, hatching vp their brood of lusts, quake at the hearing of death. There are some feare to die, others not so much to die as to be dead. The former are cowardly, the other vnbeleeuing soules. Some feare both, to whom nothing in life then life is more desireable. But when ths last extremitie
comes, mricupiunt, they desire to die. And that death, like a merciles executioner, might not haue too many strokes at their liues, they begge helpe of the Moun∣taines: that they might be throughly dispatched at once, without need of a second blow. Cain at his arraigne∣ment for his brother would needs liue: God grants it; as if it were too much fauour for him to die. But hee yeelds it for a curse; as if he heard his prayers in anger. He liues, but banished from God, carrying his hell in his bosome, and the brand of vengeance in his fore∣head. God reiects him, the earth repines at him, and men abhorre him. Loe now Cain would die: himselfe now wisheth the death he feared, and no man dares pleasure him with a murther. As Nero in the like case; Nec amicm, nec mimicum hbeo; I haue neyther friend nor enemie: or as Sau found in his Armour-bearer, not 1. Sam. 31. 4. a will to kill him, though he had a will to be killed by him. Death these reprobates feared, and onely death is now desired. They cry to the mountaines; Fall on vs. 2 Obserue, that rockes and mountaines are farre lighter then sinne. Zachary compares it to a Talent of lead: Zach. 5. Esa. 21. Esay cals it a Burden. Such a waight bore our Sauiour, that he groned vnder it. I am pressed vnder you, as a cart Amo. 2. 13. is pressed that is full of sheaues. The wicked that like Ba∣bel-builders thinke to aspie to heauen by multiplying of earth, would bee glad if umulitumuli; their bodies might be buried vnder their heapes of wealth, where their soules had beene buryed long before. But what is a load of earth, a mountaine huger then Aetna, vnder which Iupiter was sayd subter fulminare Gigantes; what is the whole massie bodie of the earth to the waight of sinne? Thinke of it ye Theomachor, that striue in your rebel∣lions imponere Pelio Ossae: ye rapacious couetous, that load your selues with thicke clay: you lay heauie burdens on the poore, heauier on your owne consciences. Sin Hab. 2.
may seeme light for a season; as a packe made vp, but not assayed with one of your fingers: when Sathan shall lay it on you, it will breake your backes. You beare it now like corke and feathers: at that day you shall iudge it heauier then rockes and mountaines. Now in contempt of law and Gospell, honestie, and conscience, earth and heauen; they call to pride, ambi∣tion, blasphemie, ebrietie, luxurie, oppression, Fall on vs and couer vs; wearing pride as a chaine, and couering them∣selues with crueltie as with a garment. Si lyes at the dore, Psal. 73. 6. and they haue no sense to take it vp. The deuill puts his shoulders vnder the waight, and thus supported they feele it not. But when Gods iustice shall reproue them, and set their sinnes in order before their ; yea impose Psal. 50. 21. them on their weake and yeelding consciences; howe different will their cry be▪  fll , ockes couer vs. The swearer saying to these heauie creatures, you are lighter then my oathes▪ the uetous, you are not so ponderous as my oppressions, the adulterer, the whole earth is a gentle pressure o the burden of my lustes. Custome in sinne obstupefies a sense: and still like that Romaine Milo, his strength ecreasing with his burden: he that first carried sinne a wanton Calfe, can at last beare it a goaring Oxe▪ Menlocke vp their iniquities, as the vsurer his money, in a Chest; where the light of reproofe may not finde them out. They packe all their iniquities vpon H, that will beare them for none but His. Or reserue them to an houres repentance; setting them a day of cancelling, but they breake it: as if their last breath could dispell and scat∣ter them all into ayre. But alas, sinnes then are found heauiest of all: and here like malefactors pressing to death, they cry out for more waight, the accession of rockes and mountaines to dispatch them▪ Loath they are to come before the Iudge, therefore would be pressed
to death by these ponderous and massy creatures. The mountaines haue not beene more barren, then they of goodnes: the rockes not so hard as their hearts. The crosse of Christ hath beene held too heauy; repen∣tance too troublesome a guest for their houses: faith and obedience haue beene cast off as poore friends: all godlynes too waightie; now rockes and hils are light. Christs yoke was not for their shoulders, Satans must: His law might not be borne it was so heauy; his wrath must be borne, and that is heauyer. Oh then thrice blessed they! whose sinnes God bindeth vp in a bun∣dle, and sinkes them in the whirlepoole of forgetful∣nes; that they may neuer be imposed; for they are too Gen. 4. 13. heauy to be borne. 3. Obserue that before these wicked were Lords of nations and Countreys; (for they are said to be Prin∣ces, Captaines, Conquerors; rich men) now they would be glad of one to hide them. Of all their dominions they begge but the barrenest parcell, a rocke or moun∣taine: and that to doe them a poore office, to con∣ceale them. How much doth mans auarice and ambi∣tion couet here; how little contents him hereafter! In death the wickedest Potentate must be content with a graue: after death he would be content with a graue still; yea glad, if in the bottome of a mountaine he might be hidden. Heare this ye couetous, that ioyne house to house, and land to land; by disioyning the societies of men: as if you would leaue the whole earth to your babes. Excu∣tit Sen. natura redeuntem, sicut intrantem. Nature shall as strictly examine your going out, as it did your cōming in. Nonne telluris tres tantum cubiti te expectant? doe Basil. not only three cubites of ground allotte themselues to receiue you? Onely a graue remaynes; and all you that boast of your great lands, shall at that day say, haec terr mea, and terra tua: this is all my land, this is all
thy land: euen so much roome as thy dusts will take vp; & all the remainder of mighty Hercules, will scarce fill a little pitcher. A litle quantitie of ground hath na∣ture proportion'd thee, distst thou possesse as much as euer the Tempter shewed Christ. When certaine Phi∣losophers intentiuely beheld the Tombe of Alexander; sayth one: Heri fecit ex auro thesaurum; bodie aurum ex Alphons. eo facit thesaurum. Yesterday he treasured vp gold, to day gold treasures vp him. Another; Yesterday the world did not content him; to day ten cubites con∣taine him. Socrates carried Alcibiades bragging of his lands to a mappe of the world, and bad him demon∣strate them: Alcibiades could not find them: for alas, Athens it selfe was but a small and scarce discernable point. A wiser man spake otherwise of his lands. O Ager, quàm multorum fuisti & eris! nunc meus, & postea mescio cuius. O Land, how many mens hast thou beene and shalt be! now mine, and herafter I know not whose. So litle ground contents vs when we are dead. But when the wicked shall rise againe, would it not serue them still with all their hearts? Had they not ra∣ther lie in rottennesse then combustion? Were not a cold graue more welcome, then a hote furnace? Yes; rather had they be dead without sense, then aliue in tor∣ment. Now they beg not a cittie, though a little one as Zoar: not a house, though poore and bleake as Codrus his: not an open ayre, though sharpe and irkesome; scorched with the Indian Sunne, or frossen with the Russian cold: there is no hope of these fauours. Giue them but a mountaine to fall on them, and a rocke to hide them, and they are highly pleased. Here is a strange al∣teration for the wicked; When they shall goe from a glorious mansion to a loathsome dungeon: from the table of surfet to the table of vengeance: from fawning obseruants to afflicting spirits: from a bed of downe to
a bed of fire: from soft linnen and silken couerings, to wish a rocke for their pillow, and a mountaine for their couerlet. Nay, and yet they that commanded so farre on earth, cannot command this peece of earth, to doe them such a kindnesse. They could in the dayes of their pride speake imperiously enough; this land is mine, this towne is mine: as Naball sayd, Shall I take my meate and my drinke &c. but nowe they feele, it was none of theirs; not one hole must shelter them, not one hillocke doe them seruice. Nothing helpes when God will smite: mountaines and rockes are no defence when God pursues. Doest thou thinke to raigne because thou cloathest thy selfe in Ce∣dar? What, is Cedar against thunder? GOD hath a Ier. 22. 15. hand that can strike through Forts, Rockes, and Bul∣warkes. The seuenfold wals of Babilon cannot defend the Tyrant within them. The heauens melt at the pre∣sence of the Lord: if he touch the mountaines, they smoake for it. The of-spring of the reuiued world offer to build a Tower, whose toppe might reach to Heauen. What securitie could be in it? Are not thinges nearer to heauen more subiect to the violences of Heauen; lightning, thunder, and those higher inflammations? Feriunt summos fulgura montes. In se magna ruunt, sum∣mis{que} negatum est stare diù. God soone made it a monu∣ment of their follie and his power. He giues confusi∣on of their voyces and their worke at once. When God raigned from heauen that greatest showre, that euer the earth did or shall sustaine, you knowe their shifts. They thinke to ouer-climbe the iudgement; and being got vp to the highest mountaines, looke downe with some hope on the swimming valleys. When the water began to ascend vp to their refuged hils, and the place of their hope became an Iland, loe now they hitch vp higher to the toppes of the tallest trees; till at last the waters ouertake them halfe dead
with hunger and horror. The mountaines could not saue them in that day of water, nor shall the moun∣taines in this day of fire. It is not then the defence of forts or ports, the secrecie of caues or graues, the bot∣tome-burroughes of hils, or vaultie dens of rockes; not a league with all the elements of the world, beastes of the earth, stones of the street, that can secure them. Be hidden they cannot, what should they then wish but death: they that once trembled to die, doe nowe more quake to liue: they would bee glad of a riddance, and kisse the instrument of their annihilation. They would prise and embrace it as the best happynes that euer saluted them, if like beasts they might perish to nothing. Here they enuie the storke, stagge, rauen, oake for long life, and chide nature for their owne shortnesse. But at this day they would change with any flower, though the continuance thereof were not so much as Ionah's Gourds: and thinke not to be, was to be happy. The pangs of the first death, are plea∣sures, in respect of the second. But what hope is there of their securitie or refuge in mountaines; when ver. 14. The very heauen shall de∣part So Esa. 34. 4. a srowle that is rolled vp together, and euerie moun∣taine and Iland shall be moued out of their places. Heauen is expansum tanquam linteum, & diducta laina; but shall then be folded vp like a garment; whose beautie is not Hebr. 1. 12. seene: or rolled together like a volume, whose large con∣tents are as it were abridged: not that the matter of the world shall be quite abolished. For as we say now of grace; Adolet non abolet naturam gratia: so we may say of glorie: Perficit non perdit mundum gloria. Cor∣ruption shalbe taken away, not all the matter that was corrupted. But if all things be thus narrowly searched, how shall the vngodly hope to lye hidden? We haue now considered the horror of the Repro∣bates; let vs looke to the Iudge, from whom they
desire to be hidden. From the presence of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the lambe. In whom we find an omniscience, and an omnipotence. which cir∣cumstances the time allowes me but to mention. First for his all knowing Wisdome. From the face. It was euer the fashion of guiltines, to flie from the presence of God. Adam had no sooner sinned, but he thrusts his head in a bush. Sins ineuitable effect is Shame. Though impudence beare it our for a time. Ier. 6. They were not ashamed when they had committed abomination: yet they shall one day beare the reproch of Ier. 6. 15. Chap. 31. 19. their sinnes, and be ashamed, yea euen confounded. Shame must come; either first to repentance. Rom. 6. what Rom. 6. 21. fruit had you then in those things, wherof you are now asha∣med: or at last in vengeance; let them be ashamed that trans∣gresse Psal. 25. 3. without a cause. Let this teach vs how to iudge rightly of sinne, that driues vs from the face of God. But doth not the glory of the Lord fill all the earth? Whither then shall they goe from his face: whither fly from Psal. 139. 7. his presence? we shall find the Prophet concluding in that Psalme; that there is neither heauen, nor hell, nor vttermost part of the sea; nor day nor night, light nor darknes, that can hide vs from his face. Our sit∣ting, lying downe, rising vp, the words of our tongues, wayes of our feete, thoughts of our hart, our reines, bones and mothers wombes, wherein we lay in our first informitie, are well knowne to him. Let vs not flatter our selues, as if we would plucke out the eye of knowledge; God hideth his face, he will neuer see Psal. 10. 11. vs. For there is neither couch in chamber, nor vault in the ground; neither bottomes of mountaines, nor holes of rockes; neither secret friend, nor more secret consci∣ence; neither heauen nor hell that can conceale vs. Of him that sitteth. Christ now sittes in glory. Whiles he was on earth
how little rested he! He dearly earned that voice, be∣fore he heard it; Sitte thou at my right hand: now be∣hold he sittes. Good rest is the reward of good labour: the weeke of our dayes spent, we shall haue an eternall Sabboth; enter into Gods rest; Apoc. 14. rest from our la∣bours. Hast thou laboured, thou shalt haue ease: hast Heb. 3. 11. Reu. 14. 13. thou trauelled in the wayes of grace, thou shalt sitte on the seate of glory. On the throne. Christ at this day shall appeare in his true Maiestie: on earth he would not be crowned; the reason of his refusall was; my Kingdome is not of this world; now he sittes in his Throne. He hath a Kingdome here, but it is secret in the conscience: then it shall be conspi∣cuous; sitting in his Throne. His maiestie hath beene de∣spised; but now Bring those mine enemies that would not Luk. 19. 27. haue me raigne ouer them, and slay them before me. Thus differs Christs first comming and his second. Then in humilitie, now in glory: then with poore shepheards, now with mightie Angells; then the con∣tempt of nations, now the terror of the world: then crowned with thornes, now with maiestie: then iudg∣ed by one man, now iudging all men: then in a cratch, now in a Throne. You see his All-knowledge; now for his Almightines. From the wrath. The wrath of Christ is his Iustice: Attribuitur ira Deo per effectum. As man offended seekes reuenge: so when God executes iudgment, it is called his wrath. But pas∣sion in vs, perfection in him. He hath long beene pro∣uoked; giue him now leaue to stricke. You that made so light to trample his bloud vnder your sensuall feet, shall now find what his wrath is. Let vs now thinke of this wrath, that we may escape it. The commination Chrise.
of hell doth not lesse commend Gods prouidence, then the promise of heauen. Nisi inntata esset gehenna, oes in gehennam Cberemur. Now or neuer is this wrath to be escaped: therefore, Kisse the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the way; if his wrath be kindled, Psal. 2. 12. yea but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trustin him. Of the Lambe. Christ was called a Lambe in his passion; so here in his comming to iudgment; not that he should suffer a∣ny more; but to shew that the same Lambe that was slaine shall giue sentence on his murderers. The Father iudgeth no man, but hath committed all iudgment vnto the Ioh. 5. 22. 27. So act. 17. 31. & Reu. 1. 7. Sonne. And hath giuen him authoritie to execute iudgment, because he is the sonne of man. It shall aggrauat their vexa∣tion, that the Lambe who offred his bloud for their re∣demption, shall now censure them for despising. He that would haue beene their mediatour to pray for them, & their aduocate to plead for them, must nowe bee their Iudge to sentence them. The Lambe that saueth the sheepe on the right hande, shall cast off the goats on the left. The Lambe they haue contemned, by this Lambe they shall be condemned. Woefull men, whome the wrath of the Lambe lights on: for he shall giue them an Ite maledicti. What shall then become of them, but to knocke at the gates of heauen whiles those gates are standing, and crie for euer to God but to no purpose! I haue no will to end with a terrour; yet no time to sweeten your thoughts with those comforts which fayth might sucke from this last word the Lambe. I say no more: the godly shall find him a Lambe indeede; as willing now to saue them, as before to suffer for them. He hath purchased, promised, and prepared a kingdome: & they shall Raigne mith him that sittes on the Throne, and with the Lambe for euermore. To whom be eternall glory. Amen.
MAIESTIE IN MISERIE OR The power of Christ euen dying. MATH. 27. 51. And behold, the vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine, from the top to the bottome; and the earth did quake, and the rockes rent: and the graues were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose. IN the lowest depth of Christs humili∣ation, GOD neuer left him without some euident and eminent testimony of his diuine power. He hangs here on the crosse dying, yea dead; his ene∣mies insulting ouer him, whereis now his God? If he be able to saue vs, let him saue himselfe. He beares not onely the wrath of God, but euen the reproch of men. Yet euen now shall his Diuinitie ap∣peare, and breake like a glorious Sunne through these clouds of miserie: he rents the vaile, shakes the earth, breakes the stones, raiseth the dead. These two verses stand gloriously adorned with foure myracles. 1. The vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine. You will say perhaps, the substance of it was not so strong, but
an easie force might rend it. But ver. 50. Christ was dead before, or dyed at that very instant. It was aboue nature, that a dying, yea a dead man, crucified in so re∣mote a place from it, should rend the vaile within the Temple. 2. The earth did quake. Say the vaile was of lesse sub∣stance, yet the huge bodie of the earth will trie a mans strength. In vaine should silly man contend with that, which shall deuoure him. He cannot moue the earth, the earth shall remoue him; from walking aliue on it, to lie dead in it. Behold the power of Christ; Terram mouet; hee makes the vast bodie of the earth to trem∣ble. 3. The rockes rent. Will any yet say, naturall causes can shake the earth? then let their malicious cauill bee choaked with this third myracle beyond exception; he breakes the stones; not little stones, but huge massie rockes. 4. Lastly to stop the mouth of all aduersaries to his diuine power; he rayseth vp the dead. Suscitare mortuos esepulchro, is onely proper to God. Psal. 49. 7. 9. No man can giue a ransome to God for his brother, that hee should liue for euer, and not see corruption. How much lesse when he is dead, recouer him to life againe. Here was the finger of God. Now to proceede in order with the myracles. 1. Myracle. The Vaile of the Temple, &c. This Vaile was the parti∣tion betwixt the Sanctum Sanctorum, & the Sanctum; as it might be the vpper part of the Quire. Heb. 9. 7. Into this went the high Priest alone once euerie yeare, not without bloud, which he offred for himselfe, and for the errours of the people. By the renting this Vaile were many things pre∣signified. 1. This serues for a confirmation of that Christ spoke on the Crosse; It is finished. The renting of the Vaile
doth actually eccho to his wordes, and indeede fulfils them. Here is an end put to all the Sacrifices and Cere∣monies of the law. In the new Testament one onely reall and royall Sacrifice, Christ crucified. This was that obiect whereto all those legall rites looked; & to them all there is now giuen a Consutum est. So that now Coremonia mortua, Lex mortifera: Ceremonies are dead, and the typicall law deadly. Nouum Testamen∣tum latet in veteri, Vetus patet in nouo. The Gospell lay hidden vnder the law, the law is compleat in the Gos∣pell. Gala. 4. 9. Now after that you haue knowne God in his Gospell, how turne you againe to the weake and beggarly Elements, whereunto you desire againe to be in bondage? Gods ser∣uice is now simple and plaine; Ioh. 4. 23. in spirit and truth. Christ is sayd to be the end of the law: the morrall law he kept himselfe syncerely, and satisfied for vs soundly. The Ceremoniall was referred to him, performed of him, fulfilled in him, extinguished by him. They had all Vig a Christo, relationem ad Christum, consummati∣onem in Christo. Hee gaue them their beginning, hee hath also giuen them their end. The Vaile rent, to wit∣nesse the cancelling of that rituall obligation. Christ hath blotted out the hand-writing of ordinances that was a∣gainst Colos. 2. 14. vs, nailing it to his Crosse. That moment was their last gaspe; they expired with Christ. But dd all Cere∣monies then vtterly die? No: some were typicall pre∣figuring Christ: those are dead. Some are for decencie and order, adminicula deuotionis, these are not dead. The law of Iewish ceremonies is abolished: but some must be retained. Christ came not to dissolue order. Men consist of bodies as well as soules; and God must bee serued with both: now bodies cannot serue God with∣out externall rites: the Spouse of Christ cannot bee without her borders and laces. On necessitie there must be some outward obseruances; but thus qualified. That they be for number few, for signification plaine,
for obseruation simple: farre from ostentation, farther from superstition. Christ his Spouse must not flaunt it like an harlot, but be soberly attired like a graue ma∣tron. Ceremoniae quasi care moniae, wants a carendo; as it were ordained to supply the defects of our nature. Be∣cause we could not serue God in that simplicitie we ought, therefore wee haue these helpes. Hence it is, that the nearer to perfection, the fewer ceremonies; as it were the more light, the lesse shadow. In the law were abundant ceremonies, in the Gospell far fewer, in heauen none at all. This condemnes the Church of Rome for a glorious Harlot, because shee loads her selfe with such a heape of gawdy ceremonies: and their masse for meere Idolatry, which they beleeue to bee a reall propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ, made by the Priestes for the sinnes of quicke and dead. This is to build vp the vaile here rent in pie∣ces, and to accuse Christ of falshood in his Consumma∣tum est. Is an end put to them, and shall they still re∣taine them, yea obtrude them as principall partes of Gods seruice; yea worship them, yea bind mens con∣sciences to them on paine of damnation? Therefore they are liable to Augustines censure; who cals such Impios sepulturae violtores; Diggers into the graues of the dead for putrified and rotten reliques. Yea to the Iudgement of God; who sayth, If ye be dead with Christ Colos. 2. 20. 22. from the rudiments of the world: why, as though liuing in the world, are ye subiect to Ordinances? after the commaun∣dements and doctrines of men? They will say, Dicit Papa, sanxit Concilium; thus sayth the Pope, thus decrees the Councell: but wee, Dixit Dominus, non Donatus: wee heare what the Lord sayes, in his Scripture concerning the law of ceremonies. 2. The second thing signified by the renting the vaile is this. The holy of holyes figured the third heauen; where GOD sheweth himselfe in glory and maiestie to his
Saints. Salomons Temple hadde in it three Courts; an vtter court whereinto the people were admitted: an inner Court wherein onely the Priests and Leuites en∣tred: an inmost of all, whereinto the high Priest alone, and that but once a yeare; and this was called Sanctum Sanctorum. So there is a threefolde Heauen: Coelum ele∣mentarium, Stellatum, Gloriosum. First the Elementarie heauen, wherein are cloudes, windes, raine, dew: and the birds are called the birds of heauen, that is of this elementarie heauen. The second is the Starrey heauen: So the Sunne is sayd to Psal. 19. 6. goe from the end of the heauen, and his circuite vnto the ends of it. The last is the Glorious, heauen, the habitation of God himselfe: and this was signified by the Holy of holyes. The vaile signified the flesh of Christ: the renting of the vaile, the crucifying of Christ: by this is made an entrance into that Sanctum Sanctorum, the heauen of glory. So expressely. Heb. 10. Hauing therefore boldnesse to enter into the Holyest by the Heb. 10. 19. bloud of Iesus; By a new and liuing way which he hath conse∣crated for vs, through the vaile, that is to say, His Flesh. Heauen gate was shut vp by our sinnes; none but our highest and holyest Priest had passage there: but hee rent the vaile, suffred his bodie to be torne by death, that he might giue vs an entrance. Paul speaking of the legall vse of that Holyest place in the Temple, sayth thus. Heb. 9. The holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest Heb. 9. 8. of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. But now by Christ his renting the vaile, Patet alti ianua Coeli, the way of saluation is opened. Let this reach forth to vs two comforts. 1. There is no feare to be shut out of heauen, if thou haue faith in Christ: for to thee is the vaile rent, the separation is abolished, Christ is crucified. For So, sayth Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 1. 11. an entrance shall be ministred vnto you aboun∣dantly, into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and Saui∣our Iesus Christ. Indeede to vnbeleeuers and hypocrites,
to worldly wolues and luxurious goates the vaile is vp still. How should they enter the Sanctum sanctorum, that neuer approched the Sanctum? How shall they see the glory of God, who would neuer entertaine the grace of God? No: to these there are inaccessible barres, and Cherubims with flaming swords, to forbidde their en∣trance. But to euery good and faithfull Seruant the vaile is taken away; and Christ sayes; Math. 25. 21. enter thou into the ioy of the Lord. 2. By this meanes we haue in this world a free accesse to the Throne of grace by our prayers: the vaile and separation of sinne and wrath is rent asunder by Christ, and a cleare way made for our supplications. The Pro∣pitiatory and Mercie-seate, the Cherubims of glory sha∣dowing it, the very presence of God, were within the Holyest: and the people might not approach it, but stood without a farre off: Our Sauiour hath torne away this vaile, and opened our petitions a free passage to the Seate of mercie in heauen. Hauing such an high Priest ouer the house of God; (sayth Paul immediately after the clearing our way through the vaile) Heb. 10. 22. Let vs draw neare with a true-heart, in full assurance of faith, &c. Wee see howe farre our prerogatiue excelles that of the Iewes. They were seruants, we are sonnes, and cry Abba Fa∣ther: they had Priests, we are Priests: they had a barre, to vs that vaile is rent away. Heb. 4. 16. Let vs therefore come bold∣ly vnto the Throne of grace, that we may obtaine mercie, and find grace to helpe in time of neede. This is singular com∣fort, that poore subiects may bee sure of accesse to the King with their petitions; yea more, bee heard in all their desires: yea most of all, haue an Aduocate at the Kinges right hand to plead their cause. But then re∣member the Psalmists caution. Psal. 66. 18. If I regard wickednesse in my heart, the Lord will not heare mee. Let the seruants of Baal cry neuer so loudly, if lewdly; their prayers are not heard. To the cryes of vnfaithfull sinners the vaile
is vp still; and like a thicke cloud reuerberates & beats backe their orisons; that they cannot ascend to the Throne of grace. Onely faith makes a free passage, and a cleare conscience hath a cleare voyce, that can peirce heauen. 3. The breaking downe of this vaile did make the Holyest and the other part of the temple all one. Whereby was signified, that of two was made one, Iewes and Gentiles one Church. Ephe. 2. 14. He is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken downe the middle wall of partition betweene vs. So that now those, the Iewes called dogges, eat the bread of the children; yea they are the children: and Gen. 9. 27. Iaphet is perswaded to dwell in the tents of Sem. She is also Beloued that was hated; euen the Church of the Gentiles is the Spouse of Christ. The vaile that hindred, Paul cals the Ephe. 2. 15. Law of comman∣dements, contained in ordinances: this he abolished for to make in himselfe, of twaine, one new man. Heauen gate is no wider open to a Iew, then to a Grecian. Gal. 6. 16. In Christ Iesus neither circumcision auaileth any thing, nor vncircum∣cision, but a new creature. And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercie, and vpon the Isra∣el of God: The Sum of the Gospell, as of the world, is not confined to lighten Iudea onely, but shines vni∣uersally. There is not one priuiledge, wherein the Gen∣tile hath not as franke a share, as the Iew: the sonnes of Hagar are adopted the sonnes of God; and the free Gal. 4. 26. Ierusalem aboue is the mother of vs all. All this did our blessed Sauiour worke for vs by renting the vaile; Ephe. 2. 16. That he might reconcile both vnto God in one body by the crosse, hauing slaine the enmitie therby. Oh then let vs keepe the vnitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Christ hath made vs at one, let vs not make our selues twaine. The vaile is rent, why set we vp new; schismes in doctrine, iarres in conuersation? The bill of diuorcement is cancelled: let vs loue our
husband Christ, and for his sake euery man his bro∣ther. Let vs set vp no more vailes, least we doe it with the curse of building more Iericho's. There is no bond so sure as Religions; no ligaments so strong, as faith and a good conscience. Wretched man, that breakest these tes, and rentest thy selfe from them to whome thou art by Christ vnited: A mothers, yea a Fathers blessing forsakes thee: and thou buildest vp a new vaile, which thou must looke for no more Christs to come rent asunder. 4. The renting of the vaile teacheth vs; that when men sinne rebelliously against God, no prerogatiue shall doe them good. The Temple was one of their principallest priuiledges, their glory, their crowne. Ier. 7. 4. The Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. It was a figure of the Church militant as Solomon the builder was a figure of Christ. For this Temples sake God often spared them. So Daniel prayes; Dan. 9. 17. Cause thy face to shine vpon thy Sanctuary, that is desolate. Yet when they fall away from God, and crucifie their Messias, this prero∣gatiue helpes not. For here Gods owne hand rents the vaile, and after giues the whole fabricke a spoyle to the Gentiles. Mala. 2. 2. If ye will not heare, if ye will not lay it to heart, I will send a curse vpon you, I will curse your blessings: yea I haue cursed them already, because you doe not lay it to heart. It lies in mans sinne, to make God curse his very blessings: and to punish the nocent in the innocent creatures. We see the way, how wee may loose Temples, and peace, and Gospell, and all priuiledges; by running the courses of disobedience. Who can number the bles∣sings we haue enioyed by the Gospell? Let vs beware, least our vngracious and vngratefull liues robbe vs not of that, with all the appertinent comforts. They that haue trauelled the Belgicke Prouinces, can witnesse the miserable footsteps of warre, and the tyrannie of deso∣lation.
Churches and Cities haue no more monuments, but the ruined foundations to testifie that they were. Sin made way for bloud and massacre; Idolatrie puld downe those wals, which otherwise the most sacrilegi∣ous hand should haue forborne. If there had beene no enemie to rase them, they would haue falne alone, ra∣ther then couered so blasphemous impietie vnder their guiltie roofes. Psal. 122. 7. Peace is within our walles, & pros∣peritie within our palaces; blessed for euer be our God of peace for it. Yet we haue a subtle aduersarie, Sacriledge, that incroacheth sore vpon vs, and Psal. 83. 12. hath taken many of Gods houses in possession. We cannot say, Psal. 74. 8. They haue burnt vp all the Synagogues in the land: but they haue done very wickedly to the Lords Sanctuaries. The wals stand, and it is well if in many places they do so: but there is not a Leuite to feede the people; alas, how can there when there is nothing left to feede a Leuite? Couetousnes would do as much hurt with vs, as warre hath done with our neighbours: it would, but I trust in the Lord Iesus, it shall not. Though they haue rent away Gods right, Mala. 3. 8. Tithes and offrings: they shall neuer rent away Gods Truth and Gospell: rent themselues from it indeede they are likely to do. 5. Lastly, The Vaile was rent. By renting the part God did threaten the subuersion of the whole. If he spare not the Holy of holyes, then much lesse the rest. Ezek. 9. When God had comanded; Slay vtterly old & young, maides and children; he addes withall, And begin Ezek. 9. 6. at my Sanctuary. If God begin at his Sanctuary, he will not faile to end with the rest: if that shall not scape be∣ing profaned, how much lesse houses built for riot & disorder, pride & ambition! If the Temple of praiers, then surely the dens of theeues. Ier. 25. 29. For loe, I begin to bring euil on the citie which is called by my name, & shall ye go vn∣punished? sayth God to the Heathen. If the sacredst things defiled by Idolatry shall be subuerted, neuer
thinke that your faire houses shall stand, when they are made couerts of oppressions, and convents of supersti∣tion! when the better things are not fauoured, the worst haue small hope. So Peter reasons; 1. Pet 4. 17. If Iudgment shall beginne at the house of God, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospell? If the strong Cedars in Lebanon be rooted vp, woe to the rotten-rooted pop∣lars. If the dragons taile swoope starres from heauen, what shall become of squalid earthy vapours? The Temple was one of the worlds greatest wonders; as curious a workemanship as sixe and thirtie yeares could make it: it wanted not the art of man, yea the blessing of heauen was added to it. Yet now loe, Etiam periere ruinae; this goodly building by sin was brought to ru∣ine, yea euen the very ruines are perished. Shall then your Forts and Pallaces, worldlinges Paradises: full of rapine, emptie of charitie; stand against all wea∣thers and stormes of iudgement? No, stone shall fall after stone; and ruine shall one day tell the passen∣gers, as GOD threatned of Ierusalem; Here stood a goodly Manner, a sumptuous edifice, a royall Pal∣lace. Or if they fall not downe in themselues, they shall fall to the owners; whose iniquities haue defiled them. God punisheth by certaine degrees; first he rents the vaile, then rents away the Temple: As by Da∣uids hand he first rent Saules garment, and then rent away his kingdome. God at first toucheth men light∣ly; in their goods, quiet, health: if these stirre not to repentance, he proceeds against the whole 1. Cor. 3. 16. Know yee not that ye are the Temple of God? If you set vp in this Temple Idoles, lusts, and euill affections, God first rents the vaile, toucheth you with some gentle afflic∣tions: but if you still continue to make this Temple a denne of theeues, the Temple it selfe will be destroy∣ed.
You haue heard the first myracle, the renting of the vaile. As the Iewes were wont to rend their garments Theophyl. when they heard blasphemie against God: so it may seeme the Temple tore his garments, rent his vaile in pieces, when it heard those execrable blasphemies a∣gainst the Sonne of God. 2. Myracle. The earth did quake. The Philosophers haue giuen di∣uers naturall causes of earth-quakes: as by hote and dry exhalations shut vp in the bowels of the earth, and la∣bouring for vent resisted by the earths solidnes, there ensueth terrae motus, a shaking of the earth, &c. But this was an extraordinary earth-quake; for it hapned exact∣ly at the very instant of Christs death. It might bee to set forth the glory of the new Testa∣ment, and to vindicate it from inferioritie to the olde. The law was both giuen and renewed with an earth∣quake. Giuen. Exod. 19. to the hand of Moses. The whole Exod. 19. 18. mount quaked greatly. As at the giuing mount Sinai, so at the renewing mount 1. Kin. 19. 11 Horeb quaked. As Eliah stood vp∣pon the Mount, there passed by a strong wind, and after the wind an Earth-quake. So when the Lord of the Gospell dyed, the earth shooke: that 2. Cor. 3. 9. the ministration of righteous∣nesse might not be lesse glorious, then the ministration of death. This myracle shall giue vs a threefolde instruction. 1. To consider the fiercenesse of Gods wrath against sinnes and sinners. For God by shaking the earth did no lesse then threaten the vtter subuersion of those despe∣rate and bloudie wretches. Corah and his confederates were swallowed vp of the earth, for rebelling against Moses the Lords seruant. Hebr. 10. 29. Of much how sorer punishment were these worthy, that had crucified (not the seruant, but) the Son of God! If the mercies of God had not bin grea∣ter then their iniquities, they had not escaped. By this we see how able God is to punish sinners: he
shewes what he can doe; it is his mercie, that hee for∣beares. Some of these were to be conuerted, therefore concussi, non excussi; moued not remoued, shaken but not destroied. Ostendisti populo grauia, saith the Psalmist. Psal. 60. 3. Thou hast shewed thy people hard things. Shewed, not imposed: shooke the rod, not laid it on. This forbearance of God Rom. 2. 4. should lead vs on to repentance: if not, it is but the fore∣runner of vengeance. Though nowe by mouing the earth he scare and spare these Iewes, yet after the earth spued them out, as an offence to her stomacke. O obsti∣nate hearts, that quake not, when the sencelesse ground quakes that beares so vnprofitable a burden. Cannot the earth admonish thee? it shall deuour thee. Si non mne∣bit. mouebit. If the almighties hand stirring it, hath not stird thee to repentance; a Sextons hand shall couer thee with moulds; a weake shaker shall doe it. Thinke when God moues the earth, he preacheth to thy soule: if thy heart (so little in comparison of that great vast bo∣die) will not tremble, know God hath one thing that shall shake thee to peices; death. 2. The nature of sinne is here considerable; so heauie that it makes the very earth to quake. The Iewes sinnes were such a burden, that the earth could not beare them without trembling. The earth is fixed, and standeth fast sayth the Psalmist; as the Center of the world: it is strange that to bee moued; euen so strange is the cause that moues it. It must needs bee a monstrous waight of iniquitie, that totters the earth on her foundations. But why is the earth so quiet now? Doe not innumerable wretches daily crucifie Christ; by their oathes, blasphe∣mies, and rebellions in his head; by their persecutions & oppressions in his members? Is not his word derided, his Sacraments despised, his good creatures abused? Why doth not the earth shrinke and shake at these hor∣red impieties? Be still: he that holds his hand from my∣racles, wil not hold it from plagues: They are for borne,
not forgiuen. God keepes silence, but hee sleepeth not: the earth may spare them, but Psal. 73. 19. Desolation in a moment shall swallow them. To the Iewes the earth moued, and they stood still: to these the earth shall stand still, and themselues shall be moued. 3. There is nothing on the earth that is not moueable, if the earth it selfe be moueable. Psal. 104. 5. God hath laid the foun∣dations of the earth that it should not be moued. Yet so, that hee who laid it, can shake it. If the earth, then whatsoe∣uer Iob 9. 6. He shaketh the earth out of her place: and the pillars thereof trem∣ble. is built vpon it. 2. Pet. 3. 10. The earth shall be burnt, sayth Peter. What alone? no, the earth with the workes that are therein shall be burnt vp. The workes of mens hands, the workes of their brines, their very thoughts shall perish. Heb. 12. 27. The Lords voyce shooke the earth, and hee hath saide, yet once againe I will shake not the earth onely, but also heauen. O blessed place that is not subiect to this shaking: whose ioyes haue not onely an amiable countenance, but a glorious continuance. The things that are shaken shall be remoued, but the things that are not shaken remaine for euer. All the terrours of this worlde mooue not him that is fixed in heauen. Impauidum ferient ruinae. Psal. 125. 1. They that put their trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot beremoued, but abideth for euer. But the Tabernacles and hopes of the wicked shall perish together. 1. Ioh. 2. 17. For the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth euer. Whereon sayth August. Quid vis? Vtrum amare temporalia, & transire cum tempore! an amare Chri∣stum, & viuere in aeternum? Whether wilt thou loue the world, and perish with it? or loue Christ, & liue for euer? 3. Myracle. The rockes rent. A wonderfull act, to breake stones and rend rockes. This giues vs two obseruations. 1. This did foresignifie the power and efficacie of the Gospell, that it should bee able to breake the very rockes. As the death and passion of Christ did cleaue those so∣lid
and almost impenetrable substances: so the publish∣ing of his death and passion shall rend and breake in pieces the rockie hearts of men. So Iohn Baptist said; Math. 3. 9. God is able of stones to rayse vp children vnto Abraham. The hearts of Zaccheus, Mary Magdalene, Paul, were such rockes; yet they were cleft with the wedge of the Gos∣pell. This is that Rod of Moses, able to breake the hardest Rockes; till they gush out with flouds of penitent teares. This is Ieremies hammer, powerfull to bruise the most obdurate hearts. The bloud of the Goate sacrificed, of force to dissolue Adamant. There is power in the bloud of Iesus, to put sense into stones. Blessed are you, if you be thus broken-hearted for him, whose heart was bro∣ken for you. For Psal. 51. 17. the broken heart the Lord will not de∣spise. 2. Obserue the wonderfull hardnesse of the Iewes hearts. The stones rent and claue in sunder at the cruell death of Iesus: but their hearts more stony then stones, are no whit moued. They rend not their garments, much lesse their hearts: when as the earth rent the Stones her bones, and the rockes her ribbes. The flints are softer then they: the flints breake, they harden. They still belch their malicious blasphemies, the rocks relent: the stones are become men, and the men stones. O the sencelesnesse of a hard heart: rockes will sooner breake, then that can be mollified. Euen the hardest creatures are flexible to some agents: flints to the raine, iron to the fire, stones to the hammer: but this heart yeelds to nothing; neyther the showers of mercie, nor the ham∣mer of reproofe, nor the fire of Iudgements: but like the stithy, are still the harder for beating. All the plagues of Egypt cannot mollifie the heart of Pharaoh. It is won∣drously vnnaturall, that men made the softest hearted of all, should be rigidiores lupis, duriores lapidibus; more cruell then wolues, more hard then stones. I woulde to GOD all hard-heartednesse had dyed with these
Iewes; but it is not so. Howe often hath Christ beene here crucified; in the word preaching his Crosse to your eares, in the Sacraments presenting his death to your eyes; thinke, thinke in your owne soules, haue not the stones in the walles of this Church beene as much moued? God forbid our obduratenesse should be punished as theirs was: since they would be so stony∣hearted, Ierusalem was turned to a heape of stones; and the conquering Romanes dasht them pitifully against those stones, which they exceeded in hardnesse. Here let the wicked see their doome: the stones that will not be softned, shall be broken. There is no chan∣ging the decree of God, but change thy nature, and then know thou art not decreed to death. Stony harts shall bee broken to pieces with vengeance: doe not striue to alter that doome, but alter thy owne stony heart to a heart of flesh, and so preuent it in the particular. Wolues and goates shall not enter into heauen: thou maiest pull starres out of heauen before alter this sen∣tence; but doe it thus. Leaue that nature, and become one of Christes sheepe, and then thou art sure to enter. No adulter nor couetous person, sayth Paul, 1. Cor. 6. 9. shall inherite the kingdo of heauen: this doome must stand; but not against thee, if thou bee conuerted. Such were Ver. 11. ye, but ye are washed, &c. You are not such. Had the Iewes ceased to be stones, they had beene spared. God will roote thornes and bryers out of his vineyard: if thou wouldst not haue him roote out thee, become a Vine: and bring forth good grapes. God threatens to breake the hairy sealpe of him that goes on in sinne; yet mayest thou ward this blow from thy selfe; Goe no further on in sinne. When God comes in iudgement to visite the earth, to shatter rockes, and breake stones in peeces; thou hast a heart of flesh, mollified with re∣pentance. Let the earth quake, and the rockes teare; thy faith hath saued thee; goe in peace.
4. Miracle. The graues were opened, and many bodyes of Sanits which slept, arose. Concerning this two questions are moued. 1. Where their soules were all this while before. I answere, where the scripture hath no tongue, we should haue no eare. Most probably thus: their soules were in heauen, in Abrahams bosome; and came downe to their bodyes by diuine dispensation, to manifest the power and Deitie of Christ. 2. Whither they went afterwards. I answere by the same likelyhood, that they died no more, but waited on the earth till Christs resurrection; and then attended him to heauen. But these things that are con∣cealed, should not be disputed. Tutum est nescire quod tegitur. It is a safe ignorance, where a man is not com∣manded to know. Let vs then see what profitable in∣structions we can hence deriue to our selues. They are many, and therefore I will but lightly touch them. 1. This teacheth vs, that Christ by his death hath vanquished death, euen in the graue, his owne cham∣ber. That gyant is subdued, the graues flie open, the dead goe out. This beares ample witnesse to that speach of Christ. Ioh. 11. 25. I am the resurrection and the life: he that be∣leeueth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he liue. The bodies of the Saints, what part of the earth or sea so∣euer holds their dusts, shall not be detayned in prison; when Christ cals for them: as the members must needs goe, when the Head drawes them. He shall speake to all creatures, Reddite quod deuorastis: restore whatsoeuer of man you haue deuoured: not a dust, not a bone can be denyed. The bodyes of the Saints shall be raised, sayth August. In Enchirid. Tanta facilitate quanta faelicitate: with as much easynes, as happynes. Sen. epist. 36. Desinunt ista, non pereunt: mors intermittit vitam, non eripit. Our bodies are left for a time, but perish not: death may discontinue life, not conclude it. Intermittit, non interimitur: it may be pau∣sed,
cannot be destroyed. 2. Obserue, that all the dead doe not rise, but Many, and those Saints. The generall resurrection is reserued to the last day: this a pledge or earnest of it. Now who shall rise with this comfort? none but Saints: as here Christ takes no other company from the graues, but Saints. 1. Thess. 4. 16 The dead in Christ shall rise first. Christ is called Coloss. 1. 18. The first borne from the dead: He hath risen, and his shall next follow him. Euerie man in his owne order; 1. Cor. 15. 23. Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christs, at his comming. Wormes and corruption shall not hinder: he that sayd To Corruption, thou art my mother: and to the wormes, you are my brethren and sisters: sayd also, I know that my Redeemer liueth, and one day with these eyes I shall behold him. The wicked shall also be raised, though with horrour, to looke vpon him whom they haue pierced. But as Christ did here, so will he at the last, single out the Saints to beare him companie. 3. This sheweth the true operation of Christs death in all men. We are all dead in our sins, as these bodies were in their graues: now when Christs death becomes effectuall to our soules, we rise againe and be∣come new creatures. From the graue of this world we come into the Church, the holy Citie. But thou com∣plainest of the deadnes of thy hart: it is well thou com∣plainest; there is some life or thou couldst not feele the deadnesse. Ioh. 5. 25. The houre is comming & now is, when the dead shall heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and they that heare it shall liue. If this word hath raysed thee from death, and wrought spirituall life in thy heart, thou shalt perceiue it by thy breathing, words glorifying God; & by thy mouing, in the waies, & to the workes of obedience. 4 Obserue that these Saints which arose, are sayd to haue Slept. The death of the godly is often called a Sleepe. So it is sayd of the Patriarches and Kings of Iu∣dah,
they slept with their fathers. So Paul saith, they 1. Cor. 15. 18 sleep in Christ. The Coffin is a couch; In quo molliùs dormit, qui benè in vita laborauit, wherein hee takes good rest, that hath wrought hard in the worke of his saluation before he went to bed. Foelix somnus cum requie, requi∣es cum voluptate, voluptas um aeternitate. It is a sweete sleepe that hath peace with rest, rest with pleasure, plea∣sure with euerlastingnes. So the godly sleepe, till the Sound of a Trumpet shall waken them, and then eternall glory shall receiue them. 5. Lastly obserue that Ierusalem is called the Holy ci∣tie, though she were at this time a sinke of sinne, and a debaushed harlot. Either as some thinke, that she is cal∣led holy, because she was once holy. So Rahab is called the harlot, because she was a harlot. Simon is termed the Math. 26. 6. Leper, for that hee was a leper: and Math. 10. 3. Mathew the Pub∣lican, for that he was a Publican. Or els she was called holy for the couenants sake; in regard of the Temple, sa∣crifices, seruice of God; and of the elect people of God that were in it. Whence we may inferre, how vnlaw∣full it is to separate from a Church because it hath some corruptions. Is apostate Ierusalem that hath crucified her Sauiour, called still the holy Citie: and must England that departeth in nothing from the faith and doctrine of her Sauiour, for some scarce discernible Imperfecti∣ons be reiected as a foedifragous strumpet? But there be wicked persons in it: what then? Shee may be still a holy Cittie. Recedatur ab iniquitate, non ab iniquis. Let vs depart from sinne, we cannot runne from sinners. Thus we haue considered the Miracles; let vs now looke into the causes, wherefore they were wrought. These may be reduced into fiue. In respect of The Sufferer dying. The Creatures obeying. The Iewes persecuting. The Women beholding. The Disciples forsaking.
1. In regard of Christ; to testifie not onely his In∣nocencie, but his Maiestie. His Innocencie, that hee was as Pilates wife acknowledged, a Math. 27. 19. Iust man. His Maiestie as the Centurion confessed, Math. 27. 54. Seeing the earth quake and the things that were done; Truely this was the Sonne of God. He seemed a worme, no man: the con∣tempt and derision of the people, forsaken of his con∣fidence: in the midst of all God will not leaue him without witnesses; but raiseth vp senseles creatures as Preachers of his deitie. Est aterni filius, qui illic pendet mortuus. He that hangs there dead on the Crosse, is the Sonne of the eternall God. Rather then the chil∣dren of God shall want witnesses of their integritie, God will worke myracles for their testimonie. 2. In regard of the Creatures, to shew their Obedience to their Creator: they are not wanting to him, that gaue being to them. These demonstrate, it was their Lord that suffered; and that they were ready to exe∣cute vengeance on his murderers. The heauen that was darke would haue rained fire on them: the earth that quaked, shooke them to peeces: the rockes that rent, tumbled on them: and the graues that opened to let out other prisoners, haue swallowed them quicke. They all waited but his command to performe this revenge∣full execution. Who shall now dare to persecute Christ in his members? The stones are thy enemies, the earth gapes for thee, hell it selfe enlargeth her iawes: if the Lord but hisse to them, they are sudden∣ly in an vprore against thee. Goe on in your malice ye raging persecutors: you cannot wrong Christ, no not in his very members, but you pull the fists of all crea∣tures in heauen, earth, and hell about your eares: flies from the aire, beasts from the earth, poison from suste∣nance, thunder from the clouds; yea at last also (though now they helpe you) the very deuils from hell against you. All creatures shoote their malignancie at them,
that shoot theirs at Christ. 3. In respect of the Iewes, his enemies; to shame and confound them. The rockes and graues are moued at his passion, not they. Lapides tremunt homines fremunt. The stones rent, the huge earth quakes with feare; the Iewes rage with malice. We see how difficult it is to mollifie a hard heart: harder then to remoue a moun∣taine, raise the dead, cleaue a rocke, shake the whole earth. It is a great mryacle to conuert a wicked man; greater then rending of rockes. Moses rod stroke a Rocke thrice and did it: ministers haue stroke mens rocky harts three hundreth times, and cannot. The graues sooner open, then the sepulchers of sinne and darkenes: the vast earth sooner quakes, then mens hearts at Gods iudgements. 4. In respect of the women that stood by; that their faith might be confirmed. For seeing him on the Crosse, at their mercie, whose bowels neuer knew the softnes of such a nature: exposed to all the tyrannie of their hands and tongs: hands that like cruell Chirur∣gions searched euery part of his blessed body: tongues that ranne nimbly through all the passages of obloquie, till they had ouertaken reproch it selfe, and cast it on him: His body at the full will of the tormenters, and his soule not without intolerable terrors; as they might iudge by strange speech that came from him; My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Doth man triumph ouer him, and doth God forsake him? This might breed in their hearts a suspition: either that hee was a deceiuer, or else vtterly cut off. To stifle this doubt in the very birth, hee shakes the earth, and rends the rockes; that as they knew him dying Hominem vrum, so they might perceaue him doing these myra∣cles not Hominem merum; but the euerliuing God. These wonders; blow the sparke of their faith, almost dying with Christ; and roote in their hearts a deepe
and infallible perswasion of their Sauiour. Something there is to keepe the faith of the elect from quenching, though Satan raigne on it showres of discomforts. Though no obiect greets the eye of flesh but discour∣agement yet there is a secret Spit within, that will neuer suffer the faith to faile. 5. In regard of the Disciples; to shame and conuince them for leauing him, Christ had said before, Luk. 19. Luk. 19. 40. Si hitacerent, loquerentur lapides. If these (speaking of his Disciples) should hold their peace, the stones would im∣mediatly cry out. Loe, this saying is here come to passe: the Disciples hold their peace, the stones speake: they forsake Christ, the rockes proclaime him. Such a shame is it for Apostles and ministers of Christ to hold their peace; that if they be silent, the very stones shall preach against them. The walles, windowes, pauements of Churches shall cry out against such Pastors, that vn∣dertake the office of a sheep-heard, and feed Christ his flocke with nothing but ayre. And euen you that come to heare; if no remorse can be put into your hearts at the relation of our Sauiours death: if you haue no feeling of his sorrowes, no apprehension of these mysteries, no repentance of your sinnes, no emenda∣tion of your liues; know that the very seates where∣on you sit, the walles of your Temples, the very stones you tread on, shall beare witnesse against you. Now the Lord Iesus, that at his death brake the Rockes; by the vertue of his death breake our rocky hearts; that being mollified in this life they may be glorified in the life to come. Grant this O Father for thy mercies sake, O Christ for thy merits sake, O holy Spirit for thy names sake: To whom three per∣sons, one onely wise and eternall God, be glory and prayse for euer. Amen.
THE FOOLE And His Sport. PROV. 14. 9. Fooles make a mocke at sinne. THE Prouerbes of Salomon are so ma∣ny select aphorismes, or diuinely mo∣rall Sayes, without any mutuall de∣pendance one vpon another. There∣fore to studie a coherence, were to force a marriage betweene vnwilling parties. The words read spend them∣selues on a description of two things: the Foole, and his Sport. The Foole is the wicked man: his Sport, pa∣stime, or babble is Sinne. Mocking is the medium or connexion, that brings together the Foole and Sinne: thus he makes himselfe merry; they meete in mocking. The foole makes a mocke at sinne. Fooles. The foole is the wicked: an ignorant heart is alwayes a sinfull heart: and a man without knowledge, is a man without grace. So Thamar to Ammon vnder his rauish∣ing hands; 2. Sam. 13. 13 Doe not this folly. If thou doest it, Thou shalt be as one of the Fooles in Israell. Ignorance cannot excu∣sare a toto; wilfull not a tanto. 2. Thes. 1. 8. Christ shall come in fla∣ming fire rendring vengeance to them that knowe not God. The state of these Fooles is fearefull. Like hooded Hawkes, they are easily carryed by the Infernall Falco∣ner to hell. Their lights are out, how shall their house
scape robbing? Ier. 4. 22. These Fooles haue a knowledge, but it is to doe euill. They haue also a knowledge of good, but not scientiam approbationis: they know, but they refuse it. So God iustly quites them: for though hee knowe them ad scientiam, he will not know them ad approbatio∣nem. But giues them a Discedite, nescio vos. Math. 7. 27. I know you not: depart from me ye workers of iniquitie. A man may be a Foole two wayes; by knowing too Little Much. 1. By knowing too little; when hee knoweth not those things, whereof he cannot be ignorant, and doe well. 1. Cor. 2. 2. I determined not to know any thing among you, saue Iesus Christ, and him crucified. But euery man sayth hee knowes Christ. If men knew Christ his loue in dying for them, they would loue him aboue all thinges: how doe they know him, that loue their money aboue him? Nemo verè nouit Christum, qui non verè amat Christum. No man knowes Christ truely, that loues him not syncerely. If men knew Christ, that he should be Iudge of quicke and dead, durst they liue so lewdly. Non no∣uit Christum, qui non odit peccatum. Hee neuer knew Christ, that doth not hate iniquitie. Some attribute too much to themselues, as if they would haue a share with Christ in their owne saluation. Nesciunt & Chri∣stum & seipsos: they are ignorant of both Christ and themselues. Others lay too much on Christ, all the bur∣den of their sinnes, which they can with all possible voracitie swallow downe, and blasphemie vomite vp a∣gaine vpon him. But they know not Christ, who thus seeke to diuide Aquam a sanguine, his bloud from his wa∣ter; and they shall faile of iustification in heauen, that refuse sanctification vpon earth. 2. By knowing too much; when a man presumes to know more then he ought. His knowledge is apt to be pursie and grosse, and must be kept low. Rom. 12. 16. Mind not high things, sayth the Apostle. Festus slandered Paul,
that Act. 26. 2 much learning had made him madde. Indeed it might haue done, if Paul had bin as proud of his lear∣ning, as Festus was of his honour. This is the 1. Cor. 8. 1. know∣ledge that puffeth vp. It troubles the braine, like vn∣digested meate in the stomach: or like the scumme that seeths into the broth. To auoyd this follie, Paul for∣tbids vs to Rom. 12. 16. be wise in our owne conceites. Whereof I find wo readings; Be not wise in your selues; and Be not wise to your selues. Not in your selues; coniure not your witte into the circle of your owne secret profit. Wee account the simple Fooles, God accounts the crafty Fooles. He that thinkes himselfe wise, is a Foole ipso facto. It was a mo∣dest speech that fell from the Philosopher. Sen. ep. 13. Si quando fatuo delectari volo, non est mihi longè quaerendus; me video. Therfore Christ pronounced his Woes to the Pharises; his doctrines to the people. The first entrie to wise∣dome, is Scire quod nescias: to know thy ignorance. Sobrietie is the measure for knowledge, as the Gomer was for Manna, Curiositie is the rennet, that turnes our milke into curds. Not to your selues; Prou. 5. 16. Let thy fountaines be dispersed a∣broad, sayth the wisest king: communicate thy know∣ledge. Math. 5. Christians must be like lights, that wast Math. 5. 15. themselues for the good of those in Gods house. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. Hee that will be wise onely to himselfe, takes the ready way to turne foole. Non licet habere priuatam, ne priuemur eâ. The closer we keepe our knowledge, the likelier wee are to loose it. Standing water soone puddles; the gifts of the mind, if they be not imployed, will be empaired. Euery wicked man is a foole by comparing their properties. 1. It is a Fooles propertie Futuranon prospicere, to haue no foresight of future things. So hee may haue from hand to mouth, he sings care-away. So the grashopper sings in haruest when the Ant labours: and begges
at Christmasse when the Ant sings. The wicked takes as litle care what shall become of his soule, as the natu∣rall foole what shall become of his body. Modo Potiar, sayth the Epicure: Let me haue pleasure now; Eccl. 9. 4. It is better to a liuing dogge then to a dead Lyon. They doe not in faire weather repaire their house against stormes: nor in time of peace prouide spirituall armour against the day of warre. They watch not; therefore the day of the Lord shall come vpon them as a theefe in the night, and spoyle them of all their pleasures. The maine busines of their soule is not thought of; nor dreame they of an Audite, till they be called by death away to their reckoning. 2. It is a Fooles propertie to affect things hurtfull to himselfe. Ludit cum spinis; he loues to be playing with thornes. Neither yet Quod nocuit, docut; hath that which hurt him, taught him caution, but hee more des∣perately desires his owne mischiefe. The wicked doe strongly appropriate to themselues this qualitie. Cum illis ludunt, quae illis laedunt: they loue to dally with their owne vexation, who else would do at on the world; and houer like waspes about the galley-pot, till for one licke of the honey they be drownd in it! What is your ambition, O ye world-affecters; sayth August: but to be affected of the world? what doe you seeke, but Confess. lib. 3. per multa pericula peruenire ad plura? per plurima ad pes∣sima? but through many dangers to find more; through easier to find the worst of all? Like that doating Vene∣tian, for one kisse of that painted harlot, to liue her per∣petuall slaue? The world was therefore called the Fooles Paradise; there he thinkes to find heauen, and there he sells it to the deuill. Noxia quaerunt improbi; Prou. 7. 23. they hast as a bird to the snare: the deuill doth but hold vanitie as a sharpe weapon against them, and they run full brest vpon it. They need no enemies; let them a∣lone, and they will kill themselues. So the enuious
pines away his owne marrow: the adulterer poysons his owne bloud: the prodigall lauisheth his owne e∣state: the drunkard drownds his owne vitall spirits. Wicked men make warre vpon themselues with the engines of death. 3. It is a Fooles propertie to preferre trifles and toyes, before matters of worth and waight. The foole will not giue his bable for the kings Exchequour. The wicked preferres bodyes of dust and ashes to their soules of eternall substance: this sinne corrupted and time-spent world, to the perfect and permanent ioyes of heauen: short pleasures to euerlasting happi∣nes: a puffe of fame before a solid waight of glory. What follie can be more pitiable: then to forsake corne for acornes: a state of immortalitie for an apple, as Adam did: a birthright with all the priuiled∣ges for a messe of pottage, belly-cheare, as Esau did: a kingdome on earth, yea in heauen too, for asses as Saul did: all portion in Christ for bacon, as the Gergesites Math. 22. did: a royaltie in heauen, for a poore Farme on earth as the bidden guest did. This is the worldlings follie. Villa, bones, vxor &c. Mundus, cura, caro caelum clausere vocalis. To esteeme grace and glory lesse then Farmes, oxen, wiues: manna then onions, mecrie then vanitie: God then Idols. They may be fitly paralelld with the Prodigall. Hee Luk. 15. forsooke 1. His Fathers house for a strange countrey: these the Church, Gods house, for the world; a place wherein they should be strangers: and wherein I am sure, they shall not be long dwellers. 2. His Fathers in∣heritance for a bag of money: so these will not tarrie for their heritagein heauen, but take the bags which Mammon thrusts into their hands on the present. Who but a Foole will refuse the assured reuersion of some great Lordship, though expectant on the expira∣tion of three liues: for a ready summe of money not
enough to buy the least sticke on the ground? This i the worldlings folly, rather to take a piece of p-coine in hand, then to trust God for the inualuable masse of glory. 3. He forsakes his louing friends for harlots, creatures of spoile and rapine: so these the company of Saints. For the Sonnes of Beliall: those that sing praises, for those that roare blasphemies. 4. Lastly the bread in his Fathers house, for huskes of beanes: so these leaue Christ the true bread of life, for the draffe which the swine of this world puddle in. Here is their Folly to fasten on transient delights, and to neg∣lect the pleasures at the right hand of God for euermore. Psal. 16. 4. It is a Fooles propertie, to runne on his course with precipitation. Yet can he not out-runne the wicked: whose 2. King. 9. 20. driuing is like Iehu's the son of Nimshi: he driueth as if he were mad. As if he had receiued that commission, salute no man by the way. Prou. 27. 12. The wise man seeth the plague and hideth himselfe, but the foole runneth on and is punished. He goes, he runnes, he flies; as if God that rides vpon the wings of the wind should not ouertake him. Hee may passe a pace, for he is benefited by the way: which is smooth, without rubbes: and downe a hill, for hell is a bottome. Facilis descensus Auerni. Hast might be good Prou. 15. 24. if the may were good, and good speed added to it. But this is Cursus celerrimus praeteruiam. He needs not run so fast: for numquamserò ad id venitur, a quo nunquam re∣ceditur: the foole may come soone enough, to that place, from whence he must neuer returne. Thus you see the respondencie of the spirituall to the naturall Foole, in their qualities. Truly the wicked man is a Foole: so Salomon expounds the one by the other. Eccl. 7. Be not ouermuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldst thou Eccl. 7. 17. die before thy time? Fooles. Obserue, this is plurally and indefinitely spo∣ken. The number is not small; Stultrum plena sunt om∣nia. Christs flocke is little; but Satans kingdome is of
large bounds. Plurima possima; vile thinges are euer most plentifull. Wisedome flies like the Raile, alone: but fooles, like Partridges, by whole coueys. There is but one Truth, but innumerable errors. Which should teach vs 1. Not to follow a multitude in euill. In ciuill actions it is good to doe as the most; in religious, to doe as the best. It shall be but poore comfort in hell, Socios habu∣isse doloris. Thou pleadest to the Iudge; I haue done as others: the Iudge answeres; And thou shalt speed as others. 2. To blesse God, that we are none of the many: as much for our Grace, whereby we differ from the fooles of the world; as for our Reason, whereby wee differ from the fooles of nature. Now as these fooles are many, so of many kindes. There is the Sad foole, and the Glad foole: the Haughtie foole, and the Naughtie foole. 1. The Sad or melancholy foole is the Enuious; that repines at his brothers good. An enemie to all Gods fauours, if they fall besides himselfe. A man of the worst diet; for he consumes himselfe; and delights in pining, in repining. Hee is readie to quarrell with God, be∣cause his neighbours flocke scape the rotte. He cannot endure to be happie, if with companie. Therefore en∣uie is called by Prosper; Lib. 3. de vir∣tut. & vitijs. De bono alterius tabescentis a∣nimi cruciatus: the vexation of a languishing minde, a∣rising from anothers well-fare. Tantos Inuidus habet iustae poenae tortores, quantos inuidiosus habuit laudatores. So many, as the enuied hath praisers, hath the enuious tormentors. 2. The Glad foole, I might say the Mad foole, is the dissolute; who rather then he will want sport, makes goodnesse it selfe his Minstrell. His mirth is to fullie euery vertue with some slander; & with a est to laugh it out of fashion. His vsuall discourse is filled vp with
boasting Parentheses of his old sinnes: and though he cannot make himselfe merry with their act, hee will with their report; as if he roued at this marke, to make himselfe worse then he is. If repentance doe but proffer him her seruice, he kickes her out of dores: his minde is perpetually drunke; and his bodie lightly dies, like Anacreon, with a grape in his throat. He is stung of that serpent, whereof he dies laughing. 3. The Haughtie foole is the ambitious: who is euer climbing high Towers, and neuer forecasteth how to come downe. Vp he will, though he fall downe head∣long. He is wearie of peace in the Countrey, and therefore comes to seeke trouble at Court: where hee haunts great men, as his great spirit haunts him. When he receiues many disappoyntments, he flatters himselfe still with successe. His owne fancie perswades him, as men doe fooles, to shoot away another arrow, thereby to find the first: so he looseth both. And lastly, because his pride will admit of no other punisher, he becomes his owne torment: and hauing at first lost his honestie, he will now also loose his wittes; so truely becomes a foole. 4. The Naughtie foole is the Couetous. This is the Follie that Salomon saw vnder the Sunne. You heard be∣fore of a merry foole; but the very foole of all is the a∣uarous: for he will loose his friends, starue his bodie, damne his soule, and haue no pleasure for it. So sayth the Prophet. Ier. 17. 11. He shall leaue his riches in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be a Foole. He wasts himselfe, to keepe his goods from wast: he eats the worst meate, and keepes his stomach euer chiding. He longs like a foole, for euery thing he sees; and at last may habere quod voluit, non quod vult: haue what he desired, neuer what he desires. He feares not the day of iudgment; ex∣cept for preuēting the date of some great oblgatio. You would thinke it were pettie treason to call a rich man
foole; but he doth so that dares iustifie it. Luk. 12. Thou Luk. 12. 20. foole, this night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee: then whose shall those things be which thou hast prouided? We haue anatomized the Foole, let vs behold his Sport. He maketh a mocke at sinne. The Fathers call this Infimum gradum, and Limen in∣ferni; the lowest degree of sinne, and the very thres∣hold of hell. It is Sedes pestilentiae, the Scorners chaire. Psal. 1. 1. Psal. 1. wherein the vngodly sittes, blaspheming God and all goodnesse. Nemo fit repente pessimus. No man becomes worst at first. This is no suddaine euill. Men are borne sinnefull, they make themselues prophane. Through many degrees they climbe to that height of impietie. This is an extreame progresse, and almost the iourneys end of wickednesse: Improbo laetari affectu. Thus Abner cals fighting a sport. 2. Sam. 2. 14. Let the young men a∣rise, and play before vs. Phil. 3. 19. They glory in their shame, sayth the Apostle; as if a condemned malefactor should boast of his halter. Fooles make a mocke at sinne. We shall the more clearly see, and more strongly de∣test this senseles iniquitie, if we consider the obiect of the Fooles Sport; Sinne. 1. Sinne, which is so contrary to goodnes: and though to mans corrupt nature pleasing, yet euen abhorred of those sparkes and cinders, which the rust of sin hath not quite eaten out of our nature, as the Creation left it. The lewdest man, that loues wickednesse as hearti∣ly, as the deuill loues him; yet hath some obiurgations of his owne heart: and because he will not condemne his sinne, his heart shall condemne him. The most re∣probate wretch doth commit some contraconscient iniquities: and hath the contradiction of his owne soule, by the remanents of reason left in it. If a lewd man had the choice to be one of those two Emperors, Nero or Constantine; who would not rather bee a Con∣stantine then a Nero? The most violent oppressor that
is cruell to others, yet had rather that others should be kind to him then cruell. The bloudiest murderer desi∣sires that others should vse him gently, rather then strike, kill, or butcher him. Nature it selfe prefers light to darkenesse: and the mouth of a Sorceresse is driuen to confesse, Video meliora, probóque. The most rigid v∣surer, if he should come before a seuere Iudge, would be glad of mercie; though himselfe will shew none to his poore bond-men. In bene viuendo requiem natura fateri. Cogitur. It is then first a contra-naturall thing to make a mocke at sinne. 2. Sinne, which sensibly brings on present iudgments Ioh. 5. 14. Thou art made whole: sinne no more, least a worse thing come vnto thee. Sinne procured the former, and that was greeuous; 38. yeares bed-rid: Sinne is able to draw on a greater punishment; Least a worse thing come vnto thee. If I should turne this holy booke from one end to the other; if I should search all Fathers, yea all writers whether diuine or humaine; I should euince this conclusion; that Sinne hales on Iudgement. Pe∣disequis sceleris supplicium. If there be no feare of impie∣tie, there is no hope of impunitie. Our Machiauellian Politicians haue a position: that Summa scelera nicipiun∣tur cum periculo, peraguntur cum praemio: the greatest wickednes is begun with danger, gone through with reward. Let the Philosophers stop their mouths: Scelus aliquis tutum, nemo securum tulit. Some guiltie men haue beene safe, none euer secure. This euerie eye must see. Let adulterie plead that na∣ture is encourager and directer of it; and that she is vniust to giue him an affection, and to barre him the action: yet we see it plagued. To teach vs that the sin is of a greater latitude, then some imagine it: vncleane, fedifragous, periured. Broad impudence, contempla∣tiue Bauderie, an eye full of whores are things but
iested at: the committers at last find them no iest, when God powres vengance on the body, and wrath on the naked conscience. Let drunkennes stagger in the robes of good fellow∣ship; and shrowdit selfe vnder the wings of merri∣ment; yet we see it haue the punishment, euen in this life. It corrupts the bloud, drownes the spirits, beggers the purse, and enricheth the carcase with surfets: a present iudgement waites vpon it. He that is a theefe to others, is at last a theefe also to himselfe; and steales away his owne life. God doth not euer forbeare sin to the last day; nor shall the bloudy Ruffian still Psal. 55. 23. escape but his owne bloud shall answere some in present, and his soule the rest eternally. Let the Seminary pre∣tend a warrant from the Pope to betray and murder Princes; and build his damnation on their tetricall grounds; which haue Parum rationis, minus honestatis, Religionis nihil; Little Reason, lesse Honestie, no Reli∣gion. Yet we see, God reueales their malicious strata∣gems, and buries them in their owne pit. Piercies head now stands Centinell, where he was once a Pioner. If a whole land flow with wickednes, it escapes not a deluge of vengeance. For England; haue not her bowells groaned vnder the heauy pestilence? If the plague be so common in our mouthes, how should it not be common in our streets? With that plague wher∣with we curse others, the iust God curseth vs. Wee shall find in that Emperiall state of Rome, that till Con∣stantines time almost euery Emperour dyed by treason or massacre: after the receiuing of the Gospell, none except that reuolter Iulian: Let not sinne then be made a sport or iest, which God will not forbeare to punish euen in this life. 3. But if it bring not present Iudgement, it is the more fearefull. The lesse punishment wickednes re∣ceiues here, the more is behind. God strikes those
here, whom he meanes to spare hereafter; and corrects that sonne which he purposeth to saue. But hee scarce meddles with them at all, whom hee intends to beate once for all. The Almond tree is forborne them, who are bequeathed to the boiling Potte. There is no rod to scourge such in present; so they goe with whole sides to hell. The purse and the flesh scapes, but the soule payes for it. This is Misericordia puniens, a greeuous mercie: when men are spared for a while, that they may be spilled for euer. This made that good Saint cry; Lord here afflict, cut, burnt, torture me; Vt in aeternum par∣cas; Aug. that for euer thou wilt saue me. No sorrow trou∣bles the wicked, no disturbance embitters their plea∣sures: But remember sayth Abraham to the merry-liu'ed rich man, Luk. 16. 25. Thou wert delighted, but thou art tormented. Tarditas supplicij grauitate pensatur: and hee will strike with iron hands, that came to strike with leaden feete. Tuli, nunquid semper feram? no; their hell-fire shall be so much the hoter, as God hath beene coole and tardy in the execution of his vengeance. This is a Iudgement for Sinne that comes inuisible to the world, insensible to him on whom it lights. To be Rom. 1. 28. 2. 5. giuen ouer to a repro∣bate mind; to a hard and impenitent heart. If any thing be vengance, this is it. I haue read of plagues, famine, death come temperd with loue and mercie: this neuer but in anger. Many taken with this spirituall lethargie sing in Tauernes, that should howle with dragons: and sleepe out Sabboths and Sermons, whose awaked soules would rend their hearts with anguish. Fooles then onely make a mocke at sinne. 4. Sinne that shall at last be laid heauy on the con∣science: the lighter the burthen was at first; it shall be at last the more ponderous. The wicked conscience may for a while lie a sleepe: but Ierom. Tranquilitas ista tempestas est: this calme is the greatest storme. The mortallest enemies are not euermore in pitched fields, one against
the other: the guiltie may haue a seeming truce, true peace they cannot haue. A mans debt is not payd by  bring: euen while thou sleepest, thy arrerages run on. If thy conscience be quiet without good cause, remember that Cedat iniustissima pax iustissimo bello: a iust warre is better then vniust peace. The conscience is like a fire vnder a pile of greene wood, long ere it burne; but once kindled it flames beyond quenching. It is not pacifiable whiles sinne is within to vexe it: the hand will not cease throbbing so long as the thorne is within the flesh. In vaine he striueth to feast away cares, sleepe out thoughtes, drinke downe sorrowes; that hath his tormentor within him. When one vio∣lently offers to stoppe a sourse of bloud at the nostril, it finds a way downe the throate not without hazzard of suffcation. The stroken deare runs into the thicket, and there breakes off the arrow: but the head stickes still within him, and rankles to death. Flitting and shifting ground giues way to further anguish. The vnappeased conscience will not leaue him, till it hath shewed him hell; nor then neither. Let then this Foole know, that his now feared conscience shall be quick∣ned: his death-bed shall smart for this. And his ama∣zed heart shall rue his old wilfull adiournings of repen∣tance. How many haue there raued on the thought of their old sinnes; which in the dayes of their hote lust they would not thinke sinnes. Let not then the Foole make a mocke at sinne. 5. Sinne, which hath another direfull effect, of greater latitude; and comprehensiue of all the rest. Di∣uinam incitat iram. It prouokes God to anger. The wrath of a king is as messengers of death; what is the wrath of the king of kings. Hebr. 12. 29. For our God is a consuming fire. If the fire of his anger be once throughly incensed, all the riuers in the South are not able to quench it: What piller of the earth, or foundation of heauen can stand,
when he will wake them? Hee that in his wrath can open the iawes of earth to swallow thee, sluce out flouds from the sea to drowne thee, raine downe fire from heauen to consume thee; Sodome, the old world, Corah, drunke of these wrathfull vialls. Or to goe no further, he can set at iarre the elements within thee, by whose peace thy spirits are held together: drowne thee with a dropsie bred in thy owne flesh: burne thee with a pestilence begotten in thy owne bloud: or bury thee in the earthly graue of thy owne melancho∣ly. Oh it is a fearefull thing, to fall into the hands of the liuing God. It is then wretchedly done, thou Foole, to iest at sinne that angers God, who is able to anger all the vaines of thy heart for it. 6. Sinne, which was punished euen in heauen. An∣geli detruduntur propter peecatum. 2. Pet. 2. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them downe to hell. It 2. Pet. 2. 4. could bring downe Angels from heauen to hell; how much more men from earth to hell! If it could corrupt such glorious natures, what power hath it against dust and ashes! Art thou better or dearer then the Angelles were? Dost thou flowt at that which condemned them? Goe thy wayes, make thy selfe merry with thy sinnes; mocke at that which threw downe Angels. Vnles God giue thee repentance, and another minde, thou shalt speed as the lost Angels did. For God may as easilie cast thee from earth as he did them from heauen. 7. Sinne, which God so loathed, that hee could not saue his owne elect because of it, but by killing his owne Sonne. It is such a disease, that nothing but the bloud of the Sonne of God could cure it. He cured vs by ta∣king the receits himselfe which we should haue taken. He is first cast into a Sweat; such a sweat as neuer man but he felt; when the bubbles were droppes of bloud. Would not sweating serue? he comes to incision, they pierce his hands, his feete, his sides; and set life it selfe
abroach. Hee must take a potion too, as bitter as their malice could make it; compounded of vineger & gall. And lastly he must take a stranger and stronger medi∣cine then all the rest; he must die for our sinnes. Behold his harmles hands pierced for the sinnes, our harmefull hands had committed. His vndefiled feete, that neuer stood in the wayes of euill, nailed for the errors of our pathes. Hee is spitted on, to purge away our vnclean∣nesse: clad in scornefull Robes to couer our wicked∣nesse: whipped, that we might escape euerlasting scour∣ges. He would thirst, that our soules might be satisfi∣ed: the Eternall would die, that we might not die eter∣nally. He is content to beare all his Fathers wrath; that no pang of that burden might be imposed vppon vs: and seeme as forsaken a while, that we by him might be receiued for euer. Behold his side become bloudie, his heart dry, his face pale, his armes stiffe; after that the streame of bloud had ran downe to his wounded feet. O thinke if euer man felt sorrow like him; or if he felt any sorrow but for Sinne. Now is that Sinne to be laughed at, that cost so much torment? Did the pressure of it lie so heauie on the Sonne of God, and doth a son of man make light of it? Did it wring from him sweat, and bloud, and teares, and vnconceiueable groanes of an afflicted spi∣rit; and dost thou O foole, iest at it? Alas that which put our infinite Redeemer God and man, so hard to it; must needs swallow vp and confound thee, poore sin∣full wretch. It pressed him so farre that he cryed out to the amasement of earth and heauen; My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? Shall he cry for them, and shal we laugh at them? Thou mockest at thy oppressions, oathes, sacriledges, lusts, frauds; for these hee groa∣ned. Thou scornest his Gospell preached, he wept for thy scorne. Thou knowest not, O foole, the price of a Sinne: thou must doe, if thy Sauiour did not for thee.
If he suffred not this for thee, thou must suffer it for thy selfe, Passio aeterna erit in te, si passio Aeterni non erat pro te. An eternall passion shall be vpon thee, if the Eter∣nals passion were not for thee. Looke on thy Sauiour, and make not a mocke at Sinne. 8 Lastly Sinne shall be punished with Rom. 6. 23. Death: you know what death is the wages of it: not onely the first, but the Reu. 20. 6 second death. Inexpressible are those torments: when a reprobate would giue all the pleasures that eer he enioyed, for one drop of water to coole his tongue. Where there shall be vnquencheable fire to burne, not to giue light; saue a glimmering; Isid. Lib. 1. de Sum. Bon. ad ag grauationem, vt videant vnde doleant: non ad consulionem, ne videant vn∣de gandeant: to shew them the torments of others, and others the torments of themselues. But I cease vrging this terrour; and had rather win you by the loue of God, then by his wrath and Iustice. Neither neede I a stronger argument to disswade you from sinne, then by his passion that dyed for vs being enemies. For if the agonie, anguish, and heart-bloud of Iesus Christ shed for our sinnes, will not moue vs to repentance, we are in a desperate case. Now therefore I fitly leaue Pauls adiura∣tion, so sweetely tempered in your bo∣somes: commending that to your consciences, and your consci∣ences to God. Rom. 12. 1. I beseech y brethren, by the mercies of God that ye present your bodies a liuing sacri∣fice, holy and ac∣ceptable vnto GOD.
THE FIRE OF CONTENTION OR The trouble that followes the Gospell. Lvk. 12. 49. I come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be alreadie kindled? BEfore I run vpon Diuision, (and yet Di∣uision is the subiect of my Text; and for methods sake I must vse some diuision in my discourse) I must let you vnderstand, what this Fire is that is sent; and how in∣nocent our Sauiour is that sendeth it. 1. There may be Dessention betwixt the good and the good: and hereof is the Deuill the author. It is the Ene∣mie that sowes those Tares. This is one of the abomi∣nations that the Lord abhorreth: Prou. 6. 19. A false witnes that speaketh lies, and him that soweth discord among brethren. God is neuer the immediate cause of that, which he a∣bominates. 1. Cor. 11. 16 If any man seeme to be contentious, we haue no such custome, neither the Churches of God. To cleare Christ and his Gospell from causing this; the tenour of all Scriptures admonisheth vs with Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 3. 8. Be ye all of one mind, hauing compassion one of another, loue as brethren, be pitifull, be courteous. Vnitie is the badge of Christianitie: wee are all the members of one bodie. 1. Cor. 12. The eye cannot say to the hands,
I haue no need of you, &c. We are all stones of one buil∣ding, therefore must not iarre one with another, least we ruine the whole house. Christ sayth, that a kingdome diuided cannot stand. The Souldiours would not diuide the vnseamed coate of Christ: farre bee it from vs to rent his bodie. There are three grounds of loue; ver∣tue, pleasure, profite. Vertue all consent to be the surest and best. That then which is grounded on the best ver∣tue, is the best vnitie: and this is Faith. Loue issuing from Faith is a bond able to tie God to man, man to God: and therefore man to man. This knot is tyed so fast, that the powers of hell cannot vndoe it. All other vnities, but the Communion of Saints may be broken. There is no peace so indissoluble, as the peace of faith. So contrarily there is no Contention so violent and ra∣ging, as that is enflamed by erroneous Religion. Lib. 2. Ep. 8. Cy∣prian writes of Nouatus, that he would not so much as allow his owne Father bread whiles hee liued, nor vouchsafe him buriall being dead: that he spurned his owne wife, and killed his owne childe within her bo∣die. O the vnmatchable crueltie, that some mens reli∣gion, (if I may so call it) hath embloudied them to! What treasons, conspiracies, massacres, did or durst e∣uer shew their blacke faces in the light of the Sunne, like to those of Papists; all vizarded vnder pretended Religion? The Pope hath a Canon, called Nos sancto∣rum Predecessorum, &c. Wee obseruing the statutes of our holy Predecessors, doe absolue those that are bound by fidelity and oath to persons excommunicated from their oathes; and doe forbid them to keepe their fealtie towards them, Quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem veniant: till they come to yeeld satisfaction. What malicious stratagems against suspended Princes, haue not beene kindled from this fire? Against what nation hath not this Canon shot the furie? Yea the more to embolden subiects to such pernicious attempts, the Pope makes
them beleeue that the very Apostles take their partes. For so it is manifest by the forme of Gregories sentence; that he commandeth S. Peter and S Paul, as if they were his bailifs errant, to execute the writtes of his pon∣tificall and priuatiue authoritie. Malice in humour is like fire in straw, quickly vp, and quickly out: but taking hold of conscience, like fire in steele; Quod tardè acquisiuit, diù retinet; what was long in getting, will be longer in keeping. Reli∣gion is the greatest enemie to religion; the false to the true. Tertull. Fauos etiam vespae faciunt: waspes also make combes, though in stead of honey wee find gun-pow∣der. Of dissension among professours of the Gospell, Christ is not authour: he neuer gaue fire to burne his Church. Yet he hath his hand in it 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be here∣sies among you that they which are approued may be made manifest. He drawes good out of euill; and makes a good Shall of the euill must: so raising a vertue from a necessitie. From contentions begot by Sathan, hee so sweetly workes, that the profession of his but darkely glowing before, shall be made to shine brightly. In Q. Maries time, when persecution wrung the Church, Martyrdome gaue a manifest approbation of many (vnknowne) Saints. The vertues of diuers had bin lesse noted, if this fiery triall had not put them to it. Gods glory and power are more perspicuous, in strengthening his against their enemies, then if they had none. Christ came not to send this fire; yet hee wisely tempers it to our good. 2. There may be Dissention betwixt the wicked and the wicked; and hereof also is Satan authour. He sets his owne together by the eares, like cockes of the game to make him sport. Hereupon hee raised these great Heathen warres, that in them millions of soules might goe downe to people his lower kingdome. Hereup∣on hee drawes ruffian into the field against ruffian: and
then laughes at their vainely spilt bloud. All the con∣tentions, quarrels, whereby one euill neighbour vexeth another; all slaunders, scoldings, reproches, calumnies, are his owne damned fires. Thus sometimes the vn∣godly massacre the vngodly, oppressours deuoure op∣pressours. Esa. 19. 2. I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight euerie one against his brother, and euerie one against his neighbour; Citie against citie, and kingdome against kingdome. The Pharises against the Sadduces: the Turke against the Pope: the Transgressour against the transgressour. Couetousnes shall be against prodiga∣litie: basenes against pride: temeritie against dastardie. The drunkard spils the drunkard, the theefe robbes the theefe: Proditorisproditor: the Traytour shalbe be∣trayed, and the cosener shall be cheated. Esa. 9. 21. They shall eate euerie man the flesh of his owne arme; Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh. It is vnpossible, that any true peace should be amongst the wicked, whiles they want the soalder that should glew them together, faith. Agreement in euill is not peace, but conspiracie. Wic∣ked mens combining themselues may be a faction, no vnitie, no amitie: for they haue but metum & noxam conscientia prosoedere: terrour and guilt of conscience for their league. But some may question; doth not Satan in setting reprobates against reprobates, ouerthrow his owne kingdome? I answere. 1. The Deuill is politicke, and will not diuide his subiects, when by their holding together hee may di∣uide the Church. So the Pharises though they hate the Sadduces; and the Herodians that despise them both: Math. 22. 16. 23. shall all ioyne forces shake and take hands against Christ. Papists are enemies to Truth, Schismaticks to Peace; yet both the Church: which suffers, as her Sauiour did, in medio iniorum, in the midst of aduer∣saries; not onely to her now, but at other times also to themselues. Herod and Pte, were of enemies reconci∣led
friends, that their vnited rancours might meete a∣gainst Iesus. The Iewes and the Lystrians, so diuersely religion'd, the deuill can make agree, to stone Paul. Act. 14. 19. Thus Satan holds them vnder colours and pay, whiles they can doe him any seruice: but when they can no longer vexe others, hee falls to vexing of them: and enrageth their thirst to one anothers bloud, when they haue done quaffing the bloud of the Saints. 2. The Deuill in raising seditions and tumults a∣mong his owne, intends not the destruction, but e∣rection of his kingdome. Perhaps his forces on earth are weakned, but his Territories in hell are repleni∣shed: wherein he takes himselfe to raigne most surely. For Satan, during a mans life, knowes not certainely, whether he belongs to God, or to him. Predestination is too mysticall and secret a booke for his condemned eyes to looke into; and repentance hath often stepped in betwixt old age and death: frustrating the hopes of Satan. Therefore he hastens a wicked man, with what speed he can, to hell; for till he came within those smoa∣kie gates, Satan is not sure of him; he may start out of his clutches. For this cause he precipitates witches with much suddennesse to their ends: whom, one would thinke, hee should let liue, that they might doe more mischiefe. No; such is his malicious policie, he would be sure of some: and rather take one soule in present, then hazard all on the vaine hope of more gaines. 3. There is a Dissention betweene the wicked and godly; nor yet is Christ the proper and immediate cause of this. For Rom. 12. If it be possible, as much as lieth Rom. 12. 18. in you, liue peaceably with all men. 4. There is an Emnitie betwixt Grace and Wicked∣nes; a continuall combate betweene sanctitie and sin: and this is the Fire that Christ came to send. Hee is to some a liuing stone, whereupon they are built to life: to others a stone of offence, whereat they stumble to
death. Now because the locall seate of holines on earth is in the hearts of the Saints; of wickednes in the De∣uill and his Iustruments: therefore it followes, that the euill will persecute the good, and the good may not partake of the vices of the bad. 2. Cor. 6. 16. What agreement hath the temple of God with Idols! Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the vncleane thing, and I will receiue you. Out of the Egypt of this world hath God called his Sonnes. We are forbidden all fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of of darkenes; not altogether with the workers: 1. Cor. 5. 10. For then wee must needs goe out of the world. It is commanded Ierem 15. that the precious be separated from the vile: yet Ier. 15. 19. so that they may returne to the good, though the good may not turne to them. It is good for the good to sun∣der themselues from the incorrigible wicked; as being the first stayre of the ladder that leaues the earth; and sets the first step of our iourney to heauen. God in his eternall decree separated the elect from the Reprobate: in his Vocation, he sequesters them from nature and sinne. When hee executes particular iudgement, hee takes Israell from the Tabernacles of Corah: when he will giue the generall, he will seuer the Sheepe from the Goates. Christ then, who is the Esa. 9. 6. Prince of Peace, causeth not quarrels betweene man and man, as they are creatures; but betwixt goodnesse and euill, as they are contrarie natures. That the sonnes of Beliall hate the sonnes of God, Christ is not the cause, but the occasion. For when the Gospell separates vs from the world, the world then bends his malicious forces against vs. So that Peace in sinne. Ver. 51. Christ came not to send; but Peace of conscience. Phil. 4. The peace of God, which passeth all vnderstanding, &c. Which because the wicked Phil. 4. 7. will not embrace, therfore Ver. 52. 53. Fiue in one house shall be di∣uided: the Father against the Sonne, and the Snne against
the Father, &c. The Gospell doth not otherwise worke this diuision, then the Law is sayd to Rom. 7. 7. make sinne; be∣cause it made sinne knowne. Or the Sunne is sayd to cause mothes, because it causeth their appearance. Let Paul continue a Pharise, and the Pharises will loue him: conuert he to a Christian, and they will hate him. Whiles we liue after the world, we haue peace with the world, none with God: when we are turned to Christ, we haue peace with God, none with the world. This ground laid, we will consider, for the better ex∣position of the words fiue circumstances. The Fire. Fewell. Kindlers. Smoake. Bellowes. Wherein we shall find Christs willing, and the fires kindling. Who wils goodnesse to his chosen, which he is sure, will enrage the wicked to their persecution. The cause thus gi∣uen, the fire is left to be kindled by others. For though Non sine Deo patimur, yet non a Deo petimur. The in∣struments of our afflictiō will be found vngodly; who, though they plead, we haue done the will of the Lord, shall goe to hell for their labour. The Fire. Is discord, debate, contention, anger, and hatred a∣gainst the godly. Euery man is composed of foure ele∣mentall humours, whereof one is Choler, resembled to Fire. In whom this Choler is most adust, & puissant, they are vsually most hote, furious, fiery. But I speake here of nature; for grace can alter nature, and purge this corruption. Regeneration is the best physicke to purge Choler. Many medicines hath Philosophie pre∣scribed against this spirituall disease; but in vaine. The Philosophers seruant could scoffe his Maister: He in∣ueighes
against anger, writes volumes against it, & ipse mihi irascitur; and yet he is angry with me. Onely grace can (more then giue rules) giue power to master this madnesse. Fire and Contention haue some resemblances. 1. Debate is like Fire; for as that of all elements, so this of all passions, is most violent. The earth is huge, yet we walke quietly on it; it suffers our ploughes to rend vp the entrals of it; to teach vs patience. The aire is copious, yet admits our respiration. The waters boy∣strous, yet sayle we vpon them, against them. But Fire, e∣specially getting the vpper hand, is vnmercifully raging: it left nothing behind, to witnesse the former happy∣nes of Sodome. The worlds last destruction, shall be by 2. Pet. 3. 12. Fire: and God vseth that, of all elements, to expresse the very torments of hell; adding Reu. 21. 8. Brimstone to it. To this is the anger of God likened; Hebr. 12. 29. Our God is euen a con∣suming fire. So doth debate exceede all passions: flouds of correction, can quench the turbulent an fiery spitit which is Iam. 3. 6. set on fire of hell. Onely one extreame may driue out another; as we hold our burnt finger to the fire, by a new heat to extract the former. Math. 3. 11. So the fire of grace onely must draw out the Fire of debate; or send it to the euerlasting ver. 12. fire to purge it. 2. Contention is like Fire; for both burne so long, as there is any exustible matter to contend against. Only herein it transcends fire: for fire begets not matter, but consumes it; debate begets matter, but not con∣sumes it. For the wicked study cause of contenti∣on, as 1. King 20. 3. 5. 7. Benhadad against Ahab 1. king 20. So when the Pope could find no iust exception against Fredericke the Emperour; he quarrell'd with him for holding the wrong stirrop; when the great Prelate should mount his palfrey; and thought he might easily mistake, for Emperours are not vsed to hold stirrops, yet hee was persecuted almost to excommunication, for it. It is wofull dwelling amongst debatefull men, whose soules
hate peace: that are , Rom. 1. 3. without naturall affection; which Paul makes a reprobates marke: striking all that stand in their way; and not ceasing to burne, till all matter cease to feede them. Salomon discribes such with a firie comparison. First. ver. 17. he cals him a Busi-body he passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him: Prou. 26. he thrusts himselfe into impertinent busines; and is like one that taketh a dog by the eares; which hee can neither hold, nor well let goe. ver. 18. He notes his politicke villanie. As a mad-man, who casteth firebrands, arrowes, and death; and saith, Am I not insport? he scattereth abroad mortall mischiefes vnder the colour of iest. And ver. 20. lest the fire should goe out, hee administers fewell himselfe. Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out. ver. 21. when he hath kindled this flame, hee striues to spread and disperse it; and is as coales to burning coales, and wood to the fire. The words of a tale-bearer are wounds, and they goe downe into the innermost parts of the belly. They pene∣trate and cruciate the most tender and sensible places. 3. As a litle sparke growes to a great flame so a small debate often proues a great rent. Iam. 3. 5. Behold how great a matter a litle fire kindleth. The wind at first a small va∣pour, yet gets such strength in going, that it ouer-turnes trees and towers. Ecclus. 28. 14. A back-biting tongue hath pulled downe strong citties, and ouerthrowne the houses of great men. Warre is compared to fire. Numb. 21. A fire is gone out of Heshbon, and a flame from the citie of Sihon: it hath Numb. 21. 28. consumed Ar of Moab, and the Lords of the high places of Arnon. But contention runs like wild-fire; so furious a pace, that nothing but bloud can extinguish it. 4. As fire is prouerbially sayd to be an ill master, but a good seruant: so Anger where it is a Lord of rule is a Lord of mis-rule; but where it is subdued to reason, or rather sanctified to grace, it is a good seruant. That anger is holy, that is zealous for the glory of God. This is Diuision; a raging fire: and able, whether it
take hold of ciuilitie or religion, of Burse or Church, to ouerthrow the common good of both. For ciuilitie, the breaking of relatiues, is the ruine of substantiues. We stand not of our selues, but vpon re∣ference. Want of iustice in magistrates, of instruction in gouernours, of obedience in subiects, of charitie in neighbours, destroyes the common wealth. Some ga∣ther thus much from the fift Commandement, by good consequence. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy dayes may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God giueth thee. For if Princes rule well and subiects o∣bey well; if masters command right, and seruants doe right: if Parents instruct children in the feare of God, and children obey parents in that feare; this happy har∣monie shall preserue the land. If this relation, and reci∣procall dutie be neglected, all runs to ruine: and the blessing of long life shall be with-drawne. For it is not fit they should haue long life, that rebell against those from whom they had, and by whom they hold their life. Begin with the least ascendently. The ouerthrow of a house is Diuision. When the husband and wife draw not euenly in the yoke; when the one brings fire & the other hath no water to-quench it: when the children are refractarie, the seruants wasters; there must needes be a decay of this familie. Whereof consists a Citie, but of many housholds? If the particulars be ruinated, what will become of the generall? When the mem∣bers are gone where is the Bodie? If the Magistrates are vniust, the people disobedient, if one profession quarrell with another, and denie mutualitie: the head refusing to giue guidance, the eyes their sight, the feete to walke, the hands to worke; the body of that Citie dissolues. The dissolution of cities and townes, must needs ruin the Kingdome. When the members fell out with the stomach, that it deuoured all, and tooke noe
paines; hereon the eye would not see for it, nor the hand worke for it, nor the foote walke for it, &c. so the stomach wanting meate, the eyes, hands, feet, and all members faint and languish. Tributes & subsidies are but the dues and duties of the members to the Prince; who, as the stomach, returnes all to their welfare and benefite. Dissention in religion doth no lesse hurt, doth more. It diuides a house. Here. Ver. 52. Fiue in one house shall be diuided: two against three, and three against two. And Math. 10. A mans foes shall be they of his owne household. Math. 10 36. It diuidesa citie. How many cities haue beene destroy∣ed by their owne mutinous distractions, whome for∣raigne inuasions could not subdue! It diuides a King∣dome; whereof Fraunce hath long beene a bleeding witnesse: neither hath England beene insensible. Ac velut in magno populo, cùm saepe coorta est Seditio, saeuit{que} animis ignobile vulgus: Virg. Iám{que} faces & saxa volant, furor arma ministrat. It ouerthrowes propinquitie: the mutuall succour of lending, borrowing, giuing, relieuing is lost. Yea it o∣uerturnes Nature it selfe, setting Math. 10. 35. children at variance a∣gainst their owne parents. There are three very neare; Superiour, equall, inferiour; Parent, wife, children: Ver. 37. yet we must separate from them, rather then from Iesus Christ. Yea it is enough to extirpate all; Regem, legem, grgem; Prince, law and people. No wonder then, if the busie deuill seekes so studiously to kindle this fire! Eccl. Hist. So Eusebius obserues; The subtle Serpent, when perse∣cutions gaue the Church breathing space, began to vexe her with her owne diuisions. The Fewell. Whereon this fire workes, is the good Profession of the godly. So the rulers against Dan. 6. 4. Daniell in causa Dei sui: because of his Religion. Psal. 59. The mightie are Psal. 59. 3.
gathered against me, not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord. They persecuted vs, not because they find e∣uill in vs, but because they cannot find euill in vs. They runne and prepare themselues against me, without my fault. Without fault? it is fault enough in their iudgement, be∣cause we serue the Lord. 1. Pet. 4. 4. They speake euill of vs, because we runne not with them to the same excesse of riot. If we will not communicate with their vicious customes, we shall participate of their raging cruelties. Against Israel, yea because it is Israel, doe they consult: Psal. 83. 4. Come let vs cut off them from being a Nation: that the name of Israell may bee no more in remembrance. For this cause was the Babilonian fire kindled against those three seruants of God; and the same cause moued mysticall Babylon to burne our Martyrs in England. If they would haue tur∣ned to Idols and Images, the fire hadde beene put out. We would not, could not yeeld to their superstitions, therefore the Fire burned. But that which is the occasion of euill, cannot be per∣fectly good. Indeed that simplie and of it selfe causeth euill, is euill it selfe. But that may be good, which indi∣rectly and by consequence, in mans corrupt nature oc∣casioneth it. The Gospell, and integritie of professing it, is not the efficient but accidentall cause; or rather properly no cause, but an occasion of this feud. The bright Sun, shining on mudde and filth, is said to cause stench: yet is not the Sun the true cause, but the former putrefaction of the subiect reflected on, when a cor∣rupt vapour comes into the firie region, it is soone en∣flamed. Their rancorous filth had lyne quiet, as mucke in a dunghill, had not the Sun of the Gospell, shone on it, and stirred it, now howsoeuer the Gospell is not the direct cause of this, yet surely the occasion. For Athens is quiet enough till Paul comes: and till Christ is borne, Ierusalem is husht in peace. Many parishes sticke not to say, we had rest and securitie enough before: but
now since preaching came in, and the Pulpets haue beene warmed, there is nothing but disturbation and vnquietnes. How else could this Text be true, that Christ came to send fire on the earth? The deluge of sinne was vniuersall, and the waters of iniquitie stood vn∣troubled, and all was a Mare mortuum: but when Christ puts fire to this water, no maruell if they wrastle. The deuill stirres not till God rowse him; as the wild boare sleepes till he bee hunted. Let darknesse couer mens impieties, and their slumber is vnmolested: pro∣duce them to the light and they cannot endure it. The vlcerous side full of dead flesh, feeles not till you touch the quicke. But let Elias tell Ahab of his Idolatries, Iohn Baptist Herod of his lusts; and then, Thou art mine enemie. The vngodly may pretend other causes, but this is the true one. The Pope refused to confirme an Arch∣bishop Math. Paris. elect, when no insufficiencie could be found against him, onely because of his age: not considering, that himselfe being older did manage a greater place. But if the Archbishop was able to trauell to Rome and backe againe to England, sure he was able to haue sate in the Chaire of Canturbury. Age was the exception; but the truth was the Archbishops honestie; that he carri¦ed not with him to Rome a golden bottle to quench the Popes thirsty soule: as many others dd, who returned home with as much wit as they went forth, but not with so much money. Such was the Popes pretense against Reimundus the good Earle of Tholouse, that hee was an Hereticke: but when his iust purgation and iustifying of himselfe would not pacifie his vnmercifull Holi∣nesse; Act. and. Mon. pag. 273. nor get peaceable possession of his owne lands: it was euident to all eyes, that the Popes desire was not so much to haue the Earle part from his Heresie, as from his Heritage. Persecutors plead castigation of errours, but they meane subersion of truth. But great peace is prophecied to the Gospell. Esa. 11.
The Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe; and the Leopard lye Esa. 11. 6. quietly by the kidde &c. And Mica. 4. They shall beate their swords, into plowshares, and their speares into pring Mic. 4. 3. hookes: nation shall not lift vp a sword against nation, neither shall they learne warre any more. I answere, God will either restraine the furie of these sauage beasts, and turne Esaus threats into mildnes when hee meets Ia∣cob. Psal. 2. 4. Hee that sittes in heauen laughes at their combi∣nings. Or many Tyrants shall be conuerted to the faith of Christ; subiecting their Crownes, and laying downe their Scepters at the feete of the Lambe. Or it may intend that outward vniuersall peace which was through all the world, when Christ was borne in the dayes of Augustus. But most specially that peace of conscience, and Communion which shall be among the Saints; who shall lay aside all querelous differences, and be made one by the bloud of Iesus. But when the Gospell came to vs in Queene Eliza∣beths dayes of so blessed memorie, we also had much peace. We had with Gloria in excelsis Deo, sung also Pax in terris. The iron gates of warre were shut vp; and the long tossed Arke of our Church had an Oliue branch of flourishing peace bestowed on it. The fury of an Aduersary was not knowne; but Righteousnes and peace kissed each other. Yet was not this peace without great Fires. 1. There was a great fire of Anabaptisme; a grosse, peruerse, and sottish sect, that hadde washed off their Font-water, as vncleane: and thought it not enough to run out of Babylon, vnlesse they ranne also out of themselues, out of their wittes. This combustion could not be well quenched; onely we were happily rid of it by the shifting ground. For when the flames were suppressed in England, they burst out beyond Sea. 2. There was a great fire of Brownisme; an Ignis fa∣tuus, fastning on abundance of crude and squalid mat∣ter,
could not easily be extinguished. It was blowne vp with the Bellowes of pride; and because it might not haue the owne swinge, it fell to direct rayling. They say the Church of England may be their mother, but is none of Gods wife: why doe they not call her plaine Whore? For such is a mother that hath children; and no husband. But these the whiles are braue Sons, who care not to proue themselues bastards, that their mother may be noted for an Harlot. But the shame be their owne, Integritie hers; who hath not defiled her bed, though they haue shamed her wombe. But whiles they call her Saint Iohns Beast in the Reuelation; let them beware, least they proue themselues Saint Pauls Beast; to the Phil. chap. 3. ver. 2. Dogs. Surely God ne∣uer will leaue peaceable spirits in England, to go dwell with railers at Amsterdam. 3. There was a raging fire of the Papists; who to mainetaine their spirituall fire of superstition, made vse of materiall fireto set a whole land in combustion. How vnspeakeable were their treasons agaynst that gratious Princesse: which yet if we gather vp into one volume, we shall find their last equalling all; which should haue beene a fire, a fire indeede; such a one as hell it selfe could onely belch out. But blesse we our God, that with sweete showres of mercie rayned it out. These fires haue beene kindled in a Land of peace, though many teares haue beene showred vpon them, & earnest prayers sent vp to heauen, for their quenching. Yea, and will be still, so long as that crowne-shorn ge∣neration can transport their burning quils into Eng∣land; and their great Antichrist, the Successor not of Peter, but of Romulus, sits on that fierie Chaire. So long as hee is suffered to tyranize ouer nations, to depose Kings, and dispose Kingdomes: who praies Peter and Pope Hilde∣brand in his second excom∣munication of Henry Emp. Paule, (as if they neuer had taught subiects to obey their Soueraignes) to eradicat and cast out an Empe∣rour
from his royaltie. Whereupon he conferred the Empire vpon Rodolphus, with this blasphemous verse. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadem Rodolpho. All Kingdomes were to Peter giuen by Christ: And Peter may dispose them as he list. But as Cardinall Benno affirmes, that when this Hil∣debrand would needs solmnly excommunicate the Em perour, his Chayre burst in pieces, being but newly made of suffcient tymber: so if it were throughly bro∣ken to fitters neuer (like Iericho) to be rebuilded then (and not till then) Princes may raigne in peace. From all this we may obserue. 1. That this fire was kindled in Christs time, and hath burned euer since. For if this rage stroke at the head, it will not fauour the members. If the sawcie Deuill durst meddle and incounter with the Cap∣taine, he will not feare to set vpon a meane souldiour. Remember, sayth Christ the word that I sayd vnto you, The seruant is not greater then the Lord: if they haue per∣secuted Ioh. 15. 20. me, they will also persecute you. We cannot ex∣pect that immunitie, which our Sauiour neuer found. In the securest and most quiet state of the Church we haue found this: that sedition hath trode on the heeles of peace; and persecution beene borne into the world, with the feete forward for hast. 2. That the godly must maintaine this fire; for there must be in them no deficiencie of fewell. They must hold fast integritie, though this be the matter whereup∣pon this fire workes. No peace must be had with them, that haue no peace with God: I deny not peace in ci∣uill affaires, but in conforming our manners to theirs. For righteousnesse must not yeeld to iniquitie: Christ must be borne, and being borne must raigne, though Math. 2. 3. Herod rage, and the Deuill foame, and all Ierusa∣lem be troubled at it. 1. Sam. 5. 3. Dagon must yeeld to the Arke, not the Arke to Dagon: the ten Tribes come to Iudah,
not Iudah goe to them: Ishbosheth to Dauid, not Dauid to Ishbosheth. The Gospell must be preached though hell breake out into opposition: and we must keepe faith & a good conscience, though persecutors print in our sides the markes of the Lord Iesus. 3. That the fruit of the Gospell is so farre from allowing carnall peace, that it giues Dissention. It hath euer beene the destinie of the Gospell to bring commotion, trouble, and warres; though no do∣ctrine teacheth so much peace. Math. 10. I came not to Math. 10. 34. snd peace, but a sword. Not that the Gospell of it selfe causeth warres; for it maketh peace betweene God and man, man and man, man and his inward soule: but it ouerturneth the tables of the money-changers, spoileth the Banke of vsurers, will not let Herod keepe his He∣rodias, barres Demetrius of his idolatrous shrines, puls the cup from the mouth of the drunkard, denounceth confusion to the oppressor, vnuizardeth painted hypo∣crisie, and discouers the vgly face of fraud to the world; therefore it hath enemies, euen to the effusion of bloud, and endeuourd extirpation of all that professe it. So that partly this proceeds from our owne corruption; that cannot endure the light, because our deedes are euill; and partly from the malice of Sathan, who by the growth of the Gospell looseth his Iurisdiction. For looke how much ground Christianitie gettes, that bloudie infernall Turke looseth. So that neither can the Deuill so vncontrollably lead men to quiet damna∣tion; neither can the euill heart bee so securely euill. For the Gospell informes the vnderstanding, the vn∣derstanding tels the conscience, and the conscience will not spare to tell men their wickednesse. Though Gods hand forbeares to strike outwardly, the conscience smites inwardly; and the former vniust peace is broken by a new iust war. Men shall by this meanes know hell
before they salute, it and discerne themselues in that broad way that leads to damnation. Safe they may be, they cannot be secure. Thus the Gospell begets all maner of enemies, forraine, ciuill, domesticall. For∣raigne, the Deuill who now makes apparant his hornes, as if it were high time to bestirre himselfe. Hee sees, he cannot lead soules to his blacke kingdome in a twine-threed, as hee was wont without reluctancie: he must clap irons vpon them, and bind them with his strongest tentations. Ciuill, the world which erst ticed vs on, as a baite doth the fish, not knowing that there is a hooke so neere the iawes wee tooke it for a kind and familiar friend; but now it is descried and described for a very aduersary. Domesticall, thy owne bosome is disquieted, and thou must muster vp all the forces of thy soule, to take the Traytour that lurkes within thee, thy owne flesh. This is a neare and a deare enemie, yet we must fight against it, and that with a will to subdue it; denying our selues, and for∣saking our delighted lusts and pleasures. The godly must be faine to sit, like the Nightingale, with a thorne against their brest. If they scape conflicts abroad, they are sure to haue them at home: and if forraigne and profest aduersaries should giue ouer their inuasions, yet this domesticall rebell, lust, must with great trouble be subdued. After which spirituall combate, our com∣fort is that in the end the victorie shall be ours. Ecclus. 28. 22. It shall not haue rule ouer them that feare God, neither shall they be burnt with the flames thereof. Hence we learne fiue vse∣full lessons. 1. That we haue neede of Patience: seeing we know that the law of our Profession binds vs to a warfare; and it is decreed vpon that all that will liue godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. When Fire, which was the God of the Chaldeans, had deuoured all the other wooden deitie, Canopis set vpon him a Caldron full of
water, whose bottome was full of holes artificially stopt with waxe: which when it felt the heat of that fu∣rious Idol, melted and gaue way to the water to fall downe vpon it, and quench it. The water of our pa∣tience must onely extinguish this Fire: nothing but our teares moderation and sufferance can abate it. But this patience hath no further latitude, then our proper respect: for in the cause of the Lord wee must must be iealous and zealous. Ieron. ad vigil. Meam iniurim patienter tuli, iniuriam contra Sponsam Christi ferre non potui. Our owne iniuries wee must bury in forgetfulnes, but wrongs to the Truth of God, and Gospell of Iesus Christ, we must striue to oppose and appease. Patience is intollerable, when the honour of God is in dange∣rous question. Otherwise we must consider, that by troubles God doth trie and exercise our patience. Ideo Deus misit in terram bonam separationem, vt malm rumpe∣ret coniunctionem. Therfore God sent on earth a good separation, that he might dissolue an euill coniunction. 2. That wee must not shrinke from our profession, though we know it to be the fewell that maintains this fire. Daniell leaues not his God, though he be shewed the Lyons; nor those three seruants their integritie and abomination of the Idoll, though the heat of the fire be septupled. Let the Pope spue out his execrati∣ons, interdictions, and maledictions (for his holie mouth is full of curses) yet keepe wee our faith: it is better to haue the Pope curse vs, then God. His curse is but like Domitians thunder: if you giue care to the crackes and noyse, it seemes a terrible and hideous matter, but if you consider the causes and effects, it is a ridiculous iest. Reuolt not from the Gospell, from thy faith and innocencie, and though he curse, the Lord will blesse. Balaam could say; Quomodo maledicam ei, cui non maledixit Dominus? How shall I curse him, whom the Lord hath not cursed? Rash and headlong
iudgement hurts not the person de quo temerè iudicatur, against whom it is denounced; but him that so indi∣screetly iudgeth. Qui conantur per iram aliena coereere, gra uiora committunt. To correct other mens errors in an∣ger, is to commit a greater error then theirs. Let not the thunders of malignant opposers disharten thy zeale Hebr. 10. 38. The iust shall liue by faith: but if any man draw backe, my soule shall haue no pleasure in him. 3. That we thinke not much of the troublous fires, that are thus sent to waite vpon the Gospell. He that gaue vs that blessed Couenant, meant not that wee should sticke at these conditions. It is enough to haue this Passeouer though we eate it with sower herbes: to enioy the Lillie, though among thornes. Let the Iewes fret and Deuils run mad; and many giue ground to these persecutions: yet say we with Peter. Ioh. 6. 68. Master, whether shall we goe from thee? thou hast the words of eternall life. He is vnworthy of Gods fauour, that cannot goe a∣way contented with it, vnlesse he may also enioy the fauour of the world. It is enough to haue the promise of a Crowne, albeit we climbe to it by the Crosse. The ancient Christians vsed to haue Crucem Coronatam pictured, a Crosse with a Crowne on the top of it. Tolle crucem, si vis et babere coronam. Their Hierogly∣phicke taught men to attaine the Crowne; by bearing the Crosse. Though the friends and factours of hell compasse vs round, yet wee haue heauen within vs, would we haue it within vs, and without vs too? that is only the priuiledge of glory. Cannot Paul endure the 2. Cor. 12. 9. thornes and buffets of Satan? Let him quiet his heart with Gods encouragement. My grace is sufficient for thee. It is enough to haue the Phil. 4. 7. peace of God, which passeth all vnderstanding, though we lacke the (ill condition'd) peace of the world. Murmure not that the world de∣nies her wanton solace, to tickle thee with vaine plea∣sures: thou hast the Rom. 14. 17. ioy of the holy Ghost. God is thy
portion. Though the lot fall short in earthly meanes, wealth and worship: yet he is well for a part, that hath God for his portion. Content thy selfe; this fire must goe with the Gospell; and thou art vnworthy of the immortall gold of grace, if thou wilt not endure it to be tryed in the Fire 1. Pet. 1. 7. Your faith is much more precious then gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire: and shall be found at last to praise, and honour, and glory, at the appea∣ring of Iesus Christ. 4. That we esteeme not the worse of our Profession, but the better. It is no small comfort, that God thinkes thee worthy to suffer for his Name. This was the Apo∣stles ioy (not that they were worthy, but) that Act. 5. 41. they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ. He refused not to be our Sauiour for the shame he was put to: hee brooked a purple robe to couer his white innocencie; his face, which is worshipped by the Angels in heauen, to be spit on; his soule in the midst of all his vnutterable pangs, to be derided and iested at; some wagging their heads, others mouing their tongues to blasphemie: and if the maner of death could adde to his ignominie, hee suffered the most opprobrious: yet sayth Paul, for our sakes, Hebr. 12. 2. he endured the Crosse, and despised the shame; this, all this shame, that he might bring saluation to vs, and vs to saluation. And shall we be ashamed of his professi∣on; that was not ashamed of our protection? If wee be, wee haue read his iudgement; Hee will be ashamed of vs before his Father in Heauen. The King doth not cast away his Crowne, though it be the occasion of many treasons. Loose not thy hope and holde of a royall Inheritance, because this Title hath many enemies. Hee was neuer wor∣thy to weare a wreath of victorie, that coward∣like ran out of the bloudie field. The vnthriftie soule is iustly starued, that will not reape and gather his corne, because there be thistles amongst it. He neuer knew
how precious a mettall gold is, that will rather throw away his oare, then take paines at the fornace. It is pitie that euer the water of Baptisme was spilt vpon his face, that forsakes the Standard of Christ, because hee hath many enemies. Israel had neuer gotten that pro∣mised Canaan, had they beene afraid of the sonnes of Anak. It is honour enough to be a Christian though others that are contemptible doe cast contempt vpon it. Our Sauiour hath armed vs with a sweet prediction. Ioh. 16. 33. These things haue I spoken vnto you, that in mee you might haue peace: in the world you shall haue tribulation; but be of good cheare, I haue ouercome the world. 5. Seeing the fewell is our integritie; and this they spe∣cially strike at; let vs more constantly hold together: confirming the Communion of Saints, which they would dissolue. Let vs more strongly fortifie our vni∣tie, because they so fiercely assault it: and cling faithful∣ly to our Head, from whom their sacrilegious hands would pull vs, Ioh. 6. 68. Lord, whether shall we goe from thee? thou hast the words of eternall life. Where those words are found, woe be to vs if we are not found. Multitudo inimicorum corroboret vnitatem a micorum. Let not bre∣thren fight with themselues, whiles they haue enough forraine enemies. It is enough that foes strike vs; let not vs strike our friends. No nor yet part with our friends and Christs, because some aduersaries are scat∣tered among them. What though the miscellane rab∣ble of the prophane: as the Brownists terme them, be admitted among vs: shall the lewdnes of these disanull Gods Couenant with his? Yes say they: this is their mercie: Gods is more. Hee still held Israel for his, when not many in Israel held him for theirs. The de∣sert was a witnesse of their mutinous rebellion against Psal. 10. 6. God and his Minister; yet the pillar of protection by day and night left them not. Moses was so farre from reiecting them, that he would not endure that God
should reiect them, though for his owne aduantage. In all companies there will be euill intruders: Sathan a∣mong the Angelles, Saul among the Prophets, Iudas among the Apostles, Nicholas among the Deacons, De∣mas among Professors. Yet though Thiatira retaines a Iezebell, the good are commanded but Reu. 2. 24. to holde their owne. But wee reserue the ceremonies of a superstitious Church: but we reserue no superstition in those cere∣monies. We haue both abridged their number, and altered their nature. As it was a paines not amisse vn∣dertaken of late, to reduce the feast of Christes natiui∣tie, as neare to the right Quando and period of time, as art and industrie could deuise: by taking vp the loose minutes which in tract of time, and multiplication of degrees, had drawne out a wider distance by certaine dayes, then was congruent to the first Calendar. So hath our Church so neare as shee could abridged the ranke superfluities, and excrescent corruptions, which the Traditionall ceremonies, and ceremoniall Tradi∣tions of Rome had brought in, (and thereby remooued her, from that neerenes to her Sauiour, which shee formerly enioyed) striuing to reduce her selfe concer∣ning Ceremonies; for their number to paucitie, for their nature to puritie, for their vse to significancie. Separate we not then from the Church, because the Church cannot separate from all imperfection. But keepe the Apostles rule. Eph. 4. 15. Follow the truth in loue: not onely the Truth, but the truth in loue. Diuerse follow the truth, but not truely. 1. Some there are that embrace the truth, but not all the truth: those are Heretickes. 2. Some embrace the truth, but not in vnitie; and those are Separatists. 3. Others embrace the truth in vnitie and veritie, but not in heart: and those are hypocrites.
Therefore the Apostle so often vrgeth it: Be ye all of one minde: haue the same affection. As children of one house haue most vsually one and the same education: so all Gods children must be like affected to God, to Christ, to the Church, and one to another. To God in obedience and pietie, to Christ in faith and synce∣ritie, to the Church in peace and vnitie, to their owne sinnes in hatred and enmitie, to one another in loue and charitie. Employing the graces of God bestowed on vs, to the edification and consolation of others: spending our selues, like torches, to giue others light. A Christian, though he be the freest man of all, yet he is seruant to all: to Christ for himselfe, to others for Christ: Gal. 5. 13. serue one another in loue. Let this affection of vnitie be encreased by considering three inconuenien∣ces of dissension. 1. A great aduantage is giuen to the enemie. They boast the goodnes of others errours, whilst wee agree not in our truth. They take opportunity to shuffle in their counterfet coine, whiles wee consent not in our gold; I say not so much for the waight or purenes of sub stance, as for the fashion. Is it not a shame for the chil∣dren of God to dissent, when the children of hell are at peace? It is a military principle; Tempt not an enemie, by giuing him the aduantage. What is this, but to harten their malignant opposition to assault vs, when they spie in the Citie a Breach? Qui vnionem rumpit, vnitatem ruit: Hee that dissolues the vnion of parts, ouerthrowes the vnitie of the whole. 2. Sinne by this meanes steales vp: nor is there an ad∣uantage giuen only to our aduersaries of Rome, but to our enemies of hell. Wickednes is a crafty theefe; which spying a towne on fire, and all hands labouring to quench it, takes his aduantage of booties; and what others redeeme, he steales. Whiles we are busie about this Fire, the deuils factors come abroad, like Nicholas
Clarkes, and steale away soules. Whiles so many disa∣gree about Christs descending into ell, Sathan ga∣thers many thether. 3 Our soules by this meanes often become , & gather corruption for want of scowring them by re∣pentance. Whiles we are carefull and curious about mint and cummin, Iustice and Pietie goe away negle∣cted. We at once grow hote in contention, and cold in deuotion. The fire of the Altar goes out whiles this fire of sedition is fewelled. It was the comparison of a worthy Diuine. The meanes whereby the sheepheards take the Pelican, is to lay fire neere her nest: which she, in a foolish pitie to saue her young ones, offers to flap out with her wings, and so is burned her selfe. So ma∣ny in a fond compassion to quench this fire, burne their owne wings, rather then help others. If our ashes could quench it, we should not grudge them: but since it en∣creaseth with part-takings, let vs either quench it with our teares, or by our prayers moue God to put it out. Howsoeuer neglect wee not the estate of our owne soules; nor suffer our hearts ouer-growne with the rust of corruption, or mosse of securitie. So thou mayest be like the gold-finer that is all day purifying of met∣tals, till himselfe be reezed, smooted, and soiled all o∣uer. Take heede, thou mayest be so long about the fire, till thou be made blacke with the smoke. We haue brought together the Fire, and the Fewell; now we must looke for Kindlers. The Kindler. Of this fire is principally Satan: it is hee that brings the fewell of good mens sanctitie, and the fire of euill mens iniquitie together; and so begets a great flame. This he doth performe either by his Instruments, or by himselfe. He is the great Bustuarie himselfe, and hath other deputed inflamers vnder him.
Sometimes immediately by himselfe. Reu. 12. That Reu. 12. 4. great red Dragon, with seauen heads and ten hornes, and sea∣uen Crownes on his heads: stands before the woman which was ready to be deliuered, for to deuoure her child so soone as it was borne. When he perceiued that the Great Light (Christ) was come into the world, by throwing downe his oracles of darknes, he begins to bustle and howsoe∣uer he speeds, he wil fight two or three bouts with him, in a monomachie or duell, person to person. He durst not trust this battell to an instrument, or fight by At∣tourney: Per alium de∣sperat; quod etiam per se fieri dubitat. this fire he will kindle himselfe. As proud as he is, rather then he will hazard the escaping of a soule from his blacke kingdome, he will in his owne proper person take the paines, to hamper him with his strong∣est temptations. Sometimes by his instrumentes, which are many thou∣sands: for if we compare numbers: he hath more hel∣pers on earth to kindle this fire, then Christ hath ser∣vants to put it out. Therfore he is called the God of this 2. Cor. 4. 4. world: where sub nomine mundi are meant mundani, worldlings. Reu. 12. He is said to deceiue the whole world. Reu. 12. 9. He labours to deceiue all that are in the world, but he doth deceiue all that are of the world. It was he that stirred vp couetousnes in the Sabeans, and couetousnes stirred vp their harts against Iob. He incenseth Haman, and Haman Ahashueroch against the Iewes. He prouo∣ked Iudas, & almost all Iudah against Iesus. He kindleth malice in their harts that kindle these damnable fires: & shall burne in vnquenchable fire for his labour. It is he that prouoketh the Magistrate to tyrannie, the people to disobedience & trecherie, the learned to heresie, the simple to securitie, all to rebellion and impietie. Men litle thinke, whose instruments they are, & whose bu∣sinesse they goe about, when they put their finger in this fire. It is the diuel, that puts slander in their tongues, malice in their hearts, & mischeefein their hands: wher∣by
they labour either seducere or abducere, to corrupt mens soules, or to cut their throates. For Satans whole intent is to draw men a cultu Dei debito, ad cultu suimet indebitum; from worshiping the God of light, to wor∣ship Rupert. him that is an Angell of darknes. Oh that men would consider what eternall fire is prepared for them, by whom this mysticall fire is kindled! Now Sathan kindleth two sorts of fires; Generall, or speciall. And either of these is double. The generall are extended either to errour, or terrour. 1. He kindles the fire of open warre. He is the great ge∣nerall of that armie. Psal. 2. that doe band themselues a∣gainst the Lords annointed. The Dragon and his angels fight against Michael and his Angels: There is no fighting a∣gainst Reu. 12. the Saints, but vnder his colours. Hee was the captaine in that Parisiā massacre; the Pilot to that inuin∣cible nauie: 88. He is the great master of the inquisition: the grand Cair of all confederacles abroad; the Machia∣uell of all conspiracies at home. There was no treason, but was first hammer'd in his forge & tooke the dam∣ned fire from his breath. The Pope hath bin his applau∣ded Instrument many yeares, to kindle these belluine & Belial fires. Innumerableseditions of warres haue bin sent from the enginous studie of his holy brest to vexe Christian Emperours and kings: wherein continually the Pope gaue the battell, but the Lord gaue the victo∣rie: and that where his vicar least intended it Hilde∣brand (Hell-brandrather) promised Rodolphus, whom he incensed against his liege-Emperour Henricus, assured conquest: but it seemes the Bishop had small power in heauen, whatsoeuer he pretended on earth: for Rodol∣phus his ouerthrow gaue Henricus direct proofe to the contrary. It appeares in a certaine letter of Benno to the Cardinals, that this Hildebrand preaching in the Pulpit did so promise and prophecie the death of Henricus, that he bid his auditors no more to take him for Pope,
but to plucke him from the Altar: if the sayd Henry did not dye, or were not deiected from his kingdome, before the feast of Saint Peter then next ensuing. But the euent proued the Pope a lyer in the Pulpit; and therefore I hope tooke from him all impossibillitie of lying in Cathedra, Indeed he laboured tooth and nale, by policie and sorcerie, by his friends and fiends to ect this: innumerable were the plots of his trea∣son. One among the rest is obseruable in the letter of the said Cardinall Benno. that he had hired a villaine, obseruing the place in the Church where th Empe∣rour vsed to pray, to cary vp to the roofe of the Church a great number and waight of stones; with purpose to let them fall downe on the Emperours head at his de∣uotion, and to knocke out his braines▪ but the traitour being busie to remoue a stone of an vnwonted huge∣nes to the place, the planke whereon he stood broke; downe they come both to the floore of the Church, & the stone (for it seemes his owne impietie made him the heauier to fall first to his center) fell on him, and quash'd him to peeces. But what speake I of their particular treasons? a pri∣uate treachery was but like the French Torney at Cha∣lons. Parvum bellum; a litle warre: wee areto consider their great Firs, which they haue kindled in the Chri∣stion world: when the Princes would neuer haue broke mutuall peace had not the Deuill set on the Pope, and the Pope set on them to this eger contention. But light∣ly as Mars and money made them Popes; so Mars and Symonie held them rich Popes. And now through Sa∣thans helpe they haue brought it about; that as at first no Pope might be chosen without the Emperour, so now no Emperour must bee chosen without the Pope. Both the swords are their claime; and they will haue them both, or they will lift them vp both against the deniers: and where the sword spirituall may not
be admitted, they will make way for it with the sword temporall. It is fit, they say, that they should beare temporall rule, that follow neerest to God: but the Pope and his Clergie follow neerest to God: therefore are the fittest men to rule. It is answered, if God behere taken for that God, which S. Paul speakes of, the Belly: they follow nearest indeed. From the other and onely Phil. 3. 19. true God, they are farre enough. If they were not, they would vse onely spirituall warre against the kingdome of Satan; and not meddle with temporall war against the kingdomes of Christian Princes. Plead what they can from the wrested Scriptures, and misunderstood Fathers; yet Frustra Apostolica authoritas pratenditur, vbi Apostolica Scriptura contemnitur: in vaine is Aposto∣lique authoritie pretended, where Apostolicke Scrip∣ture is dispised, or peruerted. Non cripit mortalia, qui reg∣na dat coelestia. That God warrants not the taking away of earthly kingdoms, that giues the kingdom of heauen. 2 The second generall fire he kindles, is error and He∣resie; a burning riuer of poyson: that Cup of abomi∣nation, which he reacheth out to the world in the hand of that great Babilonian Whore. To maintaine this fire, he cals Councells, enacts lawes, teacheth many Parlia∣ments the promulgation of bloudy Statutes: and wher∣as other lawes of Princes (tending to the ruine of ini∣quitie) are euer neglected, those that are made against Christians, haue beene most seuerely executed. And least the Deuill in this should appeare like himselfe, the Prince of death and darknes; heesits thundring in the Popes mouth like an Angell of light, and so directs him; that vnder In Dei nomine: Amen; he vnmerciful∣ly condemneth his brother. So that the vsurpation of a diuine dispensation, must burne the poore members of Christ at the fierie stakes. Now this fire he kindleth by two malicious courses. 1. By obscuring the light of the Gospell from mens
eyes; and hartning their affection to darknes. So that the children of the night haue so doted vpon Igno∣rance, that they hate and persecute all the meanes and messengers of illumination. Shine the Sunne neuer so bright, the Papists will see by nothing but Candle∣light. Therefore it may be, they are permitted tapers, torches, and candles, to content their carnall deuoti∣on; that they might not spiritually desire the Light of the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ, who is the image of God. 2. Cor. 4. 4. And if euer their caliginous minds spie the least glim∣mering of zeale, or feele a litle turning from their for∣mer impieties; the shrine, picture, or Image of some Saint hath the glory of their conuersion. A very blocke shall haue the praise, rather then God. But wee can hardly beleeue, they are conuerted from darknes to light, that fetch their illumination out of a stone. It is recorded, that at Amesbary, when Queene Alinor the wife of King Henry, 3. Lay there; a man Act. & Mon. pag. 355. ex. Chron. Rob. Amesburiensis. that fained himselfe to haue beene long blind, came to her, and told her that he had now his sight restored a∣againe at the tombe of King Henry her deceased hus∣band. The mother easily beleeued it; but her sonne Edrd the first knowing this man, that hee had beene euer a dissolute wretch and vile impostor, diswaded her from giuing faith to it: protesting that he knew so well the iustice of his Father; that if he were liuing, he would sooner pull out both the dissemblers eyes, then restore sight to any one of them. So certainely those Saints, to the vertue of whose dead bones these hypo∣crites attribute the glory of their conuersion and en∣lightening; would (if they were liuing) rather say these men had no eyes of grace at all, then that any light was giuen them out of their dead dusts, or pain∣ted resemblances. This is Sathans first proiect, to cast a thick cloud of inuincible ignorance, betweene mens eyes and the cleare Sunne.
2. By hindring all those that haue a commission to preach it. Zach. 3. He shewed me Ioshua the high Priest Zach. 3. 1. standing before the Angell of the Lord; and Satan standing at his right hand to resist m. A dore is opened, but there are many aduersaries: sayth he Apostle. Will you heare the principall aduersarie? We would haue come vnto you (euen 1. Thess. 2. 18. I Paul) once and againe: but Satan hindered vs. The good minister hath no aduersarie in his calling, but he is of the deuils raising. And herein he is either a wolfe or a foxe; effecting this either by open preuention, or se∣cret peruersion. 1 Openly he opposeth not onely his Principalities infernall, but also Powers terrestriall against it. What preacher euer beganne to sing with a cleare brest, the songs of Sion; for many hundred yeares vnder the Popes reach: but instantly, Pope, Cardinals, Fryers, Deuils cursed him with belles and candles, and were readie to burne him in flames! Saeuit mundus, cùm often∣ditur immundus. The world is mad, that his dominion and damnation should be spoken against. 2. Secretly he hinders the free preaching of the Gos∣pell, by corrupting their hearts that are deputed to that office. And this he effecteth by infusion of these foure hellish ingredients: Heresie against truth: Schisme a∣gainst peace: Popularitie against simplicitie; and coue∣tice against Charitie. 1. He poysons some hearts with hereticall poynts of doctrine; which being lightly most pleasing to the flesh, are drunke with thirstie attention. Heresie is (thus defined) humanosensu electa, Scripturae sacrae con∣traria, palam docta, pertinaciter defensa: begot of mans braine, contrary to the holy Scriptures, openly taught, and peremptorily defended. By this, so farre as the flesh in man preuailes against the Spirit, Sathan pre∣uailes against the truth. So that if they must needs haue any of the pure gold of Gods word, it shall be so so∣phisticated,
adulterate, and mingled with the drosse of humane Traditions, that they shall not be able to per∣ceiue or receiue it. 2. Those whom he cannot corrupt against truth, he incenseth against peace. Diuision shall accomplish that mischiefe, which errour failed in. Whom he cannot transport to Rome, he ferries ouer to Amsterdam. He will either keepe men on this side the truth, or send them beyond it. Errour on the right hand shall cast away soules, if errour on the left cannot. Some runne so farre from Babylon, that they will not keepe neere Ierusalem: as men that runne so eagerly from a Lyon, that they refuge themselues in the hole of a Serpent. The Schismaticke meets with the Romanist, in super∣stition another way. Thus Quibus nequit tollere verita∣tem, negat permittere vnitatem: It he cannot depriue vs of truth, he will not permit vs peace. 3. By perswading men to be temporisers, and to catch at the fauours of great men. Thus when a Preacher must measure his Sermon by his Lords humour, the truth of the Lord of Hoasts is smoothered. Against oppression he dares not speake, because it is his Lords fault: not a∣gainst pride because it is his Ladies: not against ryot, because it is his young Masters: nor against drunken∣nesse because they fauour it whom his Great-one fa∣uours. He must not meddle with those vlcers, which he sees to sticke on his Patrons conscience. That were the way to loose both present benefite, and future bene∣fice; he dares not doe it. Whiles he is their seruile chap∣laine, he must learne Turkie-worke; to make thrum'd cushions of flatterie for their elbowes. It seemes, it was not Gods businesse that such a one made himselfe Minister for; but his owne or worse. He hath three Masters: he serues his Lord, hee serues himselfe, hee serues the Deuill; which of these will pay him the best wages? Thus if Sathan can neither take away the truth,
nor peace, yet he labours against simplicitie: that for feare of men, and hope of mens, they forbeare to speake against wickednes. What his kingdome looseth one way, it recouers another. 4. By infecting their hearts with couetousnesse, and extending their desires to an insatiable wealth. With this pill he poison'd Demas; and Iudas before him, and thousands after him. The Chaire of Rome is filled with this pestilence. England hath found it, though many Princes will not find it. When the reuenues of the Crowne amounted not to halfe the Popes yearly taxes. But we are well eased of that vnsupportable burden: Edward the 3. begun it, for he first made the Premunire against the Pope: and our succeeding Christian Princes haue quite throwne him out of the saddle. God did not make his law so long, but man might easily remember it; comprising it all in ten Commandements. But the Pope hath curtalled it, & made it far shorter; abridging the ten commandements into two words; Da pecuniam Giue money. And for this the whole law shall be dispen∣sed with. Experience hath still proued, that money was the Apostolicall arguments of Rome. An Emperour paid for his absolution 120000. ounces of gold: a deare rec∣koning for those wares, that cost the Pope nothing. In the raigne of Hen. 3. The Pope required the tenths of all the moueables in England, Ireland, & Wales: and Ex Math. Pa∣risiens. because he feared, that such moneys could not be spee∣dily enough collected, he sent ouer many vsurers into the land, which were then called Caursini: who would lend money to those of the Clergy that wanted, but on so vnreasonable extortion, that the debters were still beggar'd. So that what by his violent exaction, & subtle circumuention by his owne vsurers (for all they had was the Popes money) he desired onely the tenth part, but he got away also the other 9. And indeed the Pope had reason to maintain vsury, for vsury maintained the
Pope. Neither is this infection bounded vp with that Bishop, but dissipated among all his Clergie. Not so much as the very Mendicant Fryers, that professe wil∣full pouertie, but haue a wilfull desire to be rich. They haue more holines in their hands, then in their hearts: their hands touch no money, their hearts couet it. But the great Belphegor somtimes giues them a purge. Wher∣upon said W. Swinderby; If the Pope may take from the Act. & Mon. pag. 454. Fryers to make them keepe Saint Frances rule; why may not the Emperour take from the Pope, to make him keepe Christs rule? But whosoeuer gets, the poore Laitie looseth all. There was a booke called Poeniten∣tiarius Asini, The Asses Confessor; wherein is mentioned this Fable. The wolfe, the foxe, and the asse come to shrift together, to doe penance. The wolfe confesseth himselfe to the foxe, who easily absolueth him. The foxe doth the like to the wolfe, and receiueth the like fauour. After this the asse comes to confession, and his fault was, that being hungry he had taken out one straw from the sheafe of a Pilgrim to Rome; whereof he was heartily repentant. But this would not serue, the law was executed seuerely vpon him, he was slaine and de∣uoured. By the wolfe is meant the Pope: by the foxe his Cardinals, Iesuites, Priestes: these quickly absolue one another, how haynous euer their offences were. But when the poore Asse, that's the Laitie, comes to shrift, though his offence be not the waight and worth of a straw; yet on his backe must the law be seuerely executed; and the holy Father the wolfe makes a great matter of it. Immensum scelus est, iniuria quam peregrin, Fecesti, stramen surripiendo sibi. O the insatiable gulfe of that Sea! God grant, that none of that infection euer come ouer amongst the mi∣nisters of the Gospell. There is nothing more absurd, then that those which teach others to seeke the king∣dome
of heauen, and to despise the world; should be found to embrace the world with the neglect of hea∣uen. These are the generall fires this malicious Incendiary kindles. There are also too particular and speciall, which he enflameth in priuate mens hearts: whereby he pre∣possesseth them with a preiudiciall disesmation of the Gospell, for causes either direct, or oblique. Directly for it selfe, or obliquely and by consequence for pri∣uate ends. 1. First he begets in a mans minde a dislike of the word for it selfe. This man esteemes preaching but follie: he sees no good it doth, to haue one pratling an houre or two in a Pulpit. He is a parishioner to two parishes: to the Congregation he liues with, Quoad corpus; to the Synagogue of Satan, Quoad animam. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 18. Cor. 1. The preaching of the Crosse is to them that perish, foolishnes: but vnto vs which are saued it is the power of God. It is horrible when man, dust and ashes, meere follie; shall censure the Wisedome of God. Let them haue their wils, be it in their account follie; yet it plea∣seth Ver. 21. God by the foolishnes of preaching to saue them that be∣leeue. And without this they must liue in errour, and die in terrour: hell fire will make them change their opinions. 2. Others are wrought to hate it onely for second and simister respects. The Masters of that Damosell Act. Act. 16. 19. 16. Possessed with a spirit of diuination, seeing the hope of their gaines gone, brought Paul and Silas to scourging; and neuer left them, till they saw them in prison. When Demetrius perceiued the ruine (not so much of the E∣phesian Act. 19. 24. Diana, as) of his owne Diana, gaine and com∣moditie in making of siluer shrines; he sets all Ephesus in a tumult. The losse of profite or pleasure by the Gospell, is ground enough of malice and madnesse a∣gainst it. Cannot a tyrant be bloudie, cannot an op∣pressor
depopulate, an vsurer make benefite of his mo∣ney, a swearer braue with blasphemies, a drunkard keepe his tavern-session but the Pulpets must ring of it? Downe shall that Gospell come, if they can subiect it, that will not let them runne to hell vntroubled. Non turbant Evangelium, um ab Evangelio non turbentur: let them alone, and they will let you alone. But if you fight against their sins with the sword of the Spirit, they will haue you by the eares, and salute you with the sword of death. You see the fires that the Deuill Kindleth. It is obiected. 1. Satan knowes that hee can do nothing but by the permission of God. Ans. Therefore not knowing Gods secret will, who are elect, who reprobate, hee laboures to destroy all. And if he perceiue, that God more espe∣cially loues any, haue at them to chuse. If he can but bruise their heeles, O hee thinkes hee hath wrought a great spight to God. 2. He knowes that though with his taile he can draw stars from heauen, discouer the hypocrisie of great Pro∣fessors; yet he cannot wipe the name of one soule out of the booke of life, which the Lambe hath written there. Answ. It is the Devils nature to sinne against his owne knowledge. Contra scientiam peccabit, qui con∣tra conscientiam peccavit. 3. He knowes, he shall receiue the greater damna∣tion, and the more aggravated torments. And the Devill that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire & brimstone, where the beast & the false prophet are, & shall be tormented Reu. 10. 20. day & night, for ever & ever. Ans. He sins alwaies with purposed malice of heart, proudly against God, and blasphemously agaynst the holy Ghost: though he re∣ceiue the smart himselfe. We perceiue now the Fire, the Fewell, and the Kind∣ler; let vs looke to The Smoke. There goes lightly a Smoke before this Fire. Reu. 9. Reu. 9. 2.
He opened the bottomlesse pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoake of a great fornace, and the Sunne and the ayre were darkened by reason of the smoake of the pit. And there came out of the smoke, Locusts vpon the earth, When we see smoke wee conclude their is fire. Christ will not quench the smoking flaxe; for the smoke Gen. 19. 28. without shewes a sparke of faith within. When Abra∣ham saw the smoke of the countrey going vp as the smoake of a fornace. He knew that the fire was begun in Sodom. This smoke is the signe of persecution ensuing: and it is either Publique or Priuate Publique is two fold. 1. The threatning of Tyrants; this smoke came out Act. 9. 1. of the mouth of Saul. Act. 9. And Saul yet breathing out threatnings. Such were the Romish vaunts of the Spa∣nish ships: but God quenched that fire in water; and it was but a smoke. Hee that could forbid the fire to Dan. 3. 25. burne, can also forbid the smoke to become a . Onely the massacre at Paris was a fire without a smoke vnles it be smoke enough (as indeed it is) for Papists to liue among Protestants. 2. Securitie is a publique Smoke: when men cry Peace, peace; this is the smoake of warre. The carelesse liues of the old world and Sodom, were portentuous smoakes of their enkindled destruction. Our secure and dead∣harted conuersations are arguments of the like to vs. God both auert that, and conuert vs. We feast reuel, daunce, sin, and sing like swannes the prognostickes of our owne funerals. We are not circumspect to looke vp on those, which watch vs with the keene eyes ofmalice our sleep giues themhope & our selues danger. Neglect of defence hartens on a very coward enemie. Our com∣fort only is; He that keepeth Israel doth not slūber nor sleepe, Psal. 121. 4. The priuate Smoke, particularly laid to a Christian, is a gentler & more soft tētation. But if this Smoke preuaile not, Satan coms with a fiery trial. Ifhe cannot peruert Io seph with his tempting mistres, a kind smoke: he will trie
what a Iayle can doe. If the deuill can draw thee to his purpose with a twine threed, what needes he a Cable rope! If Sampson can be bound with greene withes, the Philistines need not seeke for iron chaines. But Sathan knows, that some will not, like Adam and Esau be wonne with trifles: that some will sticke to Christ whiles the weather is faire, and there is peace with the Gospell; yet in time of Math. 13. 21 persecution start away. When he comes with tempests and flouds, then the house not built on a rocke, Math. 7. 17. fals. If our foundation be straw and stubble, we know this fire will consume it: but if gold, it shall rather purge and purifie it. He will not goe about, that can passe the next way. If a soft puffe can turne thee from Christ, Sathan will spare his blustring tempests: if a smoake can doe it, the fire shall be forborne. If Io could haue beene brought to his bow, with killing his cattell, seruants, children; perhaps his bodie had beene fauour'd. So that after gen∣tle temptations looke for stormes; as thou wouldst af∣ter smoake fire. Inure thy heart therefore to vanquish the least, that thou mayst foile the greatest: let the for∣mer giue thee exercise against these latter; as with wooden Wasters men learne to play at the sharpe. Be thy confidence in him that euer enabled thee; and affie his promise, that will not suffer thee to be tempted aboue thy strength. Onely handle this weapon with more heedfull cunning: and when thou perceiuest the dally∣ings of the Deuill, play not with his baites. Corrupt not thy conscience with a little gaine, so shalt thou withstand more. Thinke the easiest tentations a Porc∣pose before a tempest, smoake before fire, signes and prodigies of a fearefull conflict to come. There remaines nothing now to be considered but the Bellowes; that helpe to maintaine this fire. The Bellowes Are double; Passiue and Actiue. Some blow because
they cannot, others because they will not auoid it. 1. The Passiue Bellowes are the godly; for they must haue no peace with wickednesse; No fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse. We must loue their per∣sons, Ephe. 5. 11. and pray for them as Christ for his crucifiers. But if they will not be conuerted, if they cannot be suppressed, we may desire either their conuersion or confusion: as God willes none to perish as a creature, but as a sinfull creature; not of his owne making, but of their owne marring. So we must hate not virum, but vitium; reprouing and condemning euill works, both by our lips and liues; though our good conuersation be the passiue Bellowes to blow this fire. 2. The Actiue are the wicked; who doe profound∣ly hate the good, in regard of both their actions and their persons. To this their owne forwardnesse is hel∣ped by the deuils instigation. If thou blow the sparke it shall burne: if thou spitte vpon it, it shall be quenched: and Ecclus. 28. 12. both these come out of thy mouth. But all men loue good naturally. No, not all: for some haue not onely extinguished the flames of religi∣on, but euen the very sparkes of nature in their hearts. But some wicked men haue loued the godly: True, but not for their actions, not for their persons, not of their owne natures. But 1. either because God snafles the horses and mules, and curbes the malicious rage of Tyrants. Or 2. conuerts them to the faith and obedi∣ence of his truth; as he tooke Saul from his raging cru∣eltie, and made him readie to die for him, whose ser∣uants he would haue killed: so turning a Wolfe into a Lambe. Or 3. els they loue the good for some benefit by them: and therein they loue not them, so much as themselues in them. So Ahashuerosh loued Hester for her beautie; Nebuchadnezz, Daniel for his wisedome: , Ioseph because his house prospered by him: and
for this cause did the former Pharaoh affect him. But otherwise with bloud-red eyes, and faces spark∣ling fire they behold vs; as Haman did Mordecai. They plot like Machiauels, raile like Rabshace's, and conspire like Absolons. These are the Deuils Bellowes here, to blow quarrels among men: and shall be his bellowes in hell to blow the fire of their eternall torments. A man that is great both in wealth and wickednesse, cannot be without these bellowes, Intelligencers, Informers, Tale-bearers. Let these seditious spirits vnderstand their employment; they are the Deuils bellowes; and when their seruice is done, they shall be throwne into the fire. I conclude▪ All this trouble and calamitie shall be but vpon the earth: so sayth our Sauiour. I came to send fire on the earth: In heauen shall be no distraction to breake our peace. We should be too well affected to the world, if it had this priuiledge and exemption: but in vaine we seeke it, where it is not to be found. In heauen onely we shall find it, in heauen onely let vs seeke it. Here we may haue desideriu pacis, but there onely pacem desiderij: here the desires of peace, there peace of our desires. Now then the Peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, Phil. 4. 7. keepe your harts and minds through Christ Ie∣sus. Amen.
THE CHRISTIANS WALKE OR The Kings high-way of Charitie. EPHES. Chap. 5. Ver. 2. Walke in loue, as Christ also hath loued vs; and hath giuen himselfe for vs, an offering and a sa∣crifice to God for a sweete smelling sauour. OVR blessed Sauiour is set forth in the Gospell, not onely a Sacrifice for sin, but also a direction to vertue. He cal∣leth himselfe the Truth, and the Way: the truth in regard of his good learning the way in respect of his good life. His Actions are our Instructions, so well as his Passion our Saluation. He taught vs both Faciendo, and Patiendo; both in doing, and in dying. Both sweetly propounded and compounded in this verse. Actiuely he loued vs: Passiuely he gaue himselfe for vs. And so is both an ensample for vertue, and an offering for sinne. He gaue himselfe, that his Passion might saue vs: he loued vs, that his Actions might di∣rect vs. Walke in loue, as Christ, &c. We may distinguish the whole verse into a sacred Canon. Crucifixe. The Canon teacheth vs What: the Crucifixe, How.
In the Canon we shall find A Precept It is partly Exhortatory Precedent Exemplary. The Precept, Walke in loue: the Precedent or Pat∣terne; As Christ loued vs. The Precept holy, the Pat∣terne heauenly. Christ bids vs doe nothing to others, but what himselfe hath done to vs: we cannot find fault with our example. The Crucifixe hath one maine stocke: He gaue him∣selfe for vs. And two branches, not vnlike that crosse∣peece whereunto his two hands were nailed. 1. An of∣fering or Sacrifice. 2. Of a sweete smelling sauour to God. To begin with the Canon, the method leads vs first to the Precept; which shall take vp my discourse for this time. Walke in loue. Here is 1. The Way prescribed. 2. Our Course incited. The way is Loue: our Course Walking. Loue is the Way. And that an excellent way to heauen. Our Apostle ends his 12. Chapter of the 1. Corin. in the description of many spirituall gifts. Apostleship, Prophecying, Tea∣ching, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Working of Myracles, healing, speaking with togues. All excellent gifts; and yet concludes. Ver. 31. ut co∣uet earnestly the best gifts: And yet shew I vnto you a more excellent Way. Now that excellent, more excellent Way was Charitie: and he takes a whole succeeding Chap∣ter 1. Cor. Chap. 13. to demonstrate it: which he spends wholy in the prayse and prelation of Loue. I hope, no man, when I call Loue a Way to God, will vnderstand it for a iustifying way. Faith alone leaning on the merits of Christ, doth bring vs into that high Chamber of Presence. Loue is not a Cause to iustifie, but a Way for the iustified. There is difference betwixt
a Cause and a Way. Faith is Causa iustificandi: Loue is Via iustificat. They that are iustified by faith, must walke in Charitie. For Faith worketh, and walketh by loue. Faith and loue are the braine and the heart of the Soule: so Gal. 5. 6. knit together in a mutuall harmonie and correspon∣dence, that without their perfect vnion the whole Christian man cannot mooue with power, nor feele with tendernesse, nor breath with true life. Loue then is a path for holy feete to walke in. It is A Cleare Way A Neare Way A Sociable Way. Cleare. There be no rubbes in Loue. Nec retia tendit, nec lae∣dere intendit. It neither does nor desires anothers harme: it commits no euill; nay, 1. Cor. 13. 5. it thinkes no euill, sayth our Apostle. For passiue rubbes, it Prou. 19. 11. passeth ouer an offence. It may be moued with violence, cannot be remoued from patience. 1. Pet. 4. 8. Charitie couers a multitude of Sinnes: sayth Peter: Prou. 10. 12. All sinnes, sayth Salomon. Couers them partly from the eyes of God, in praying for the offen∣ders: partly from the eyes of the world, in throwing a cloake ouer our brothers nakednes: especially from it owne eyes, by winking at many wrongs offred it. 1. Cor. 13. 4. Charitie suffreth long: the backe of loue will beare a load of iniuries. There be two graces in a Christian, that haue a con∣trary qualitie. The one is most stout & sterne: the other most mild and tender. Loue is soft and gentle; & ther∣fore compared to the Colos. 3. 12. bowelles. Viscera Misericordiae. Faith is austere and couragious, carrying Luthers mot∣to on the Shield. Cedo nulli, I yeeld to no enemie of my faith. So sayd our precious Iewel; I denie my liuing, I deny my estimation, I deny my name, I denie my selfe: but the Faith of Christ, and the Truth of God I cannot denie. But loue is mild, long∣suffering,
mercifull, compassionate; and so hath a Cleare way to peace. Neare. Loue is also a very neare way to blessednesse; and as I may say, a short cut to heauen. All Gods law was at first reduced to ten Precepts. The lawes of na∣tions, though they make vp large volumes, yet are still vnperfect: some statutes are added as necessary, o∣thers repealed as hurtfull. But the law of God, though contained in a few lines, yet containes all perfection of duetie to God and man. There is no good thing that is not here commanded: no evill thing, that is not here forbidden. And all this in so short bounds, that those ten precepts are called but ten Words. Yet when Christ came he abridged this Law shorter, and redu∣ced the Ten into Two. Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and thy neighbour as thy selfe. S. Paul yet comes after and rounds vp all into one. God redu∣ceth all into Tenne, Christ those tenne into Two; Paul those two into one. Rom. 13. Loue is the fulfilling of the Rom 13. 10 law. Which is Contr. Mor∣cion. Lib. 5. Compendium, non dispendium legis; saith Tertullian: an abridging, not enervating of the law of God. So Augustin, God in all his law De doctrin. Christ. Lib 3. Cap. 10. Nihil praecipit ni∣si Charitatem, nihil culpat nisi cupiditatem: commands nothing but Loue, condemnes nothing but lust. Yea it is not onely the Complement of the Law, but also the Supplement of the Gospell. Ioh. 13. Novum man∣datum; A new commandement I giue vnto you, that yee loue Ioh. 13. 34. one another. All which makes it manifest, that Loue is a Neare way to heauen. Sociable It is also: for it is neuer out of company; never out of the best company. The delight thereof is with the Saynts that are in earth, and with the excellent. The Psal. 16. 3.
two maine obiects of Enuie are Highnesse, and Nigh∣nesse: the enuious man cannot endure another aboue him, another neare him: the envious man loues no neighbour. But contrarily loue doth the more hearti∣ly honour those that are higher, and embrace those that are nigher: and cannot want societie, so long as there is a Communion of Saints. Loue is the way you heare; our Course is Walking. As cleare, neare, and sociable a way, as loue is, yet few can hit it: for of all wayes you shall find this least travel'd. The way of Charitie, as once did the Wayes of Sion, mournes for want of passengers. This path is so vncouth and vnbeaten, that many cannot tell, whether there be such a way or not. It is in their opinion, but Via serpentis; the way of a serpent on the earth, or of a bird in the ayre; which cutteth the ayre with her wings, and leaues no print or tract behind her. But some Chimra, or mathematicall imaginary poynt; an Ens rationale, without true being. Viam dilectionis ig∣norant; as the Apostle sayth, Uiam pacis; The way of Rom. 3. 17 peace they haue not knowne. Others knowe there is such a way, but they will not set their foote into it. Their old way of malice and co∣vetousnesse is delightfull; but this is Arda & praerupta via, a hard and a harsh way. Indeede Artis tristissima ianua nostrae: the entrance to this way is somewhat sharp and vnpleasant to flesh; for it begins at repen∣tance for former vncharitablenesse. But once entred into this Kings high-way, it is full of all content and blessednes; Adlaetos ducens per gramina fluctus. Walke in Loue. He doth not say, talke of it, but walke in it. This pre∣cept is for course, not discourse. Loue sittes at the
doore of many mens lips, but hath no dwelling in the heart. We may say truely of that charitie; it is not at nome. A great man had curiously engrauen at the gate of his Pallace, the image of Bountie, or Hospitalitie. The needie Trauellers with ioy spying it, approach thither in hopefull expectation of succour. But still silence or an emptie Eccho answers all their cries and knockes: for hospitality may stand at the gate, but there is none in the house. One among the rest (his hungry trust thus of∣ten abused) resolues to plucke downe the Image. With these words; If there be neither meate nor drinke in the house, what needs there a Signe? Great Portals in the Countrey, and coloured Posts in the Cittie, pro∣mise the poore Beggar liberall reliefe; but they are of∣ten but Images: Muta & utila signa; dumbe and lame signes: For Charitie is not at home: onely the shadow without Speillectat inai giues faire and fruit∣lesse hopes. We are too much wearied with these shadowes of Charitie. Ambrose makes two parts of Liberalitie; Be∣neuolence Offic. lib. 1. cap. 30. and Beneficence. Many will share the for∣mer, but spare the latter. They will wish some thing, but doe nothing. They haue open mouthes, but shut hearts: soft words, but hard bowels. To these S. Iohn giues aduise Let vs not loue in word, nor in tongue, but in 1. Ioh. 3. 18. deed and in truth. Opposing workes to words, veritie to vanity. Verball complements are not reall implements: and with a little inuersion of the Philosophers sense; The belly hath no eares. The starued soule delights not to heare Charitie, but to feele it. Oculate mihi sunt ma∣nus: the poores hands haue eyes; what they receiue, they beleeue. The gowtie vsurer hath a nimble tongue: and though he will not walke in loue, he can talke of loue: for of all members the tongue Postrema senescit; waxeth old last. Let a distressed passenger come to some of their gates, and he shall haue diuinitie enough, but no
humanitie; wholesome counsell, but no wholesome food. They can afford them exhortation, but not com∣passion; charging their eares, but in no wise ouer-char∣ging their bellies. They haue scripture against begging, but no bread against famishing. The bread of the San∣ctuary is common with them, not the bread of the Buttery. If the poore can be nourished with the Philo∣sophicall supper of good morall sentences, they shall be prodigally feasted: but if the bread of life will not con∣tent them, they may be packing. But sayth S. Iames; If you say to the poore, Depart in peace, be warmed, be filled: yet Iam. 2. 16. giue them nothing needfull to the body, your deuotion pro∣fites not; neither them, nor your selues. There is diffe∣rence betwixt breath and bread, betweene wording & working, between meere language, & very sustenance. The Apostle chargeth vs to walke, not to talke of loue: One step of our feet, is worth ten wordes of our tongues. The actions of pitty do gracefully become the profession of pietie. It is wittily obserued, that the ouer∣precise are so thwartingly crosse to the superstitious in all things, that they will scarce doe a good worke, be∣cause an Hereticke doth it. That whereas a Papist will rather loose a penie then a Pater-noster: these will ra∣ther giue a Pater-noster then a peny. They are deuout and free in any thing, that toucheth not their purses. Thus with a shew of spirituall counsell, they neglect corporall comfort: and ouerthrow that by their cold deeds, which they would seeme to build vp by their hote words. That the poore might well reply; More of your cost, and lesse of your counsell would do farre better. Walke in Loue. Doe not step ouer it, nor crosse it, nor walke besides it, nor neare it, but walke in it. The doctrine in full strength directs vs to a constant embracing of Chari∣tie.
The whole course of our liuing, must be louing: our beginning, continuance, end, must be in Charitie. Two sorts of men are here specially reprouable. Some that seeme to Begin in Charitie, but end not so. End in Charitie, that neuer walked so. Some haue had apparant beginnings of loue, whose conclusion hath halted off into worldlinesse, whiles they had little, they communicated some of that little: but the multiplying their riches, hath beene the abate∣ment of their mercies. Too many haue verified this in∣congruent and preposterous obseruation; that the fil∣ling their purses with money, hath proued the empty∣ing their hearts of Charitie. As one obserues of Rome; that the declination of pietie, came at one instant with the multiplication of mettals. Euen that Clergie, that poore cared onely to feed the flocke; once growne rich studied onely to fil the paile. Ammianus Marcellinus saith of them, that Matronarum oblationibus ditabantur, they were enriched by Ladies gifts. And heruepon, together with that vnlucky separation of the Greeke head from the Latine bodie, the Empire began to dwindle, the Popedome to flourish. Now plentie is the daughter of prosperitie, ambition of plentie, corruption of ambiti∣on. So Diuitiae veniunt, Relligioque fugit. Religion brings in wealth, wealth thrusts out Religion. To this purpose, and to preuent this readie euill, was Gods charge by the pen of Dauid. Psal. 62. 10. If riches encrease, set not your heart vpon them. For till they encrease, there is lesse danger. But sayth one; Societas quaedam est, etiam nominis, vitijs & diuitijs. Wealth and wickednesse are neere of kinne. Nimia bonorumcopia, ingens malorum oc∣casio. Plentie of goods, lightly occasions plentie of e∣uils. Goodnes commonly lasts till goods come: but di∣tion of state; alters condition of persons. How many had beene good, had they not beene great! And as it was said of Tiberius; He would haue made a good sub∣iect,
was a very ill King: so many haue dyed good ser∣uants, that would haue liued bad masters. God that can best fit a mans estate here, that it may further his saluati∣on hereafter; knowes that many a man is gone poore vp to heauen, who rich would haue tumbled downe to hell. We may obserue this in Peter; who being got∣ten into the High Priestes Hall, sits him downe by the Mark. 14. 54. warme fire, and forgets his master. Before Peter fol∣lowed Christ at the hard heeles, through cold & heat, hunger and thirst, trouble and wearines; and promiseth an infallible adherence. But now he sittes beaking him∣selfe by a warme fire, his poore Master is forgotten. Thus his bodie growes warme; his zeale, his soule cold. When he was abroad in the cold, he was the hotter Christian; now he is by the fire-side he grows the col∣der. Oh the warmth of this world, how it makes a man forget Christ! He that wants bread, pitties them that be hungry: and they that want fire haue compassion of the poore cold and naked: but the warmth and plentie of the world starues those thoughts. When the Princes are at ease in Sion, they neuer Amo. 6. 6. grieue for the afflictiō of Ioseph. Whilst vsurie can sit in furres; ambition looke downe from his loftie turrets: lust imagine heauen in her soft embracings; Epicurisme studie dishes and eate them: pride studie fashions & weare them: the downe-troden poore, exposed to the bleakeayre, afflicted, famished, are not thought on. So easily are many that begun in loue, put by riches out of the way: and made to forbeare Walking in Charitie, euen by that which should enable their steps. Thus auarice breeds with wealth, as they speake of toads that haue beene found in the midst of great stones. Though the man of meane estate, whose owne want instructs his heart to commiserate others, say thus with himselfe; If I had more goods, I would do more good: yet experience iustifies this point, that many haue changed their minds with their meanes: and the
state of their purse hath forspoken the state of their conscience. So they haue Gal. 3. 3. begunne in the charitie of the Spirit, and ended in the cares of the Flesh. Euerie man hath a better opinion of himselfe, then to thinke thus. As Hazael answered Elisha; when the good Prophet told him with teares, that hee should burne the cities of Israel with fire, slay the inhabitants, rip vp the women with child, and dash the infants a∣gainst the stones 2. King. 8. 13. Am I a dog that I should doe this horred thing? So you will not thinke, that being now meane, you relieue the distressed; if you were rich, that you would robbe, spoile, defraud, oppresse, impouerish them. O you know not the incantations of the world. It is a Pipe, that (beyond the Sirens singing) makes many sober men run mad vpon it. I haue read of an D. White. Serm. at the Spittle. exquisite musician, of whom it was reported, that hee could put men into strange sittes and passions, which he would as soone alter againe with varying his notes: enclining and compelling the disposition of the hearer to his straines. There was one, that would make triall how hee could affect him; daring his best skill to worke vpon his boastd composedne and resolution. The Musician begins to play; and gaue such a Lacrymae, so sad and deepe a lesson that the man fell into a dum∣pish melancholy; standing as one forlorne, with his armes wreathed, his hat puld ouer his eyes, venting many mournefull sighes. Presently the Musician chan∣geth his stroake into mirthfull & lusty tunes: and so by degrees into ligges, crotchets, and wanton ayres: then the man also changeth his melancholy into spritely humours, leaping, and dancing, as if he had bin trans∣formed into aire. This passion lasting but with the note that moued it; the Musician riseth into wild rap∣tures, maskes and Anticks. Whereupon he also riseth to showting, holloing, and such franticke passages, that he grew at last starke madde. Such a charming power,
said a worthy Diuine, hath the musicke of money and wealth, and such fittes it workes in a mans heart. First it takes him from peacefull setlednes, and from great content in his litle, and puts him into dumps; a miser∣able carking thoughtfullnes, how to scrape together much dirt. Next when he hath it, and begins with de∣light to sucke on the dugges of the world; his purse, his barnes, and all his, but his heart, full: hee fals to dancing, and singing requiems; Luk. 12. 20. Soule take thine ase, eate, drinke, and be merry. Then shall his table standfull of the best dishes, his cup of the purest wine, his backe with the richest robes: and he conceites a kinde of immortalitie in his coffers: he denies himselfe no satie∣tie, no surquedrie. But at last the worldes bedla-mu∣sicke puts him into frenzi: hee growes rampant. Runnes into oppressions, extortions, depopulations, rapes, whordomes, murders, massacres: spares not bloud or friendship, authoritie nor vssalage, widow nor orphan, Prince nor subiect: Nec , nec Ar; neither poore mans cotage, nor Churches altar, Yea, if the Common wealth had but one throate, as Nero wish ed of Rome, he would cut it. O the vnpacifiable mad∣nes, that this worlds musicke puts those into, which will dance after his Pipe. For this cause saith our Apo∣stle, continue in the Charitie thou hast begun; Walke in loue Gal. 5. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you? Doth wealth keepe you from charitie? ver. 8. This perswasion commeth not of him that calleth you. God neuer meant when he gaue you riches, that you should then begin to be couetous. He did not for this purpose shew new mercie to you, that you should take away your old mercies from his. There are other, that seeme to end in Loue, who neuer all their dayes walked in this heauenly path. They haue a will lying by them, wherein they haue bequeathed a certaine legacie to the poore; something to such a Church, or such an Hospitall. But this will is
not of force till the testator be dead, so that a man may say, though the will be ready, yet to will is not ready with thē: for God shall not haue it, so long as they can keepe it. These can wish with Balaam, to dye Christians, but they must liue Pagans. Hauing raised thousands out of their sacrilegious and inhospitable Impropriations; they can bestow the dead hope of a litle mite on the Church. In memoriall whereof the heyre must pro∣cure an annuall recitation; besides the monumentall sculpture on the Tombe. Be his life neuer so blacke, and more tenebrous then the vaults of lust, yet said a Reuerend Diuine, he shall find a blacke prophet, for a blacke cloake, that with a blacke mouth, shall com∣mend him for whiter then snow and lillies. Though his vnrepented oppressions, vnrestored extortions, and bloud-drawing vsuries, haue sent his soule to the infer∣nall dungeon of Sathan; whose parishioner he was all his life; yet money may get him cannonizd a Saint at Rome, and robe him with spotles integritie and inno∣cence. So diuerse among them, that liued More Latronū yet in death affected Cultum martyrum. Hence Epitaphs and funerall orations shall commend a mans charitie, who neuer all his dayes walked two steps in Loue. But it is in vaine to write a mans charitie in a repai∣red window; when his tyrannous life is written in the bloudy and indeleble characters, of many poore mens ruine and ouerthrow. Nor can the narrow plaster of a little poore beneuolence, hide and couer the multitude of gaping wounds, made by extortion and vnmerciful∣nes. No, God hates the Sacrifice of robberie: 1. Psal. 16. 4. their drinke offerings of bloud will I not offer; said Dauid. The oblati∣on that is made vp of the earnings of the poore, is an abomination, offending Gods eye, and prouoking his hand. First restore the lands and goods of others, iniu∣riously or vsuriously gotten: let not an vniust peny lie rotting on thy heape and heart: and then build
Hospitals repaire ruin'd holy places, produce the fruits of mercie, walke in Loue. Otherwise it is not smooth marble, and engrauen brasse, with a commending epi∣taph; that can any more preserue the name from rotten putrefaction, then the carcase. But for all that, the me∣morie shall stinke aboue ground, as the body doth vn∣der it. It is a desperate hazard, that a wicked man by a charitable will shal make amends for all: whereas com∣monly an vsurers Testament is but a Testimonie of his lewd life. There is small hope, that they end in charitie who would neuer walke in Loue. There bee others that cannot walke in Loue, through a double defect, either of eyes, or of feete. Some haue Feet, but want eyes. Eyes, but want feet. 1. Some haue the feet of affections, but they lacke eyes; and so cannot descry the true and perfect way of Loue. Indeed no man can find it without God Psal. 25. 4. Shew me thy wayes, O Lord; teach me thy pathes. For it is he that directs 1 Ver. 8. sinners & wandrers to the way. These want him, that should Esa. 48. 17. Leade them by the way that they should goe. They thinke that by building vp a ladder of good workes, their soules shall on meritorious rounds climbe vp to heauen. They cannot distinguish betweene Viam regni, and causamregnandi. They suppose, if they releeue Seminaries, fast Lents, keepe their numbredorisons, pro digally sacrifice their blouds in treasons for that Ro∣maine Harlot; this is via dilectionis; the way of Loue. So the silly seruant, biddē to open the gates, set his shoul∣ders to them, but with all his might could not stir them whereas another comes with the key, & easily vnlocks thē. These men so confidēt in their good workes, do but set their shoulders to heauen-gates: alas! without com∣fort: for it is the key of faith that only opēs them. These haue nimble feete, forward affections, harts workeable
to charitie, and would Walke in Loue if they had eyes. Therfore Let vs prayfor them. Psal. 143. 8. Cause them to know the way, O Lord, wherein they should walke. 2. Other haue eyes, but they want feete: they vnder∣stand the way of loue, but they haue no affection to walke in it. They know that false measures, forsworne valuations, adulterate wares, smooth-checked circum∣uentions, painted cosenages, malicious repinings, de∣nied succours; are all against Loue. Noscunt & poscunt. They know them, but they will vse them. They know that humblenes, kindnes, meekenes, patience, remissi∣on, compassion, giuing and forgiuing; actuall com∣forts, are the fruits of Loue. Norunt & nolunt, They know it, but they will none of it. These know but walke not in Loue. It is fabled, that a great king gaue to one of his subiects, of his owne meere fauour, a goodly citie; happily replenished with all treasures and pleasures. He does not onely freely giue it, but directes him the way; which keeping, hee should not misse it. The reioyced subiect soone enters on his iour∣ney, and rests not till hee comes within sight of the Citie. Thus neare it, he spies a great company of men digging in the ground: to whom approching, hee found them casting vp white and red earth in abun∣dance. Wherewith his amazed eyes growing soone enamoured, he desires a participation of their riches. They refuse to ioyne him in their gaines, vnlesse he wil ioyne himselfe in their paines. Hereupon he fals to toy∣ling, digging & deluing, til some of the earth fals so hea uie vpon him, that it lames him; and he is able to goe no further. There he dies in the sight of that Citie, to which he could not goe for want of feet: & looseth a certaine substantial gift, for an vncertain shadow of vaine hope. You can easily apply it. God of his gracious fauour, not for our deserts, giues man his creature a glorious Citie: euen that whose Reu. 21. 19. foundations are of Iasper, Saphyre
and Emerald &c. He doth more, directes him the way to it; Goe on this way, Walke in loue. He begins to tra∣uell, and comes within the sight of heauen: but by the way he spies worldlings toyling in the earth and scra∣ping together white and red clay; siluer and gold, the riches of this world. Hereof desirous, he is not suf∣fered to partake, except hee also partake of their couetousnes, and corrupt fashions. Now Mammon sets him on worke, to Effodiunr opes irritameta malorum. Me∣tam. digge out his owne damnati∣on: where after a while this gay earth comes tumbling fo fast vpon him, that his feet be maimed, his affections to heauen lost: and he dyes short of that glorious Ci∣tie, which the king of heauen purchased with his owne bloud, and gaue him. Thinke of this, ye worldlings; and seeing you know what it is to be charitable, put your feet in this way; Walke in Loue. There be yet others, whose whole course is euery step out of the way to God; who is Loue; and they must walke in Loue, that come vnto him. 1. There is a path of Lust: they erre damnably, that call this the way of Loue. They turne a spirituall grace into a carnall vice: and whereas Charitie and Chastity are of nearer allyance then sound; these debauched tongues call vncleanesse Loue. Adulterie is a cursed way, though a much coursed way for a whore is the high-way to the Deuill. 2. There is a path of malice, and they that trauell it, are bound for the Enemie. Their euill eye is vexed at Gods goodnes: and their hands of desolation would vndoe his mercies. Other mens health is their sick∣nes, others weale their woe. The Iesuites and their bloudy Proselyts are pilgrims in this way. We know by experience the scope of their walkes. Their ma∣lice was strong, as Sauire in saxa; but they would turne Ierusalem in aceruum Lapidum; into a heape of stones. Yea such was their rage: that Nil reliqui fecerunt,
Vt non ipsis elementis fieret iniuria; they spared not to let the elements know the madnesse of their violence. They could not draw fire from heauen, (their betters could not do it in the dayes of Christ on earth) there∣fore they seeke it, they digge it from hell. Flectere cùm nequeunt Superos, Acheronta movebunt. Here was a ma∣licious walking. 3. There is a counterfeit path; & the Travellers make as if they walked in loue, but their loue is dissimulation. It is not dilectio vera, true love, which S. Ioh. speakes 1. Ioh. 3. 18. of. nor dilectio mera, as Luther; not a plaine-hearted loue. They will cosen you vnseene, and then like the whore in the Proverbes, wipe their mouthes, and it was not they. Their art is Alios pellere aut tollere; to giue o∣thers a wipe or a wound: & Iudas-like they salute those with a kisse, against whome they intend most treason. 4. There is a way directly crosse to loue: which nei∣ther obeyes God, for loue keepes the commandements; nor comforts man, for loue hath compassion on the di∣stressed. These haue feete swift enough, but Rom. 3. 5. swift to shed bloud. Destruction and miserie are in their wayes. They are in 2. King. 25. 7. Zedechiahs case: both their eyes are put out, and their feete lamed with the captiue chaines of Satan; so easily carried downe to his infernall Babilon. These are they that Mic. 2. 2. devoure a man and his heritage. Therefore Christ calles their riches, not , but ; things without them, as if they had swallowed them down into their bowels. The phrase is vsed by Iob Luk. 11 Iob. 20. 15. He hath swallowed downe riches, & he shall vomit them vp againe: God shall cast them out of his belly. When this vomit is given them, you shall see strange stuffe come from them. Here the raw and vndigested gobbets of vsurie; there the mangled morsels of bloudy oppressions: here fiue or sixe impropriate Churches, there thousand acres of decayed tillage: here a whole casket of bribes, there whole houses and patrimonies of vndone orphans;
here an Inclosure of commons, there a vastation of proper and sanctified things. Rip vp their conscie n∣ces, and this is the stuffing of their hearts. These walke crosse to the Crosse of Christ; as Paul sayth, they are Enemies, cursed Phil. 3. 18. walkers. Whereupon we may conclude with Bernard. De conside∣rat. Lib. 1. Periculosa tempora iam non instant, sed extant: the dangerous times are not comming, but come vpon vs. The cold frost of inde∣votion is so generall, that many haue benūmed ioynts; they cannot walke in loue. Others so stiffe and obdu∣rate, that they will meete all that walke in this way, and with their turbulent malice striue to iustle them out of it. Therefore David prayes: Psal. 104. 4. Preserue me from the violent men, that haue purposed to ouerthrowe my goings. Let vs then vpon this great cause, vse that deprecation in our Let any. From pride, vain-glory, & hypocrisie; from envy, hatred, malice & all vncharitablenes; Good Lord deliver vs. I am loth to giue you a bitter farewell, or to con∣conclude with a menace. I see I cannot, by the times leaue, drinke to you any deeper in this cup of Charity. I will touch it once againe, and let every present soule that loues heauen, pledge me. Walke in loue The way to life everlasting is loue; and hee that keepes the way is sure to come to the end. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We knowe that we haue passed from death to life, because we loue the brethren. For this are the workes of mercie, charity pie∣ty, and pitty so much commended in the Scriptures, & by the Fathers, with so high titles: because they are the appoynted way, wherein we must walke, and where∣by we must worke vp our owne salvation. Therefore the Apostle claps in the necke of good workes; 1. Tim. 6. 19. laying vp in store for themselues a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life. Thereby wee lay the ground of saluation in our consciences and take assured hold of eternall life. He that goes on in
loue, shall come home to life. This comforts vs; not in a presumption of merite, but in confident knowledge, that this is the way to glo∣ry: wherein when we find our selues Walking, wee are sure we are going to heauen: Psal. 138. 5. and sing in the wayes of the Lord: Great is the glory of the Lord. Now therefore Colos. 3. 12. Put on (as the elect of God, holy, and beloued) bowels of mercies, kindnes, humblenes of minde, &c. As you claime any portion in those gracious blessings, Election, San∣ctification, and the loue of God; as you would haue the sweet testimonie of the Spirit, that you are sealed vp to the day of Redemption: Put on mercie, kindnes, meeknes, long suffering: let them be as robes to couer you all o∣uer. Yea bowels of mercies; let them be as tender and in∣ward to you as your most vitall parts. Lay forbearance and forgiuenes as deare friends in your bosomes. De∣part from iniquitie: for Prou. 16. 17. the high way of the vp∣right is to depart from euill: and he that keepth his way, preserueth his soule. And Colos. 3. 14. above all these things put on Charitie, which is the bond of perfectnesse; Walke in loue. Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walke accor∣ding to this rule, peace be on them, and mercie, and vppon the Israell of God. Amen.
LOVES COPIE OR The best Precedent of Charitie. EPHE. 5. 2. As Christ loued vs. WE distinguished the whole verse into a Canon, and a Crucifixe. The Canon consisted of a Precept, and a Prece∣dent. Loue is the Subiect: and it is both commanded and commended. Commanded in the Charge, which you haue heard. Commended in the Example, which you shall heare. I determined my speach with the Pre∣cept; Walke in loue. The Precedent or Patterne remaines to be propounded and expounded; As Christ loued vs. Every word is emphaticall: and there be foure, signify∣ing foure seuerall natures. Here 1 As is a word of 1 Qualitie 2 Christ 2 Maiestie 3 Loued 3 Mercie 4 Vs 4 Miserie. Two of these words be Vincula or Media; that ioyne and vnite other things; Sicut and Dilexit: As and Lo∣ued. As directs our loue to God and Man, by the ex∣emplified rule of Christ louing vs. Walke in loue to o∣thers, As Christ loued vs. Loued is that blessed reconci∣ling nature; whereby Gods good Greatnes descends
to our bad basenesse; and the Iust giues to the vniust Saluation. For what other nature but Mercie, could reconcile so high Maiestie, and so low Miserie! As According to Zanchius his obseruation on this place, is a note of Qualitie, not Equalitie; of Similitude not of Comparison. We must loue others As Christ loued vs; As; for the manner, not for the measure. His Cant. 8. 6. loue was strong as Death; for to the death hee loued vs. It was a bright & cleare fire; many maters could not quench it; yea water and bloud could not put it out. Ioh. 3. 16. God so loued the World: so freely, so fatherly, so fully; as no tongue can tell, no heart thinke. Ephe. 3. 19. The loue of Christ pas∣seth knowledge. To thinke of equalling this loue, would be an impossible presumption. Our loue is inconstant, weake; a mingled, and often a mangled loue, mingled with selfe loue, and mangled with the wounding af∣fections of the world. Our loue is faine, his strong: ours ficle, his constant: ours limited, his infinite. Yet wee must follow him so fast as we can, and so farre as wee may; Walking in loue, as he loued vs. His Walking in loue was strange and admirable: hee tooke large steps; from heauen to earth, and from earth to heauen. As Bernard on that speech of the Church concerning her Beloued. Cant. 2. 8. Behold! hee commeth leaping vpon the mountaines, skipping vpon the hils. He leaps from heauen to the Virgins wombe, from the wombe to a manger, from the manger to Egypt, from Egypt to Iu∣dah, from thence to the Temple, from the Temple vp to the Crosse, from the Crosse downe to the graue, from the graue vp to the earth, and from the earth vp to the highest glory. And he shall yet haue another leap, from the right hand of his Father to iudge quicke and dead. These were great iumpes, & large paces of loue. When he made but one stride from the clouds to the cradle,
and another from the Cradle to the crosse, and a third from the crosse to the crowne. To come from the bo∣some of his immortall father, to the wombe of his mor∣tall mother, was a great step. From the lowest hell, or depth of his humiliation; to the highest heauen or top of his exaltation was a large pace. We cannot take such large steps, nor make such strides. These leaps are beyond our agilitie, our abilitie. Yet we must follow him in loue; stepping so farre as we can, and walking so fast as we may. Follow we carefully and chearfully; though non passibus aequis. The Father, that takes his yong son into the field with bowes & shafts, and bids him shoot after him, doth not expect that the child should shoote so farre as he, but so farre as he can. Though we cannot reach Christs marke, yet 2. Cor. 8. 12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, not according to that he hath not. Now this particle As, is not barely similitudinary, but hath a greater latitude: and serues To Confine the Measure of our Imitation. Define Matter Refine Manner 1. This Sicut Confines Our imitation, and limits it to that circumference, which the present rule or compasse giues it. We may not follow Christ in all things, but in this thing; Loue, As he loued vs. Our imitation hath a limitation, that it may not exorbitantly start out of the circle. There are speciall workes, which God reserues to himselfe; and wherein he did neuer commaund or commend mans following: but rather strikes it downe as pre∣sumption. His Power, his Maiestie, his Wisedome, his Myracles, cannot without a contumacious ambiti∣on be aymed at. When Lucifer aspired to be like God in Maiestie, he was throwne out of heauen. When Adam contended to be like God in knowledge, he was cast
out of Paradise. When Nebuchadnezzar arrogated to be like God in Power, he was expulsed his kingdome. When Simon Magus mounted to be like God in wor∣king Miracles, and to flie in the ayre, he was hurld downe, and broke his necke. God must not be imita∣ted in his Finger, in his Arme, in his Braine, in his Face; but in his Bowels. Not in the Finger of his Myra∣cles; nor in the Arme of his Power; nor in the Braine of his Wisedome; nor in the Face of his Maiestie; but in the Bowels of his Mercy. Luk. 6. 36. Be ye mercifull, as your hea∣uenly Father is mercifull. And sayth Paul; Col. 3. 13. Put on the Bowels of mercy; as Christ put them on: Forbeare, for∣giue; Walke in Loue; As hee loued vs. Neither An∣gell nor Man did euer, or shall euer offend, in coueting to be like God in Loue, Grace, Mercy, Goodnes. So that this Sicut excludes his Myracles, and directs vs to his Morralls. Walke in Loue,  &c. 2. This Sicut Defines. What our Loue should be; As Christ was to vs. Now his loue to vs had an infinite extention; and is past the skill of men or Angels to describe. Yet because this is the perfect Copy of our imitation; and the infallible Rule whereby we must square our Charitie; I must according to my shallow power wade a litle into this infinite and boundles Sea. I will onely note foure sweete streames of life in his Loue. It was Holy Sine Merits. Hearty Mode. Kind Despect. Constant Defect. 1. Holy. The Loue of Iesus to vs was Sancta & sanctificans dilectio: a Loue holy formaliter, in itselfe: and holy ef∣fectiuè, in making those holy on whom it was set. He
gaue himselfe to vs, and for vs: and gaue vs a faith to receiue and embrace him. Sine quo nec dilcti, nec dili∣gentes fuissemus. Without whom wee neither could haue receiued loue, nor returned loue. Now his loue did not only extend to our bodyes health, but to our soules blisse. So he loued vs, that he saued vs. Our loue should likewise be holy & whole: desiring not onely our brothers externall welfare; but much more his internall, his eternall blessednes. He that pitties not a famished body, deserues iustly the name of an vnmerci∣full man: but he that cōpassionates not an afflicted con∣science, hath much more a hard heart. It is an vsual speech of compassion to a distressed man; Alas poore Soule: but this same, alas poore Soule, is for the most part mistakē. Neither the pittier, nor the pittied imagins the soule pittiable. Very humanitie teacheth a man to behold an execution of theeues & traytours with griefe: that men to satisfie their malicious or couetous affecti∣ons, should cut off their owne liues with so infamous a death. But who commiserates the endangered Soule, that must then ventor and enter on an eternall life or death? The story of Hagar with her Son Ishmael, is set downe by so heauenly a pen, that a man cannot read it without tears. She is Gen. 21. 14. cast out of Abrahams house with her child that might call her Master father. Bread & water is put on her shoulder, and she wanders into the wildernes: a poore reliefe for so long a iourney, to which there was set no date of returning. Soone was the water spent in the bottle: the child cries for drinke, to her that had it not; and lifts vp pittiful eyes, euery glance whereof was enough to wound her soule: vents the sighes of a dry & panting heart; but there is no water to be had; except the teares that ran from a sorrowful mothers eyes could quench the thirst. Downe she layes the child vnder a shrubbe: and went as heauy as euer mother parted from
her onely son: and sate her downe vpon the earth, as if she desired it for a present receptacle of her griefe, of her selfe: a good way off, saith the Text, as it were a bow-shoe that the shrickes, yellings, & dying groanes of the child might not reach her eares: crying out; Let me not see the death of the child. Die she knew he must: but as if the be∣holding it would rent her heart, and wound her soule; she denyes those windowes so sad a spectacle; Let mee not see the death of the child. So she lift vp her voyce and wept. Neuer was Hagar so pittifull to her Sonne Ishmael, as the Church is to euery Christian. If any sonne of her wombe wil wander out of Abrahams familie, the House of Faith; into the wildernes of this world; and prodi∣gally part with his Ion. 2. 8. owne mercy; for the gawdy tran∣sient vanities thereof. She followes, with intreaties to him, and to heauen for him. If he will not returne, she is loath to see his death: she turnes her backe vpon him, and weeps. He that can with dry eyes, and vnrelenting heart, behold a mans Soule ready to perish, hath not so much passion and compassion, as that Egiptian bond-woman. 2. Hearty. The loue of Christ to vs was hearty; not consisting of shewes, and signes, and courtly complements; but of actuall, reall, royall bounties. He did not dissemble liue to vs, when he dyed for vs. Exhibitio operis, probatio amoris. He pleaded by the truest and vndenyable ar∣gument, demonstration. I loue you: wherein? I giue my Life for you. Tot ora, quot vulnera; tot verba, quot verbera. So many wounds, so many words to speake actually his loue: euery stripe he bore gaue sufficient testimony of his affection. His exceeding rich gift, shewes his ex∣ceeding rich loue. This heartines must be in our Loue; both to our Creator, and to his Image. 1. To God: so he chalengeth thy loue to be conditi∣oned;
with thy Heart, with all thy heart. And this saith Christ, is Primum & Maximum mandtum Math. 22. 38. the First and the greatest Commandement. The first; Marlorat. Quasi virtu∣aliter centinens reliqua; as mainely comprehending all the rest. For he that loues God with all his heart will neither Idolatrize, nor blaspheme, nor profane his Sab∣boths; no nor wrong his creatures. The greatest; Aretius. as re∣quiring the greatest perfection of our loue. This then must be a hearty loue; not slow, not idle, but must shew it selfe Et properando, & operando: in ready diligence, in fruitfull & working obedience. There are many otent to loue God alitle, because he blesseth them much. So Saul loued him for his kingdome. These loue God Pro seipsis, not Prae seipsis; For themselues, not before them∣selues. They will giue him homage, but not fealtie: the calues of their lippes, but not the calues of their stals. If they feast him with venison, part of their Imparked Ri∣ches, which is deere to them: yet it shall be but rascall deere, the trash of their substance: they will not feast him with the heart, that is the best deere in their Parke. 2. To man: whom thou art bound to loue as thy selfe: where say some, As is but a Tam, not a Tntum. As thy selfe, not As much as thy selfe: As for the maner, not for the measure. But this is certaine; true loue begins at home; and he cannot loue another soundly, that prima∣rily loues not himselfe. And he that loues himselfe with a good heart, with the same heart will loue his brother: Iacob. de Vorag. in Luc. 10. Serm. 2. In qu seipsum, & proptr quod seipsum: In that maner, & for that cause that he loues himselfe. This then cōmands the same loue, if not the same degree of loue, to thy brother, that thou bearest to thy selfe. This hearty loue is hardly found. More is protested now then in former times, but lesse done. It is wittilyob serued, that ye old maner of saluting, was to take & shake one another by the hand: now we locke armes & ioyne breasts, but not hearts. That old hand full was better
then this new armefull. Our cringes and complemen∣tall bowings promise great humilitic: but the smoo∣therd venime of pride es within. We haue low lookes and loftie thoughts. There are enough of those Psal. 28. 3. Which speake peace to their neighbours, but mischiefe is in their hearts. Whose smooth habites doe so palliate, and or∣namentally couer their poyson; as if they did preserue mud in Chrystall. The Romaynes vsually painted Friendship, with her hand on her heart: as if she promi∣sed to send no messenger out of the gate of her lips, but him that goes on the hearts arrand. Now we haue stu∣died both textures of words, and pretextures of man∣ners, to shrowd dishonestie. But one ounce of reall charitie is worth a whole talent of verball. He loues vs best, that does for vs most. Many Politicians, (and the whole world now runnes on the wheeles of policie) vse their louers as ladders, their friends as scaffolds. When a house is to be erected, they first set vp scaffolds, by which they build it vp: the house finished, downe pull they the scaffolds, and throw them into the fire. When the couetous or ambitious man hath his turne serued by others; either for his aduancing or aduanta∣ging; for gaine or glory: he puts them off with neglect and contempt. The house is built, what care they for the scaffold? The feate is wrought, let the wise and ho∣nest helpers be prison'd or poison'd, sinke or swimme, stand or perish. Nay it is well, if they helpe not those downe, that helped them vp. 3. Kind. The Apostle makes Col. 3. 12. Kindnesse one essentiall part of our loue; deriuing it from Christs example: who was Kind to vs, both in giuing vs much good, and forgi∣uing vs much euill. And God commendeth, yea com∣mandeth the inseparable neighbourhood of godlinesse and brotherly kindnesse. 2. Pet. 1. 7. Adde to your godlinesse bro∣therly
kindnes. For there is no piety towards God, where there is no kindnesse to our brother. Now Christs kind∣nes to vs consisted in 2. excellent effects Corrigendo. Porrigendo. 1. In correcting our errours, dircting and amen∣ding our liues. Non minima pars dilectionis est, reprehen∣dere dilectm, It is no small part of kindnesse, to re∣proue him thou louest. Therefore God sayth; Th shalt reproue thy brother; and not hate him in thy heart. A louing man will chide his erring friend: and he that does not, hates him in his heart. Aug. de ver∣bis Apost. Serm. 22. Sic vigilet tolerantia, vt non dormiat disciplina. So let patience watch, that disci∣pline sleepe not. This was Dauids desire. Psal. 141. 5. Let the righ∣teous smite me, it shall be a kindnes: and let him reproue e, it shall be an excellent oyle, which shall not breake my head. Our Sauiour tooke this course, but he was pittifull in it: not Math. 12. 20. breaking the bruised red, nor quenching the smoking flaxe. He was not transported with passion, but moued with tender compassion, and mercifull affection. Mark. 6. 36. He was moued with compassion toward the people, seeing them as sheepe without a shepheard. Psal. 103. 13. As a Father pittieth his chil∣dren, so the Lord pittieth them that feare him. And chil∣dren are Vicera parentum, saith In Epist. Paul. ad Philem. Ierome: the very bow∣els of the parents. Therefore his bowels earned with∣in him, when he saw the weakly blind led by the wil∣fully blind, and he instructed them. It is no small mercy in a Father, to correct his erring child. This is one office of loue almost quite forgotten in the world. Our eyes and eares are conscious of many horridsinnes, whereof we make also our soules guiltie by our silence. Like Cameleons, we turne to the colour of our companie. Oppressions that draw bloud of the Common-wealth, moue vs not. Oaths that totter the battlements of heauen, wake vs not. O where is our kindnesse! whilst wee doe not reproue, we approue these iniquities. Greg. He is conscious of secret societie, that
forbeareth to resist open iniquitie. Thou sayest, it is for loues sake thou sparest reprehension: why, if thou loue thy friend, thou wilt gently rebuke his faults. If thou loue thy friend neuer so dearly, yet thou oughtst to loue truth more dearly. Let not then the truth of loue preiudice the loue of truth. 2. In , reaching orth to vs his ample mer∣cies: 1. Tim. 6. 17. Giuing ichly l things to enioy. Where the A∣postle describes Gods bountie; that he Giues Freely. Fully. Vniuersally. Effectually. 1. Freely; he giues without exchange: hee receiues nothing for that he giues. Vngodly men haue honor, wealth, health, peace, plentie: their bellies are filled with his treasure, and they doe not so much as returne him thankes. His Sunne shines, his raine fals on the vniust and ingratefull mans ground. Man when hee giues, & respicit & recipit gratitudinem; both expects and accepts thankes, and a returne of loue: God hath not so much as thankes. For the good, they are indeed gratefull: but this Gratia grati is Gratia gratificantis: God giues them this grace, to be thankefull: and they may blesse him, that he stirres them vp to blesse him. 2. Fully and richly, as becomes the greatest King. A Duke at the wedding Feast of his daughter, caused to e brought in thirtie Courses; and at euery Course gaue so many gifts to each guest at the Table, as were Dishes in the Course. And I haue read of a Queene, that feasted her guests with wines brewed with dissol∣ued precious stories; that euery draught was valued at a hundred crownes. Here was royall entertainment; but this was but one Feast. Such bountie continued would quickly consume the finite meanes of any earth∣ly Prince. Onely God is Ep. . . rich in mercie: his treasurie
fils all the world, without emptying, yea empairing or abating it selfe. 3. Vniuersally; all things. The king hath his Crowne, the great man his honour, the mightie his strength, the rich his wealth, the learned his knowledge, the meane man his peace: all at his Gift. He opens his hand wide, he sparseth abroad his blessings, and filles all thinges liuing with his plenteousnesse. 4. Effectually: he settles these gifts vpon vs. As he gaue them without others, so others without him shall neuer be able to take them away. As he created, so he con∣serueth the vertues; strength in bread, and warmth in cloathes; and giues wine and oyle their effectiue chear∣fulnesse. Be ou so kind as this holy and heauenly patterne, not ayming at the measure which is inimitable, but le∣uelling at the maner which is charitable. Like Iob, who vsed not to Iob 31. 17. eate his morsels alone: neither to deny his bread to the hungry, nor the fleece of his flocke to the cold and naked. Let thy stocke of kindnes be liberall, though thy stocke of wealth bee stinted. Giue Omni petenti, though not Omnia petenti; as that Father excellent∣ly. 4. Constant. For with Christ is no variablenes, Iam. 1. 17. no shadow of change. But Ioh. 13. 1. Whom he once loues, he loues for euer. Ficklenesse is for a Laban, whose Gen. 31. . countenance will turne away from Iacob: and his affection fall off with his profite. I haue read of two intire friends, well deseruing for their ver∣tues; that when the one was promoted to great wealth and dignitie, the other neglected in obscuritie: the pre∣ferred, though he could not diuide his honour, yet sha∣red his wealth to his old companion. Things so altered that this honourd friend was falsely accused of treache∣rie, and by the blow of suspition throwne downe to
misery: & the other for his nowe obserued goodnes rai∣sed vp to a high place where now he requites his deiect∣ed friend with the same courtesie: as if their minds had cōsented & contended to make that equall, which their states made different. O for one dramme of this immu∣table Loue in the world! Honours change manners: & wee will not know those in the Court, who often fed vs in the countrey. Or if wee vouchsafe to acknow∣ledge them as friends, we will not as Sutors. Hereon was the verse made. Quisquis in hoc mundo cunctis vult gratus haberi: Det, Capiat, Quaerat, Plurima, Pauca, Nihil. He that would be of worldly men well thought: Must alwayes Giue, Take, Beg, Much, Litle, Nought. Men cannot brooke poore friends. This inconstant charitie is hatefull; as our English phrase premonisheth; Loue me Little, and Loue me Long. 3. This Sicut Refines Our loue; Walke in loue, as Christ loued vs. Where As is not onely similitudinary, but causall. Loue because Christ loued vs: for this cause, as after this maner. Which serues to putrifie our loue, to purge it from 1. Iohn 4. 19. corruption, and to make it perfect. Dilectio Dei nosfacit & diligibiles & diligentes: both such as God can loue, and such as can loue God. For it is the loue of Christ to vs, that works a loue to Christ in vs. A man will euer loue that medicine, that hath freed him from some desperate disease. Christs Loue hath healed vs of all our sores and sinnes: let vs honour and loue this me∣dicine, compounded of so precious simples, water and bloud. And let vs not onely affectionately embrace it our selues, but let vs inuite others to it Psal. 66. 16. Come and har∣ken all ye that feare God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soule. Christ. I haue beene so punctuall in this word of Qualitie,
that I can but mention the rest. The word of Maiestie is Christ; who being almightie God, coequall and coe∣ternall with the Father and the Spirit; tooke on him our nature: and was factus homo, vt pro homine pacaret Deum. God was made man, that for man he might ap∣pease God. Thus did so great a maiestie stoupe low for our loue; Non exuendo quod habuit, sed induendo quod non habuit: not by loosing what he had, but by accepting what he had not; our miserable nature. Bern. Tract. de diligendo Deo. Ipse dilexit nos & Tantus & tantum, & gratis tantillos & tales. Hee that was so great loued so greatly, vs that were so poore and vnworthy freely. Loued Is that word of Mercy, that reconciles so glorious a God to so vngracious sinners. The cause which mo∣ued Christ to vndertake for vs, was no merite in vs, but meere mercy inhim. He Loued vs, because he loued vs: in our Creation when we could not loue him: in our Redēption, when we would not loue him. Loued vs, notbutthat he loueth vs stil. But the Apostle speaks in this time, to distinguish the loue wherewith he now loueth vs, from that whereby he once Loued vs. Rom. 5. 10. For if when wee were enemies, we were reconciled to God by his death: much more being reconciled, we shall be saued by his life. Though it be also true, that Ier. 31. 3. from euerlasting he Lo∣ued vs. Vs Is the word of Miserie: Vs hee loued, that were so wretched. The word is indefinite; Us, all vs. Vs be wee neuer so vnworthy: All vs, be wee neuer so many. 1. Vs that were vnworthy of his loue, from whom he expected no correspondence. That hee loued the blessed Angels was no wonder, because they with winged obedience execute his hests Psal. 103. 20. and doe his word.
Yea that he loued his very reason-lesse and insensible creatures, is not strange: for Psal. 148. 8. fire and haile, snow and vapour, stormy wind and tempest fulfill his word. But to loue vs, that were weake, vngodly, sinners, enemies. Rom. 5 weake, no strength to deserue: vngodly, no pietie to procure: sinners, no righteousnes to satisfie: enemies, no peace to atone: for wee hated him, and all his Math. 10. 22. yee shall be hated of all men for my names sake. To loue such vs, was an vnexpectable, a most mercifull Loue. Hee that wanted nothing, loued vs, that had nothing. Im∣mortall eternitie loued mortall dust and ashes. O if a man had Ora mille fluentia melle, yea the tongues of An∣gels, he could not sufficiently expresse this loue. Ioh. 3. 16. So God loued the world: Mundum immundum, the vncleane world; that not onely not Ioh. 1. 10. receiued him; but euen crucified and killed him. 2, All of vs, without acception of persons. This is the Ioh. 1. 29. Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. The Gospell proclaimes an vniuersall Si quis; Whosoeuer beleeues, and is baptised, shall be saued. Qui seipsum excipi se ipsum decipit. He that excepts himselfe, beguiles his owne soule. Hence I find three inferen∣ces, obseruable, which I will commend to your con∣sciences, and your consciences to God. Dilecti diligamus. Dilectos Diligentes 1. We are loued our selues, therefore let vs loue. He that bids vs loue, loued vs first Ioh. 15. 12. This is my Comman∣dement, that yee loue one another. Why? As I loued you. Non aliud iussit, quam gessit: he chargeth vs with no∣thing in precept, which he performed not in practise. Therefore Si tardi suus ad andum, non tardi simus ad redamandum. Though we haue not beene forward to loue first, let vs not be backward to returne loue. Dilecti diligite 1. Ioh. 5. 11. If God so loued vs, we ought also to loue one ano∣ther.
Magnes amoris amor: and the sole requitall which God requires for his rich loue, is our poore loue; that onely may loue him, but haue nothing to giue him, that is not his. 2. They are beloued whom thou art charged to loue. He that bids vs loue others, loues them himselfe. It is fit we should loue those whom Christ loues. If thou loue Christ, thou art bound to loue others, because he loues them: yea with that very same loue, wherewith he loues thee. Therefore Dilectos diligamus. 3. They also loue God, whom God commands thee to loue. The loue of Christ is so shed abroad into all Christian hartes, that they vnfainedly affect Iesus their Sauiour. They loue him, whom thou louest, therefore loue them. It is fit, we should loue them highly, that loue God heartily. Therefore Diligentes diligamus. Thus you haue heard Loues Walke, or Race: now then sayth Paul; So runne that you may obtaine. I will end with an Apologue, an Epilogue, a Parable. Charitie, and certaine other her riualls, or indeed enemies would runne a race together. The Prize they all ranne for, was Felicitie; which was held vp at the Gaoles end by a bountifull Lady, called Eternitie. The runners were Pride, Prodigalitie, Enuie, Couetousnes, Lust, Hypocrisie, and Loue. All the rest were either diuerse or aduerse, neighbours or enemies to Charitie. I will, Herald-like, shew you their seuerall equipage; how they begin the Race and end it. 1. Pride, you know, must be formost; and that comes out like a Spanyard, with daring lookes and a tongue thundring out braues: mounted on a spritely Iennet named Insolence. His Plumes and Perfumes a∣maze the beholders eyes and nosthrils. He runnes as if he would ouerthrow Gyants and Dragons: yea euen the great Red-Dragon, if he encountred him: and with his lance burst open heauen gates. But his Iennet stum∣bles,
and downe comes Pride. You know how wise a king hath read his destinie; Pride will haue a fall. 2. The next is Prodigalitie; and because hee takes himselfe for the true Charitie, hee must be second at least. This is a young Gallant, and the horse he rides on, is Luxurie. Hee goes a thundring pace, that you would not think it possible to ouertake him: but before he is got a quarter of the way, hee is spent, all spent; ready to begge of those, that begd of him. 3. Enuie will be next, a leane meager thing, full of ma∣licious mettle, but hath almost no flesh. The horse he rides on is Malcontent. He would in his iourney first cut some thousand throates, or powder a whole kingdome, blow vp a State; and then set on to heauen. But the hangman sets vp a Galowse in his way, wher∣at he runs full butt, and breakes his necke. 4. Then comes sneaking out Coeteousnes; a hunger∣staru'd vsurer, that sells wheat, and eates beanes: many men are in his debt, and he is most in his owne debt: for he neuer payd his belly and backe a quarter of their dues. He rides on a thinne hobbling Iade called vncon∣scionablenes which for want of a worse stable hee lod∣geth in his owne heart. He promiseth his soule to bring her to heauen: but tarrying to enlarge his barnes, he lost opportunitie and the prize of saluation: and so fell two bowes short; Fayth and Repentance. 5. Lust hath gotten on Loues cloke, and will venture to runne. A leprous wretch, and riding on a trotting beast, a hee-goate; was almost shaken to pieces. Disea∣ses doe so crampe him, that hee is faine to sit downe with Vae misero: and without the helpe of a good Doctor or a Surgion, he is like neuer to see a comfort∣able end of his iourney. 6. Hypocrisie is glad that he is next to Charitie; and presumes that they two are brother and sister. Hee is hors'd on a halting hackney (for he does but borrow
him) called Dissimulation. As he goes, hee is offring euerie man his hand, but it is still emptie. Hee leanes on Charities shoulder, and protests great loue to her: but when shee tryes him to borrow a little money of him for some mercifull purpose; he pleads, he hath not enough to serue him to his iourneys end. He goes for∣ward like an Angell, but his trusted horse throws him, and discouers him a Deuill. 7 The last named, but first and onely that comes to the prize at the goales end, is Charitie. She is an hum∣ble vertue, not mounted as the other racers, but goes on foote. She spares from her owne belly, to relieue those poore Pilgrims that trauell with her to Heauen. She hath two Virgins that beare her companie; Inno∣cence, and Patience. She does no hurt to others, shee suffers much of others; yet was shee neuer heard to curse. Her language is blessing, and shee shall for euer inherite it. Three celesti∣all Graces, Glory, Immortalitie, and E∣ternitie, hold out a Crowne to her. And when Faith and Hope haue lifted her vp to heauen, they take their leaues of her; and the bosome of e∣uerlasting Mercie receiues her.
A CRVCIFIXE OR A Sermon vpon the Passion. EPHES. 5. 2. He hath giuen himselfe for vs, an offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet swelling sauour. THis latter part of the verse is a faire and liuely Crucifixe, cut by the hand of a most exquisite caruer: not to a∣maze our corporall lights with a peece of wood, brasse, or stone curi∣ously engrauen, to the encrease of a carnall deuotion. But to present to the eye of the conscience, the grieuous Passion, and gracious compassion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ; Who gaue himselfe for vs, &c. This Crucifixe presents to our eye seauen considerable Circumstances Who, Christ. What, Gaue. Whom, Himselfe. To whom, To God. For whom, For vs. After what manner, An offering & Sa∣crifice. Of what effect. Of a sweet sauour. The poynts, you see, lie as readie for our discourse, as the way did from Bethanie to Ierusalem: onely fayle not my speech, nor your attention, till we come to the Iourneys end.
Who. The Person that giues is Christ: the qualitie of his person doth highly commend his exeeding loue to vs. We will ascend to this consideration by 4. staires or de∣grees and descend by 4. other. Both in going vp, and comming downe, we shall perceiue the admirable loue of the giuer. Ascendently. 1. We will consider him Hominem; a man. Ioh. 19. 5. Behold the man, saith Pilate. We may tarry and wonder at his lowest degree; that a man should giue himselfe for man. Rom. 5. 7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die. But this man gaue himselfe for vnrighteous man to die; not an ordinary, but a greevous death, exposing himselfe to the wrath of God, to the tyrranie of men and De∣vils. It would pittie our hearts to see a poore dumbe beast so terrified, how much more Hominem, a man, the Image of God! 2 The second degree giues him hominem innocen∣tem, an Innocent man. Pilate could say. Luk. 23. 14 I haue found no fault in this man. No nor yet Herod. No nor the De∣vill, who would haue beene right glad of such an ad∣vantage. So Pilates Wife sent her husband word. Math. 27. 19. Haue thou nothing to do with that iust man. So the Per∣son is not onely a man, but a iust man, that gaue him∣selfe to endure such horrors for vs. If wee pittie the death of malefactors, how should our compassion be to one Innocent! 3. In the third degree, he is not onely Homo, a man; and Iustus homo, a good man; but also Magnus homo a great man: royally descended from the auntient Patri∣arches and Kinges of Iudah. Pilate had so written his Title, and he would answere▪ not alter it; Quod scripsi, scripsi. And what was that? Ioh. 19. 19. Iesus of Nazereth, the King of the Iewes. Now as is the Person, so is the Passion: the more noble the giuer, the more excel∣lent the gift. That so high a King would suffer such
contempt and obloquie to be cast vpon him; when the least part of his disgrace had beene too much for a man of meane condition! That a Man, a Good man, a Great man bore such calumnie, such calamitie for our sakes; here was an vnmatchable, an vnspeakable loue. 4. This is enough, but this is not all: there is yet a higher degree in this Ascent: we are not come to our full Quantus. It is this; he was Plus quam homo, more then man: not onely maximus hominum, but mator ho∣minibus; the greatest of men, yea greater then all men. Not mere filius hominis, but verè filius Dei: he was more then the Sonne of man, euen the Sonne of God. As the Centurion acknowledged Mark. 15. 39. Truely this man was the Sonne of God. Here be all the foure staires vpwardes; a Man, a Harmeles man a Princely man; and yet more then man, euen God himselfe. Salomon was a great king; but here is a Greater then Salomon. Salomon was Christus Domini; but here is Christus Dominus: he was the annoin∣ted of the Lord; but this is the Lord himself annointed. And here all tongues grow dumbe; & admiratio sealeth vp euery lippe. This is a depth beyond sounding. You may perhaps drowsily heare this and coldly be affected with it; but let me say, Principalities and Powers, An∣gels and Seraphins stood amazed at it. We see the Ascent; shall we bring downe againe this consideration by as many stayres? 1. Consider him Almightie God taking vpon him Mans nature: this is the first steppe downe wards Ioh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs. And Gal. 4. 4. God sent forth his Sonne made of a woman. And this was done Aug. Epist. 120. Naturam suscipiendo nostram, non mutando suam: by put∣ting on our nature, not by putting off his owne. Homo Deo accessit, non Deus a serecessit. He is both God and man, yet but one Christ: one not by confusion of substance but by vnitie of person. Now in that this E∣ternall God became man, he suffered more, then man
can suffer either liuing or dead. That man should be turned into a beast, into a worme, into dust, into nothing; is not so great a disparagement as that the glorious God should become man. Phil. 2. 6. 7. He that thought it not robbery to bee equall with God, was made in the likenesse of man. Hee that is Hebr. 1. 4. more excellent then the Angels, became lower then the Angels, that hee might aduance vs as high as the Angels. Euen the brightnesse of Gods glorie takes on him the base∣nesse of our nature: and hee that layd the foundati∣ons of the earth, and made the world, is now in the world made himselfe. This is the first descending de∣gree. 2. The second stayre brings him yet lower. He is made man: but what Man? Let him be vniuersall Monarch of the world: and haue fealtie and homage acknowledged to him from all kings and Emperors, as his viceroyes: Let him walke vpon Crownes and scepters, and let Princes attend on his Court: and here was some Maiestie, that might a little become the Son of God. No such matter. Indust formam serui; Phil. 2. 7. He tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant. He instructs vs to humili∣tie by his owne example Math. 20. 28. The Sonne of man came not to be ministred vnto, but to minister. Esa. 43. 24. O Israel, thou hast made me to serue with thy sinnes. He gaue himselfe for a Mi∣nister, not for a Master; ad seruitutem, non ad dominatio∣nem. He that is Gods Sonne, is made mans seruant. Proudly blind, & blindly poore man, that thou shoul∣dest haue such a seruant, as the Sonne of thy maker. This is the second steppe downewards. 3. This is not low enough yet. I am a worme no man; sayth the Psalmist in his Person. Yea the shame of men, and contempt of the people. He is called. Psal. Psal. 24. 7. 24. the King of glory. Be yee open yee euerlasting doores, and the King of glorie shall come in. But Esa. 53. He Esa. 53. 3. is despised and reiected of men: we hid as it were our faces
from him: he was despised, and wee esteemed him not. O the pittie of God, that those two should come so neare together, the King of glory, and the shame of men. Quo celsior maiestas, eò miserior humilitas. Thus sayth the Apo stle, hee made himselfe of no reputation. Hee that re∣quires Phil. 2. 7. all honour as properly due to him, makes him∣selfe (not of little, but) of no reputation. Here was deiection; yea here was reiection. Let him be layd in his poore cradle, the Bethlemites reiect him; the manger must serue, no roome for him in the Inne. Yea Ioh. 1. 11. Hee came to his owne, and his owne receiued him not. All Israel is to hote for him; hee is glad to flie into Egypt for protection. Come hee to Ierusalem? which he had honourd with his presence, instructed with his Sermons, amazed with his myracles, wet and bedewed with his teares▪ they reiect him. I would, and ye would not. Comes he to his kindred? they deride & tra∣duce him, as if they were ashamed of his alliāce. Comes he to his Disciples? Ioh. 6. 66. They goe backe & will walke no more with him. Will yet his Apostles tarry with him? So they say ver. 6. 8. Lord, to whom shall we goe? thou hast the words of eternall life. Yet at last one betrayes him, another for∣sweares him, all forsake him: & Iesus is left alone in the middest of his enemies. Can malice yet adde some fur∣ther aggrauation to his contempt? Yes, they crucifie him with malefactors. The qualitie of his compa∣nie, is made to encrease his dishonour. In medio La∣tronum, tanquam Latronum immanissimus: In the mid∣dest of theeues, as it were the Prince of theeues; sayth Luther. He that thought it no robbery to be equall to the most holy God, is made equall to theeues and murde∣rers; yea tanquam Dux; as it were a Captaine amongst them. This is the third step. 4. But wee must goe yet lower. Behold now the deepest stayre, and the greatest reiection. Affligit me Deus Lement. 1. 12 the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger Esa. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him: he hath put  to griefe. No burden seemes heauy, when the com∣forts of God helpe to beare it. When God will giue solace, vexation makes but idle offers and assaults. But now to the reiection of all the former, the Lord turnes his backe vpon him as a stranger: the Lord wounds him as an enemie. He cryes out; My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? How could the Sunne and starres, heauen and earth stand, whiles their maker thus com∣plained! The former degree was deepe; he was cruci∣fied with euill doers; reckoned amongst the wicked. Yet theeues fared better in death then he. We find no irri∣sio, no insultation, no taunts, no invectiues against thē. They had nothing vpon them but paine; hee both con∣tempt & torment. If scorne and derision can vexe his good soule, he shall haue it in peales of ordinance shotte against him. Euen the basest enemies shall giue it: Iewes, Souldiours, Persecutors yea suffering malefactors spare not to flowte him. His bloud cānot appease them with out his reproch. But yet the disciples are but weake men, the Iewes but cruell persecutors the Deuils but malicious enemies: all these doe but their kind, but the lowest degree is; God forgets him, and in his fee∣ling hee is forsaken of the highest. Weigh all these circumstances, and you shall truely behold the Person, that gaue himselfe for vs. What We come to the Action, Dedit. Giuing is the argument of a free disposition. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 10. 17. 18. I Lay downe my life. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. I haue power to lay it downe, and I haue power to take it againe. He that giues life to vs, gaue vp his owne life for vs. Hee did not sell, set, let, or lend, but giue. Obla∣tus est, quia ipse voluit. He was offered, because he would be offered. No hand could cut that stone from the quar∣rey of heauen: no violence pull him from the bosome
of his Father; but Sua misericordia, his owne mercie: he gaue. Cant. . 8. He commeth leaping vpon the mountaines, skipping vpon the hils. He comes with willingnesse and celeri∣tie: no humane resistance could hinder him; not the hillockes of our lesser infirmities, not the mountaines of our grosser iniquities, could stay his mercifull pace to∣wards vs. He gaue his life; who could bereaue him of it? To all the high Priestes armed forces he gaue but a verball encounter; I am he: and they retire and fall backward. His very breath disperst them all. Hee could as easily haue commanded fire from heauen to consume them, or vapours from the earth to choake them. He that controlles Deuils, could easily haue quailed men. More then twelue Legions of Angels were at his becke; and euery Angell able to conquor a Legion of men. Hee giues them leaue to take him; yea power to kill him: from himselfe is that power, which apprehends him∣selfe. Euen whiles he stands before Pilate scorned, yet tels him; Thou couldst haue no power against me, nisi datam desuper; vnlesse it were giuen thee from aboue. His owne strength leads him, not his aduersaries. He could haue beene freed, but he would not. Constraint had abated his merite: he will deserue, though he die. The losse of his life was necessary, yet was it also vo∣luntary. Quod amittitur necessarium est, quod emittitur voluntarium. Therefore he gaue vp the Ghost. In spight of all the world hee might haue kept his soule within Ambro. his bodie; he would not. The world should haue bin burnt to cinders, and all creatures on earth resolued to their originall dust; before he could haue beene enfor∣ced. Man could not take away his Spirit, therefore he gaue it. Otherwise if his Passion had beene onely Ope∣ris, and not voluntatis; materiall and not formall; it could not haue beene meritorious, or afforded satis∣faction for vs. For that is onely done well, that is
done of our will. But it is obiected out of Hebr. 5. that hee offered vp prayers and supplications, with strong crying and teares, vnto Hebr. 5. 7. him that was able to saue him from death. Hence some blasphemers say, that Christ was a coward in fearing the naturall death of the bodie. If hee had so feared it, hee needed not to haue tasted it. Christ indeed did natu∣rally feare death; otherwise he had not bin so affected as an ordinary man. Yet he willingly suffered death, o∣therwise he had not beene so well affected as an ordi∣nary Martyre. But he prayes thrice; Let this cuppasse. Diuines vsually distinguish here: the Sententiaries thus. That there was in Christ a double humane or created will: the one voluntas vt natura; a naturall will; the o∣ther voluntas vt ratio, a reasonable will. Christ according to his naturall will trembled at the pangs of death; and this without sinne: for Nature abhorreth all destructiue things. But in regard of his rationall will, he willingly submits himselfe to drinke that cup. Not as I will O Fa∣ther, but as thou wilt. Aman, sayth Aquinas, will not naturally endure the lancing of any member: yet by his reasonable will he consents to it, for the good of the whole bodie: reason masters sense, and cutting or cauterizing is endured. So Christ by the strength of his naturall wil feared death: but by his Reason perceiuing, that the cutting, wounding, crucifying of the Head, would bring health to the whole Bodie of his Church; and either he must bleed on the Crosse, or we must all burne in hell: behold now he willingly and chearful∣ly giues himselfe an offering and Sacrifice to God for vs. But was it a meere temporall death that our Sauiour feared? No, he saw the fierce wrath of his Father, and therefore feared. Many resolute men haue not shrunke at a little: diuers Martyrs haue endured strange tor∣ments with magnanimitie. But now when he that gaue them strength, quakes at death; shall wee say he was a
Coward? Alas! that which would haue ouerwhelmed man, would not haue made him shrinke: that which he feared, no mortall man but himselfe euer felt. Yet hee feared. The despaire of many thousand men was not so much, as for him to feare. He saw that which none saw, the anger of an infinite God. He perfectly appre hended the cause of feare; our Sinne and torment. He saw the bottome of the Cup; how bitter and dreggish euery drop of that viall was. He truely vnderstood the burden, which we make light of. Men feare not Hell, because they know it not. If they could see through the opened gates, the insufferable horrors of that pit; trem∣bling & quaking would run like an ague through their bones. This insupportable lode he saw: that the spunge of vengeance must be wrung out to him; and hee must sucke it vp to the last and least drop. Euery talent of our iniquities must be laid vpon him, till as a cart he be loden Amo. 2. 13. with sheaues. And with all this pressure hee must mount his Chariot of death, the Crosse; and there beare it, till the appeased God gaue way to a Consummatum est; It is finished. The Philosopher could say, that Sapiens miser magis est miser, quàm stultus miser: a wise man miserable, is more miserable then a foole miserable; because he vn∣derstands his miserie. So that our Sauiours pangs were aggrauated by the fulnesse of his knowledge. No mar∣uell then if he might iustly take Dauids words out of his mouth; Thy terrors haue I suffered with a troubled minde. This thought drew from him those teares of bloud. His eyes had formerly wept for our misdoings: his whole bodie now weepes; not afaint dew, but hee swett out solid drops of bloud. The thornes, soourges, nailes fetched bloud from him; but not with such paine as this Sweat. Outward violence drew on those: these the ex∣tremitie of his troubled thought. Here then was his cause of feare. He saw our euerlasting destruction, if
he suffered not: he saw the horrors which hee must suf∣fer to ransome vs. Hinc illae lachrymae: hence those grons, teares, cryes, and sweat: yet his loue conquerd all. By nature he could willingly haue auoided this cup: for loues sake to vs he tooke it in a willing hand. So he had purposed, so he hath performed. And now to testifie his loue, sayth my Text, he freely Gaue. Whom? Himselfe. This is the third circumstance, the Gift; Himselfe. Not an Angell: for an Angell cannot sufficiently mediate betweene an immortall nature offended, and a mortall nature corrupted. The glorious Angels are blessed, but finite and limited: and therefore vnable to this expiation. They cannot bee so sensibly Heb. 4. 15. touched with the feeling of our infirmities; as hee that was in our owne nature; in all poynts tempted like as we are, sin onely excepted. Not Saints; for they haue no more oyle then will serue their owne Lampes. They haue enough for them∣selues, not of themselues; all of Christ: but none to spare. Fooles cry, Giue vs of your cyle. They answere, Math. 25. 9. Not so, least there be not enough for vs and you: but goe ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selues. They could not propitiate for sinne, that were themselues guilty of sinne; and by nature lyable to condemnation. Wret∣ched Idolaters, that thrust this honour on them against their wils: how would they abhorre such sacrilegious glory! Not the riches of this world. 1. Pet. 1. 18. We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as siluer and gold. Were the riches of the old world brought together to the riches of the new world; were all the minerall veines of the earth emptied of their purest mettals: this pay would not be currant with God. It will cost more to redeeme
soules Psal. 49. 67. They that trust in their wealth, and boast in the mul∣titude of their riches: Yet cannot by any meanes redeeme their brother, nor Giue to God a ransome for him. The ser∣uant cannot redeeme the Lord. God made a man ma∣ster of these things: hee is then more precious then his slaues. Not the bloud of Bulls or Goates. Hebr. 9. Alas, those legal sacrifices were but dumbe shewes of this tragedie, the meere figures of this oblation; mystically presenting to their faith, that Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. This Lambe was prefigured in the sa∣crifices of the law, & now presented in the sacraments of the Gospell: slaine indeed from the begining of the world Who had power. Prodesse, to profit vs; before hee had Esse, a being himselfe. None of these would serue. Whom Gaue he then? Seipsum, Himselfe; who was both God and man: that so participating of both na∣tures, our mortalitie, and Gods Immortalitie, he might be a perfect Mediator. Aug. Confes. Lib. 10. cap. 43 Apparuit igitur inter mortales peccatores & immortalem iustum, mortalis cum hominibus, iustus cum Deo. He came betweene mortall men and immortall God, mortall with men, and iust with God. As man he suffered, as God hee satisfied: as God and man he saued. He gaue himselfe; Se Totum Himselfe Wholy Solum Onely 1. All himselfe, his whole Person, soule and body. Godhead and manhood. Though the deitie could not suffer, yet in regard of the personall vnion of these two naturs in one Christ, his very passion is attributed in some sort to the Godhead. So Act. 20. It is called the bloud of God. And 1. Cor. 2. 8. The Lord of glory is said Act. 20. 28. to be crucified. The Schooles distinction here makes al plaine: He gaue Totum Christum, though not Totum Christi: All Christ, though not All of Christ. Home non valuit, Deus non voluit. As God alone he wold not,
as man alone he could not make this satisfaction for vs. The Deitie is impassible; yet was it impossible without this Deitie for the great worke of our saluation to be wrought. If any aske how the manhoode could suffer without violence to the God-head; being vnited in one Person: let him vnderstand it by a familiar com∣parison. The Sunne-beames shine on a tree; the axe cuts downe this tree, yet can it not hurt the beames of the Sunne. So the God-head still remaines vnharmed, though the axe of death did for a while fell downe the man-hood. Corpus passum est dolore & gladio. Anima do∣lore non gladio. Diuinitas nec dolore nec gladio. His bodie suffered both sorrow and the sword: his soule sorrow not the sword: his Deitie neither sorrow nor the sword. Deitas in dolente, non in dolore. The God-head was in the Person pained, yet not in the paine. 2. Himselfe onely; and that without a Partner Comforter. 1. Without a Partner, that might share either his glo∣ry, or our thankes: of both which he is iustly iealous. Christi passio adiutore non eguit. The sufferings of our Ambr. Sauiour need no helpe. Vpon good cause therefore we abhorre that doctrine of the Papists: that our offences are expiated by the passions of the Saints. No, not the blessed Virgin hath performed any part of our iustifica∣tiō, payed any farthing of our debts. So sings the Quire of Rome. Sancta virgo Dorothea, tua nos virtute bea, cor in nobis novum crea. Wherin there is pretty rime, petty rea∣son, but great blasphemie: as if the Virgin Dorothy were able to create a new heart within vs. No; 1. Ioh. 1. 7. but the bloud of Iesus Christ clenseth vs from all sinne. His bloud, and his onely. O blessed Sauiour, euery drop of thy bloud is able to redeeme a beleeuing world. What then need we the helpe of men? How is Christ a perfect Sauiour, if any act of our redemption be left to the performance of Saint or Angell? No, our soules must die, if the bloud
of Iesus cannot saue them. And whatsoeuer wittie er∣rour may dispute for the merits of Saints; the distressed conscience cries, Christ, and none but Christ. They may sitte at Tables and discourse, enter the Schooles and argue, get vp into the Pulpits and preach; that the workes of good men is the Churches treasure, giuen by indulgence, and can giue indulgence; and that they will doe the soule good. But lie we vppon our death∣beds, panting for breath, driuen to the push, tost with tumultuous waues of afflictions, anguished with sorrow of spirit; then we sing another song: Christ & Christ alone: Iesus and onely Iesus: Mercie, mercie: pardon, comfort for our Sauiours sake. Act. 4. 12. Neither is there saluation in any other: for there is none other Name vnder heauen gi∣uen among men, whereby we must be saued. 2. Without a Comforter: he was so farre from ha∣uing a sharer in his Passion, that he had none in com∣passion; that (at least) might any wayes ease his sor∣rowes. It is but a poore comfort of calamitie, Pittie; yet euen that was wanting. Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you, all yee that passe by? Is it so sore a sorrow to Christ, and is it no∣thing to you? a matter not worth your regard, your pit∣tie? Man naturally desires and expects, if he cannot be deliuered, eased; yet to be pittied. Iob. 19. 21. Haue pittie vpon me, haue pittie vpon me, O ye my friends: for the hand of God hath touched me. Christ might make that request of Iob, but hee had it not: there was none to comfort him, none to pittie him. It is yet a little mixture of refresh∣ing, if others be touched with a sense of our miserie; that in their hearts they wish vs well, and would giue vs ease if they could: but Christ hath in his sorest pangs not so much as a Comforter. The Martyrs haue fought valiantly vnder the banner of Christ, because hee was with them to comfort them. But when himselfe suf∣fers, no reliefe is permitted. The most grieuous tor∣ments find some mitigation in the supply of friends
and comforters. Christ after his monomachie or single combate with the deuill in the desart, had Angels to at∣tend him. In his agonie in the garden an Angell was sent to cofort him. But when he came to the maine act of our redemption, not an Angell must be seene. None of those glorious spirits may looke through the win∣dowes of heauen; to giue him any ease. And if they would haue relieued him, they could not. Who can lift vp, where the Lord wil cast downe? What Chirur∣gion can heale the bones, which the Lord hath broken? But his mother, & other friends stands by, seeing, sigh∣ing, weeping. Alas! what doe those teares, but euerease his sorrow? might hee not iustly say with Paul. Act. 21. 1. What meane ye to weepe, & to breake mine heart? Of whom then shall he expect comfort? Of his Apostles? Alas they be∣take them to their heeles. Feare of their owne danger drownes their copassion of his miserie. He might say with Iob; Miserable comforters are ye all. Of whom then? The Iewes are his enemies, and vie vnmercifullnes with deuils. There is no other refuge but his Father, No, euen his Father is angry: & he that once said; Math. 3. 17. This is my beloued Son, in whom I am well pleased; is now incen∣sd. He hides his face from him, but layes his hand heauy vpon him; & buffets him with anguish. Thus Solus pati∣tur: he gaue himselfe, & only himselfe, for our redemptiō. To whom? To God; and that is the fourth circumstance. To whom should he offer this sacrifice of expiation, but to him that was offended? and that is God. Against Psal. 51. 4. thee, thee onely haue I sinned; and done this euill in thy sight. Luk. 15. 21. Father I haue sinned against heauen, and in thy sight. All sinnes are committed against him: his iustice is displeased, and must be satisfied. To God: for God is angry, with what, and whom? with sinne and vs, and vs for sinne. In his iust anger he must smite; but whom?
In Christ was no sinne. Now shall God doe like Annas or Ananias. Ioh. 18. 22. If I haue spoken euill, sayth Christ, beare witnesse of the euill: but if well, why smitest thou me? So Paul to Ananias Act. 23. 3. God will smite thee thou whited wall: for Sittest thou to Iudge me after the Law, and comman∣dest me to be smitten contrary to the Law? So Abraham pleads to God Gen. 18. 25. shall not the Iudge of all the earth doe right? Especially right to his Sonne? and to that Son which glorified him on earth, and whom he hath now glorified in heauen? We must fetch the answere from Daniels Prophecie Dan. 9. 26. The Messiah shall he cut off, but not for himselfe. Not for himselfe? For whom then? For solution hereof we must steppe to the first point; and there we shall finde. For Whom; For vs. He tooke vpon himour person, he became suretie for vs. And loe, now the course of Iustice may proceed against him. He that will become a Suertie, and take on him the debt, must be content to pay it. Hence that innocent Lambe must be made a Sacrifice: and 2. Cor. 5. 21. he, that know no  in himselfe, must be made sin for vs; that we might be made the righteousnes of God in him. Seauen times in three verses doth the Prophet Esay Esay. 53. 4. 5. 6. inculcate this. We, Our, vs. Wee were all sicke, gree∣uously sicke; euerie sinne was a mortall disease. Quot Vitia, tot febres. He healeth our infirmities, sayth the Pro∣phet: Chryso. he was our Phisician; a great Physician. Mag∣nus Venit medicus, quia magnus iacebat agrotus. The whole world was sicke to death, & therfore needed a power∣full Physician. So was he; and tooke a strange course for our Cure. Which was not by giuing vs physicke, but by taking our Physicke for vs. Other patients drink the prescribed potion; but our Physician drunke the po∣tion himselfe, and so recouered vs. For vs. Ambr. De Fid. ad Grat. Lib. 2. cap. 3. Pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret. He suffered for me, that had no cause to suffer
for himselfe. O Domine Iesu, doles non tua, sed vulnera mea. So monstrous were our sinnes, that the hand of the euerlasting Iustice was ready to strike vs with a fatall and finall blow: Christ in his owne person steppes betweene the stroke and vs; and bore that a while, that would haue sunke vs for euer. Aug. de Doctrin. Chri∣stian. Lib. 1. cp 14. Nos immor∣talitate malè vsi sumus, vt moreremur; Christus mortalitate benè vsus est, vt viueremus. We abused the immortality we had to our death: Christ vsed the mortality he had not to our life. Dilexit nos; he loued vs; & such vs, that were his vtter enemies. Here then was loue without li∣mitation, beyond imitation. Vnspeakable mercy, sayes Bernard; that the king of eternall glory should yeeld himselfe to be crucified, Serm. de qua∣druplici debito. Protam despicatissimo vernacu∣lo, immò vermiculo: for so poore a wretch, yea a worme and that not a louing worme, not a liuing worme: for we both hated him and his; and were dead in sinnes and trespasses. Yea for All vs; indefinitely: none excepted that will apprehend it faithfully. The mixture of Moses Perfume is thus sweetly allegorized Exod. 30. 34. God cōmands him to put in so much frankincense as Galbanum, and so much Gal∣banum as frankincense. Christs Sacrifice was so sweetly temperd: as much bloud was shed for the peasant in the field, as for the Prince in the Court. The offer of sal∣uation is generall: whosoeuer among you areth God, and worketh rightousnes; to him is the word of this saluation sent. As there is no exemption of the greatest from misery, so no exception of the least from mercie. Hee that will not beleeue and amend, shall be condemned be he ne∣uer so rich: he that doth, be hee neuer so poore shall be saued. This one point of the Crucifixe, For vs requires more punctuall meditation. Whatsoeuer we leaue vnsaid, we must not huddle vp this. For indeed this brings the Texthome to vs, euen into our consciences, & speakes
effectually to vs all: to me that speake, and to you that heare; with that Prophets application, Thou art the man. Wee are they, for whose cause our blessed Sauiour was crucified. For vs he endured those greeuous pangs for vs that we might neuer tast them. Therefore say we with that Father Aug. dsancta virginit. cap. 55 Toto nobis figatur in corde, qui totus pro nobis fixus in cruce. Let him be fixed wholy in our hearts who was wholy for vs fastned on the Crosse. We shall consider the vses we are to make of this, by the ends for which Christ performed this. It serues to Saue vs. It serues to Moue vs. It serues to Mortifie vs. 1. To saue vs. This was his purpose & performancel he did, all he suffered, was to redeeme vs. Esa. 53. 5. By his stripes we are healed: by his Sweat we refreshed: by his sorrows we reioyced: by his death wee saued. For euen that day, which was to him Dies Luctus, the heauiest day that euer man bore; was to vs Diessalutis, 2. Cor. 6. 2. the accepted time, the day of saluation. The day was euill in respect of our sinnes & his sufferings: but eventually in regard of what he payed, and what he purchased; a good day, the best day; a day of ioy and Iubilation. But if this Saluation be wrought for vs, it must be ap∣plied to vs; yea to euery one of vs. For that some re∣ceiue more profite▪ by his passion then others, is not his fault▪ that did vndergoe , but theirs that doe not vnder∣take it; to apply it to their own coscience But we must not only beleeue this Text in grosse; but let euery one take a handfll out of this sheafe, & put it into his own bosome. So rning this Fr vs into For me. As Paul. Gal. 2. Gal. 2. 20. I liue by the faith of the Son of God, who loued me, & gaue himselfe for me. Blessed faith, that into the plurall Vs puts in the singular soule. Me. Se dedit pro me. Euery one is a rebell, guiltie & conuicted by the supreme Law; death waites to arrest vs, and damnation to receiue vs. What
should we doe but pray, beseech, cry, weepe, till we can get our pardon sealed in the bloud of Iesus Christ: and euery one find a sure testimonie in his owne soule, that Christ gaue himselfe for me. 2. This should moue vs: was all this done for vs, and shall we not be stirred? Lam. 1. 12. Haue ye no regard? Is it nothing to you, that I suffer such sorrow as was never suffred? All his agonie, his cries, and teares, and groanes, and pangs were for vs: shall he thus grieue for vs, and shall wee not grieue for our selues? For our selues I say; not so much for him. Let his passion moue vs to compassion, not of his sufferings, (alas our pit∣tie can do him no good) but of our sinnes which caused them. Luk. 23. 28. Daughters of Ierusalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues, and for your children. For our selues: not for his paeynes▪ that are past, but for our owne that should haue beene, and (except our faith settes him in our stead▪) shall bee. Shall hee eepe o vs, for vs, and shall wee not mourne? Shall he drinke so deepely to v in this cup of sorrow, and shall we not pledge him? Doth the wrath of God make the Sonne of God shrike ot; and shall not the ser∣vants for whome he suffered tmble? Hieron. in Math. Oms creatura compatitur Christ . Euery creature seemes to suffer with Christ. Sunne, earth, rockes, sepulchers: Solus miser  non compatitur, pro quo solo Christus pa∣titur. Onely man suffers nothing, for whome Christ suffered all. Doth his passion teare the Uaile, rent the stones, cleaue the rockes, shake the earth, open the graues; and are our hearts more hard then those insen∣sible creatures, that they cannot be penetrated? Doth heauen and earth, Sunne and elements, suffer with him, and is it nothing to vs? We, wretched men that wee are, that were the principals in this murder of Christ: whereas Iudas, Caiphas, Pilate, Souldiours, Iewes, were all but accessaries and instrumentall
causes. We may seeke to shift it from our selues, & driue this haynous fact vpon the Iewes: but the exeutioner doth no properly kl the man.  peccatum  est. Sin, our sinnes were the murderers. Of vs he suffe∣red, and for vs he suffered: vnite thse in your thoughts and tell me if his passion hth no cause to moue vs. And yet so obdurate are our hears; that wee cannot endure one houres discourse of this great busines. Christ was many houres in dying for s, we cannot sit one houre to heare of it. O that wee should find fault with heat or cold in harkning to these heauenly iste∣ries; when he endured for vs such a , such a sweat, such agonie; that through his flesh and skinne hee sweate drops of bloud. Doth hee weepe teares of gorebloud for vs, and cannot wee weepe teares of water for our seles?  how would wee die for him, as hee dyed  we are wry of hea∣ring, what he did fo vs▪ 3. This should   Christ deliuered  to death for ou ,  vs from death, and . H  detroy the deuill, but to 1. Ioh. 3. 8. . Neither doth he take onely from  , the •. 8. 1 power to condemn  but  , the • Rom. 6. 6. 12. power to rule and   Chri death, as it answers the Iusti of  for , so it must kill in  the will of . Christ in ll parts suffered, that e in all parts might  mortified. His f∣ferings were so abundant, that men cnot know ther number, nor Angels their naure, neiher  nor An∣gels their measure. His Passion ound an end, our thoughts cannot. He Suffered At all times In all places In all senses In all members In body and soule also All for Vs
1. At all times: in his childhood by pouertie and He∣rod: in the strength of his dayes by the powers of earth, by the powers of hell, yea euen by the powers of hea∣uen. In the day hee lackes meate, in the night a pillow. Euen that holy time of the great Passouer is destined, for his dying. When they should kill the Paschall Labe in thankfulnesse, they slay the Lambe of God in wickednes. They admire the shadow, yet condemne the substance. All for vs; that all times might yeelde vs comfort. So the Apostle sweetly 1. Thess. 5. 10. He dyed for vs, that whether we wake or sheepe, wee should liue together with him. 2. In all places: in the cradle by that Foxe: in the streets by reuilers: in the mountaine by those that would haue throwne him downe headlong: in the Temple by them that Ioh. 8. 59. toke vp stones to cast at him. In the high Priests hall by buffers, in the garden by be∣trayers: by the way loden with his crosse. Lastly in Caluary, a vild and stinking place, among the bones of malefactors, crucified. Still all for vs; that in all places the mercy of God might protect vs. 3. In all Sense. For his tast, loe it is icted with gall & vineger; a bitter draught for a dying man. His touch felt more; the nailes driuen into his hands and feete: and in those places wounded lies the greatest paine, being the most sinewy parts of the bodie. His Eares are full of the blasphemous contumelies, which the sauage multitude belced out against him. Not him, but Barab∣bas, they crie to Pilate; preferring a murderer before a Sauiour. Will you reade the speeches obiectuall to his hearing! See Math. 27. ver. 29. 39. 42. 44. 49. In all consider their blasphemie, his patience. For his Eyes, whether can hee turne them without spectacles of sorrow? The dispight of his ene∣mies on the one side shewing their extremest ma∣lice: the weeping and Lmenting of his mother on
the other side; whose teares might wound his heart. If any Sense were lesse afflicted it was his Smelling: & yet the putrified bones of Caluarie could be no plea∣sing sauour. Thus suffered all his Senses. That Tast that should be delighted with the wine of the vineyard, Cant. 7. 9. that goeth downe sweetly, is fed with vineger. He lookes for good grapes, behold Esa. 5. 4. Sower grape: he expects wine,  re∣ceiues vineger. That Smell that should bee refrehed with the odorferous sent of the Cant. 6. 2. beds of spices, the pietie of his Saints; is filled with the stence of iniquities. Those hands that sway the Scepter of the heauen▪  faineto carry the Reed of Repr, & end the ailes of death. Those eyes that were as, a Reu. 1. 14.  of Fire; in re∣spect of whom the very Sunne was darknes, must be hold the afflicting obiects of shame and tyrannie. Those ares, which to delight, the high Quorillers of heauen sing their  notes, must be wearied with the taunts and  of blasphemie. And all this for vs: not onely to satisfie those sinnes which our Senses haue committed; but to mortifie those senses, and presee them from those sinnes. That our eyes may be no more full of adulteries, nor throw couetous lookes on the goods of our brethren. That our ares may no more giue so wide admission and welcome entrance to lewd reports, the incantations of Sathan. That sinne in all our senses might be done to death: the poison exhausted, the sense purifi∣ed. 4. In all members. Looke on that blessed Body con∣ceiued by the Holy Ghost, and borne of a pure Virgin: it is all ouer scourged, martyred, tortured, manacled, mangled. What place can you find free? Caput An∣gelic Bern. spiritibus tremebundum densitat spinarum pungi∣tur: facies pulchrapr filijs hominum Iudorum spt is de∣trpatur: Oculi  sole in  caligantur &c. To
begin at his head: that head which the Angels reuerence is crowned with thornes. That face, which is Psal. 45 2. fairer them the sonnes of men, must be odiously spit on by the filthy Iewes. His hands that made the heauens, are ex∣tended & fastned to a crosse. The feet which tread vp∣on the neckes of his and our enemies, feele the like smart. And the mouth must be buffeed, which Ioh. 7. 46. spake as neuer man spake. Still all this for vs. His head bled for the wicked ima∣ginations of our heads. His face was besmeared with spittle, because we had spit impudent blasphemies a∣gainst heauen. His lips were afflicted, that our lips might henceforth yeeld sauoury speeches. His feet did bleed, that our feet might not be swift to shed bloud. All his members suffered for the sinnes of all our members: and that our members might be no more ser uants to sin: but Rom. 6. 19. seruants to righteousnes, vnto holines. Hieron. Cō∣spi voluit; vt nos Lauaret: velari voluit, vt velamen igno∣rantia a mentibus nostris : in capite percuti, vt corpori sanitatem restitueret. Hee would be polluted with their spettle, that hee might wash vs: hee would bee blindfolded, that he might take the vaile of ignorance from our eyes. He suffered the head to be wounded, that hee might renew health to all the body. Sixe times we read, that Christ shed his bloud. First when he was circumcised: at eight dayes old his bloud was spilt. 2. In his agonie in the garden; where he swett drops of bloud. 3. In his scourging, when the merciles tormentors fetch'd bloud from his holy sides. 4. When he was crowned with thornes: those sharpe prickles raked and harrowed his blessed head, and drew forth bloud. 5. In his crucifying; when his hands & feet were pierced, bloud gushed out. 6. Lastly after his death Ioh. 19. 34. One of the souldiours with a speare pierced his side and forthwith came there out bloud and water. All his members bled, to shew that he bled for all his members. Not one drop
of this bloud was shed for himselfe: all for vs; for his enemies, persecutors, crucifiers, our selues. But what shall become of vs, if all this cannot mortifie vs? How shall Rom. 6. 8. we liue with Christ, if with Christ wee bee not dead? Dead in deed vnto sinne, but liuing vnto righteous∣nesse. As 2. King. 4. 34. Elisha reuiued the Shunamites child: hee lay vpon it; put his mouth vpon the childes mouth, and his eyes vpon his eyes, and his hands vpon his hands, and stretched himselfe vpon the child, and the flesh of the child waxed warme: So the Lord Iesus, to recouer vs that were dead in our sinnes and trespasses, spreads and applies his whole Passion to vs: layes his mouth of blessing vpon our mouth of blasphemie: his eyes of holinesse vpon our eyes of lust: his hands of mercie vpon our hands of crueltie: and stretcheth his gratious selfe vpon our wretched selues, till we begin to waxe warme, to get life, and the (holy) Spirit returnes into vs. 5. In his Soule. All this was but the out-side of his Passion; Ioh. 12. 27. Now is my Soule troubled, and what shall I say? Father saue me from this houre: but for this cause came I vnto this houre. The paine of the bodie is but the bodie of paine; the very soule of sorrow is the sorrow of the soule. All the outward afflictions were but gentle pric∣kings in regard of that his soule suffered. Pro. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustaine his infirmitie: but a wounded spirit who can beare? He had a heart within that suffered vnseene, vnknowne anguish. This paine drew from him those Heb. 5. 7. strong cryes, those bitter teares. He had often sent forth the cryes of compassion: of passion and complaint not till now. He had wept the teares of pittie, the teares of loue; but neuer before the teares of anguish. When the Sonne of God thus cryes, thus weepes, here is more then the bodie distressed; the soule is agonized. Still all this for vs. His Soule was in our soules stead: what would they haue felt, if they had bin in the stead of his. All for vs; to satisfaction, to emendation. For
thy drunkennesse and powring downe strong drinks, he drunke vineger. For thy intemperate gluttonie, he fasted. For thy sloth, he did exercise himselfe to con∣tinuall paines. Thou sleepest secure, thy Sauiour is then waking, watching, praying. Thy armes are inured to lustfull embracings, hee for this embraceth the rough Crosse. Thou deckest thy selfe with proud habiliments, he is humble and lowly for it. Thou ridest in pompe, he iourneys on foote. Thou wallowest on thy downe beds, thy Sauiour hath not a pillow. Thou surfeiest, and he sweats it out; a bloud sweat. Thou fillest and swellest thy selfe with a  of wickednes; behold incision is made in the Head for thee; thy Sauiour bleeds to death. Now iudge, whether this point (For vs) hath not deriued a neere application of this▪ Text to our owne consciences. Since then Christ did all this for thee and me, pray then with Medit. cap. 1. August. O D Ies; da cordi  t dederare,  qrere, qu∣rendo inuen, ienien do , amdo  redemp∣ta  rare. Lord giue me a heart to desire thee, desi∣ring to seeke thee, seeking to find thee, finding to loue thee, louing no more to offend thee. There are two maine parts of this Crucifixe yet to handle. I must onely name them; being sorry that it is still my hap to trouble you with prolixitie of speech. 6. The next is the Manner; An offering and Sacrifice. His whole life was an Offering, his death a Sacrifice. He gaue himselfe often for vs an Eucharisticall oblation, once an explator Sacrifice. In the former hee did for vs all that we should doe: in the latter hee suffered for vs all that we should suffer. 1. Pet. 2. 24. Who his owne selfe bare our sins in his owne  on the tree. Some of the Hebrewes haue affirmed, Paul. Tagius. cap. 4. that in the fire which consumed the le∣gall Sacrifices, there alwayes appeared the face of a Ly∣on. Which mysterie they thus resolue, that the Lyon of Iudah should one day giue himselfe for vs, a perfect ex∣piatory
Sacrifice. Thus Heb. 9. 26. Once in the end of the world, hath hee appeared to put away sinne by the sacrifice of him∣selfe. 7. The last poynt is the Effect; Of a sweet smelling sa∣uour. Here is the fruit and efficacie of all. Neuer was the Lord pleased with sinfull man till now. Were he neuer so angry, here is a pacification, a sweete sauour. If the whole world were quintessenced into one perume, it could not yeeld so fragrant a smell. We are all of our selues putida & putrida cadvera; dead and stinking car∣kases, the pure nostrels of the most holy cannot endure vs: behold the perume that sweetens vs, the redeem∣ing bloud of the Lord Iesus. This so filles him with a delightfull sent, that hee will not smell our noisome wickednesse. Let me leaue you with this comfort in your bosomes. How vnsavoury soever our owne sin haue made vs, yet if our hand of faith lay hold on this Saviours censor, God will sent none of our corruptions; but we shall smell sweetely in his nostrels. Bed for all. O deare Iesus, Mori deb, & tusolvis:  peccavius, & tu uis. Opus sine exemplo gratia sine merito, chas sine do. We should die, & thou payest it, we haue offended, & thou art punished. A mercie without example, a favour with∣out merite, a loue without measure. Therefore I con∣clude my Sermon, as we all shut vp our prayers, with this one clause; Through our Lord Iesus Christ. O Father of mercie accept our Sa∣crifice, of Prayer and Prayse, for his Sacrifice of payne and merite; e∣ven for our Lord Iesus Christ his sake. To whom with the Father & blessed Spirit be all glo∣ry for ever. Amen.
THE GOOD POLITICIAN DIRECTED. MATTH. 10. 16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmelesse as Doues. OV of euery creature (simply considered) there is some good to bee learned. The di∣uine Du Bartas. 1. day. 1. Week. fol. 6. Poet sweetly. The World's a Schoole, where in a generall sirie, God alwayes reads dumbe lctures of his glorie. It is a three leau'd booke, Heauen, Earth, and Sea: and euery leafe of this booke, euery line of euery leafe, eue∣ry creature in this vniuerse, can read to man, for whom they were made, a Diuinitie lecture. In a speaking si∣lence they preach to vs that Deitie, which made both them and vs, and them for vs. Seculm Speculum: the world is a glasse, wherein wee may behold our Crea∣tors Maiestie. From the highest Angell to the lowest worme, all instruct vs somewhat. For one and the same almightie hand, that made the Angels in heauen, made also the wormes on earth. Aug. Soliloq. cap. 9. Non superior in illis, non in∣ferior in istis. Besides this generall lecture, they haue all their par∣ticular schoole. Prou. 6. 7. Salomon sends vs to the At to learne Prouidence. Esa. 1. 3. Esay to the Oxe, to learne thankfulnesse Many beasts doe excell Man in many naturall things.
Nos aper auditu praecellit, aanea tactu, Vultur odoratu, Lynx visu, simia gustu. The Bore excels vs in hearing, the spider in touching, the Vulture in smelling, the Lynx in seeing, the Ape in tasting. Some haue obserued, that the art of curing the eyes was first taken from the Swallowes. The E∣gles haue taught vs architecture: we receiued the light of Phlebotomie from the Hippopotamas. The Egyp∣tian bird Ibis first gaue to Physicians knowledge, how to vse the Glister. The Spider taught vs to Weaue. Here the Serpent instructs vs in Policie, the Doue in simplicitie. Now we are falne among Serpents, stinging serpents, enemies to man: can wee fetch away any good from them? Yes, those very venemous and malicious crea∣tures shall afford vs Documenta, not Nocumenta: they shall teach vs, not touch vs. I may say of them, as it is sayd of the Iewes. Hostes sunt in cordibus, suffragatores in codicibus. They are our enemies in their hearts, our friends in their bookes. The malice of Serpents is mor∣tall, their vse shall be vitall. So it may, so it shall, if our sobrietie keepe the allowed compasse. For our imitati∣on is limited & qualified. We must not be in all points like Serpents, nor in all respects like Doues; but in some, but in this; Be ye wise as serpents, harmelesse as doues. Per∣haps other vses might be accommodated. As the Ser∣pent might teach vs how with wisedome to dwell be∣low on the earth: and the Doue with wings of inno∣cence to flie vp to heauen aboue. We may in earthly matters keepe a serpentine and winding motion, but to heauen with the Doue we must haue a strait course. But I confine my selfe to the pith of the Text, and our Sa∣uiours meaning. Be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doues. The words may (not vnfitly) be distinguished in∣to a Perhibition. Cohibition:
as it were the Raines, and the Curbe. The Perhibition, allowance, or Raines; Be wise as serpents. The Cohibi∣tion, correctiue, restraint, or Curbe; Be harmelesse as Doues. They must goe hand in hand without disiunction. Vnited they are commodious, parted dangerous. There is a necessitie of their vnion to our peace: diuide them, and you loose your selues. Witte without innocence will offend others: Innocence without witte will not defend our selues. Prudentia sine simplicitate malitia: sim∣plicitas sine prudentia stultitia. Witte without innocence is wickednesse: innocence without witte is foolishnes. Whosoeuer hath the one and wants the other, must needs be either guiltie of follie, or of dishonestie. Least we be too craftie, and circumuent others, let vs keepe the innocencie of the Doue: least we be too simple, and others circumuent vs, let vs keepe the wisedome of the Serpent. Let vs first see from the Serpent, how we should bee wise: and then goe to the Doue for innocence. Sixe principall Lessons of Wisedome the Serpent may teach vs. 1. Their first policie is by all possible meanes to de∣fend their head. If they must encounter with danger, they expose their whole body to it; but howsoeuer they will safeguard their head. They write of them, that though all a serpents body be mangled, vnlesse his head be cut off, (which he cunningly hides) by a kind of at∣tractiue power and vigor one part will come to ano∣ther againe. This is to vs a singular document of Wisedome, to looke well to our Head. Christ is our Head; and the sinewes and nerues that knitte vs to him, is our Faith and Hope: let vs preserue these indanted, indamaged. We fight against an enemie, that seekes especially to wound vs there. He strikes indeed at euery place: he
hath, sayth Ierome, noina mille, mille nocendi artes: there∣fore Paul chargeth vs to Ephe. 6. 11. Put on the whole armour of God, that we may be able to stand against all the wles of the Deuill: but especially the head. Ver. 16. 17. Aboue all take the shield of Faith, and the Helmet of saluation: saue the Head. Pro∣tect all parts, if it be possle: let not oppression wound thee in the hand, nor blasphemie in the tongue, nor wantonnes in the eye, nor couetousnesse in the heart: but howsoeuer shield thy head: loose not thy hope of saluation, thy faith in Iesus Christ. Homo qui habet se, habet totum inse; said the Philoso∣pher. He that hath himselfe, hath all in himselfe. But ille habet se, qui habet Christum, & ille habet Christum, qui habet fidem. He hath himselfe that hath Christ, and he hath Christ that hath faith. Whatsoeuer you loose, loose not this: though you loose your loues, though you loose your liues▪ keepe the faith. Iob. 13. 15. I will trust in thee, though thou kill me, saith Iob. 2. Tim. 4. 7. I haue kept the faith, saith Paul; though Gal. 6. 17. I beare in my bodie the markes of the Lord Iesus. If insati∣ate death be let alone, to cutte vs into pieces with the sword, to grind vs into the mawes of beastes, to burne vs in the fire to ashes: yet so long as our head Christ is safe, he hath the Serpents attractiue power to draw vs to him. Ioh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they whom thou hast giuen me, be with me where I am. The more we are cut off, the more we are vnited: death, whiles it striues to take vs from him, sends vs to him. Keepe faith in the Head. With what mind soeuer Seneca wrote it, I know to good vse I may speake it. Malo mihi successum deesse, quam-fidem. I rather want successe, then faith. Fidem qui perdidit, nil habet vltra quod perdat. He that hath lost his faith, hath nothing els to loose. But it is the Lord, that preserues the head. Psal. 140. 7. O God the strength of my saluation: thou hast co∣uered my ead in the day of battell. 2. The next Policie in Serpents is to stop their ares against the noyse of the charmers. This is one of the
similitudes which the Psalmist giues betweene the wic∣ked and Serpents. Psal. 58. 4. 5. Their poison is like the poison of a Ser∣pent: they are like the deafe adder that stoppeth hor are. Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so Wisely. This charming as they write, was in∣vented in the Easterne countreyes, where they were pesterd with abundance of serpents. Which musicke the Serpent hearing, wisely distrusting his owne strength▪ thinkes it the surest course to stop his ares. This he doth by couching one are close to the ground and covering the other with his voluminous tayle. The incantations of this world are as often sung to vs, as those charmes to the Serpents: but we are not so wise as Serpents to avoyd them. Sometimes a Siren sings vs the charmes of lust; and thus a weake woman overcomes him that overcame the strong Lyon. Lenam non potuit, potuit superare Leaenam. Quem fera non valuit vincere, vicit hera. Sayes the Epigrammatist. Prou. 7-22- He goeth after her straight way: though ver. 27- her house the way to hell, going downe to the chambers of death. Sometimes Satan comes to vs like a gold-finch, and whistles vs a note of vsurie, to the tune of ten in the hundred; we are caught presently, and fall a dancing after his pipe. Sometimes like Alecto, he charmes vs a Madrigall of revenge for private wrongs: instantly we are caught with malice, destruction sits in our lookes. Not seldome hee comes to a man with a drunken caroll (lay thy peny to mine, and we will to the wine) he is taken suddenly; he runs to it though he reeles from it. He sings the slothfull a Dormi securè and hee will sleepe, though his 2. Pet. 2. 3. damnation sleepeth not. Yea there are not wanting, that let him sing a song of blasphemie, they will sweare with him. Let him be∣gin to raile, they will libell with him. Let his incan∣tation bee treason, and they will answere him in gun∣powder. Yea let him charme with a Charme, a
witlesse, senceles sorcerie; and if a tooth akes, or a hog grones, they will admit it, admire it. Of such follie the very serpents shall condemne vs. But as open ar'd as men are to these incantations of the Deuill and sinne; let the musicall bells of Aaron be rung, the sweet songs of Sion sung, they will not listen: they will not be charmed, with all our cunning. So that wee shall be faint to send them to the Iudgment seate of God, with this scrole on their forheads; Nolue∣runt incantari: Lord, wee haue done our best; but this people would not be charmed. 3. Their third Policie. They flie mens societie, as knowne enemies; and rather chuse a wildernes; see∣king peace among bryers and thornes. And may they not herein teach vs, with Moses, Hebr. 11. 25. rather to chuse afflicti∣on in a wildernes with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasure of sin for a season. Much hath bin, and may be said, to lessen mens dotage to the world; and yet one word I must adde; Non quia vos nostra sperem prece posse mo∣veri. Did euer any of you know what the peace of consci∣ence, and ioy of the holy Ghost is? whiles that comfort and iubilation dwelt in your heart, I aske you how the world stood in your sight? Stood it not like a defor∣med witch, deuils sucking on her breasts; a shoale of vgly sinnes sitting like screechowles on her head; bloud and massacres besmearing her face; lies, blas∣phemies, periuries waiting at her backe; extortion and oppression hanging on her armes; wickednes and wretchednesse filling both her hands; the cryes, grones, and imprecations of widowes and orphans sounding in her eares; heauen thundring vengance on her head; and the enlarged gates of the infernall pitte yawning to entertaine her. Is this your Paramour, O ye worldlings? Is this the beautie you hazard a soule to get? O munde immunde;
euill fauoured world, that thou shouldst haue so many louers! August. Ecceruinosus est mundus, & si amatur: quidsi perfectus esset? Quid forosus faceret, quùm de∣formis sic adoratur? If the world beeing ruinous so pleaseth men, what would it doe if it were sound and perfect? If it were faire and beauteous how would wee dote on it, that thus loue it deformed? But how rare a man is hee, Ambr. in Psal. Qui nihil habet commune cum seculo! that hath no communion with this world! That retires himselfe, like the Serpent; and doth not intricate his mind in these worldly snares! who does not watch with enuie, nor trauell with auarice, nor clime with ambition, nor sleepe with lust vnder his pillow▪ But for all this Vincet amor mundi: money and wealth must be had, though men refuse no way on the left hand to get it. We may charge them Num∣mos propter Deum expendere, to lay out their wealth for Gods sake: but they will Deum propter nummos colere, worship God for their wealths sake. We say let the world waite vpon religion: they say, let re∣ligion waite vpon the world. You talke of heauen & a kingdome; but Tutius h clum, quod bruis ca tenet. That heauen is surest, thinke they, that lies in their coffers. As those two Gyants bound Mars in chaines, and then sacrificed to him: so men first coffer vp their wealth, & then worship it. Or if they suffer it to passe their locke & key, yet they bind it in strong chains and charmes of vsurie to a plentifull returne. Enough is a language they will neuer learne, till they come to hell: where their bodies shall haue enough earth, their soules enough fire. There are foure aduerbs of quantitie: Parum, Nihil, Nimis, Satis. Litle, no∣thing, Two much, Enough. The last that is the best is seldome found. The poore haue Litle: the beggar nothing: the rich two much: but Cui satis? who hath
Enough? Though they haue too much, all is too little; nothing is enough. Quid satis est▪ si Roma parum? What is enough, if all Rome bee too little; sayd the Lucan. Poet. But the world it selfe could not bee enough to such. Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi. The couetous man may habere quod voluit, nunquam quod vult, hee may en∣ioy what hee desired, neuer what hee desireth: for his desires are infinite. So their abundance, which God gaue them to helpe others out of distresse▪ plungeth themselues into destruction: as Pharaohs Chariot drew his master into the sea. In the Massilian sea, sayth, Ber∣nard, scarce one ship of foure is cast away: but in the sea of this world scarce one soule of foure escapes. 4. Their next Policie. When they swimme, though their bodies bee plunged downe, yet they still keepe their head aboue the water. And this lesson of their wisdome I would direct to the Riotous, as I did the former to the Couetous. Which vitious af∣fections, though in themselues opposite: (for the co∣vetous thinke Prodigum Prodigium, the Spender a won∣der: and the prodigall thinke Parcum Porcum, the nig∣gard a hogge) yet either of them both may light his candle at the lampe of the Serpents wisedome: and learne a vertue they haue not. Though you swimme in a full sea of delights, yet bee sure to keepe your heads vp for feare of drow∣ning. It is naturall to most sensite creares to beare vp their heads aboue the flouds: yet in the streame of pleasures foolish man commonly sinkes. If I had au∣thoritie, I would here bid Gluttonie & Drunkennesse stand forth; & heare themselues condemned by a Ser∣pent. If the belly haue any  let it heares & not suffer the head of the body ch  the head of the soule Reason, to be drowned in a puddl of riot. Multafercu∣la, multos . Many dishes many diseases. Gluttony was euer a friend to . But for the throas
indulgence. Paracelsus for all his Mercurie had dyed a beggar. Intemperance lies most commonly sicke on a downe bedde; not on a padde of straw. Ay me's, and grones are soonest heard in rich mens houses. Gowtes Pleurisies, dropsies, feuers, surfets, are but the conse∣quents of epicurisme. Qu nisi diuitibus nequeunt contingre . Horat. lib. . Satyr. 4. A Diuine Poet morrally. We seeme ambitious, Gods whole worke t' vndo. Of nothing he made vs, and we striue two, To bring our selues to nothing backe: and we Doe what we can, to do't as soone as he. We complaine of the shortnes of our liues, yet take the course to make them shorter. Neither is the corporall head onely thus intoxicate, and the senses drowned in these deluges of ryot: but Reason the head of the Soule, and Grace the head of Reason is ouer whelmed. Rarum  ine vitio  convitio. Reuellers and Reuilers are wonted compani∣ons. When the belly is made a Crassus, the tongue is turned into a Cesar, and taxeth all the world. Great feasts are not without great danger. They serue not to suff ce nature, but to nourish corruption. Luk. 2. Ioseph and Mary went vp to Ierusalem to the feast with Iesus: a Luk. 2. 4. but there they lost Iesus. Twelue yeares they could keepe him, but at a feast they lost him. So easily is Christ lost at a feast. And it is remarkable there. ver. 46. that in the Temple they found him againe. Iesus Christ is often lost at a banket: but he is euer found in the tem∣ple Ver. 12. Iude speakes of some, that feast without feare. They suspect not the losse of Christ at a banket. But Iob. 1, 5. Iob feared his children at a feast. It may be my sonnes haue sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Let vs suspect these riotous meetings; lest wee doe not on∣ly swimme, but sinke. Let vs be like the Deere, who are euer most fearefull at their best feeding. d Let vs
walke hnestly as i the dy: not in riting and drunkennesse, d Rom. 13. 13. that were to feast the world: not in chambering and wan∣tesse, that were t feast the flesh: not in strife and en∣uying, that were to feast the deuill. I know therebe some, that care not what be sayd against eating, so you meddle not with their drinke. Who cry ou like that German, at a great Tournea∣ment at Court, when al the specors were pleased: Va∣leant Ldi : farewell that sport, where there is no drinking. I will say no more to them; but that the Serpents hed keepes the vpper hand of the waters, but dnke gts the vpper hand of their heads. How  is this: Sobrij serpentes,  homines! Sober serpents, and drunken men. The Serpent is here brought to tch v wisedome: and to bee sober, is to be wise. The Philosophr so deriues wisedome in his Ethick's.  st quasi . Or as another, quia . 5. The fift instance of their wisedo propounded to our imitation, is vigilancie. They eepe litle: and then last, when they suspect the  of danger. A prdent wo ou following: Eph. 5. 15. See that ye walke cir∣cspectly; not  foles, but as wise Eccl. 2. 14. The wisemans eyes are in his head. Carry your eyes in your own heads; no. Like those  in a boxe. Nor, lik a  Prince, that is not suffered to see but through  spectes. Be watchfl, saith our Siour: yo  not wh houre your master will come. 1. Pet. 5. 8. B , b vigilnt: because your aduer∣say the Deuil, a a roaring Lyon walketh about, seeking whom he ay deuoure. Thse are two mine motiues to watchfullnes. First our Landlord is ready to come for his rent. Secondly our enemy is ready to assault ou fort. And let me adde; the Ten we dwell in is so weake and ruinous, that it is  readie to drop downe about our eares. Hee that dwell in a rotten  house, dares
scarce sleepe in a tempestuous night. Our bodies are earthly decayed, or at least decaying Tabernacles: eue∣rie little disease like a storme, totters vs. They were indeed at first strong cities: but we then by sinne made them forts of rebells. Whereupon our oended Liege sent his Sariant death, to arrest vs of high treason. And though for his mercies sake in Christ he pardoned our sinnes, yet he suffers vs no more to haue such strong houses: but lets vs dwell in thack'd cottages▪ paper walles, mortall bodies. Haue wee not then cause to watch; least our house, whose Iob. 4. 19. foundation is in the dust, fall; and Math. 7. 7. the fall thereof be great? Shall wee still continue sine etu, perhaps sine motu dormitantes? It is a fashion in the world to let Leases for three liues: as the Diuine Poet sweet∣ly. So short is life, that euerie Tenant striues, In a torne house or field to haue three liues. But God lets none for more then one life: and this expired, there is no hope to renew the lease. He suffers a man sometimes to dwell in his Tnement Psal. 90. 10. three∣scre and ten yeeres; sometimes fourescore: till the house be ready to drop downe, like mellow fruite. But he secures none for a moneth, for a moment. Other far∣mers know the date of their leases, and expiration of the yeares: man is meerely a Tenant at will; and is thrust often sedibus adibus, at lesse then an houres war∣ning. We haue then cause to watch. Cant. 5. 2. I sleepe, but mine heart waketh: sayth the Church. If temptation doe take vs napping, yet let our hearts wake. Mark. 14. 37. Simon, Dormis? Sleepst thou, eter? Indeed there is a time for all things: and sometimes sleepe and rest is Dabile and Laudabile; necessary and profitable. But now Simon, when thy Lord is ready to be giuen vp into the hands of his enemies, when the houre and power of dark∣nesse
is instant, when the great worke of saluation is to be wrought; Simon sleepest thou? Thou that hast promi∣sed to suffer with me, canst thou not watch with me? Quomodo morieris, qui spctare & expectare nonpotes? Be∣loued, let vs all watch; that Iesus, who was then when Peter slept, ready to suffer: is now, though we all sleepe, ready to iudge quicke and dead. 6. The last generall point of Wisedome we will learne from them, is this. As they once a yeare slippe off their old coate, and renew themselues: so let vs cast off the old man, and Iude. ver. 23. the garment spotted of the flesh (more speck led with lusts then the skin of any Serpent) and Eph. 4. 24. be renewed in our mind, to serue God in the holynesse of truth. The Grecians haue a fabulous reason of this renoua∣tion of serpents. Once mankind stroue earnestly with the Gods by supplication, for Perpetuall youth. It was granted; and the rich trsure being lapped vp, was layd vpon an Asse to be carried among men. The silly beast being sore thirstie came to a fountaine to drinke: the keeper of this fountaine was a Serpent; who would not suffer the Asse to drinke, vnles hee would giue him his burden. The Asse, both ready to faint for thirst, and willing to be lighted of his lode, condiscended. Hereby the Serpent got from man per∣petuall youth. Indeed the serpent changeth his age for youth, and man his youth for age. And the Asse for his punishment, is more tormented with thirst then any other beast. The serpent may thus get the start of a man for this world; but when he dyes, he dies for eer; life neuer returnes. But wee shall put off, not the skinne, but this mortall body: and so be clothed with im∣ortalitie and eternall life aboue: we shall be young a∣gaine in heauen. 2. Cor. 5. Only death adds t'our strength: nor are we growne: In stature to be men, till we are none.
Let this answer the Poet. Anguibus exuitur tenui cum pelle vetustas: Cur nos angust a conditione suus? Tibullus. Why do serpents repaire themselues, and man decay? The answere is easie and comfortable when there shall be new heauens and new earth, wee shall haue new bodies. They haue here new bodies, and we old bo∣dies: but there we shall haue new bodies when they are no bodies. But to our purpose. They write that the Serpent gets him to some narrow passage, as betweene two stickes, & so slips off his skinne. And this is called Sp∣lium serpentis, or vrnatio serpentis. If wee would cast off our old coate, which is corrupt according to deceitfull lusts, wee must passe through a Math. 7. 13. narrow gate; as it were two trees; faith and repentance. Hea∣uen is called Reu. 21. new Ierusalem: you cannot creepe through those new dores with your old sinnes on your backes. Be no Gibeonites: God will not bee cossened with your old Garments. Put them off, sayth Paul: put them off, and cast them away: they are not worthy mending. None are made of Satans slaues, Gods sonnes; but they must put off their old liuerie, which they wore in the Deuils seruice; the cogni∣sance of Mammon. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Let him that is in Christ be a new creature. Old things are passed away: behold, all things are become new. I saw, sayth S. Iohn, Nouum Coe∣lum &c. a new heauen, and new earth. For whom proui∣ded? for new creatures. Enuie this ye worldlings, but striue not in your lo∣wer pompes to equall it. Could you change robes with Salomon. and dominions with Alexander, you could not match it. But quake at your doome, ye wicked . 3. 33. Top is orded of old. Old hell for old sinners. But which way might a man turne his eyes to behold this Re∣nouation. Nil i vid, nil nui audio. The hand is old,
it extorts: the tongue is olde, it sweares. Our vsuries are still on foote to hunt the poore: our gluttonies looke not leaner: our drunkennesse is thirstie still: our securitie is not waked. Old Idoles are in our inward and better temples. Our iniquities are so old and ripe; that they are not only alb ad messem, white to the har∣uest: but euen sicca ad ignem, dry for the fire. Not onely Serpents, but diuers other creatures haue their turnes of renewing. The Eagle reneweth her bill, sayth the Prophet: our Grand-mother earth becomes new: and to all her vegetatiue children the Spring giues a renouation. Onely we her vngracious Sons remaine old still. But how shall we expect hereafter new glori∣fied bodies, vnlesse wee will haue here new sanctified soules? Gal. 6. 15. 16 In Christ Iesus neither Circumcision auaileth any thig, nor ; but a new creature. And as ma∣ny as wlke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mer∣cie, and vpon the Israell of God. I haue taught you, according to my poore meditati∣ons, some Wisedo from the Serpent. Augustine giues 6. or 7. other instances, worthy your obseruation, and imitation; which I must pesse ouer in silence. The  chalengeth some piece of my discourse: for I dare not giue you the Raynes, and let you goe without the Curbe. And yet I shall hold you a little longer from it: for as I haue shewed you some good in Serpents, that you may follow it: so I must shew you some euill in them, that you may eschew it. The vicious and ob∣noxious affections of Serpents, haue more followers then their vertues. These instances are of the same num∣ber with the former. 1. The Serpent, though creeping on the dust, hath a loftie spirit; reaching not onely at men, but euen at the birds of the aire. And here hee is the Ambitious mans embleme. He was bred out of the dust, yet he catcheth a Lordships and honours: ransackes the Citie, forred∣ges
th Countrey, scowres it through the Church; but his arrand is to the Court. He is the maggot of pride, Stultus in so∣lio, Simia in tecto. begot out of corruption: and lookes in an office, as the Ape did when hee had got on the robes of a Se∣nator. 2. Their flatterie or trecherie: they embrace, whiles they sting. They lie in  greene grasse, and vnder sweet flowers, that they may wound the suspectlesse passenger. Here I will couple the Serpent with the Flat∣terer; a humane beast, and of the two the more dan∣gerous. And that fitly; for they write of a Serpent, whose sting hath such force, that it makes a man die laughing. So the flaerer tickles a man to death. There∣fore his teares are called Crocodile lacrimae; the Croco∣diles teares. When h weeps, he wounds. Euery frowne he makes, giues his Patron a vomite: and euery candle of commendation a purge. His Church is the Kitchin, his tongue is his Cater; his yong Lord his God; whom at once he worships, and worreys. When he hath got∣ten a lease, he doth no longer feare his master: nay more, he feares not God. 3. Their ingratitude; they kill those that nourished them. And here I ranke with Serpents those prodigies of nature, vnthankfull persons. Seneca sayes they are Se. epist. 48. worse. Venenum qud serpentes in alienam pernicim profe∣runt, fine s continent. No ita vitium ingritudinis conti∣netur. The poyson which a Serpent casts out to the danger of another, he retaines without his owne. But the vice of ingratitude cannot be so smoothered. Let vs hate this sinne, not onely for others sake, but most for our owne. 4. Their voracitie; they kill more then they can eate. And here they would be commended to the Ingrossers: who hoord more then they can spend, that the poore might stue for lacke of bread. Such a man (if he be not  a Serpent, a Deuill then man) makes his
Almanacke his Bible: if it prognosticate raine on Swi∣this day, he loues and beleeues it beyond the Scrip∣ture. Nothing in the whole Bible pleaseth him, but the storie of Pharaohs dreame; where the seauen leane Kine did eate vp the seauen fat ones. Hee could wish that dreame to be true euery yeare; so hee might haue graine enough to sell. He cryes out in his heart for a deare yeare, and yet he is neuer without a deare yeare in his belly. Salomon sayes, the people shall curse him: and I am sure God will not blesse him: but hee feares nei∣ther of these so much as a cheape yeare. 5. Their hostilitie and murderous minds: they de∣stroy all, to multiplie their owne kind. And for this I wil bring the depopulator to shake hands with serpents. For he cannot abide neighbours. If any man dwels in the Towne besides himselfe, how should he doe for el∣bow roome? There are too many of these Serpents in England: I would they were all exild to the wildernes; where they might haue roome enough, and none to trouble them, except of their owne generation, Ser∣pents. They complaine eagerly against our negligence in discouering new parts of the world: but their mea∣ning is to rid this land of Inhabitants. They haue done their best, or rather their worst: when as in my memo∣rie from one towne in one day were driuen out aboue threescore soules: harbourlesse, succourlesse, exposd to the bleake ayre and vnmercifull world: besides those that could prouide for themselues. But the Lord of hea∣uen sees this: the clamours of many poore debters in the Dungeon, of many poore labourers in the field, of many poore neighbours crying and dying in the streetes, haue entred the ares of the Lord of hoasts, & he will iudge it. Psal. 10. 14. Thou hast seene it, for thou beholdest mis∣chiefe and spite, to requite it: the poore committeth himselfe vnto thee, thou art the helper of the fherlesse. 6. Lastly, their enitie against Man, whom they
should reuerence▪ which we sorely found, and cannot but thinke of, quotis  picati pi: as often as we remember that ieapple. Aelias and Ple report, that when a serpent hath killed a man, he can neuer more couer himselfe in the earth: but wan∣ders vp and downe like a forlorne thing: the earth disdaining to receiue into her bowels a man murthe∣rer. The male doth not acknowledge the ale, nor the female the male, that hath done such a deed. Since therefore they rebell against Man whom they should honour let me yoke with them Traytours, Seminaries, and Renegates, that refuse allegiance to their Lieges & Soalgnes. Will they say▪  Prince may loose Ius regni, the right of his kingdome, per  regnandi, by raigning with iniustice & ? and so they are absolued of their obedience? But how haps it that the Scripture neuer knew this distinction? Saul though guiltie of all sinnes against the first Table yet exsolo  is chctere, might not bee deposed: but Dauid cals him Christum Do, the Lords Annoin∣ted. If the Prince be an offender, must they punish? Who gaue them that authoritie? No cit  in , quòd Deum expect . It is enogh for him, that he looke for God to bee his Iudge. O but when the Popes excommunication thundrs, it is no sinne to de∣crowne Kings. So super sttiously they follow the Pope, that they forsake Christ; and will not giue Csar his due. They are the fire brands and bustuaries of King∣domes; Serpents hidden in Ladies and Gentlewomens chambers: in a word▪ long spoones for traytors to feed with the Deuill. You see also now Quid . There is poyson in Ser∣pents now told you, leaue that: there is Wisedome to be learned from Serpents before shewed you, studie that. Euery vice you nourish, is a venemous stinging serpent in your owne bosomes. If you will haue hope of hea∣uen,
expell those Serpents. I haue read of a contention betweene Scotland and Ireland, about a little Iland: either chalenging it theirs. It was put to the decision of a French-man: who caused to be put into the Iland li∣uing Serpents. Arbitrating it thus; that if those Serpents liued and prospered there, the ground was Scotlands: if they died, Irelands. If those serpentine sinnes, lusts, and lewdnes, liue d thriue in your hearts, Satan will chalenge you for his dominion. If they perish and die through mortification, and by reason of the pure aire of Gods holy Spirit in you, the Lord seales you vp for his owne inheritance. I haue giuen you the Raines at large: let me giue but one pull at the Curbe, and you shall goe. The Cohibi∣tion is, Be harmelesse as Doues. In Doues there be some things to be eschewed, many things to be commēded: one thing to be followed. The Doue is a timorous and faint hearted creature. Hos. 7. 8. Ephr is like a silly Doue, with∣out heart. Be not ye so. In Doues there are many things commendable; but I will but name them, regarding the limits of both my Text and Time. 1. Beautie▪ By that name Christ prayseth the beauty of his Spouse. Thou art fayre my Le, my Doue, &c. Cant. 4. 1. Thou ast Doues  within thy lkes. And the Church prayseth her Sauiour. Cant. 5. 12. and 1. 5. His eyes are as the eyes of Doues by the riuers of water, washed with milke, d fitly set; as a precious stone in the foile of a Ring. A white doue is a pleasing sight, but not like a white soule. 2. Chastitie. Nescit aduerij flaam inteerata Co∣lumba. The Doue knowes not the luxurious pollution of an adulterate bed. Who euer saw Doue sicke of that lustfull disease. Happie bodie that hath such continen∣cie: and blessed soule which shall be 2. Cor. 11. 2. presented a pure virgin to Iesus Christ. Reu. 14. 4. They are virgines; and follow the Lambe whether seuer he goeth. 3. Fruitfulnesse. Most moneths in the yeare they
bring forth young. The faithfull are in this respect Doues: for faith is euer pregnant of good workes, tra∣uels with them, and on all occasions brings them forth. 4. Amitie. They loue their owne mates; not chan∣ging till death giue one of them a bill of diuorce. Gmit urtur: the turtle groanes when hee hath lost his mate. Nature teacheth them, what Reason aboue nature, and Grace aboue Reason, teacheth vs; to reioyce with the wiues of our youth. 5. Vnitie. They liue, feed, flie by companies. Many of them can agree quietly in one house. Euen teaching vs, Psal. 133. 1. how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell toge∣ther in vnitie. That as we haue Ephe. 4. 4. one hop, so to haue Act. 4. 32. one heart. Therefore the holy Ghost came downe Math. 3. 16. in the likenesse of a Doue, of all birds: and it was the Gen. 8. 9. Doue that would not leaue Noahs Arke. But these are but circumstances; my Cnter is their Innocence. Bern. in die Purific. Columba simplex est animal, felle caret, rostro non ldit. Other fowles haue their talons and beakes, whereby they gripe and deuoure, like vsurers and op∣pressors in a Common-wealth. The Doue hath no such weapon to vse, no such heart to vse it. They write that she hath no gall; and so free from the bitternesse of an∣ger. Talem Columbam audiimus, non talem hominem. We haue heard of such a Doue, not of such a Man. Who can say, he hath innocent hands, and a simple heart? Indeed none perfectly in Gods sight: yet some haue had, and may haue this in part, by the witnesse of their owne consciences. Samuel could chalenge the Is∣raelites to accuse him; 1. Sam. 12. 3. Whose xe haue I taken? Whom haue I defrauded? Of whose hd hae I receiued any bribe? And Iob sweetly; My heart shall not condemne me for my dayes. Iob 31. 21. &c. If I haue lift vp my hand against the fatherles let it be broken. If I reioyced at the destruction of him that hated me. (For that is true Innocence, sayth Augustine, quae nec
inimico nocet; that hurts not our verie enemie. If my land cry against me, or the furrowes thereof complaine. Let thistles grow in stead of wheat, and cockles in stead of barley. How few amongst vs dare thus plead! So Dauid. O Lord, thou knowest mine innocenc. O blessed testimonie. This is Munus aeneus, a wall of brasse about a man. Sen. In  sperre bonum, nisi inno∣cens, n potest. To hope for good in the middest of euils, no man can but the Innocent. He goes fearlesse of danger, though not secure. Impauidum ferient ruinae. Greg. in Mor Ne suspectus est pa, quod se non  fecisse. He can∣not looke to suffer that wrong, which he knowes hee hath not done. Innocence▪ sayth Chrysoft. is free in seruitude, safe in danger, ioyfull in bonds. Cum humi∣liatur, erigitur: um pugnat, vincit: cum occiditur, corona∣tur. When it is cast downe, it is raysed vp: when it fights, it conquers: when it is killed, it is crowned. This is that elesnes which must be ioyned with the Serpents Wisedome. So Paul to his Romans. Rom. 16. 19. I would hue you wise vnto that which is good, and simple concerning euill. This is an excellent mixture, sayth Gregor. In locum. Vt sim∣plicitatem  astia▪ serpentis instrueret: vt serpentis astut simplicitas colu emperaret. That the wise∣dome of the Serpent might instruct the simplicity of the Doue: that the Doues simplicitie might temper the Ser∣pents policie. So eda on the first of Iob. Iob is sayd to be simple and vpright: simple in innocencie, vpright in discreet equitie. Simplex quia alijs non ldit, rectus quia se ab alijs non corrumpi . Simple in that he did not hurt others, vpright in that he suffered not himselfe to be corrupted by others. Ierom. ad Rust. Non mulùm distat in vitio, aut decipere, aus decipiposse. There is small difference in that vice, which either deceiues. or may be deceiued. The one is weakenesse, the other wickednesse. This is that grace, to which the gates of heauen stand open, Innocence. But alas▪ where shall the robbers and
workers of violence appeare? What shall become of the vsurer? No creature in heauen or earth shall testifie his innocencie. But the sighes, cryes, and grones of vndone parents, of beggard widdowes and Orphanes shall witnesse the contrary. All his money, like Hempe seede, is sowed with cur∣ses: and euery obligation is written on earth with inke and bloud, and in hell with bloud and fire. What shall become of the Encloser of Commons? Who shall plead his innocence? Hedges, ditches, fields, Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura co∣lumbas. Iuven. sat. 2. and townes; the weeping of the poore, the very low∣ings of beastes shall witnesse against him. Where shall fraud, cosenage, racking of rents, iniu∣rie, periurie, mischiefe appeare? You may conceale your craft from the eyes of man; defraud the minister, beguile your neighbour, impouerish the Common-wealth, vnperceiued, vnpunished: but know that the Lord will not hold you innocent. I conclude; Make you the picture of Innocencie, and hang it in your houses: but especially draw it in the ta∣ble of your hearts. Let it bee a Virgin faire and louely, without any spot of wrong to blemish her beautie. Let her garments be white as snow, and yet not so white as her conscience. Let the teares of compassion drop from her eyes, and an Angell holding a bottle to catch them. Let her weepe, not so much for her owne af∣flictions, as for the wickednes of her afflicters. Let the wayes be milke where she sets her foote, and let not the earth complaine of her pressure. Let the Sun offer her his beames, the clouds their raine, the ground her fruits, euery creature his vertue. Let the poore blesse her: yea, let her very enemies be forced to prayse her. Let the world be sommoned to accuse her of wrong, and let none be found to witnesse it. Let peace lie in her lappe, and Integritie betweene her brests. Let re∣ligion kisse her lippes, and all Lawes reuerence her.
Patience possesse her heart, and humilitie sit in her eyes. Let all Christians make her the precedent of their liues; and studie the doctrine that her mouth teacheth. Let the Angels of heauen be her guardians; and the mercie of God a shield of defence vnto her. Let her tread vp∣on iniurie, and stampe the Deuill and violence vnder her feete. Let her greatest aduersaries, Oppression and Hypocrisie, flie from her presence. Let rapine, malice, extortion, depopulation, fraud, and wrong, be as farre remoued from her, as hell is from heauen. Let the hand of mercie dry her eyes, and wipe away her teares. Let those glorious spirits lift her vp to the place of rest. Let heauen adde to her beautie, Immortalitie set her in a throne of ioy, and Eternitie crowne her with glorie. Whether may all her children follow her, through the bloud and merites of that most innocent Lambe Iesus Christ. Amen. THE WAY HOME. MATTH. 2. 12. And being warned of God in a dreame, that they should not returne to Herod, they departed into their owne Countrey another way. WHen these Wise men had presented to Christ their gifts; (which indeed he first gaue them; for the earth is his, and the fulnesse thereof: yet) he rewardes them. They emptied their Treasures of Gold, Myrrhe, and Frankincense. and he filled the treasure of their hearts with heauenly graces.
For their Gold, he returnes them pure wisedome. They were called Wise men before; but their wisedome was infernall, downewards to hell, perhaps consulting with Deuils. Now he giues them Iam. 3. 17 Wisedome from aboue, pure and refined as gold. For their Frankincense, he purgeth them of their for∣mer superstitious Idolatries, from sacrificings to Sa∣tan: and instructs them to whom frankincense is due, and all other offerings of pietie; to their Creator and Sauiour. For their Myrrhe, he giues them Charitie, a true loue to him, that so truely loued them; and for his sake a loue to others. They made then a blessed ex∣change with Christ; when for Gold, Frankincense, Myrrhe, they receiued Wisedome, Devotion, Charitie. Now to testifie how highly the Lord fauoured them, he speakes to them in a dreame, and reveales his mind for the safety of his Sonne; that they should not returne to Herode. And to witnesse how truely they serued the Lord, they gaue obedience. They departed into their owne countrey another way. The whole may be distinguished into An Informing into a word Performing worke God giues the word, the Magi doe the worke. God doth informe, and they performe. Hee instructeth, and they execute. He giues direction, they obedience. His word, informance, instruction, direction is. He warn∣ed them in a dreame, that they should not returne to Herod. Their worke, performance, pliable obedience. They departed into their countrey another way. In the direction or monition Informing are consi∣derable these three circumstances: The Men, Wise men, Magicians. Maner, In a dreame. Matter, That they should not returne to Herod.
The Persons to whom God gaue this admonition, are expressely called Wise men. Some say, they were also Great men. If so, then was this reuelation made Potentibus. Petentibus. 1. To great men. It is the opinion of some, that these magi were kings: & that the Euangelist in calling them wise men, gaue them a more honourable title, then if hee had called them kings. So Ludolphus sayes, that Magus was in those dayes more noble then Magnus. But wee must know, who they are that thus stile them: Fryers & Iesuites, such as can by no meanes endure the superiority of Princes. That are Derisores hominum maxime potentū. Hereon some of them haue mooted strange problemes able to fill whole volumes. An Sacerdotes Regibus praefe∣rendi. Whether Priests be not aboue kings. But still the conclusion is against Princes. Some more moderate on that side haue confessed them not Reges, but Regulos, litle kings, petit Princes. Like those one & thirtie kings, that conspired against Iosu. 12. 24. Iosuah. Or those fifty that met at Troy. There is a kind of king in France, whom the common people call, Le Roy Dlynetot. But that these were but three in number, and kings in power, it may be painted in a popish window, is not in Catholickes bible, therefore needs not be in a Christians creed. 2. Howsoeuer these Magi were Potentes, or no, they were Petentes. Though they were great men, yet they humbly seeke the greatest of men, yea the great God, Iesus. And behold, gratiously the Lord offers himselfe to their search: according to his infallible promise, that he will be found out of al that seeke him Leo. in Loc. Dedit aspicien∣tibus intellectum, qui praestitit signum: & quod fecit intelligi, fecit inquiri. So he offers himselfe to all faithful searchers. But we cannot find him we seeke, vnles he find vs first: Luk. 19. 10. that came to seeke & to saue that which was lost. We seeke in vaine, vnles we seeke him: & wee seeke him in vaine,
vnles he find vs. Fulgent. Nos ad se quarendum suscitat-se ad inve∣niendum porrigit. He stirres vp our hearts to seeke him, & offers himselfe to be found. There was neuer faithfull hart sought the Lord Iesus, but he found him whom his Cant. 3. 1. soule loued. His patience might be excercised, his fidelity tried, his desires extended, by Gods hiding himselfe for a season. In the night of obscurity, security, ignorance, he may misse him. ver. 1. Though hee enquire among the deepest Philosophers, & honestest worldlings. ver. 2. he may not find him. But. ver. 3. the watchmen wil bring him to him: yea ver. 4. Christ himselfe wil appeare in gratious mercy. He may say for a while, as the Poet of Anchises. Quaregio Christum? quis habet locus? Illius ergo Venimus. Aenead. 6. Where is Christ! in what countrey may I find him? But the Lord Iesus will reueale himselfe: yea meete Luk. 15. him halfe way, as the mercifull father mette his vn∣thrifty Sonne when he returned. Wee shall conclude with ioy: Ioh. 1. 41. 45. We haue found the Messias: euen him of whom Moses in the Law, and the prophets did write, Iesus of Na∣zareth. You heare the Persons to whom this admonition was giuen: the next Circumstance is The Maner. In a dreame. I might here enter into a cloudy and confused dis∣course of Dreames, till I brought you all asleepe. But I loue not to fetch any bowtes, when there is a neerer way. Herein I may say with Augustine. Ad Evodium. ep. 100. & de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 20. I would to God I could discerne betweene dreames. Some are Naturall. Preternaturall. Supernaturall. 1. Naturall: and such arise either from Complexion Affection 1. From complexion or constitution. The Sanguine hath merry dreames: the melācholy sorrowful dreames
the Cholericke dreames of fire, and such turbulent thoughts: the Phlegmaticke, of raine, of flouds; and such warry obiects. And as these elementall humours do abound in a man, the dreames haue a stronger force, and more violent perturbation. 2. From Affection: what a man most desires, hee soonest dreames of. Omnia quae sensu voluuntur vota diurno, Claudian. in Praef. Lib. 3. Tempore nocturno reddit amica quies. Venator defessa toro dum membra reponit. Mens tamen ad siluas & sua lustra redit. Gaudet amans furto: permutat nauit a merces: Et vigil elapsas quarit aarus opes. So Augustine. Lib. de spiritu & anima. cap. 25. S nascitur ex studis praeteritis. what man desires in the day, he dreames in the night. The hunters mind is in the forrest, whiles his wearied bones are reposed on a soft bed. The souldiour dreames of batteries, assault, encounters: the Lawyer of quirkes and demurres: the citizen of trickes and frauds: the mu∣sician of crotchers, the Seminary of equivocations. The glutted Epicure dreames of dainty dishes and fat mor∣sells. The thirsty drunkard dreames of his licour, Esa. 29. 8. and behold he drinketh; but awake, his thirst is not satisfied. The vsurer dreames of his trunckes, & that he is telling his gold: and starts, as if euery rat were a thiefe breaking in vpon him. The timorous dreame that they are fly∣ing before ouertaking danger. The Lustfull imagines his desired embracings. The angry that he is fighting killing, spoyling. The secure, that they are wilstling, singing, dancing. The ielous man dreames of his wiues errors, when she lyes chastly by his side. The ambiti∣ous, that he is kissing the kings hand, and mounted in∣to the saddle of honour. The ouercharged mind dreames of his employment. Eccl. 5. 3. For a dreame commeth through the multitude of businesse.
2. Preternaturall: and these are either Ad Errorem Terrorem Whereof the first is wrought by Satan Permittente Deo God suffering it. The second by God mediante Diabolo, Satan being a mediate instrument. 1. There are Dreames for Error, wrought by the meere illusion of Satan: whom God once suffered to be a lying Spirit in the mouth of 400. Prophets. Hee working vpon mans affections, inclinations, and humours, causeth in them such dreames, as seduce them to wickednes, and induce them to wrechednes. They write of one Amphiaraus, an Argiue Soothsayer, that by a dreame hee was brought to the Theban voyage; where Hiatu terrae absorbetur; he was swallowed vp of the earth. Gen. 40. 16. So Pharaohs Baker was encouraged to hope∣full error by a dreame. So was that monstrous hoste of Midian ouerthrowne by a Dreame of a Iudg. 7. 13. Barley cake, that hit a Tent, and ouerwhelmed it: which was inter∣preted the Sword of Gideon. 2. For Terror. Iob sayes, that Deus terret per somnia, & per visiones horrorem incuiit. God strikes terror into the hearts of the wicked by Dreames. As a Malus genius is said to appeare to Brutus the night before his death: or as the face of Hector was presented to Andromache. Polydore virgil records the dreame of that bloudy tyrāt, Richard 3. that in a dreame the night before the battaile of Bosworth field, he thought all the deuils in hell were haling and tugging him in pieces: and all those whom he had murdered, crying & shricking out vengeance a∣gainst him. Though hee thinkes this was more then a dreame. Id credo non fuisse somnium, sed conscientiam seelerū He iudged it not so much a dreame, as the guiltie con∣science of his own wickednes. So to Robert Winter, one of the powder-traytors, in a dreame appeared the gastly figures and distracted visages of his cheefe friends and confederates in that treason; not vnlike the very same
maner, wherin they after stood on the pinnacles of the Parliament house. 3. Supernaturall; such as are sent by diuine inspira∣tion, and must haue a diuine interpretation, Such were the dreames of Pharaoh expounded by Ioseph: the dreames of Nebuchadnezzar declared by Daniel. Of these were two sortes. 1. Some were mysticall: such as those two kings dreames; and Pharaohs two officers: whose exposition is onely of God. So Gen. 40. 8. Ioseph answers; Are not interpre∣tations of the Lord? So Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel. Dan. 4. 18. Thou art able, for the spirit of the holy God is in thee. The Sorce∣rers and Astrologers dearly acknowledged their igno∣rance Dan. 2. 13. with their liues. Thus Pharaoh may dreame, but it is a Ioseph that must expound it. It is one thing to haue a representation obiected to the fantasie: another thing to haue an intellectuall light giuen to vnderstand it. 2. Others are demonstratiue: when the Lord not onely giues the dreame, but also withall the vnderstan∣ding of it. Such were Daniels dreames, & these Wisemens, & Iosephs in this chapter. Wherein was a Vision & Pro uision: a vision what to doe: a prouision that no harme might come to Iesus. These dreames were most specially incident to the new Testament: when God at the ve∣ry rising of the Sunne, began to expell the shadowes of darke my steries. Act. 2. 17. And it shall come to passe in the last dayes (saith God) I will powre out of my Spirit vpon all flesh: and your sons & your daughters shall prophecie, & your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dreame dreames. Now the Sunne is gotten vp into the midst of heauen the Gospel into the ful strength, these shadowes vanish: the more light, the lesse shadow. So that now to expect reuelation of things by dreames were to intreat God to lend vs a candle whiles wee haue the bright Sun. The superstitious Papists are sill full of these dreames: and find out more mysteries
in their sleepe, then they can well expound waking. The Abbot of Glastenbury, when Ethelwold was Monke there, dreamt of a tree, whose branches were al couered with Monks cowles: & on the highest bough one cowle that ouertop'd all the rest: which must needs be expoūded the future greatnes of this Ethelwold. But it is most admirable, how the Dominicke Friers make shift to expoūd the dreame of Dominickes mother; which she had when she was with child of him: that she had in her wombe a wolfe with a burning torch in his mouth. Say what they will, a wolfe is a wolfe still: & that order hath euer carried a burning torch to scorch their mo∣ther, the Church. But there is no dreame of theirs with out an interpretation, without a prediction. And if the euent answere not their foretelling, they expound it after the euent. If one of them chance to dreame of a greene garden, he goes presently and makes his will. Or if another dreame that he shakes a dead friend by the hand, he is ready to call to the Sexton for a graue; takes solemne leaue of the world, and sayes hee cannot liue. Beloued, God hath not grounded our fayth vpon dreames nor 2. Pet. 1. 16. cunningly deuised fables; but on the holy Gospell, written by his seruants in bookes, and by his spirit in the tables of our hearts. They that will beleeue dreames and Traditions aboue Gods sacred word, let them heare and feare their iudgement. 2. Thes. 2. 11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeue a lye. That they all might be dāned who beleeue not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes. Banish from your hearts; this superstitious follie, to repose any confidence expectant on dreames. But if you desire to make any vse of dreames, let it be this. Consider thy selfe in thy dreaming, to what inclination▪ thou art mostly carried: and so by thy thoughts in the night, thou shalt learne to know thy self
in the day. Be thy dreames lustfull? examine whether the addictions of thy heart run not after the byas of concupiscence. Be they turbulent, consider thy owne contentious disposition. Be they reuengefull, they point to thy malice. Runne they vpon gold and riches, they argue thy couetousnesse. Thus God may be said to teach a man by his dreames still; non quid erit, sed qualis est: not what shall be, but what he is. Not future euents, but present condition may be thus learned. Neither day nor night scapes a good man without some profite: the night teacheth him what he is, as the day what he should be. Therefore said a Philosopher, that all waking men are in one com∣mon world: but in sleepe euery man goes into a world by himselfe. For his dreames doe signifie to him those secret inclinations, to which hee thought himselfe a stranger, though they were home-dwellers in his heart. Euen those fancies are speaking images of a mans dis∣position. And as I haue heard of some that talke in their dreames, and then reueale those secrets, which awake they would not haue disclosed. So may thy dreames tell thee when thou wakest, what kind of man thou art. The hypocrite dreames of dissimulation: the proud woman of paint and colours: the theefe of robberie and booties▪ the Iesuite of treasons. Let them aske their very sleepe, quale sint; what manner of men they ar. For so lightly they answere temptations actually wa∣king, as their thoughts doe sleeping. Thus onely a man may make good vse of his dreames. Here let vs obserue, that God doth sometimes draw men to him suis ipsorum ; by their owne delights and studies. No doubt these Magi were well acquain∣ted with dreames: it being amongst Ethnickes and Pe∣ripatetickes a speciall obiect of diuination. Therefore there is a booke bearing the name of Aristotle; De diui∣ne pr somnium. Many ors these men had swal∣lowed
by dreames; now behold, in a dreame they shall receiue the truth. So God called them by a Starre, whose profession was to relie too much on the Starres. Chrysolog. hom. 6. in Math. Qua∣re per Stellam? vt per Christum ipsa materia erroris, fieret salutis occasio. Why by a Starre? that through Iesus Christ the very matter of their error might be made a meanes of their saluation. Per  ills vocat, qu familria illis con∣studo fecit. God cals them by those things, which cu∣stome had made familiar to them. They that are stung with Scorpions, must be cured by the oyle of Scorpi∣ons. Thus God allures men to him, as Fishermen , with such baites as may bee somewhat agble to them. Paul is occasioned by the Act. 17. 23. Al  the vnknow God, to make knowne the true God, the  Iesus. Doth Dauid loue the Sheepe-folds? he shall be a Shepheard still. Ps. 78. 71. From following the es great with yong, he brought him to feed Iacob his people, and Isrll his ∣ritance. Doth Peter loue fishing? he shall goe a fishing still, though for more noble creatures; to catch soule. Doe these Magicians loue Starres and Dreames, behold a Starre and a Dreame shall instruct them in the truth of God. Old Is takes occasion by the smell of his Sons garments, sauouring of the field, to pronounce a spiri∣tuall blessing. Gen. 27. 27. The smell of my Sonne is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed. Ierome notes of Amos, that he begins his Prophecie with roaring. Am. 1. 2. The Lord shall roare from Sion. Because he being a field-man, kept the woods, where hee was wonted to the roaring of Lyons. Iudaei signa quaerunt? Doe the Iewes seeke a signe.? Why Christ will there euen among them worke his Myracles. Doth Augustine loue eloquence? Ambrose shall catch him at a Sermon. Rom. 8. 28. All things shall worke to their good, that are good: Omnia, etiam peccata. All things, euen their very sinnes, sayth Augustin.  in his Essayes writes, that a libidinous gentleman sporting with a Courtezan in a house of sinne, chanced to aske
her name; which she sayd was Mary. Whereat he was stricken with such a remorse and reuerence, that he in∣stantly not onely cast off the Harlot, but amended his whole future life. Well-beloued, since this is Gods mercie, to allure vs to him by our owne delights, let vs yeeld our selues to be caught. What scope doth thy addiction leuell at, that is not sinfull, which Gods word doth not promise and afford? What delight can you aske, which the Sanctuarie giues not? Loue you hunting? learne here to hunt. Cant. 2. 15. the Foxes, the little Cubbes, those craftie sins sculking in your bosomes. Would you dance? let your hearts keepe the measures of Christian ioy; and leape, like Iohn the Baptist in Elizabeths wombe, at the salua∣tion of Iesus. Delight you in running? Paul sets you a race. 1. Cor. 9. 24. So runne that ye may obtaine. You shall haue good company. Did promiseth, that he Psal. 119. 32. will run the way of Gods commandements. Peter and Iohn will runne with you to Iesus. Loue you Musicke? Here are the Bels of Aaron still ringing; the treble of Psal. 101. 1. Mercie, and the tenor of Iudgement; Leui's Lute, and Dauids Harpe. There are no such songs as the songs of Sion. Would you be merry? Phil. 4. 4. Reioyce in the Lord alwayes; and againe I say reioyce. If euer you found ioy like this ioy; Rom. 14. 17. the peace of conscience, and ioy of the holy Ghost; backe againe to the world. Louest thou daintie cheare? here be the best cates, the body and bloud of thy Sauiour, the bread of life: no hunger after it. Wilt thou drinke much. Cant. 5. 1. Drinke my wine and my milke: drinke, yea drinke abun∣dantly, O Beloued. Bibe & : as the originall imports; drinke, and bee drunken with loues: pledge the health that Christ begun; euen asauing health to all na∣tions. Are you ambitious? there is no preferment like that to be had here, in the Court of the King of Kings. Dauid iudged it no little thing to bee Sonne in law to a King: but what is it then to bee a King? Desire you
stately buildings? Alas, the whole world is but a Cot∣tage, a poore transient Tabernacle, to the Ioh. 14. 2. Mansions promised by Christ. Lastly, are you couetous? Yet I need not aske that question, but take it as granted. Why then here is gold; more precious then that of A∣rabia, or of Hauilah: rust or theefe may distresse that; this is a treasure can neuer be lost. What should I say more? What can winne you? Which way soeuer your desires stands, God doth allure you. The best thinges in earth or in heauen are your baite. With these doth the Lord seeke you; not for any need that he hath of you, but for your owne saluation. When the fairest of all Beloueds doth thus wooe vs, let him winne vs: and espouse vs to himselfe in grace, that wee haue the ple∣nary marriage in glory. You see the Manner of their Warning. The Matter. That they should not returne to Herod. Why not to He∣rod? Because the Lord now lets them see his hypocri∣sie. For howsoeuer he pretended. Ver. 8. to come and worship him; yet he intended not seruire, but suire: not to honour him, but to murder him. He cals the Wise∣men priuily, as if hee quaked at the propagation of this newes, for it came vpon him like the pangs of death. He commands them to inquire de infante, not de rege; of the babe, not of the King; for that title galled him to the heart. That I may worship him. Dirum facinus tin∣git colore pietatis. It is a monstrous wickednesse, which he would die in the colours of godlinesse. The Lord doth disappoint the purposes of Tyrants: though their Bowes bee bent, and their swords whet∣ed, yet the marke shall be remoued: and they shall ra∣ther wound themselues, then their hated obiect. Though they be Psal. 7. 14. great with child of iniquitie, and conceiue mischiefe, yet they shall bring forth but falshood. Though those Iewes
had bound themselues Act. 23. 12. vnder a curse, neither to eate nor drinke till they had killed Paul. Yet if they had kept their vow, they had fasted to death. Though Sennacherib purposed to swallow vp Ierusalem at a morsell; yet the Lord mocked his menaces. Esa. 37. 33. Hee shall not come into this citie, nor shoot an arrow there, nor cast a banke against it. Herod made himselfe sure of Christ, but the Lord de∣ceiued him againe and againe. First he stroke him with extreme sottishnes: that learning by the Wise men the birth of Christ, yet (though the matter in his thought touched his Crowne) hee sends none of his Courtiers with them vnder pretence of gratifying them: which might so haue seised on that innocent Lambe; and not worshipped, but worrey'd him. But the Lord so con∣founded his wits with the spirit of giddines, that the Magi goe alone. Next, now that his bloudie hopes de∣pend vpon their returne, behold they are sent home another way. So that Ver. 16. he saw that he was mocked. Herod mocked the Wisemen, and God shall direct the Wisemen to mocke Herod. He pretended to adore, whom he did abhorre: and they doe eum vulp vulpinara; beguile the Foxe: yea rather vicula lupum fallit: the Lambe de∣ceiues the Wolfe. Simplicitie goes beyond subtletie. A cane non magno saepe tenetur aper. Here was Herods follie, that he would not suffer the King of the whole world, to be King in Iury: that in feare of a Successor, he would kill his Sauiour. Nay further: for feare of a strange heire, he killes his owne heire. Which occasio∣ned Augustus to say, that it was better being Herods Hogge then his heire. Here then see his crueltie: if his strength cannot take Iesus, hee will trie his cunning: and last when his cunning failes, he fals to open vio∣lence againe: sending forth men of warre. Thus when Ty∣rants faile in their Politicians Rhetoricke, they fall to the Carters Logicke. You see the Informance, let vs looke vpon their Per∣formance.
They departed into their owne Countrey another way. All which (wanting time to prosecute the hysto∣rie) I will applie to our selues. Their course home, shall teach vs a course to our home: euen to heauen and glo∣ry. Wherein I desire to obserue these Circumstances Our selues naturally lost: Our finding of Christ. Our charge not to returne to He∣rod: But to goe to our owne Coun∣trey; And that by another way. 1. Let it be granted, that we haue all wandred from the way of life. Esa. 53. 6. All we like sheepe haue gone astray, wee haue turned euery one to his owne way. I would to God, euery one would sentire, feele this in particular; and not onely consentire, consent to it in generall. Math. 9. 13. I am not come to call the righteous, sayth Christ, but sinners to repentance. And Luke 15. he leaues the hypocriticall  to their owne high-conceited puritie, and seekes the lost sheepe. We may here pawse, and wonder, at our misery, at his mercie. Wee were so lost, that wee could neuer find him: e is so good, that he sought and found vs Inuenit non quaerentes, non prdet inues. He found v not seeking him, being found he will not loose vs. Math. 11. 28. Come to me all that labour, and are heauie laden, and I will giue you rest. The proud sinner who doth not find his sinne; the careles, who doth not feele his sinne; is not called. Onely sentsentibus morbum promittitur medicina. Health is promised to those that feele their sicknes. 2. Christ cals vs, but how shall we come? Behold he sends vs a Starre for direction, his holy Word. Ioh. 6. 68. Lord to whom shall we goe? Thou hast the words of eternall life. Would you come to him that is vita, the life? You must come by him that is via, the Way. It is he Quò eundem, whether we would goe: it is he Qua eundem, by which we must goe. To his word then let vs come with an honest heart: not to sleepe, not to carpe, not to gaze:
but to obserue attentiuely, to remember faithfully, and to practise obediently, what is there taught vs. Nei∣ther must God onely for his part afford vs a Starre for guidance; but we must also for our part bring feete to walke to him. These are three. 1. Contrition▪ a heart truely sorrowfull for our for∣mer iniquities. He that is cast downe by repentance, shall be raised vp with ioy. It is not possible to walke to God without this foote. Hee that goes to heauen, must wash his steps with teares. And hee that hath this foote, shall make large paces to glory. Though he hath long lingred, he will now hast: as the malefactor stept by this foote from the Crosse to Paradise. 2. Faith. Sorrow may cast downe too fast, too far. Though the head haue leaue to ake, yet let not the hand of faith be wanting to hold it. Though the eye be blub∣bred with teares, yet must it looke through all that wa∣ter to the cleare Sunne, Iesus Christ. When the Law hath done the office in making thy sinne manifest; thanke it, and take thy leaue of it: as thou wouldest doe of a friend that hath done thee a good turne, but now growes troublesome. Put Moses behind thee, sayth Luther: and fixe thine eyes vpon Christ; that Ioh. 1. 29. Lambe of God which takes away the sinnes of the world. Without this foot thou shalt step short of comfort. Faith must bring thee to the fountaine of that 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Bloud, which shall wash away all thy sinnes. 3. Obedience: this foote must be continually vsed: all the dayes of thy life must thou trauell in the wayes of God with this foote. It knowes and keeps Celeritie, In∣tegritie, Constancie. Celeritie. Psal. 119. 32. I will runne the way of thy commandements. It makes hast, knowing that God will not bee pleased with halting obedience: or with that zeale, that onely goes a Parliament-pace. The Creeple was carried to the Temple: God loues not such limping zeale, that is Act. 3.
carried to Church on two Crutches, Law & Custome: but that which with Peter and Iohn, runs to the place where Christ is. But it is God, that Psal. 18. 33. maketh our feete like the feete of hindes. Integritie: it turnes not to the right hand, nor to the left, but goes straight on: Heb. 12. 18. running with patience the race that is set before it. Therefore sayth the Apostle. ver. 13. Make straight paths for your feete, least that which is lame be turned out of the way: for all false wayes the Lord doth vt∣terly abhorre. Psal. 12. . The wicked walke on euery side: they haue circular goings, on euery side of the truth, but the true way they cannot find. But Integritie is not so light heeld, to skip out of the way of righteousnes, at euery dog that reproachfully barkes at it, nor at euery Siren that temptingly would call it aside. The Deuill, with all his force of terror or error cannot seduce it. Constancie: it is euer trauelling, though through ma∣ny hindrances. It hath a heauy load of flesh to burden it, and make euery step tedious, yet it goes. Cares for fa∣mily, troubles of contentious neighbours, frowning of great aduersaries, malicious turbulencie of the world; all offer to stay it, but it goes on. As if it had receiued the Apostles Commission, Salute none of these Remo∣ra's by the way; it resteth not till it see the saluation of God. The Lord Psal. 56. 13. deliuers the feete from falling, that it may walke before God in the light of the living. 3 We must not returne backe to Herod. Why not to Herod? He was a fit type of the Deuill: and they that are recouered and escaped from him, should not fall backe into his clutches. The Deuill is like Herod, both for his subtletie and crueltie. The Herods were all dissemblers, all cruell. There was Herod Ascalonita, Herod Antipas, and Herod Agrippa: all cruell in the butchering of Gods Saints. Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Iohannem, Agrippa Iacobum, mittit{que} in carcere Petrum.
Ascalonite makes an earnest shew of zeale to Christ: but he desired not subijcerese Christ, sedsib Christum: not to become subiect to Christ, but to make Christ the sub iect of his furie. Antipas seemed to loue Iohn the Baptist, but he suffers a dancing foote to kicke off his head. The crueltie of the other Herod was monstrous. He slew all those whom hee could suspect to issue from the line of Dauid: all the Infants of Bethlem vnder two yeares old, at one slaughter. Hee slew his kinred, his sister, his wife, his sonne. Hee cut the throates of Ioseph. Antiq. Lib. 17. cap. 8. many noble Iewes, whiles he lay on his death bed. Yea made it in his will, that so soone as euer the breath was out of his body, all the sonnes of the nobler Iewes shut vp into a safe place, should be instantly slaine to beare him company. By this meanes hee resolued, that some should lament his death, which otherwise would haue bin the cause of great ioy. A wretched Testament, and fit for such a deuill to make. That Deuill wee are charged not to returne to, ex∣ceeds this both in subtletie and crueltie: euen as much as a father may his Sonne. Herod was not so perfect a Master of his art. The wise men deceiued Herod; hee must be a wise man indeed that ouer-reaches Satan. Herod was a bungler to him: he trusted to instruments to destroy Christ; the Deuill lookes to that busines himselfe. Hee can transforme himselfe into an Angel of light: and rather then not draw men to hell, hee will dissemble a loue to heauen. He will speake good, that he may worke euill: and confesse the truth, that therby hee may procure credit to greater falshood. He can stoope to the reprobate, like a tame horse till they get vp and ride him: but when he hath them on his backe, he runs post with them to hell. When he hath thus excercised his policie, wil he spare his power? when his Foxes part is done, hee begins his Lyons. Bloud, massacre, destruction are his sof∣test
embraces: horror and amazement are the pleasures of his Court: kill, kill, burne, burne, is the language of his tongue; to those miserable wretches, which must euer be burning, neuer consumed; euer killing, and neuer die. Oh then let vs neuer returne to Herod, nor venture on his mercie. The poore bird, that hath escaped the hawkes talons, is carefull to auoyd his walke. The strayed Lambe, falne into the wolfes caue and deliuered by the Shephard, will no more straggle out of the flocke. If the Lord Iesus hath sought and brought vs to himselfe by the Starre of his Gospell, let vs no more goe backe to Herod: flying the workes of darknes, and seruing the liuing God with an vpright heart. Indeed they that are truely freed from his serui∣tude, will neuer more become his vassalls. Many seeme escaped, that are not. If the adulterer returne like the 2. Pet. 2. 22. Hogge to the mire, and the drunkard like the Dog to his vomit; it is likely that they loue Herod well, for they goe backe to him. The minister may desire to Rom. 15. 16. offer them vp a liuing sacrifice to the Lord; but like wild beasts, they breake the rope, and will not bee sacri∣ficed. But wee Luk. 1. 74. being deliuered by Christ out of the hands of our enemies, must serue him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. 4. Wee must goe to our owne Countrey. In this world wee are but strangers: though perhaps we thinke too well of these vanities, yet they are but forraine things, wee haue another home. We may be raui∣shed with this earth, as Peter with Tabor, Bonum hic; it is good being here: but if wee looke vp to that heauen which is our Countrey, Mundi calca∣mus inutile pondus. Behold, the very outside is faire: the outmost walls are beautified with glorious lights euerie one as a world for greatnes, so a heauen for goodlinesse. All those spangles bee as radiant stones, full of Lustre; pure gold to the drosse of
earthly things. What may wee then thinke there is within? Yea whatsoeuer the wicked thinke, yet this world is but the through-fare: and it is not their home neither, though indeede they haue their portion in this life. It is sayd of Iudas going to hell, that Act. 1 25. he went to his owne place: therefore that, and not this, is their owne countrey; as sure as they thinke themselues of this world. In heauen there is all life, no death: in hell all death, no life: on earth men both liue and die; passing through it as the wildernes, either to Egipt or Canaan. This earth as it is betweene both, so it prepares vs for both: and sends euery one to their owne countrey; eter∣nall ioy, or euerlasting sorrow. Hee that here dies to sinne, shall hereafter liue in heauen: he that liues in sinne, shall hereafter die in hell. All soiourne, either with GOD, feeding on his graces, or with Satan surfeing on his iniquities. They that will haue Sathan for their host in transgressi∣on, shall afterwards be his guests in perdition. But they that obey God as theyr master, shall also haue him their father, and that for euer. Contemne we then this world: what though we haue many sorrows here, & a still succession of miseries: we are not at home. What stranger looks for kind vsage a∣mongst his enemies? As well might the captiue Iewes expect quiet among the Babilonians. Thou art sure of a countrey wherein is peace. In that heauen the wicked haue no part, though here much pleasure. When thou considerest this truely, thou wouldst not change porti∣ons with them. Let it be cōfort sufficient, since we can∣not haue both, that we haue by many degrees the better Their owne countrey. Heauen is our owne countrey. 1. Ours, ordained for vs by God the Father. Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherite ye the kingdome. 2. Ours, pur∣chased for vs by God the Son. Heb. 10. 19. We haue boldnes to enter
into the Holyest by the bloud of Iesus. 3. Ours sealed to vs by God the holy Ghost. Eph. 4. 30. The Spirit of God seales vs vp to the day of redemption. Rom. 8. 16. The Spirit it selfe beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Ours thus, though we are not yet fully entred into it. Habemus ius ad rem, nondum in re. Wee are ver. 17. heires to it, though now we be but wards. Our minoritie bids & binds vs to be as seruants. The heire as long as he k Gal. 4. 1. is a child differs nothing from a seruant, though he be Lord of all. When we come to full yeares, a perfect growth in godlynes, in mensuram staturae adulti Christs, Eph. 4. 13. to the measure of the stature of the fullnesse of Christ, we shall haue a plenary possession. It is ours already, not in re, but in spe; as Aug. Our common Law distinguisheth betweene two maner of freeholds. A freehold in deede when a man hath made his entry vpon lands, and is thereof really seised. A freehold in law, when a man hath right to possessions, but hath not made his actuall entry. So is this Coun∣trey ours: ours Tenore iuris, though not yet iure teno∣ris: ours in the inheritance of the possession, though not in the possession of the inheritance. To this coun∣trey, our countrey, let vs trauell: and that we may do it the better, 5. The last circumstance shewes vs how; Another way, we must change the whole course of our inordi∣nate conuersation, and walke another way: euen the Kings high-way to Paradise. Euseb. Emis∣sen. Hom. 1. de Epiph. Immutatio vi, emendatio vitae. The changing of the way, is the amending of our life. Repentance must teach vs to tread a new path. To man truely penitent, Optimus portus est mutatio consi∣y: The best hauen is the change of his life: 1. King. 13. 9. not to turne Tertull. againe by the same way that he came. Thus must we re∣nounce our owne wils, & old wayes: and being made new creatures, take new paths. So Gregory. o We departed from our countrey by pride, disobedience, doting on visible
delights, and pleasing the lusts of the flesh: we must therefore returne by humilue, obedience, contemning the world, and condemning the flesh. Quia Paradisi gaudijs per delecta∣tionem recessimus, ad hc per poenitentiam, tanquàm per nouam viam, reuocaur. We that departed from Pa∣radise by sinne, must returne thether, by a new way, Repentance. Hast thou walked in lust? take another way; by puritie and chastitie. Didst thou trauell with pride? there is another way to heauen, humilitie. Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the kingdome of heauen. Wert thou giuen to auarice? there is a new way to heauen; by charitie. Ye haue fed me hungry &c. Math. 25. therefore come ye blessed. Didst thou trudge with con∣tention, and molesting thy neighbours with sutes? this is the way to Westminster hall, there is another way to heauen. Math. 5. 9. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God. Didst thou trade in vsurie? this is the way to the Exchange: thou must exchange this way if thou wilt come to glory. Hast thou forred∣ged with oppression? Thou must with Zaccheus seeke out another way. Luk. 19. 8. If I haue taken any thing from any man by false dealing, I restore him fourefold. Let the drunken epicure, malicious repiner, sedi∣tious incendiary, dissembling hypocrite, vniust oppressor, leaue their wretched pathes: & seeke another way to happi∣nes. God giue vs all grace to find this way of Repentance, that wee may come at last to our owne Countrey, peace and rest with Iesus Christ. Amen.
SEMPER IDEM OR The Immutable mercie Of Iesus Christ. HEBR. 13. 8. Iesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for euer. BY the name of Iehouah was God knowne to Israel; from the time of the first missi∣on of Moses to them, and their manumis∣sion out of Egypt: and not before. For sayth God to Moses Exod. 6. 3. I appeared vnto A∣braham, and vnto Isaac, and vnto Iacob, by the Name of God Almightie; but by my Name IEHOVAH was I not knowne to them. This (I Am) is an eternall word, comprehending three times; that was, that is, and is to come. Now to testifie the equalitie of the Sonne to the Fa∣ther, the Scripture giues the same Eternitie to Iesus, that it doth to Iehouah. He is called Alpha and Omega, Primus & nouissimus, the First and the Last: which is, which was, and which is to come. Reuel. 1. and here the same yesterday, and to day, and for euer. Therefore he was not onely Christus Dei, the Annointed of God; but Chri∣stus Deus, God himselfe Annointed. Seeing that Eter∣nitie which hath neither beginning nor ending, is on∣ly
peculiar and proper to God. The words may be distinguished into a Center Circūference Mediate Line, referring the one to the other. The immouea∣ble Center is Iesus Christ. The Circumference that runs round about him here, is Eternitie: Yesterday, to day & for euer. The Mediate line referring them is. , The same▪ Iesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for euer. The Center is Iesus Christ. Iesus was his proper Name, Christ his appellatiue. Iesus a name of his nature, Christ of his Office and dignitie; as Diuines speake. Iesus a Name of all sweetnes. Bern. in Can. Mel in ora, Me∣los in are, iubilus in corde. A reconciler, a Redeemer, a Sauiour. When the conscience wrastles with Law, Sin, Death; nothing but horror and despaire without Iesus. He is Ioh. 14. 6. the way, the Truth, and the Life: without him Error, Medacium, Mors. Si scribas, non placet, nisi legam ibi Iesum: saith Bernard. If thou writest to me, thy letter doth not please me, vnles I read there Iesus. If thou conferrest, thy discourse is not sweet, without the name of Iesus. The blessed restorer of all, of more then all that Adam lost▪ for we haue gotten more by his regenerating grace, then we lost by Adams degenera∣ting Sinne. Christ is the Name of his Office: being appoin∣ted and annointed of God, a King, a Priest, a Pro∣phet. This Iesus Christ is our Sauiour: of whose names I forbeare further discourse, being vnable, though I had the tongue of Angels, to speake ought worthy anto Nomine, Tanto Numine. All that can be said, is but a li∣tle: but I must say but a litle in all. But of all names
giuen to our Redeemer still Iesus is the sweetest. O∣er, sayth Bern. are names of Maiestie, Iesus is a name of mercie. The Word of God, the Sonne of God, the Christ of GOD, are titles of Glory: Ie∣sus a Sauiour, is a title of grace, mercie, redempti∣on. This Iesus Christ is the Center of this Text: and not onely of this, but of the whole Scripture. The Summe of Diuinitie is the Scripture: the Summe of the Scripture is the Gospell, the Summe of the Gos∣pell is Iesus Christ. In a word, Nihil continet ver∣bum Domini, nisi verbum Dominum. There is no∣thing contained in the word of God, but God the Word. Nor is he the Center onely of his Word, but of our rest and Peace. 1. Cor. 2. . I determined not to know any thing among you, saue Iesus Christ, and him crucified. Thou hast made vs for thee. O Christ; and our heart is vnquiet till it rest in thee. It is naturall to euery thing appettere centrum, to desire the Center. But Col. 3. 3. our life is hid with Christ in God. We must needes amare, where wee must animare. Our mind is where our pleasure is, our heart is where our treasure is, our loue is where our life is: but all these, our pleasure, treasure, life, are reposed in Iesus Christ. Thou art my Portion, O Lord, sayth Dauid. Take the world that please, let our Portion be Christ. Mat. 19. 27. We haue left all, sayth Peter, and fellowed thee: you haue lost nothing by it, sayth Christ; for you haue gotten me. Nimis auarus est, cui non sufficit Christus. Hee is too couetous, whom Iesus Christ cannot satisfie. Let vs seeke this Center, sayth In Ioan. August. Quramus in∣ueniendum, quaeramus inuentum. Vt inveniendus qura∣tur, paratus est: vt inuentus quratur, immensus est. Let vs seeke him, till wee haue found him: and still seeke him when we haue found him. That seeking wee may find him, he is ready: that finding we may seeke him, he
is infinite. You see the Center. The referring Line proper to this Center, is Semper Idem. The same. There is no mutabilitie in Christ: Iam. 1. 17. no va∣riablenes, nor shadow of turning. All lower lights haue their inconstancie; but in the Father of lights there is no changeablenes. The Sunne hath his shadow; the the Mal. 4. 2. Sonne of righteousnesse is without shadow: that turnes vpon the Diall, but Christ hath no turning. Ioh. 13. 1. Whom he loues, he loues to the end. He loues vs to the end; of his loue there is no end. Tempus crit consummandi, nullus con∣sumendi misericordiam. His mercie shall be perfected in vs, neuer ended. sa. 54. 8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment: but with euerlasting kindnesse will I haue mer∣cie vpon thee, sayth the Lord thy Redeemer. His wrath is short, his goodnesse is euerlasting. Ver. 10. The mountaines shall depart, and the hils be remoued: but my kindnesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall the couenant of my peace be re∣moued, sayth the Lord, that hath mercie on thee. The moun∣taines are stable things, the hils stedfast: yet hils, moun∣taines, yea the whole earth shall totter on the founda∣tions; yea the very 2. Pet. 3. 10. heauens shall passe away with a noyse, and the elements shall melt with heate; but the Couenant of God shall not be broken. Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee vnto me for euer; sayth God. This marriage-bond shall neuer be canceld; nor sinne, nor death, nor hell shall be able to diuorce vs. Six & twentie times in one Psal. 136. Psalme that sweet singer chants it: His mercie endureth for euer. Iesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for euer. As this meditation distilles into our beleeuing hearts much comfort, so let it giue vs some instructions. Two things it readily teacheth vs; a Diswasiue caution. Perswasiue lesson. 1. It diswades our confidence in worldly thinges because they are inconstant. How poore a space do
they remaine , the same! To proue this, you haue in the first of Iudges. Ver. 6. a Iury of threescore and ten Kings, to take their oathes vpon it. Euery one had his throne, yet there lickes crums vnder another Kings table: and shortly euen this King, that made them all so miserable, is made himselfe most miserable. Salomon compares wealth to a wild fowle. Prou. 23. 5. Riches make themselues wings, they flie away, as an Eagle toward heauen. Not some tame house-bird or a hawke that may be fetched downe with a lure, or found againe by her bels: but an Eagle, that violently cuts the aire, and is gone past recalling. Wealth is like a bird: it hops all day from man to man, as that doth from tree to tree; and none can say, where it will roust or rest at night. It is like a vagrant fellow, which because he is big boned & able to worke, a man takes in a dores, and cherisheth; and perhaps for a while he takes paines: but when he spies opportunity, the fugitiue seruant is gone, and takes away more with him then all his seruice came to. The world may seeme to stand thee in some stead for a season, but at last it irreuocably runs away, and carries with it thy ioyes; thy gods, as Rachell stole Labans Idoles: thy peace and content of heart goes with it, and thou art left despe∣rate. You see how quickly riches cease to be the same: and can any other earthly thing boast more stabillitie? Ho∣nour must put off the robes when the play is done: make it neuer so glorious a shew on this worlds stage, it hath but a short part to act. A great name of world∣ly glory is but like a peale rung on the bels: the Com∣mon people are the clappers: the rope that moues them is popularitie: if you once let goe your hold & leaue pulling, the clapper lies still, and farewell honour. Strength, though like 1. Kin. 13. 4. Ieroboam, it put forth the arme of oppression, shall soone fall downe withered. Beau∣tie
is like an Almanacke: if it last a yeare, t'is well. Pleasure like lightning: ritur, moritur: sweet, but short: a flash and away. All vanities are but butter-flies, which wanton chil∣dren greedily catch for: and sometimes they flie be∣sides Anselm. medi∣tat. them, sometimes before them, sometimes behind them, sometimes close by them; yea through their fin∣gers, and yet they misse them: and when th haue them, they are but butterflies; they haue painted wings, but are crude and squalid wormes. Such are the things of this world, vanities, butter-flies. Vel sequendo labi∣mur, vel assequendo ldimur. The world it selfe is not vnlike a Hartechoke: nine parts of it are vnprofitable leaues, scarce the tythe is good: about it there is a lttle picking meate, nothing so wholesome as daintie: in the midst of it there is a coare, which is enough to choke them that deuoure it. O then set not your hearts vpon these things: cal∣canda sunt, as Ierome obserues on Act. 4. They that sold their possessions, brought the prises, and layed them downe Act. 4. 35. at the Apostles feete. At their feete, not at their hearts: they are fitter to be troden vnder feet, then to be wai∣ted on with hearts. I conclude this with Augustine. Ecce turbat mundus, & amatur: quid si tranquillus esset? Formoso quomodo hreres, qui sic amplecteris soedum? Flores eius quàm colligeres, qui sic a spinis non reuocas manū. Quàm confideres terno, qui sic adhres caduco? Behold, the world is turbulent and full of vexation, yet it is loued; how would it be embraced if it were calme and quiet? If it were a beauteous Damosell how would they doat on it; that so kisse it being a deformed stigmaticke. How greedily would they gather the flowers, who will not forbeare the thornes? They that so admire it being transient and temporall; how would they bee enamou∣red on it if it were eternall? But 1. Ioh. 2. 17. the world passeth, and God abideth. Heb. 1. 11. 12 They shall perish, but thou remainest: they all
shall waxe old as doth a garment: and as a vesture shalt thou fold them vp, and they shall bee changed: but thou art The Sam, and thy yeares shall not faile. Therefore 1. Tim. 6. 17. trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God. And then Psal. 125. 1. they that trust in the Lord; shall be as Munt Sion, which cannot be remoued, but abideth for euer. Iesus Christ the Sa yesterday, and to day, and for euer. 2. This perswades vs to an imitation of Christs Con∣stancie. Let the stablenes of his mercie to vs, worke a stablenes of our loue to him. And howsoeuer like the lower Orbes, we haue a naturall motion of our owne from good to euill: yet let vs suffer the higher power to moue vs supernaturally from euill to good. There is in vs indeed a reluctant flesh; Rom. 7. 23. a Law in our members warring against the Law of our minde. So August. confes∣seth. Confes. lib. 8. cap. 10. Nec planè nolebam, nec planè volebam. And Eg e∣ra qui volebam, ego qui nolebam. I neither fully granted, nor plainely denied: and it was I my selfe, that both would, and would not. But our ripenesse of Christia∣nitie must ouergrow fluctuant thoughts. Irresolution and vnsteddines is hatefull, and vnlike to our master Christ, who is euer The Same. Iam. 1. 8. A double minded man is vnstable in all his wayes. The inconstant man is a stranger in his owne house: all his purposes are but guests: his heart is the Inne: if they lodge there for a night, it is all; they are gone in the morning. Ma∣ny motions come crowding together vpon him: and like a great prease at a narrow dore, whiles all striue, none enter. The Epigrammatist wittily. Omnia cùm facias, miraris cur facias nil: Posthume, rem solam qui facit, ille facit. Marul. pigr. lib. 3. He that will haue an oare for euery mans boate, shall haue none left to row his owne. They, sayth Melan∣cton, that will know aliquid in omnibus, shall indéed know nihil in toto. Their admiration or dotage of a thing is extreame for the time, but it is a wonder, if it
out-liue the age of a wonder, which is allowed but nine dayes. They are angry with Time, and say the times are dead, because they produce no more innouations. Their inquiry of all things is not Quàm bonum, but Quàm novum! They are almost wearie of the Sun for continuall shining. Continuance is a sufficient quarrell against the best things: and the Manna of heauen is loathed, because it is common. This is not to be alwayes the same, but neuer the same: and whiles they would bee euery thing, they are no∣thing: but like the worme Plinie writes of, multipoda; that hath many feete, yet is of slow pace. A while you shall haue him in England, louing the simple truth: a∣none in Rome groueling before an Image: soone after, he leaps to Amsterdam: and yet must he still be turning, till there be nothing left but to turne Turke. To win∣ter an opinion is too tedious: he hath bin many things; what hee will be, you shall scarce know, till he is no∣thing. But the God of Constancie would haue his to be con∣stant. Stedfast in your faith to him. Colos. 1. Continue in the faith grounded and setled, and be not moued away from Colos. 1. 23. the hope of the Gospell. Stedfast in your faithfulnesse to man, Psal. 15. 4. promising and not disappoynting. Doe not a∣liud stantes, aliud sedtes: least your changing with God, teach God to change with you. Ambr. in luc. lib. 5. Nemo potest tibi Chri∣stum uferre, isi t illi auferas. No man can turne Christ from thee, vnles thou turne thy selfe from Christ. For Iesus Christ the same yesterday, &c. We come now to the Circumference; wherein is a distinction of three times; Past, Present, Future. Tem∣pora mutantur: the times change, the Circumference wheeles about; but the Center is the same for euer. We must resolue this Triplicitie into a Triplicitie. Christ is the same according to these three distinct termes, three distinct wayes.
Obiectiuè, in his Word. Subiectiuè, in his Power. Effectiuè, in his gratious Operation. Obiectiuely. Iesus Christ is the same in his word; and that Yesterday in Preordination. To day in Incarnation. For euer in Application. Yesterday in Preordination. So Saint Peter in his Sermon tels the Iewes, that Act. 2. 23. he was deliuered by the determinate counsell and foreknowledge of God. And in his Epistle; that 1. Pet. 1. 20. he was verily preordai∣ned before the foundation of the world. Reuel. 13. He is cal∣led the Lambe slaine from the foundation of the world. Pri∣us Reu. 13. 8. prfuit, quamfuit. His Prophets did foretell him, the Types did prefigure him, God himselfe did promise him. Rtus or do Dei: the decree of God is constant. Much comfort I must here leaue to your meditation. If God preordained a Sauiour for man, before he had eyther made man, or man mar'd himselfe: (as Paul to Timothie; 2. Tim. 1. 9. he hath saued vs according to his own purpose ad grace, which was giuen vs in Christ Iesus before the world began.) then surely he meant that nothing should Rom. 8. 39. sepa∣rate vs from his eternall loue in that Sauiour. Quos  increatos, redeit perditos, non deseret redemptos. Whom he chose before they were created, and when they were lost redeemed, he will not forsake being sanctified. To day in Incarnation. Gal. 4. 4. When the fulnesse of the time was come, God sent forth his Sonne made of a Woman. Ioh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh: which was, sayth Emissenus, Hom. 2. de Nati. Christi. Non deposita, sed seposit maiestate. Thus he became younger then-his Mother, that is as eternall as his Father. He was Yesterday God before all worlds, he is now made man in the World.
Euseb. Emiss. vbi supra. Sanguinem, qum pro matre btulit, antea de sanguine ma∣tris accepit. The bloud that he shed for his Mother, hee had from his Mother. The same Eusebius▪ on the 9. of Esay acutely. Esa. 9. 6. Vnto vs a child is borne, vnto vs a Sonne is giuen. He was Datus ex Diuinitate, natus ex virgine. Datus est qui erat; natus est qui non erat. He was Giuen of the Deitie, Borne of the virgin: He that was giuen, was before: he as borne, was before. Donum dedit Deus ∣quale sibi, God gaue a gift equall to himselfe. So he is the same yesterday, and to day, obiectiuely in his Word. Idom qui velatus in veteri, reulatus in none. In illo praedictus, in isto praedicatus. Yesterday prefigured in the Law, to day the same manifested in the Gospell. For euer in Operation. He doth continually by his Spirit apply to our con∣sciences the vertue of his death and passion. Ioh. 1. 12. As many as receiue him, to them giues e power to become the Sonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue on his Name. Heb. 10. 14. By one of∣fering hee hath perfected for euer them that are sanctified. This is sure comfort to vs: though hee dyed almost 1600. yeares agoe, his bloud is not yet dry: his wounds are as fresh to doe vs good, as they were to those Saints that beheld them bleeding on the Crosse. The vertue of his merits is not abated, though many thou∣sand hands of Faith haue taken large portions out of his treasurie. The riuer of his Grace, which makes glad the citie of God, runnes ouer the bankes, though infinite soules haue drunke heartie draughts, and satisfied their thirst. But because we cannot apprehend this for our selues of our selues; therefore he hath promised to send vs the Ioh. 14. 17. Spirit of truth, who will dwell with vs, and applie this to vs. for euer. Thus you haue seene the first Tripli∣citie; how he is the Same Obiectiuely in his Word. Now he is Subiunctiuely in his Power the Same; and
that Yesterday, for he made the world. To day, for he gouerns the world. For euer, for he shall iudge the world. Yesterday in the Creation. Ioh. 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. Col. 1. 16. By him were all things cre∣ated that are in heauen, and that are in earth, visible and in∣visible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principali∣ties, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. All things; euen the great and faire booke of the world; of three so large leaues, Coelum, Solum, Salum; Heauen, Earth, and Sea. The Prophet cals him Esa. 9. 6. the Everlasting Father: Daniel, Dan. 7. Auntient of dayes. Salo∣mon sayes that, Prov. 8. 22. the Lord possessed him in the beginning of his way, before his workes of old. So himselfe told the vn∣beleeuing Iewes: Ioh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was, I am. We owe then our selues to Christ for our creation, but how much more for our redemption? Bern. de dilig. Deo. Si totum me debeo pro ine facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto? In primo opere me mihi dedit: in secundo se mihi dedit. If I owe him my whole selfe for making me, what haue I left to pay him for redeeming me? In the first worke he gaue my selfe to me, in the second he gaue him∣selfe to me. By a double right we owe him our selues: we are worthy of a double punishment, if we giue him not his owne. To day in the Gouerning: He. 1. 3. Hee vpholdeth all things by the word of his power. Hee is Paterfamilias; and disposeth all thinges in this vniuerse, with greater care and pence, then any house-holder can menage the bunesse of his priuate familie. Hee leaues it not, as the Car∣penter hauing built the frame of a house, to others to perfect it; but lookes to it himselfe. His Creation
and Prouidence is like the Mother and the Nurse: the one produceth, the other preserueth. His creation was a short prouidence, his prouidence a perpetuall crea∣tion. The one sets vp the frame of the house, the o∣ther keepes it in reparation. Neither is this a disparagement to the Maiestie of God, as the vaine Epicures imagined, curare minima, to regard the least things: but rather an honour, curare infinita, to regard all things. Neither doth this extend onely to naturall things, chained together by a regular order of succession: but euen to casuall and contingent things. Oftentimes cùm aliud volumus, aliud agimus; the euent crosseth our purpose. Which must content vs though it fall out otherwise then we purposed, be∣cause God purposed as it is falne out. It is enough that the thing attaine the owne end, though it misse ours: that Gods will be done, though ours be crossed. But let me say; Mat. 6. 26. 28 Hath God care of foles and flowers, and will he not care for you, his owne Image? Yea let me goe further; Hath God care of the wicked? Doth he powre downe the happie influences of heauen on the Mat. 5. 45. vniust mans ground? And shall the faithfull want his blessing? Doth hee prouide for the Sonnes of Beliall, and shall his owne children lacke? He may giue meate and ray∣ment to the rest, but his bountie to Beniamin shall ex∣ceed. If Mb his Wash-pot tast of his benefites, then Iudah the signet on his finger cannot bee forgotten. The King gouernes all the Subiects in his Dominions, but his seruants that waite in his Court, partake of his most Princely fauours. God heales the sores of the very wic∣ked: but if it be told him, Ioh. 11. 3. Lord, hee whom thou louest, is sicke  enough, hee shall bee healed. The wicked may h utward blessings without inward, and that is Esau's pottage without his Birth-right: but the elect haue inward blessings though they want outward, and that is Iacobs inheritance without his pottage.
For euer, because he shall iudge the world. Act. 17. 31. GOD hath appoynted a day in the which he will iudge the world in righteousnesse, by that Mn whom he hath or∣dained. Rom. 2. 16. In the day that God shall iudge the secrets of mn by Iesus Christ. Let the wicked flatter themselues, that all is but talke of any comming to Iudgement: non ali∣ud videre patres aliudve n ptes aspicnt: all is but terri∣culamenta nutricum, meere scar-babes. Scribarm pe mendaces: they haue written lies; there is no such mat∣ter. But when they shall see that Lambe, Re. . 7. whom they haue pearced and scorned, Reu. 6. 16. they shall cry to the mountaines and rockes, Fall vpon vs and couer vs. Now they flatter themselues with his death: mortuus est, hee is dead and gone: and Mortuum Caesarem quis etuit? Who feares euen a Caesar when he is dead? But Reu. 1. 18. he that was dead, liueth: behold, I am aliue for euermore, Amen. Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and for euer. Qusitor scerum veni∣et, vindexque reorum. Here is matter of infallible comfort to vs. Luk. 21. 28. Lift vp your heads, for your Redemption draweth nigh. Here wee are imprisoned, martyred, tortured: but when that great Assise, and generall goale-deliuery comes; Ms non rit vltra: Reu. 21. 4. there shall be no more death, nor sorrow; but all teares shall be wiped from our eyes. 2. Thes. 1. 6. 7. For it is a righ∣teous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with vs, when the Lord Iesus shall be reuealed from heauen with his migh∣tie Angels. We shall then find him the S: the same Lambe that bought vs, shall giue vs a venit beati; Coe ye blessed, receiue your kingdome. Reu. 22. 20. Surely I come quick∣ly, Aon. Euen so, Come Lord Iesus. Effectually in his Grace and Mercie; so he is the▪ Same Yesterday to our fathers. To day to our selues. For euer to our children.
Yesterday to our Fathers. All our Fathers, whose soules are now in heauen, those Spirits of iust men made perfect. Hebr. 12. were, as Heb. 12. 24. the next words intimate, saued by Iesus the mediatour of the new Couenant, and by the bloud of sprinkling, that spea∣keth better things then that of Abell. Whether they liued vnder Nature, or vnder the Law, Christ was their ex∣pectation; and they were iustified credendo in ventu∣rum Christum; by beleeuing in the Messias to come. So Luke 2. Simeon is sayd to waite for the consolation of Luk. 2. 25. & ver. 38. Israell. To day to our selues. His mercie is euerlasting: his truth endureth from generation to generation. The same gracious Sauiour, that he was Yesterday to our Fathers, is he To day to vs, if we be to day faithfull to him. All catch at this com∣fort, but in vaine without the hand of Faith. There is no deficiencie in him, but is there none in thee? What∣soeuer Christ is, what art thou? He forgaue Mary Magd. many grieuous sinnes; so hee will forgiue thee if thou canst shed Mary Magdalens teares. He tooke the male∣factor from the Crosse to Paradise; thither he will re∣ceiue thee if thou haue the same faith. He was mercifull to a denying Apostle: chalenge thou the like mercie if thou haue the like repentance. If we will be like these, Christ assuredly will be euer like himselfe. When any shall proue to bee such a sinner, he will not faile to bee such a Sauiour. To day he is thine, if to day thou wilt be his: thine to morrow, if yet to morrow thou wilt be his. But how if darke death preuent the morrowes light? He was Ye∣sterday, so wert thou: he is to day, so art thou: hee is to morrow, so perhaps mayest thou not be. Time may change thee, though it cannot change him. He is not (but thou art) subiect to mutation. This I dare boldly
say; He that repents but one day before he dyes, shall find Christ the same in mercie and forgiuenesse. Wic∣kednesse it selfe is glad to heare this: but let him bee faithfull on his part, as God is mercifull on his part: let him be sure that he repent one day before he dies: whereof he cannot be sure except he repent euery day. For no man know his last day. Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruetur omnis dies. Therefore (sayth Augustine) we know not our last day, that wee might obserue euery day. Psal. 95. 7. To day therefore heare his voyce. Th hast lost yesterday negligently, loosest to day wilfully, and therefore moyst loose for euer ineuitably. It is iust with God, to punish two dayes neglect, with the losse of the third. The hand of faith may be withe∣red, the spring of Repentance dryed vp, the Eye of Hope blind, the Foot of Charitie lame. To day then heare his voyce, and make him thine. Yesterday is lost, To day may be gotten, but that once gone, and thou with it; when thou art dead and iudged, it will do thee small comfort, that Iesus Christ is the Se for euer. For euer to our Children. He that was yesterday the God of Abraham, is to day ours, and will bee for euer our childrens. As well now Luk. 2. 32. the light of the Gentiles, as before the glory of Israell. I will be the God of thy seed, sayth the Lord to Abraham. Luk. 1. 50. His mercie is  them that feare him, fr generation to ge∣neration. Many parents are ollicitously perplexed, how their children shall do when they are dead. Yet they cosider not, how God prouided for them when they were chil∣drē. Is the Lor  shortned▪ Did he take thee from thy mothers brests; and wh thy arents for sooke thee, as the Psalmist saith, became thy Father? And cannot this expe∣riēced mercy to thee, perswade thee, that he wil not for▪ sake thine? Is not Iesus Christ the s yesterday, & to day,
and for euer? I haue beene young, sayth Psal.  Dauid, and  now old: yet haue I not sne the rights forsaken: (that is granted; nay) nor his seed begging bread. Many distrustfull Fathers are so carking for their posteritie; that whiles they liue, they starue their bodies, and hazard their soules, to leaue them rich. To such a Father it is said iustly. Di es hdi, pauper ipsque ti∣bi. Like an ouer-kind Hen, he feeds his Chickens, and famisheth himselfe. If vsurie, circumuention, oppressi∣on, extortion, can make them rich, they shall not bee poore. Their follie is ridiculous: they feare least their children should be miserable, yet take the onely course to make them miserable. For they leaue them not so much heires to their goods, as to their euils. They doe as certainely inherite their Fathers sins, as their lands. Iob. 21. 19. God layeth vp his iniquitie for his children: and  f∣spring shall wa a sell of bd. On the contrry. Psal. 37. 26. The good  ad ln∣deth: and his seed i blssed. That the worldling thinkes shall make his posteritie poore, God sayth shall make the good mans rich. The Exod. 20. 6. Precept giues a promise of mercie to Obedience; not onely confined in himselfe, but extended to his sd, and that euen to a sand generations. Trust th Christ with thy children: when thy friends shall , vsurie  no dat, oppression be condemned to hell, thy selfe roen to dust, the world it selfe turned and burned into Cinders▪ still Iesus Christ is the same Yesterday, and to-day, and for . Now then. Reu. 1.  Grace and Pea are from him Which is, and Which Reu. 1. 4. , and Which is to come. So Glory and  him, Which i, Which was, and Which is to come: euen to Iesus Christ the sa Yester∣day, & today, and for er.
GODS BOVNTIE OR The blessings of both his hands. Prov. 3. 16. Length of dayes is i her right hand: and in her left hand, riches and honour. BY Wisedome, here the consent of Diuin vnderstandeth the Sonne of God, the Sa∣uiour of Man. In the first to the  1. Cor. 1. 24. he is called the Wisedome of God. Col. 2. 3. In  are hid all the treasures of Wisedome and Knowledge. Wisedome is formerly commended for her Beautie, here for her Bountie. Length of dayes is in her right hand; in her left riches and honour. Conceiue her a glorious Queene sitting in  throne of Miestie, and lling her children about her, to the participation of those riches, which from euerlasting shee hadde decreed them. Not to trauell farre for distribution, the parts of this Text are as easily distinguished, as the Right hand from the Left. Here be two Hands, and they containe two sorts of treasures. The Right hand hath in it Length of dayes: the Lest, riches and honour.
The right hand Is vpon good reason preferred; both for it owne worth whereby it excelles, and for the worth of the treasure which it containes. It hath euer had the dig∣nitie as the dexteritie. Length of dayes Is the treasure it holds. This cannot be properly vn∣derstood of this mortall life: though the sense may al∣so stand good with such an interpretation. Prou. 9. 11. For by me, sayth Wisedome, thy dayes shall be : and the yeares of thy life shall be increased. Wisedome is the mother of abstinence, and abstinence the Nurse of health. Where∣as voluptuousnesse and Intemperance, (as th French Prouerbe hath it) Digges the owne ge with the teeth. But all a mans Wisedome cannot keepe him still aliue. Eccl. 2. 16. The wise man dyeth, as the foole, sayth Salomon. And the Father of Salomon excludes it from hauing power to keepe a man. Psal. .  That he should liue still for e∣r, and not see rruption. Meushalem liued nine hun∣dred sixtie and nine yeares; yet he was the Sonne of Ech, who was the sonne of ared, who was the sonne of , who was the sonne of Cainan, who was the sonne of , who was the sonne of Seth, who was the sonne of A, who was the sonne of dust. The best constitutions, that communicate in the sanguine of the Rose, and Snow of the Lilly, haue this parentage; they are the sonnes and daughters of dust. This   i not  to the Poles, nor are these dayes measured by the Sunne in his Zodiacke: all is pitched aboue the Wheele of changeable mor∣talitie. It is Eternitie that fils the Right hand of Wise∣dome.
Length of dayes. Dayes for the Claritie. Length for the Eternitie. Dayes. Mans life in this world is called a Day: a short day, a sharpe day. Short, for instat vesper: it is not sooner morning, but it is presently night. The Sunne of life quickly sets, after it is once risen. Sharpe; for miserie is borne with life, brought vp with life, and to the good dies with life: to the wicked remaines in death. Like Hippocrat twinnes, inseparable in their begin∣ning, processe, end. So that aged Patriarch to Pharao. Gen. 47. 9. My dayes haue beene few and euill, So. Iob. Iob. 14. 1. Man is of few dayes, and many troubles. Petrarch. Animal vi breuissimi, so∣licitdinis infinitae. And Paul cals it Ephe. 6. 13. the euill day. It is somewhat to comfort, that though it be sharpe, Euill: yet it is but short, a Day. Ephe. 5. 16. Redeeme the time, for the dayes are euill. But howsoeuer Semper mali dies in seculo, yet semper boni dies in Domino: as In Psal. 33. Augustine sweetly. Though the world hath alwayes euill dayes, yet God hath alwayes good dayes. And this Day shall haue no night. Nox non erit il∣lic. Reu. 21. 25. There shall be no night. The Sunne that inlightens it; cannot be ecclipsed. Ver. 23. That cittie hath no need of the Sunne, neyther of the Moone, to shine in it: for the Glorie of God doth lighten it, and the Lambe is the light of it. No clouds shall draw a vaile of obscuritie ouer it. Here the light of the Sunne darkens the Moone, and the Moone obscures the luster of the Starres: Some∣times halfe the earth is in light, the rest in darke∣nesse. But in these Dayes, Albeit 1. Cor. 15. 41 there is one glorie of the SVNNE, another of the MOONE, and ano∣ther of the STARRES; and one starre differeth from
another starre in glory: yet the light of one increaseth the light of another: and the glorie of one, is the glory of all. Aug. Medit. cap. 25. Dispar est glo , sed  Latitia omnium. So in summe, here we liue but a short day; Giue vs this day our dayly bread. But in that world wee shall haue Daies, & those good dayes, and great dayes; dayes of eternall length, for they shall haue no night. Length. As the glorie is cleare for the Countenance, so it is long for the Continuance. Nullus erit defectus, nullus erminus. There shall be  charit, chara rnitas Gods eternall decree to chuse v in Christ had no be∣ginning, but it shall haue an end: when the elect are taken vp to glory. The possession of this decreed Inheritance shall haue a beginning, but no end 1. Thess. 4. 17 Wee shall eer be with the Lord. Gods mercie in both hath neither beginning nor end; for it is from euerlasting to euerlasting. Here then is both the Countenance; it is a cleare day: and the Continuance, it is of length; the very same Length that Euerlastingnesse it selfe. Hezekiahs day was a long day, when 2. King. 20. 11 The shadow of the sunne went tenne degrees backward in the diall of Ab. Iosuah had a long day; when the Sunne stood still in Gibeon, and the Moone in the valley of . Iosh. 10. 14. And there was no day like that before it, or after it. But both these dayes had their nights; and the long forbearing sunne at last did set. Here the dayes are so long, that it shall neuer be night. You see the clearenesse and the length: both are expressed. Dan. 12. They that be ise, shall shine as the firmament, and they that turne many to righteouses, as the Dan. 12. 3. starres; there is the Claritie: and that for euer and euer, there is the Eternitie. There is nothing made perfectly happy, but by Eter∣nitie; as nothing but eternitie can make perfect misery.
Were thy life a continued scene of pleasures, on whose stage griefe durst nuer set his vnwelcome foote: were the spoyle of Noahs Arke the cates of thy table: hadst thou king Salomons wardrobe and treasurie: Did the west Indie send thee all her gold, and the East her spices: and all these lying by thee whiles a late successi∣on of yeares without car, snowes white vpon thy head: thou we euer indulgent to thy selfe, and health to thee. Yet suddenly there comes an impartiall Purse∣uant, death; and hee hath a charge to take thee away  de , bathing thy selfe in thy delights. Alas; what i  thy glory but a short play, fll of mirth till the last act, and that goes off in a tragedie. Couldest thou not haue made death more welcome, if hee had found thee lying on a padde of straw, feeding on crs and water gruell? Is not thy paine the more troublesome, because thou wast well? Doth not the end of these temporary ioyes aict thee more, then if they had neuer beene? Onely then eternitie can giue perfection to pleasure: which because thi world cannot afford, let vs reckon of it as it is, a meee Through : and desi our Home, wh we shall be happy for . In her Left hand, riches and honour. The gift of the right hand is large and eternall, of the left▪ short and . Yet you see, I am short in the long part, giue mee leaue to bee long in the short part. Herein wee haue many things considera∣ble. 1. That Riches and Hr are God gifts. 2. That all are not so, but some: and therefore it is necessary for vs to learne, whether God gaue vnto vs that riches and honour which we haue. 3. That albeit they are his gifts, yet but the gifts of his left hand.
4 That wealth and worship are for the most part companions; for both those gif lie in one and the same hand. 1. Riches and honour are God gifts, therefore i themselues not euill. Sunt Dei , rgo i se bona. Saith Augustine▪ Ep. 70. ad Bonif. Ne ptentur a,  &  bna,  & lis. That they may not be thought euill, they are giuen to good men: that they may not be thought the best good, they are giuen also to euill men. A rich man may be a good man, and a poore man may be wicked. Christ sanctified  as well as ; and that in his Life Death. 1. In his Birth: hee sanctified Pouerti, when hi chamber of presence was a Stable, his crdle a manger, his royall robes course ragges. Hee sanctified Ric, when he reced of the wise men preciou  Mat. . 11. Gld, Frankincense, and Myrth, Que  ipsissi la, dedignatus esst. Which if they had beene simply euill, he would not haue accepted. 2. In hi Life: hee sanctified  when hee was maintained , hauing no garment to put on; and the good women kept him by their contri∣butions. Hee was glad to borrow an Asse colt, when he was to ride: and to angle for mony in the sea, when he payd tribute. And ( if he wanted a bed) to complaine; Mat. 8. 20. Th Foxes haue holes, and the birds of the aire haue nests: but the Sonne of  hath not whre to rest his head. Hee sanctified Riches, when hee called Luk. 19. 2. Zaccheus a wealthy vsurer, and raised Iohn. 11. Lazarus a weal∣thy citizen, had his Ioh. 12. 6. Sd which gaue almes to the distressed, and bo his pse. And like a Prince, feasted thousands at one banket. 3. In his Death. He sanctified Pertie, when he had not a Graue of his owne, but was buried in another
mans Luk. 23. 53. Sepulchre: nay, not a sheete to wrappe him in, but was beholding to another for his linnen. And euen dying conuerted a poore malefactor on the Crosse by him. He sanctified Riches, when he accepted the kind∣nes of Ioseph, (whom Matthew calls a Mat. 27. 57. rich man, Marke an Mark. 15. 42. honourable) for his sepulture: and Ioh. 19. 39. Nichodemus his costly vnction, euen an hundreth pound waight, mix∣ed with myrrhe, and aloes. Though riches be to some pernicious; a fuming wine which turnes their braines: yet to others they are a vessell, wherein they may with more speed saile to hea∣uen: though no compasse, starre, or cause, to bring them thether. Others are called by Dauid, iri diuitiarum, Men of riches: because they possesse not their riches, but their riches haue subiugated them. We haue a kind of presage, though we conceiue it not, in saying of such a one; He is a man of wealth. The speach signifies him a slaue to his riches: the wealth is not the mans, but the man the wealths. But otherwise a rich man may be a good man: for wickednesse is not bound to wealthinesse, as heate is to fire: and arrogancie or lewdnesse may be incident to pouertie and basenes. Pauper superbus: a poore man proud, was one of Cyprians twelue abuses. A rotten log will yeeld as much saw-dust, as a piece of good timber: & a peasant ill nurtured, is also ill natured. A great gen∣tleman will shew more humble courtesie, then a thra∣shing hind, or a toiling ploughmā. Hagar was but a Gip∣see, a bondwoman yet was her excellent mistres Sara Gen. 16. 4. dispised in her eyes. As Ierm reproued the Monkes. Quid facit sub tica pnitentis regimus animus? So not seldome a sset coate shrowds as high a heart, as a silken gar∣ment. You shall haue a palrie cottage send vp more blacke smoke, then a goodly mannor. It is not wealth therefore, but vice that excludes men out of heauen.
The Fryers and Iesuites haue very strongly & strang∣ly backbited Riches: but all their railing on it is but behind the backe: secretly and in their hearts they loue it. When they are out of the reach of eyes, then Gold is their Sunne by day, and siluer their Moone by night. Some of them for enforced want, like the foxe dispraise the grapes they cannot reach. Or as Eusebius notes of Li∣cinius the Emperor; that he vsed to raile at learning, & to say, nothing worse became a prince, because himself was illiterate. So they cōmend nothing more then Pouerty, because they are, & must be poore, against their wills. Others of them find fault with Riches, whereof they haue great store; but would that none should couet it beside themselues. So the cosening Epicure made all his fellow guests beleeue, that the banket was poy∣soned; that all they refusing, hee might glut himselfe alone. These often cheate themselues, and worke their owne bane: whiles they so beat off others from the world, and wrappe themselues vp in it to their confu∣sion. The foxe in the fable, with diuerse other beasts, found a rich bootie of costly robes and iewels. Hee perswades the Lyon that he needs not trouble himselfe with them, because he is king, and may command all at his pleasure. He tells the Stagge, that if he should put them on, they would so molest him that hee could not escape the huntsmen. For the Boare, hee sayes they would euill fauouredly become him: and the wolfe he shuffles off with the false newes of a fold of Lambes hard by, which would doe him more good. So all gone he begins to put on the robes himselfe, and to reioyce in his lucky fraud. But instantly came the owners, and surprised him: who had so pusled himselfe in these ha∣biliments, that hee could not by flight escape: so they tooke him, and hanged him vp. The subtle foxes, Iesuites and Fryers diswade kings from coueting wealth, because of their power to com∣mand
all: and Great men, because it will make them enuied and hunted after for their trappings. Countrey men it will not become they say: and all the rest, that it will hinder their iourney to heauen. So in conclusi∣on they driue all away, and get the whole world for their master Pope, and themselues. But at last these foxes are caught in their owne noose: for the deuill finds them so wrapp'd & hamperd in these ornaments, and their hearts so besotted on money and riches, that he carries them with as much ease to hell, as the char∣riot drew Pharaoh into the red sea. For vs beloued, we teach you not to cast away the bagge, but couetousnesse. Non facultatem, sed cupiditatem reprehendimus. We bid you vse the world, but enioy the Lord. And if you haue wealth Luk. 16. 9. make you friends with your riches: that they (so made friends by your charitie) may receiue (and make way for) you into euerlasting habita∣tions. It is not your Riches of this world, but your riches of grace, that shall doe your soules good. Not my wealth, nor my blood, but my Christianitie makes me noble: quoth that noble Martyr Romanus. And though the Philo∣sopher merrily, when he was asked whether were bet∣ter, wisedome or Riches, answered, Riches: for I haue oftē, said he seene poore wise men at rich fooles dores; but neuer rich fooles at poore wise mens dores. Yet wealth may be ioyned with wisedome, goodnesse with greatnesse. Mary and Martha may bee sisters: righte∣ousnesse and riches may dwell together. Chrysostome on that aphorisme of Christ, Mat. 6. 24. Yee cannot serue God and Mammon obserues: that hee doth not say, Yee cannot haue God and Mammon; but ye can∣not serue God and Mammon: for hee that is the ser∣uant of God, must bee the master of his wealth. The Lord Iesus is able to sanctifie and saue the rich mans soule as well as the poores: and to send poore Lazarus into the bosome of rich Abraham. Where consider not
onely Aug. in Psal. 51. Qui sublatus, but Quò sublatus. Poore, but good Lazarus, is carried into Rich, but good Abrahams bo∣some: to signifie that neither Pouertie deserues heauen, nor Riches hell. Diuitiae non iniquae, sed iniquis. Riches are not vnrighteous, but to the vnrighteous. Nec culpa∣bile est habere ista; sed harere istis. It is not a sinne to haue them, but to trust them. As much might be sayd for Honour. It is the Lord that aduanceth. 1. Sam. 2. 30. Those that honour me, I will honour sayth God. It is God, sayth Iob, that putteth on the kings girdle that fastneth his honour about him. Promotion commeth neither from the East, nor from the West: nor from North, nor South: but onely from the Lord. Hence it followes that Great men may be good men: yea hence it should follow, that great men ought to be good men. They may be good. Christ had his faithfull fol∣lowers euen in Cesars familie. De Consid. Lib. 4. Bernard indeed com∣plained, that the Court is wont to receiue good men, but to make them bad men. Bonos facilius recipere, quam facere: and Plures illic defecisse bonos, quam profecisse malos. The Court doth sooner take good men, then make good men. There moe good are peruerted to euill, them euil converted to good. Yet in the Court of Pha∣raoh was a good Ioseph: in the Court of Darius a good Daniel in the Court of Ahashuerosh a good Mordecai. Neither is it euer true that, Quò quis corruptior moribus, & corrumpentior muneribus; the more a man is corrupt with vices, and corrupting with bribes, so much the more set by. The Pharises obiection is sometimes false. Ioh. 7. 48. Haue any of the Rulers beleeued on him? They may be good; yea They must be good. For they are vnprinted Sta∣tutes whereout euerie man reads his dutie. They are Legis factores, & therefore should not be Legis fractores. Aristotle calls them Loquentes Leges; speaking Lawes. In feriours often set their eyes, to supply the place of
their eares; and rather looke to see their duetyes, then to heare it. All should liue by Precept, but most will liue by Precedent. A Superiour therefore should teach men, to take the measure of his greatnesse, by his goodnes. These two should be of an euen length, of an equall pace. If honour out-runnes honesty, it will hardly be ouertaken. Let such a one appeare to the people as he would haue them be: and be himselfe such a one as he appeares. A great Person is like a great hill; which giues a faire prospect, but is subiect to the lightning and thunder of censures. 2, But it may here be obiected, that if Riches and Honour be GODS gifts, then is he the giuer of Iu∣das his wealth, and Hamans honour. Perhaps you would here learne, whether your riches and honours come from God or no: your demand is requisite, and I will striue to giue you satisfaction. First for Riches. If they come from God, they are Honestly gotten. Iustly disposed. Patiently lost. 1. They are well gotten: for God is not the Patron of vniust gaines. He can blesse a man well enough without the help of the Deuill. There are many that will haue wealth though they go a fishing for it, ey∣ther with Habakkuks Hab. 1. 15. net, or Ophni's booke. They do not onely trouble the waters for it, but they bloudy the waters; fetch it out of the bowels and life-bloud of the poore. This is not from God, nor will he blesse it. But Mica. 1. 7. as it was gathered of the hire of a harlot, so it shall returne to the hire of a harlot. It is easie for that man to be rich, that will make his conscience poore. He that will defraud, forsware, bribe, oppresse, serue the time, vse, abuse all men, all things, swallow any wickednesse; cannot escape rich∣es. Whereas he, whose conscience will not admit of
aduancing or aduantaging himselfe by indirect means, sits downe with contented Pouertie. But Bonus non cito esit diues: a good man seldome becomes rich on the suddaine. Wealth comes not easily, not quickly to the honest dore. Neither let vs enuie the grauell, that stickes in the throate of iniustice. For hee that will swallow the baite, which hangs on the Line of another mans estate, shall be choaked with it. Of riches let vs neuer desire more, then an honest man may well beare away. Mallem me mi∣serum sanctum quàm prosperum peccatorem. I had ra∣ther be a miserable Saint, then a prosperous sinner. When the raising of thy roofe, is the rasing of ano∣thers foundation. Hab. 2. 11. The stones shall cry out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber shall answere it. Thus on accipimus data, sed arripimus prohibita: we take not things with a beggars hand, but with a Tyrants: they are not Gods gifts, but our felonies. For this cause Riches are called Bona fortunae; the goods of fortune: not that they come by chance, but that it is a chance if euer they be good. Hab. 2. 6. Vaeac cumulan∣ti non sua. And Ver. 9. Woe to him that coueteth an euill couetous∣nesse to his house. Wee thinke the oppressors auarice euill onely to the houses of the oppressed: but God sayth, it is most euill to his owne. Whether fraud or force bring in vniust gaine, it is as a coale of fire put in the thatch of his house. And to shew that God is not the giuer of this, hee powres a curse vpon it; that often they who thus desire most wealth shall not haue it: the world be∣ing to them like a froward woman, the more woed, the further off. Esa. 33. 1. Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoyled: when thou shalt cease to spoyle, thou shalt be spoi∣led. And Habac. 2. 8. Because thou hast spoyled many nations, all the  of the people shall spoyle thee and thou shalt be for booties vnto them. Many a great fish in
the sea of this world, deuoures another: and instantly comes a greater, and deuoures him. As that Sueton. in vita vespas. Empe∣ror suffered his Officers to bee like spunges, sucking vp the goods of the comminaltie: and being once full, hee squeased them into his owne coffers. Gen. 41. 21. Phara∣ohs leane kine, that deuoured the fat, were yet them∣selues neuer the fatter. Philip was wont to say, that an asse laden with Gold, would enter the gates of any citie: but the golden lode of bribes and extortions shall barre a man out of the Citie of God. All that is so gotten, is like quick siluer; it will bee running. If the Father leaue all to his son, yet the sonne will leaue nothing for his sonne, perhaps nothing for himselfe: neuer resting till. Quodcumque profunda Traxit auaritia, Luxu peiore refundat. Claudian. Vntill he hath throwne abroad all with a forke, which his father got together with a rake Nahu. 2. 12. The lion did teare in pieces enough for his whelpes, and filled his holes with prey, and his denns with rauine. But I will bee against thee, sayth the Lord: and the sword shall deuour thy young Lyons. The father playes the Lyon for his whelps, oppresseth and consumeth the poore: but his young Lyons, which he so prouides for, shall be destroyed. Non habet euentus sordida praeda bonos. Ov. Amor. We haue seene huge hills of wealth, like mountaines of ice, thus suddenly thawed as waxe, with the heate of Luxurie. But Parum iusto, Psal. 27. 16. a little that the righteous man hath, is better then the riches of many wicked. For the armes of the wicked shall be broken: the strength of their state shall be confounded. Their wealth is not Gods, therefore he takes no charge of it. But the Riches of the good, is the riches of God, and he will prosper it. 2. These riches are well disposed or vsed. Pietie not
lust, rules them. He whom Gods blessings hath made rich, giues God his part, man his part, and keepes the thirds to himselfe. He returnes part. 1. To God: it is reason that he who giues all should haue part of all. And because thou shouldest not grudge it, hee chalengeth but a litle part, but the tenth part, wretched men, that will not giue him one, that gaue them tenne. As Pilates wife sent her husband word; Mat. 27. 19. Haue thou nothing to doe with that iust man: meddle not with Gods portion; lest a voyce come to thee, as to Abimelech, Gen. 20. 3. Thou art but a dead man. This was good Iacobs resolution; Gen. 28. 22. of all that thou shalt giue me, I will sure: ly giue the tenth vnto thee. Goe too now ye that say, the Gospell hath no law for Tythes; and that they were meerely ceremoniall. Iacob payed them vnder nature: they are therefore vnnaturall men that deny them. You can find no law commanding your payment, but you shall find a law condemning your non payment. What can then be pleated for our accursed Impro∣priations? Did the heauenly Wisedome euer giue you those riches? Shew vs your Patent, and wee will be∣leeue you. If euer God did conuey his owne por∣tion to you shew vs his hand and seale for it. Where did euer Iesus passe away his royall prerogatiue, or acknowledge any fine before a Iudge; that you say, Haec nostra sunt; these are ours? What money did, you euer pay him for them? where is your acqui∣tance? Shew your discharge. O but you plead prescription! If you were not past shame, you would neuer dare to prescribe against the eternall God. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: the king of heauen had these from the beginning, and will you now plead prescription? You may thus vndoe the poore Minister in these terrene Courts, but your plea shall bee damned in the Courts of God. We can produce his act and deed, whereby hee separa∣ted
Tenths to himselfe: haue you nothing to shew, and will you take away his inheritance? Goe to, you haue a Law, and by your owne law this proceeding is intole∣rable. You say, you hold them by your law, by your law you shall be condemned. Perhaps you thinke to make amends for all, for you will encrease the stipend of the vicar. When the Father hath gotten thousands by the sacrilegious Impro priation, the Sonne perhaps may giue him a Cowes grasse, or a matter of fortie shillings per annum. Or be∣stow a litle whiting on the Church, & a wainscote seate for his owne worship. Yea more; hee may chance to found a litle Almeshouse, and giue twelue pence a piece a weeke to sixe poore people. O this oppressor must needes goe to heauen, what shall hinder him? But it will bee, as the by-word is, in a Wheelebarow: the fiends, and not the Angells will take hold on him. For is it not a great piece of charitie, to get fiue hun∣dred pound a yeare from God and to bestow twenty markes a yeare on the poore? When Dauid prouiding for the Temples building, saw how bountifully the Princes and people offered; he giues solemne thankes to God, acknowledging that they had all receiued this first from him. f For all things come of thee, and of thine 1. Chro. 29. 14 owne haue we giuen thee. The originall is, of thine hand. What here the left hand of God gaue to them, their right hand returnes to God. They did not as our Church∣sackers and ransackers doe; robbe God with the right hand, and giue him a litle backe with the left: take from him a pound, and restore him a peny. Well you would know whether God hath giuen you your wealth; and he sayes, whatsoeuer you haue gotten by Tenths was none of his giuing: and, besides euerlasting malediction, it shall make your posteritie beggars. 2. The second rule of vsing our riches well, is
(when God hath his owne, in the next place) tribuere cuique suum: to render euery man his due. If they bee Gods gifts, they must be disposed with iustice. This is double; Commutatiue, & distributiue Iustice. The one Arithmeticall, the other Geometricall. Arithmeticall is to giue euerie one alike: Geometricall is to giue euerie one according to his deserts. 1, Cùm res adaequaturrei. 2. Cùm res adaequatur personae. There are two rules for him that would be iust: a negatiue, and an affirmatiue rule. 1. The negatiue. Tobit. 4. 15. Doe that to no man which thou wouldest not haue done to thy selfe. Quod tibi non vis, alterine facias. 2. The affirmatiue. Mat. 7. 12. Whatsoeuer ye would that men should doe to you, doe ye euen so to them. Not what euerie man out of his disordered passions would haue another doe to him: but what in his composed and deliberate iudg∣ment he approues done to himselfe, let him doe that to others. Wouldst thou be relieued? Relieue. Wouldest thou borrow? lend. If I should follow this point of iust distribution, as a marke to discerne of your riches whether they are Gods goods or not; how distasting would my speech be! How few of your houses are filled with those trea∣sures onely, which the heauenly wisedome here disper∣seth! How litle of them is found to come in Gods name! It may be some of your wealth was giuen you of God; but your euill vsage alters the nature of it; and it can no more properly be ascribed to him. It is hard to draw this circumstance into a square: it is so confu∣sed in your actions, that I cannot tell how to find a method for it in my discourse. You may make your riches none of Gods blessings, by vsing them ill in re∣spect of others, especially three wayes. Or Detinendo debita, by detaining things due to others Extrudendo vilia, by putting forth base things for good. Corrūpendo vtilia, by corrupting with good things others.
1. By detaining those things that are due to others: & these are either Debts Promises. 1. Debts. Rom. 13. Rom. 13. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to loue one another. Indeed there must be some owing, as there must be some lending: without this mutuall commerce we are worse then Sauages. But we must pay againe. Psal. 37. 21. The wicked borroweth, and payeth not againe. Debt is not deadly sinne when a man hath no meanes, but when he hath no meaning to pay. There must be votall restituti∣on, if there cannot be actuall. Restore Quoad affectum. thought you cannot Quoad effectum. 2. Cor. 8. 12. For if their be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, & not according to that he hath not. God reckons that as done which a man Bern. verè voluit, tamet si non valuit adimplere; faithfully would, though not fully could accomplish. There are that will restore some, but not all: to this they haue Posse, but no velle: let the creditors be con∣tent with one of foure. But this litle detinie is great ini∣quitie. For a mite is debt, as well as a million. Tam, though not Tantum: so good a debt, though not so great a debt. And Mat. 25. 23. he that is faithfull in a litle, shall bee made ruler ouer much. What shall we then say of their goods, that breake, and defraud others? Come they from Gods hand, or from the deuills? Surely Satans right hand gaue them, not Gods Left. Haec mea sunt, sayth the Deuill: meae diuitie, mei diuites. These are mind, my riches, and my rich men. O that men would see this damnable sinne! mee thinkes their terrified consciences should feare, that the bread they eate should choake them; for it is stolne; and stolne bread fills the belly of grauell. They should feare the drinke they swallow should poyson them; being the very bloud of good housholders, mixed with the teares of widowes and orphanes. The poore creditor is often vndone, and glad of bread
and water: whiles they like hogges lurking in their styes, fatte and lard their ribbes with the fruite of others labours. They robbe the husband of his inheritance, the wife of her dowry, the children of their portions: the curse of whole families is against them. And if this sinne lye vpon a great mans foule, hee shall finde it the heauyer, to sinke him lower into perdition. They are the Lords of great lands, yet liue vpon other mens moneys: they must riot and reuell, let the poore commoners pay for it. They haue their Protections: their bodyes shall not bee molested, and their Lands are exempted: what then, shal they escape? no, their soules shall pay for it. When the poore creditor comes to demand his owne, they raile at him, they send him loden away, but with ill words, not good money. In the Countrey they set labourers on worke, but they giue them no hire. Tut they are Tenants, vassalls: must they therefore haue no pay? Yet those very Land-lords will bate them no∣thing of their rents. But the riches so hadde, are not of Gods giuing, but of the Deuills lending; and hee will make them repay it a thousand fold in hell. 2. Promises are due debts, and must not be detained. If the good man promise, though to his owne hurt, Psal. 15. 4. he changeth not. Indeed now Promissis diues quilibet esse potest: men are rich in promises, but they are poore in performance. More respect is had to commoditie, then to honestie. Men haue their euasions to disanull their promises: either they aequiuocate, or reserue; or be∣ing vrged plead for getfullnesse. But the truth is, they haue sufficient memorie, but not sufficient honestie. It is said that a good name is the best riches; Qua semet amissa, postea nullus eris. But what care they for a name, so long as they saue their money? Iuen. Satyr. 1. Quid enim saluis in∣famia nummis?
A Pilate could say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; Ioh. 19. 22. What I haue written, I haue written: and shall not a Christian say, Quod dixifaciam, what I haue promised, I will per∣forme? Hence it comes that there is so litle fayth in the world: that scriueners haue so much worke, that the prouerbe runns in euery bodies mouth; Fast bind, fast find: that there is no hope of good deeds, but Sea∣led and deliuered: that there is more trust to mens seales, then to their soules. For the Law of God holds vs not so fast, as the lawes of men. There is more awe of iudgement in the common Pleas, then of a sentence of condemnation in the Court of heauen. The Sherife is altogether feared, not God: their is no dread of any Execution but his. Is the wealth thus detai∣ned, in your owne consciences, Gods blessing? de∣ceiue not your owne soules. God requires vs to be iust in all our words, as righteous in all our wayes. A Christians word should bee as currant as his coine. Thus you see this first circumstance of In∣iustice taxed. Therefore Prou. 3. 27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due; when it is in the power of thy hand to doe it. 2. By putting forth base things for good. The Pro∣phet Amos speakes of some, that Chap. 8. 6. sell the refuse of their wheat the basest wares: neither doe they sell them for base, but for good. If halfe a score lies, back'd with as many oathes, will put off their vile commodities, they shall not lye vpon their hands. Not vpon their hands, I say; though vpon their consciences. Plenius aequo Laudat venales, qui vult extrudere merces. Hor. lib. 2. ep. Their rule for themselues is Vincat vtilitas; for others Caueat emptor. Either they will shew you one thing, & sell you another: and this cosenage hath longer armes then all other trickes, and ouer reaches them.
Or they will conceale the insufficiencie of the wares; and for this cause they darken their shops, lest the light should reueale their workes of darkenesse. Ioh. 3. 19. They loue darkenesse more then light: let them take heed, least it be vnto them according to their desires: least as they haue brought hell into their shops, so their shops send them into hell. Or if the commoditie bee discerned bad, you must haue that or none. If your necessity forceth you to buy, it shall force you to buy such base stuffe. This is a grie∣uous sinne in all professions, especially amongst Apo∣thecaries: because with their iniustice may be also mix∣ed a spice of murder. But you will say, wee compell none to buy our commodities: we but shew them, and make the price. But it is craft tendere plagas, etsi agita∣turus non sis: to lay snares, though you driue not men into them. Or be it what it will, yet rather then refuse your money, they will protest to giue you the buying. Yea rather then faile, they will sell it you cheaper, then before they swore it cost them. Quis metus aut pudor est properantis auari? What, sell cheaper then they buy? How should they then liue? Iuv. Sat. 14. The answere is easie, they liue by their lying. Now doth this wealth come on Gods name? is this the blessing of Heauen? Which of your consciences dare thinke so? Saint Augustine speakes of a certaine De Trin. lib. 13. cap. 3. Iester, that vndertooke to tell the people what they all did most desire. Multitudes came to heare this: to whose expectation he thus answered.  vultis emere, & cha∣re vendere: You would buy cheape, and sell deare. And this is euery mans desire, that desires to bee rich, more then to be iust. 3. By making others bad with his goods: and here we may fitly proceed to the condemnation of Bribe∣ry. Deut. 16. 19. A gift blindeth the eyes of the wise. They that see fur∣thest into the Law, and most clearly discerne the causes
of iustice, if they suffer the dusts of bribes to be thrown into their sight, their eyes will water and twinkle, and fall at last to blind connivence. It is a wretched thing, when Iustice is made a Hackney, that may bee back'd for money, and put on with golden spurs, euen to the desired iourneys end of iniurie and iniquitie. If the partie be innocent, let his cause be sentenced for his innocencies sake: if guiltie, let not gold buy out his punishment. If the cause bee doubtfull, the Iudge shall see it worse, when he hath blinded his eyes with Bribes. But the will of the giuer doth transferre right of the gift to the receiuer. No, for it is not a volunta∣ry will. But as a man is willing to giue his purse to the theife, rather then venture his life or limbe: so the poore man giues his Bribes, rather then hazard his cause. Thou sayest, the theefe hath no right to the purse so giuen: God sayth, nor thou to the Bribe. And this is sinfull in a Iusticer, though he passe true Iudgment on the cause: but much more accursed, when for this he will condemne the cause he should allow, or allow the cause he should condemne. To iustifie the wicked, and condemne the innocent, is alike abhomination to the Lord. Farre be from our soules this wickednes; that the eare which should be open to complaints, is thus stopped vp with the eare-waxe of partialitie. Alas poore truth, that shee must now bee put to the charges of a golden eare-picke, or sh cannot be heard. But to shew that these riches are not of Gods giuing, his anger is hoe against them. Iob. 15. 34. Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of Briberie. The houses or tabernacles, the hambers, hals, offices, studies, Benches; a Fire shall consume them. They may stand for a while, but the indignation of the Lord is kindled; and if it once be∣gin to burne, all the waters in the South are not able to quench it. These Riches then come not of Gods bles∣sing: but I pray that Gods blessing may bee yours,
though you want those Riches. Time, that seuere mode∣rator, chargeth me silence: and I rather chuse abruptly to breake off my discourse, then immodestly to abuse your tryed patience. The Lord send vs the gifts of his Left hand at his owne good pleasure, but neuer denie vs the blessings of his Right, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. The second Sermon. PROV. 3. 16. Length of dayes is in her right hand: and in her left hand, riches and honour. WE are looking into the left hand of Wisedome: and there haue found. 1. that Riches and Honour are GODS gifts. 2. That euery mans riches and honour are not so; that the mouth of wickednes might be stopped. Therefore to satisfie our owne consciences, that they are Gods blessings to vs, I obserued that they must be. 1. honest∣ly gotten. 2. iustly disposed: and that by rendring sin∣cerely that which is due. 1. to God. 2. to Man. 3. to our selues. Duties to others ended my former dis∣course, I must now beginne at Our selues. The third act of disposing our Riches well, when God hath his portion, and Man his portion; is to take
the thirds to our selues. It is Gods will that with the wealth he hath giuen thee, thou shouldest refresh and consolate thy selfe. Psal. 23. 5. Thou preparest a table before mee, thou annointest my head with oyle, my cup runneth ouer. Wherefore hath God spred a table before thee, but that thou shouldest eate? Wherfore giuen thee a cup running ouer, but that thou shouldest drinke? If thou haue Psal. 104. 15. wine, make thy heart glad: if oile, let thy face shine: if bread, strengthen thy spirits. Weare thy owne wooll, and drinke the milke of thy owne flockes. It is a blessing which the Lord giues to those that feare him; Psal. 128. 2. Thou shalt eate the labour of thine owne hands: happie shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. But a curse to the wic∣ked; that they shall plant vineyards, and not taste the fruit thereof. The riches that God truely giues, man truely enioyes. Eccl. 5. 19. Euery man to whom God hath giuen ri∣ches and wealth, and hath giuen him power to eate thereof, and to take his portion, and to reioyce in his labour: this is the gift of God. Now a man may take from himselfe this comfort in abusing his wealth; and this many wayes? especially foure: to Superstition, Malice, Ryot, Miserie. 1. By spending them vpon workes of Superstition, to the dishonour of God. And this is a high degree of ingratitude; When God hath giuen them a sword to defend themselues, and they turne the poynt of it vpon his owne brest. So God gaue Israell sheepe and oxen, and they offer them vp to Baall. Many in Eng∣land are beholding to God for great reuenewes, lands, and Lordships; and they therewith maintaine Iesuites and Seminaries, his professed enemies. These vse their riches as the Israelites did their eare-rings and iewels: God gaue them for their owne ornament, and they turne them to an Idoll.
2. By malice, in abusing them to vnnecessary quar∣rels & contentions of Law; to the hindrance of Gods peace and their neighbours welfare. When men will put out one of their owne eyes, to put out both their neighbours: Nay both their owne, for one of his. Thus what they get by the happines of forraine peace, they spend in ciuill warres. How vnnaturall is it for one hand thus to beate and wound another! Eyther of them gets a shell: You know who goes away with the meate. 3. By ryot. Quicquid dant, dant vel veneri vel ventri. They spend more vpon the Tauerne, then vpon the Tabernacle: at the house of playes, then at the house of prayse: more vpon their owne hounds, then vpon Gods poore children. Iulius Caesar seeing women car∣rie little Dogs vnder their armes, asked if they had no children. God asketh you, that giue your bread to dogs, if he hath no children for your charitie. But they an∣swere all, as the wicked in the 12. Psalme. Psal. 12. 4. Our tongues are our owne. They stop the mouth of all exhortation to frugall courses, with It is my owne: a man may spend his owne as hee list: I wast none of your goods: and what hath friend in priuate, or preacher in publicke to doe with it? But they shall find one day, that they were but Stewards, that these Riches were but intrusted to them, and they shall giue a strict account. Nothing is properly a mans owne, but Peccata sua, his sinnes. Thy sinnes are thine owne, thy riches Gods. 4. By miserable niggardice, in forbearing to take his owne portion; and so becometh his owne con∣sumption. No maruell if such a miser starue others, when hee famisheth himselfe. Such a one is the worst vermine the land beares: another vermine seekes but to feed it selfe; but he hoording vp his graine feedes many thousands of them. Let him beware, least they also at last deuoure himselfe. As that Germane Bishop,
that hauing great store of corne in a grieuous famine, Act. & Mon. pag. 185. refused to sell it to the poore, and suffered the Rattes to eate it. But by the ust iudgement of God, the Mise and Rats which he fed with his graine, did also feed vpon him; albeit he built a Tower in the middest of the riuer Rheine to auoid them; which the Germanes call still Rattes Tower. How shall they which slander heauen with pretended dearths, be admitted as friends to that place which they haue belyed! You see how these riches must be gotten, how dis∣posed; honestly gotten, iustly dispensed; now it follows also in the next place, that they must be 3. Patiently lost: When God giues riches to the good, he giues them also a heart to trust in himselfe: in himselfe I say, not in them. 1. Tim. 6. 17. Trust not in vncertaine Ri∣ches, but in the liuing God; who giueth vs aboundantly all things to enioy. He giues abundantly, but he forbiddeth trust in that abundance. He commends riches to vs, as a great man doth a seruant to his friend; worke him, but trust him not: put labour to him, not confidence in him. Wealth may doe vs good seruice; but if it get the masterie of our trust, it will turne tyrant, Terma∣gant; we condemne our selues to our owne gallies. To the godly riches are neuer so deare, but they can be content to forgoe them. They receiue them at Gods hands with much thankfulnesse, and they loose them with much patience. When God takes ought from vs, he does vs no wrong. Retrahit sua, non abstrahit nostra: Greg. in Mor. he doth but take backe his owne, not take away ours. So Iob. Iob. 1. 21. The Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken away. The Lord giueth, therefore hee may take away. Yea faith sayes; Lord, take all, so thou giue me thy selfe. Mat. 19. 27. We haue left all, and followed thee; sayth Peter. Nos se∣quamur Christum, caetera sequentur nos. Let vs follow Christ, other thinges shall follow vs. But if they doe not, it is gaine enough to haue Christ. He is too coue∣tous
whom the Lord Iesus cannot satisfie. We may loose diuitias Dei, but neuer Deum diuitiarum. We may be forsaken of these riches of God, but neuer of the God of riches. Amittamus omnia, dum habeamus haben∣tem omnia. Let vs loose all, so we haue him that hath all. That was neuer perfectly good, that might bee lost. Of this nature are riches: they haue made many prou∣der, none better. As neuer man was better, so neuer wise man thought himselfe better for them. That wise Prophet would neuer haue prayed against riches, if their want had beene the want of blessednesse. The De∣uill indeed sayes, All those will I giue thee: but the two dearest Aposties say, Siluer and gold haue I none. Who would not rather be in the state of those Saints, then of that Deuill? Riches are such thinges, as those that haue them not, want them not: those that haue them, want them: they are lost in a night, and a man is neuer the worse for loosing them. How many Kings (not fewer then nine in our Iland) that haue begun their glory in a Throne, haue ended it in a cell: changing their command of a Scepter, for the contemplation of a Booke! Alas silly things, that they should dare aske one dramme of our confidence. Non tanta in multis foelicitas, quanta in paucis securitas. There is not so much happines in the highest estate, as there is content and peace in the lowest. Only then God be our trust, whose mercie we can no more loose, then himselfe can loose his mercie. Thus you see this second generall poynt amplified: if Riches be Gods good blessings, (not onely in them∣selues, so they are alwayes good, but to vs) then they are gotten honestly, disposed iustly, lost patiently. As much happily might be said for Honour; wherein I will briefely consider, how and when it is of God. God indeed giues Honour and Riches; but not all Ho∣nour;
as you heard before not all Riches. There are foure things in an honoured person. First his Person, where∣in he pertakes of the common condition of Mankind; liues and dies a man. Euen the sonnes of Princes haue their breath in their nosthrilles. Secondly his Honour and dignitie; this simply considered is of God, whoso∣euer he be that hath it, a Ioseph or a Haman. Thirdly, the manner of comming to his Honour: and this is no longer of God, then the meanes are good. If it bee Gods honour, God must giue it, not man vsurpe it. Fourthly the menaging of this Honour; and this is also of the Lord, if it be right and religious. It happeneth often that Potens, the great man is not of God. Hos. 8. 4. They haue set vp Kings, but not by me: they haue made Princes, and I knew it not. The manner of getting dignity is not alwayes of God. Richard 3. came to the Crowne of England by bloud and murther. Alexander 6. obtained the Popedome, by giuing himselfe to the Deuill: Yet the dignitie is of God. Prou. 8. 15. By me Kings raigne: by me Prin∣ces and Nobles. It is a hard question, wherein Honour consists. It is in bloud, descending from the veines of noble aunce∣stors? Not so, except nature could produce to Noble parents noble children. It was a monstrous tale that Nicippus his Ewe should yeane a Lyon. Though it be true among irrationall creatures, that they euer bring forth their like; Eagles hatch Eagles; and Doues Doues: yet in mans progenie there is often found not so like a proportion, as vnlike a disposition. The earthy part onely followes the seed, not that whose forme and at∣tending qualities are from aboue. Honour must there∣fore as well plead a Charter of successiue vertue, as of continued scutchions, or it cannot consist in bloud. The best things can neuer be traduced in propagation: thou mayest leaue thy sonne heire to thy lands in thy will, to thy Honour in his bloud; thou canst neuer be∣queath
him thy vertues. The best qualities do so cleaue to their subiects, that they disdaine communication to others. That is then onely true Honour, where dignitie and desert, bloud and vertue meete together: the great∣nesse whereof is from bloud, the goodnesse from ver∣tue. Among Fooles dignitie is enough without desert: among wise men desert without dignitie. If they must bee separated, desert is infinitely better. Greatnesse without vertue laudatur ore alieno, damnatur conscientia sua; is commended by others tongues, condemned in the owne heart. Vertue though without promotion, is more comforted in the owne content, then dishart∣ned by others contempt. It is a happie composition when they are vnited: thinke it your honour ye great men, that you are ennobled with vertues: not that you haue, but that you deserue Honour. Let this that hath beene spoken teach vs some lessons concerning Ho∣nour. 1. Take it when God sends it, but bee not ambiti∣ous of it. Indigni est arripere, non accipere honorem. It is an argument of vnworthinesse to snatch it denyed, not to accept it offered. 1. Pet. 5. 5. God resisteth the proud; oppo∣seth himselfe in a profest warre against him; as if he held a sword against his brest, when he would rise vp in glory, to nle him fast downe to the earth. But he giueth grace to the humble: like a great & good Prince he giues those seruants grace and honour, whom hee perceiues least ambitious of it. Such men seeke not for honour, as for a Iewell they would faine find, but one∣ly stumble at it, as Saul sought but his Fathers Asses, when he lighted on a Kingdome. Pride like smoke will surge vpward, though it vanish into aire: massie vertue like gold keeps below, & is more preciously respected. Hee that would mount, cares not what attendance he daunces at all houres, vpon whose staires hee sittes
waiting, what enormities he soothes, what deformi∣ties he imitates, what base offices he does prostrate himselfe to, so he may rise. His carriage is alienum a se, quite another thing from himselfe: he doth glew it on indecently, that he may skrew himselfe into fauour. This man neuer vnderstood the charge that goes with honour; Which the most wise disposition of God hath coupled together. Charge without some honour would ouerlay a man. If a man could haue ho∣nour without some trouble, it would so transport him, that he were continually in danger of running madde. The poore man enuies the great for his honour: the great perhaps enuies the poore more for his peace: for as he liues obscurely, so securely. He that rightly knowes the many publicke, and more secret vexati∣tions incident to Honour, would not (as that King sayd of his Crowne) stoope to take it vp, though it lay at his feete before him. 2. Liue worthy of that Honour thou hast. Great∣nesse not gooded with grace is like a Beacon vpon a high hill: Qui conspiciunt, despiciunt: they that behold it, hate it, though perhaps they dare not cen∣sure it. The knee may be forced to reuerence, but but the mind cannot but abhorre so vnworthy a Sta∣tue. In his pride he stomackes the couerd head, or the stiffe knee of a good Mordecai, fretting that other men do not thinke him so good as he thinkes himselfe. But indeed he doth not thinke himselfe more honour∣able then others thinke bim base. All the poore ho∣nour that hee hath, is onely kept aboue ground with his body; both corrupt, fall, and rotte together: and if it bee coniurd vp at the funerall, to present it selfe, yet it failes not to goe backe with the He∣ralds. 3. Forget not your originall, ye whose browes the wreathes of honour haue (aboue hopes) engirt.
If the Lord hath Psal. 113. 7. 8. raised you out of the dust: and lifted you vp out of the dunghill: and set you among the Princes of the people; yet forget not your Fathers house, nor the place of your beginning. Miseranda obliuio originis non meminisse. He neuer truely vnderstands what hee is, that forgets what hee hath beene. Salomons ob∣seruation is often true; Eccle. 10. 6. Follie is set in great digni∣tie: Albeit this bee not the right Vbi; Follie in excel∣lencie. Now these excellent fooles soone forget, de quo surrectio detur; From howe low estate they are risen. They consider not how glad their Carkases would once haue beene of a warme couering; that are now richer then Lilies, more gorgeous then May: scarce Mat. 6. 29. Salomon in all his glory was arayed like one of these. They consider not, that neede once made them trudge through the Mire, euen many tedious iourneys; that climbe by vniust Riches to that dig∣nitie, as in their Caroches to be whirled through the popular streetes. It was Iacobs humble acknowledgement of Gods mercie to him. Gen. 32. 10. With my staffe I passed ouer this Ior∣dan, and now I am become two bands. If blind Ingrati∣tude would suffer many proud eyes to see it, howe iustly might diuerse say: With my staffe came I hi∣ther walking, and now I ride in triumph with atten∣dants. To these let me apply the words of the Pro∣phet: Esa. 51. 1. Looke vnto, the Rocke whence ye are hewen, and to the hole of the pitte whence ye are digged. Remember your poore beginning, that you may blesse God for your aduancing. Say not onely in generall, Quis homo! Psal. 8. 4. What is man that thou O Lord art so mindfull of him? But Quis ego? 1. Sam. 9. 21. What am I, and what is my Fathers house, that GOD should thus raise me vp! 4. If thou haue Honour, keepe it, but trust it not. Nothing is more inconstant; for it depends vpon in∣constancie
it selfe, the vulgar breath. Which is Bel∣lua multorum capitum, a Beast of many heads, and as many tongues, which neuer keepe long in one tune As they neuer agree one with another, so seldome doe they agree long with themselues. Paul and Bar∣nabas Act. 14. come to Lystra, and raise an impotent Creeple: Hereat the amased people would needs make them Gods, and draw Buls and garlands to the Altars for sacrifice to them. Not long after they draw Paul out of the Citie, and stone him. They suddenly turne him from a God to a malefactor; and are ready to kill him in stead of killing sacrifice to him. O the fickle∣nesse of that thing, which is committed to the keeping of vulgar hands. Trust not then popularitie with thy Honour, so it is mutable: but trust vertue with it, so it is durable. Nothing can make sure a good memorie, but a good life. It is a foolish dreame, to hope for im∣mortalitie and a long-lasting name, by a monument of brasse or stone. It is not dead stones, but liuing men, that can redeeme thy good remembrance from obliui∣on. A Sumptuous Tombe couers thy putrified Car∣kase; and be thy life neuer so lewd, a commending E∣pitaph shadows all: but the passenger that knew thee, telles his friends; that these out-sides are hypocriti∣call, for thy life was as rotten as is thy corpes: and so is occasioned by thy presumed glorie, to lay open thy deserued infamie. Neither can the common peo∣ple preserue thy honour whiles thou liuest, nor can these dull and senselesse Monuments keepe it when thou art dead. Onely thy noble and Christian life makes euery mans heart thy Tombe, and turnes euery tongue into a pen, to write thy deathlesse Epitaph. 5. Lastly, if God giues to some men Honour, it is then manifest that God allowes difference of persons. He ordaines some to rule and others to obey: some ma∣sters, others seruants; he setteth some vp on high,
and placeth others in a low degree. To repine at o∣thers greatnesse and our owne meannesse, is to cauill with God; as if hee wanted wisedome and equitie in disposing these inferiour conditions. It is a sauage and popular humour, to maligne and inveigh against men in eminent places. That rhyme, When Adam delued, and Eue span, Who was then a Gentleman? seemes to bee made among Iacke Strawes followers, and to sauour of Rebellious discontent. God allowes no man to vilefie, where hee hath honoured: no scurri∣lous Libelles disgracing those that liue, yea dispara∣ging the very dead; shall passe the Court of Gods Iustice vncensured. Where the Lord conferres and confirmes Honour, woe to the tongue that shall traduce it. This second poynt hath held vs long, the breuitie of the rest shall ease it. 3. Obserue that Salomon in the donation of the left hand, couples together Riches and Honour: as if these two were for the most part inseparable companions. Eccle. 6. God giues to a man Riches and Honour. First Riches, and then Honour: for it is lightly found, Eccl. 6. 2. so much Riches, so much Honour; and reputation is measured by the Acre. I haue wealth enough, saith the worldling. Luke 12. I will turne Gentleman, take my ease, eate, drinke, and be merry. Riches are the staires whereby men climbe vp into the height of dignitie; the fortification that defends it: the food it liues vp∣pon: the oyle that keeps the lampe of Honour from go∣ing out. Honour is a bare robe, if Riches doe not lace and flourish it: and Riches a dull Lumpe, till Honour giue a Soule to quicken it. Fiftly then Honour and Riches, Wealth and Worship doe beare one another companie. 4. Lastly obserue, that though riches and honour be Gods gifts, yet they are but the gifts of his left hand: therefore it necessarily followes, that euery wise man
will first seeke the blessings of the Right. Math. 6. 33. First seeke the kingdome of God, and his righteousnes: and these things shall be added to you. Godlinesse is the best Riches, Ri∣ches the worst: let vs striue for the former without condition: for the other if they fall in our way, let vs stoope to take them vp: if not, let vs neuer couet them. It is no Wisedome to refuse Gods kindnesse, that offers wealth: nor pietie to scratch for it when God withholds it. When the Lord hath set thee vp as high as Haman in the Court of Ahasuerus, or pro∣moted thee to ride with Ioseph in the second Chariot of Egypt: were thy stocke of Cattell exceeding Iobs; Iob 1. 3. seauen thousand sheepe, three thousand Camels, fiue hun∣dred yoke of Oxen: did thy Wardrobe put downe Sa∣lomons, and thy cup-bord of plate Belshazzars, when the vessels of Gods temple were the ornature. Yet all these are but the gifts of Wisedomes left hand; and the possessors may be vnder the malediction of God and goe downe to damnation. If it were true, that sancti∣or qui ditior, that goods could make a man good, I would not blame mens kissing the left hand, and suc∣king out Riches and Honour. But alas what antidote a∣gainst the terrour of conscience can bee chym'd from gold? What charme is there in braue apparell to keepe off the rigour of Sathan? Quod tibi praestat opes, non tibi praestat opem. That which makes thee wealthy, can∣not make thee happie. Ionas had a Gourd that was to him an Arbour: he sate vnder it secure: but suddenly there was a worme that bitte it, and it dyed. Compare (secretly in your hearts) your riches to that Gourd: your pleasure to the greenesse of it: your pompe, attendance vanities to the leaues of it: your suddaine encrease of wealth, to the growing and shooting vp of it. But withall forget not the Worme and the Wind; the Worme that shall kill your roote is Death, and the Wind that
shall blow vpon you is calamitie. There is a greater defect in this wealth and worshippe then their vncer∣taintie. Non mdo fallacia quia dubia verùm insidiosa quia dulcia. They are not onely deceitfull through their Aug. ticklenesse, but dangerous through their lushosnesse. Men are apt to surfeit on this luxurient abundance: it is a bae to securitie, a baud to wantonnes. Here is the maine difference betweene the gifts of Gods right hand and of his left. He giues reall blessings with the left, but he doth not settle them vpon vs: he promiseth  perpetuitie; but with the graces of his right he giues assurance of euerlastingnes. Christ calles Riches the Math. 13. 22. riches of deceitfulnesse: but grace Luk. 10. 42. Psal. 35. Psal. 125. the better part that shall neuer be taken away. Dauid compares the wealthy to a flourishing tree that is soone withered: but Faith stablisheth a man like Mount Sion, neuer to be remoued. He that thinkes hee sittes surest in his seate of Riches, let him take heed least he fall. When a great man boasted of his abundance, (sayth Paulus Emilius) one of his friends told him, that the anger of God could not long forbeare so great prosperitie. How many rich Marchants haue suddenly lost all! How many Noble∣men sold all! How many wealthy heires spent all! Few Sundayes passe ouer our heads without Collecti∣ons for Ship-wrackes, fires, and other casualties; De∣monstratiue proofes that prosperitie is inconstant, ri∣ches casuall. And for honour, wee read that Belsarius an honourable Peere of the Empire, was forced in his old age to beg from dore to dore, obulum date Bel sa∣rio. Fredericke a great Emperour was so low brought, that he sed to be made but the Sexton of a Church. O then let vs not adhere to these left hand blessings, but first seeke length of dayes, eternall ioyes neuer to be lost. A man may enioy the other without fault: the sinne consisteth praeferendo vel conferendo; either in pre∣ferring Riches, or in comparing them with faith and a
good conscience. Vtere caducis, fruere aeternis, Thou must necessarily vse these transient things, onely enioy and rest vppon the euerlasting comforts of Iesus Christ. When God hath assured to a Christian spirit the inhe∣ritance of Heauen, he ioyfully pilgrims it through this world: if wealth and worship salute him by the way, he refuseth not their companie; but they shall not stray him out of his path, nor transport his affections: for his heart is where his hope is, his loue is where his Lord is; euen with Iesus his Redeemer at the right hand of God. Now this mans very Riches are blessed to him; for as from the hand of God hee hath them, so from Eccl. 2. 24. the hand of God hee hath to enioy good in them. Whereas to some (sayth Salomon) Eccl. 5. 13. I haue seene Riches kept for the owns thereof to their hurt: to this man Rom. 8. 28. they shall worke to the best; blessing his condition in this life, and enlarging his dition in heauen; as the wise man sweetly. Prou. 10. 22 The blessing of the Lord it maketh rich: and hee addeth no sorrow with it. Thus in particular: if we conferre the right hand with the left, we shall generally learne 1. That both Gods hands are giuing: it is enough if man giue with one hand; but the Lord settes both his handes a doling his Almes of mercie. Nemo tua∣rum vnam vincet vtraque manu. No man can doe so much with both handes, as GOD with one hand, with one finger. Hee hath Manum plenam, extensam, expansam; hand full, not emptie: so full that it can neuer be emptied with giuing. Innumerable are the drops in the sea yet if one be taken out, it hath (though insensibly) so much the lesse: but Gods goodnesse can suffer no diminution, for it is infinite. Men are spa∣ring in their bountie, because the more they giue, the lesse they haue: but Gods hand is euer full, though it euer disperse: and the filling of many cisternes is no abatement to his euer running fountaine. Our prayers
therfore are well directed thether for blessings; whence though we receiue neuer so much, wee leaue no lesse behind. Let this master of Requests in heauen haue all our suites: wee are sure either to receiue what wee aske, or what wee should aske. It is extensa, a hand put forth, and stretched out. Eccl. 4. 31. Stretched out, not to receiue, but to giue. The Prophet speakes of Rulers that stretch out their hands for bribes and cry Hos. 4. 18. Giue yee: but the Lords hand is put forth to offer good things. Rom. 10. 21. All day long haue I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient people. Indeed God hath a hand; and woe to the man against whom it is stretched. Homer sayth that all the Gods could not ward a blow of Iupiters hand. His hands are not onely , hands that cannot be sufficiently preised: but , hands that cannot be resisted. It is a heauy hand when it lights vpon men in anger. It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God. When reuol∣ting Israell fell to serue Baal and Ashtaroth Iudg. 2. 15. Whe∣thersoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was a∣gainst them for euill. When the men of Ashdod were smitten with Emerods, it is said 1. Sam. 5. 6. the hand of the Lord was heauie vpon them. So Dauid in his grieuous miserie, Psal. 38. 2. Thine arrowes sticke fast in me, & thy hand presseth mesore. It is not this hand that God here stretcheth out. Ser. . in cant Ber∣nard sayth, God hath two hands; Fortitudo and Lati∣tudo. A hand of strength, Qua defendit potenter: where∣with he protects his friends, and confounds his ene∣mies. A hand of Bountie, Qua tribuit affluenter, wher∣by he disperseth and disposeth the larges of his gifts. This is the hand here put forth, manus regalis, and giues munus regale; a royall hand, full of reall mercies; let vs humbly kisse it. It is expansa, not a shut hand, but open, Psal. 145. 16. Thou ope∣nest thy hand, and fillest all things liuing with plente∣ousnesse. 1. Tim. 6. 18. God giues richly, sayth Paul. Man is poore,
because hee is a creature: the very nam of crea∣ture inferres pouertie: it implies a receiuing of all. Quid habes quod non accepisti? The Creator hath the possession of all, and the disposition of all, at his own pleasure. Iam. 1. 17. Euery good gift, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of Lights. Bread in the Lords prayer is called Ours; Giue vs this day our daily bread: Aug. Epist. 143. but ne putetur a nobis, dicimus da no∣bis: lest we should imagine it our owne from our selues, we are taught daily to begge it of our father in heauen, whose it is. It is the Lords hand that barreth the gates of our cities, that filleth our garners with plentie, that Psal. 144. 13. sets peace about our walles, and prosperitie in our pal∣laces; that blesseth our goings out, and commings in; euen all the workes of our hands. But what speake I of temporall things the gifts of his lest hand, in comparison of length of dayes, euerlasting ioyes, the treasures of his right? Repentance, humilitie, charitie, and the Lady of all graces Faith come from his hand, and are the faire gifts of God. Aug. de spiri∣tu & liter &. cap. 34. Ipsum velle credore Deus operatur in homine. The first will to beleeue is wrought in man by God. If any aske, Cur, illi ita sua∣deatur, vt persuadeatur; illi autem non ita? Why doth this man beleeue, & another remaine in infidelitie? Hic digi∣tus Dei: the hand of God hath bin here, working faith in the soule of him that beleeueth. All comes from this hand of mercy. Aug. Confes. Lib. 9. cap. 13. Quisquis tibi enumerat merita sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi muneratua? He that reckons to God his merites; what doth he reckon, but Gods mercies? Quae bo na mea, dona tua: those that are my goods, as Gods gifts. 2. Though hands be here attributed to God, yet it is but by way of metaphore; not literally and in a true proprietie of speech. To conceiue GOD to bee as man, with humane dimensions, was the heresie of the Anthro pomorphites: and hee that thus grossely thinkes of God, sayth Ierome makes an Idol of God in
his heart. But herein God stoopes to the qualitie of our vnderstandings ascribing to himselfe anger and displeasure, as it were passions to the impassible: where∣as Nec Deus affectu capitur, nec tangitur ir: they are not passions, but perfections. God hath a mouth, by which he teacheth man wisedome: he hath feet, by which he walketh on the earth his footestoole: he hath hands, by which he giueth food to all flesh: he hath none of these organically, as men haue; but in the varietie of effects which he produceth. So Bernard; Per effectum haec ha∣bet, Serm. 4. in Cant. non per naturam. 3. Obserue that in the left hand there is a double be∣nefite, Riches and Honour: in the right but a single one; Length of dayes: yet this one farre transcends both the other. For if we should restraine it to this world: long life is a great blessing; and more valuable then wealth and worship. But taking it as it is meant, for eternitie. (For this life is but a span long; a span then; now scarce the length of a finger) as Psal. 23. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for euer: originally to length of dayes; but fitly Psal. 23. 6. trāslated For euer: the left hand is as far exceeded by the right, as short mortalitie is by euerlastingnesse. Aged Israel to his grand-children, Ephraim & Manasseh two sonnes of Ioseph, when the father had placed the first borne Manasseh to his right hand, and Ephraim the younger to his left: hee crossing his hands, layd the right vpon Gen. 48. 14. Ephraim, and the left vpon Manasseh. When Ioseph would haue remoued his hands, he refu∣sed: I know it my sonne, I know it. Manasseh also shall be∣come a people, and he also shall be great: but truely his youn∣ger brother shall be greater then he. The Lord doth blesse many Manassehs with his left hand in riches and ho∣nours: but blessed be that Ephraim to whom his right hand is commended. Lord, let others enioy the trea∣sures of thy left hand, but lay thy right vpon our soules. 4. I conclude. Since the Lord out of both his
hands powres and showres vpon vs these mercies, what should we doe but be thankfull? Shall wee re∣ceiue benefites by heapes; and is the incense of our gra∣titude of so thinne a smoake? Et capitur minimo thuris honore Deus? All these blessings seeme to say to man; Take, and take heed: Accipe, redde, caue: Receiue, re∣turne, beware. Take warmth from me sayth apparell, heat from me fyth fire, strength from me sayth bread. Restore thankfullnesse to the Giuer. Or else beware lest the fire burne thee, water drowne thee, aire choake thee: lest all giue destruction, that should giue comfort. Receiue in the name of God, Returne in the Praise of God, or Beware in the feare of God. To whom for the blessings of both his hands, be glory ascribed from all lips and hearts, for euer and euer. Amen. THE LOST ARE FOVND. LVK. 19. 10. For the Sonne of man is come to seeke, and to saue that was lost. THE first word is Causall, and puts vs in mind of some reference. In briefe the dependance is this. Litle Zacheus became great in Gods fa∣uour: he was. ver. 2. a Publican, a chiefe Publican, a rich Publican: Yet he hath a desire to see Iesus, and Iesus hath a purpose to see him. A figtree shall helpe him to the sight of Christ, & Christ to the sight of him.
Our Sauiour calls him downe, (it is fit they should come downe in humilitie that entertaine Christ) and bids himselfe to his house to dinner. He is made Zache∣us his gest for temporall food, and Zacheus is made his guest for euerlasting cheare. This day is saluation come to this house. ver. 9. This mercy is not without the Pharises grudging ver. 7. When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That hee was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner. Murmu∣ring is betweene secret backbiting, and open railing: a smotherd malice, which can nether beevtterly concea∣led, nor dare bee openly vented. The cause of their murmuring was, that hee was become a guest to a sin∣ner: as if the Sunne of righteousnesse could bee cor∣rupted in shining on a Dunghill of sinne. No: whiles hee did associate the bad, hee made them good; fee∣ding them spiritually, that fed him corporally. Hee did not consent to their sinne, but correct it: not in∣fecting himselfe, but affecting their soules, and effecting their blisse. A man may accompany those, whom hee desires to make better, or them to make him better. And that the mouth of all wickednesse might be stopped, our Sauiour sayes, that his comming into the world was not onely to call home Zacheus, but euen many such Publicans. For the Sonne of man is come to seeke, and to saue &c. Wee are thus gotten ouer the threshold; For: let vs now looke into the house, and suruay euery cham∣ber and roome in it. The foundation of this com∣fortable scripture is Iesus Christ and the building may bee distinguished into fiue seuerall Parlours, all richly hung and adorned with the graces and mercies of God: and the midst thereof paued with loue for the daughters of Ierusalem. CHRIST is the Buttresse or corner stone; and in him consider Cant. 3. 10. here
His Humilitie. The Sonne of man. Veritie. Is come. Pittie. To seeke. Pietie. To saue. Power. That which was lost. 1. The Sonne of man. Ecce Humilitatem. Hee that is the Sonne of eternall God, cals himselfe the Sonne of mortall man. 2. Is come. Ecce veritatem. What God had promi∣sed, his Seruants prophecied, his Types prefigured, he hath now performed. They all foretold in their kinds that he should come: he makes all good, he Is come. 3. To seeke. Ecce compassionem. He knew that we were vtterly gone; that we had Nec valentis oculum, nec vo∣lentis animum: neither an eye able, nor a mind willing to seeke him: in Pittie he seekes vs. 4. To saue. Ecce Pietatem. He seekes vs not in ruinam, to our destruction as we deserued: but in salutem, to our saluation as he desired. Amissos quaerit, quaesitos invenit, inventos seruat. He seekes them that were lost, hee finds them he seekes, he saues them he finds. To saue. 5. The lost. Ecce Potestatem. He is not onely able to strengthen vs weake, nor to recouer vs sicke, nor to fetch vs home offring our selues to bee brought: but when we had neither will nor power to procure this; yea when wee had a reluctancie against this, for wee were his enemies and hated him: he did recall vs gone, reviue vs dead, seeke and saue vs that were lost. You see the Chambers, how they lie in order: let mee keepe your thoughts in this house of Mercie a while, wherein may all our soules dwell for euer. In survaying the Roomes, it is fit wee should begin with the lowermost: and thither the Text aptly first leads vs. The Sonne of Man. Christ is called a Sonne in three respects. 1. In re∣gard
of his Deitie, the Sonne of God, begotten of him from all eternitie, coequall and coessentiall to him. 2. In respect of his flesh, the Son of Mary, naturally borne of her. 3. He cals himselfe the Sonne of Man, in re∣gard that he tooke on him mans nature, and vnder∣tooke the performance of mans redemption. Man like vs in all things, sinne onely excepted. So that in this cir∣cumstance two things are considerable in Christ; the one necessarily involved in the other: His Humanitie. Humilitie. His Humanitie. When the fulnesse of time was come, Gal. 4. 4. God sent his Sonne made of a Woman. Ex muliere, non in muliere: as Gorran notes against Valentinus, whose heresie was, that Christ passed through the Virgin as water through a Conduit-pipe. But this Preposition Ex, signifies a pre∣existent matter: as a house is made of tymber & stones, bread of wheat, wine of grapes. Christ had therefore the materials of his bodie from the virgin Mary; though not his Formale principium: for the holy Ghost was agent in this wonderfull conception. Neither is this a thing impossible to God, though wonderfull to Man; that this Christ should be the Son of Mary without man. As it was possible to God in the first creation, to make a Woman out of a Man without the helpe of a Woman: so in this new crea∣tion, to make a Man out of a Woman without the helpe of a man. There is the same reason of possibili∣tie. It is as easie to bring fire from a steele without a flint, as from a flint without a steele. But he that could dare essentiam nihilo, can raise a nature ex aliquo. God had foure diuerse manners of creating humane creatures. 1. The first man Adam was made of no man, but immediately created of God. 2. The second, that
was Eue, was made (not of a woman, but) of a man alone. 3. The third sort, all men and women else are begotten of man and woman. 4. Christ the last sort was of a different maner from all these. 1. not of no precedent flesh, as Adam. 2. Not of a man without a woman, as Eue. 3. Not of man and woman, as all we. 4. But after a new way; of a woman, without a man. We are all in this sort opposed to Adam, Christ to Eue, Adam was made of neither man nor woman, wee of both man and woman. Eue of a man without a woman, Christ of a woman without a man. Now as this was a great worke of God, so it is a great wonder to man. Three miracles here. Deum nasci, virginem parere, fidem haec credere. That the Sonne of God should become the Sonne of woman, a great myracle. That a virgin should beare a child, and yet before, at, after the birth remaine still a vir∣gin, a great myracle. That the faith of man should be∣leeue all this, Maximum miraculum; this is the grea∣test wonder of all. Thus you haue Diuinitie assuming Humanitie: a great mystery; 1. Tim. 3. 16. God manifested in the flesh. In mundum venit, qui mundum condidit: he comes downe to earth, but hee leaues not heauen; hic affuit inde non defuit. Hu∣mana natura assumpta est, Diuina non consumpta est. Hee tooke Humanitie, he lost not his Diuinitie. He abideth Mariae Pater, the Father of Mary; who is made Mariae Filius, the Sonne of Mary Esa 9. 6. To vs a child is borne, to vs a sonne is giuen. Whereon Hom de. Nat. Emissenus; Natus qui sentiret occasum, datus qni resciret exordium. Hee was borne that should feele death: hee was giuen that was from euerlasting, and could not die. Natus qui & matre esset iunior, datus quo nec Pater esset antiquior. He that was borne was younger then his mother; hee that was giuen was as eternall as his father. He was Sonne to both God and Mary. Non alter ex Patre, alter ex
Virgine: sed aliter ex Patre, aliter ex virgine. As the flowers are said to haue Solem in coelo patrem, solum in terra matrem: so Christ hath a father in heauen without a mother, a mother on earth without a father. Here is then the wonder of his Humanitie. The euer∣lasting Esa. 9. 6. Father is become a litle child. He that spreads out the heauens, is wrapd in Luk. 2. 7. swadling clouts. Hee that is the Word, becomes an Infant not able to speake. The Sonne of God calls himselfe the Sonne of man. His Humilitie. If your vnderstandings can reach the depth of this bottome, take it at one view. The Sonne of God calls himselfe the Sonne of man. The omnipotent Creator becomes an impotent creature. As himselfe sayth; Ioh. 15. 13. Greater loue hath no man then this, that a man lay downe his life for his friends. So greater humilitie neuer was then this, that God should be made man. It is the voyce of Pride in man, Esa. 14. 14. I will bee like God: but the action of Humilitie in God, I will be man. Proud Ne∣buchadnezzar sayes, Ero similis altissimo, I will be like the Highest: meeke Christ sayth, Ero similis infimo I will be like the lowest: hee put on him the the forme of a ser∣uant: yea hee was a despised Worme. God spoke it in derision of sinfull man; Gen. 3. 22. Behold, hee is become as one of vs: but now we may say, God is become as one of vs. There the lowest aspires to bee the Highest, here the Highest vouchsafes to be the lowest. Alexander a sonne of man would make himselfe the sonne of God: Christ the Sonne of God makes him∣selfe the sonne of man. God in Psal. 16. 11. whose presence is fullnesse of ioy, becomes Esa. 53. 3. a man full of sorroes. Eternall rest betakes himselfe to vnrest: hauing whilst hee liued i passiue action, and when hee dyed actiue pas∣sion. Bern. ser. in ser. 4. hebd.
The Act. 10. 36. LORD ouer all things, and Hebr. 1. 2. Heire of the world, vndertakes ignominie and pouertie. Ignominie: the Psal. 24. 7. King of glory is become Psal. 22. 6. the shame of men. Pouer∣tie: Bern. tract. de Pass. Dom. cap. 2. Pauper in nativitate, pauperior in vita, pauper∣rimus in cruce. Poore in his Birth, for borne in another mans stable: poore in his Life, fed at ano∣ther mans table: poore in his Death, buried in ano∣ther mans sepulcher. There are sayth In Cant. ser. 34. Bernard, some that are humbled, but not humble: others that are humble, not hum∣bled: and a third sort that are both humbled and hum∣ble. Pharaoh was humbled and cast downe, but not humble: smitten with subuersion, not moued with submission. Gothfrey of Boloigne was not hum∣bled, yet humble: for in the very heate and height of his honour he refused to be crowned in Ierusalem, with a Crowne of gold, because Christ his master had bin in that place crowned with a crowne of thornes. Others are both humbled and humble. Psal. 78. 34. When he slew them they sought him: they returned and enquired early af∣ter GOD. Our Sauiour Christ was Passiuely hum∣bled: Heb. 2. 9. hee was made lower then the Angels, by suffering death: the Lord did breake him. Actiuely he humbled himselfe. Phil. 2. 7. he made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant: he humbled himselfe. Habitually hee was humbled. Mat. 11. 29. Learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart. Let this obseruation lesson vs two dueties. 1. Esteeme wee not the worse, but the better of Christ, that hee made himselfe the Sonne of man. Let him not lose any part of his honour, because hee abased himselfe for vs. Hee that tooke our Rom. 9. 5 flesh, is also over all, GOD blessed for ever, Amen. There is more in him then humanitie: not alia persona, but alia natura: not another person, but another nature. Though hee bee verus homo, hee is not merus homo.
And euen that Man, that was crucified on a crosse, and layed in a graue, is more high then the heauens, more holy then the Angels. Stephen saw this very Act. 7. 56. Sonne of man standing on the right hand of God. The bloud of this Sonne of man giues saluation: and to whome it doth not, this Sonne of man shall Ioh. 5. 27. adiudge them to condemnation. Vnder this name and forme of Humilitie our Sauiour appo∣sed his Disciples. Mat. 16. 13. Whome do men say, that I, the Sonne of Man, am? Peter answeres for himselfe and the A∣postles, whatsoeuer the people thought; Ver. 16. Thou art Christ the Sonne of the living God. He cals himselfe the Sonne of man, Peter cals him the Sonne of God. 1. Cor. 1. 23. The Iewes see him onely a stmbling blocke, and the Greekes foolish∣nesse: but Christians see him Ver. 24. the Power of God, and the Wisedome of God. The wicked behold him Esa. 53. 2. without forme or comelynesse, or beauty to desire him: but the faith∣full behold him Cant. 3. 11. crowned with a Crowne, Mat 17. 2. his face shining, as the Sunne in his glory. Therefore Bern. ser. 22. Quantò minorem se fecit in humilitate, tantò maiorem exhibuit in bonitate. Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior. The lower hee brought himselfe in humilitie, the higher hee magnified his mercie. By so much as hee was made the baser for vs, by so much let him be the dearer to vs. Obserue it O man: & quia limus es, non sis superbus: & quia Deo iunctus; non sis ingratus: because thou art dust of thy selfe, be not proud: because thou art made immortall by Christ, be not vnthankefull. Condemned world, that despisest him appearing as a silly man! The Iewes expected an externall pompe in the Messias: Can hee not come downe from the Crosse; how should this man saue vs? They con∣sider not, that hee who wanted a Rest for his head, & Bread for his followers, fed some thousands of them with a few loaues: that hee which wanted a pillow,
giues rest to all beleeuing soules: that hee could, but would not come downe from the crosse; that the deare price of their redemption might be payed. Many still haue such Iewish hearts: what, beleeue on a crucified man? But Paul 1. Cor. 2. 2. determines to know no∣thing, but this Iesus Christ, and him crucified. They can be content to dwell with him on mount Tabor, but not to follow him to mount Caluary. They cleaue to him so long as hee giues them bread, but forsake him when himselfe Ioh. 19. 28. cryes for drinke. Oderunt pannos tuos. O Christ, they like well thy robes of glory, but not thy rags of pouertie. They loue him whiles the people cry Hosanna; but shrinke backe when they cry, Crucifie him. All pleaseth them but the Crosse: all the faire way of delights they will accompany him, but at the Crosse they part. They would share with him in his kingdome, but they will none of his vassalage. The Lyon (in a Fa∣ble) had many attendants, and he prouided for them good cheare. They like well of this, and are proud of their master, to whom all the other beastes gaue awe and obedience. But it chanced that the Lyon fell into the daunger of the Dragon; who had got him downe; readie to deuoure him. His followers seeing this quick∣ly betake them to their heeles; and fell euery beast to his old trade of rapine. Onely the poore Lambe stood bleating by, and though hee coulde not helpe, would not forsake his Lord At last the Lyon gets the victo∣ry, and treads the Dragon vnder his feet to death. Then he punisheth those revolting traytors with deserued de∣struction, and sets the Lambe by his owne side. The great Reu. 5. 5. Lyon of Iudah feeds many of the Iewes, and at this day profane wretches: whilest his bountie lasts, Christ, and none but Christ. But when the Red Dragon hath got him vnder, nailed him to the crosse, Crucified him dead; away goe these runnagates;
no more peny, no more Paternoster. If affliction come for Christ his cause, they know where to find a kinder Master. Backe to the world: one to his fraud, and hee will ouer-reach others with the sinne of deceitful∣nesse, though himselfe be ouer-reached with the Heb. 3. 13. de∣ceitfulnesse of sinne. Another to his vsurie; and hee chy∣mically proiects money out of the poores bowels. A third to his couetousnesse; and hee had rather that the very frame of the world should fall, then the price of corne. A fourth to his Idols; and hee hopes for cakes from the Queene of heauen, as if the King of heauen was not able to giue bread. If the Lord pinch them with distresse, they runne to Rome for succour: expecting that from a blocke, which they would not tarry to ob∣taine from the God of mercie. Then they cry like the Israelites: Exod. 32. 1. Vp, make vs gods to goe before vs: for as for this Moses, wee know not what is become of him. But at last this Lyon conquers the Dragon; ouercomes Sa∣than & his damnation: what shall he then say to those Rebelles that would not haue him raigne ouer them? But Luk. 19. 27. Bring those mine enemies, and slay them before me. But the poore and pure innocent Lambs that Rom. 8. 17. suffer with him, shall raigne with him. Mat. 5. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecuti∣on for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of hea∣uen. . The other vse is St. Pauls. Phil. 2. 5. Let the same minde be in you, which was in Christ Iesus. What mind is that? Hu∣militie. Ver. 7. He that thought it no robberie to bee equall with God, humbled himselfe to become Man: we should haue found it no robberie to be equall with Deuils, and shall we be proud? What an intolerable disproporti∣on is this; to behold Humilem Deum, & superbum ho∣minem? an humble God, and a proud man? Who can indure to see a Prince on foot, & his vassall mounted? Shall the Sonne of God be thus humble for vs, & shall not we be humble for our selues? For our selues, I say;
that deserue to be cast downe among the lowest; for our selues, that we may be exalted. He that here cals himselfe the Sonne of man, is now glorified: they that humbly acknowledge themselues to be the Sonnes of men, that is mortall, shalbe made the Sonnes of God, that is immortall. In the first of King. 19. There was a mightie strong winde, that rent the mountaines, and brake the rockes; but God was 1. King. 19. 11. not in the Wind: the Lord will not rest in the turbulent spirit, puffed vp with the wind of vaine-glory. There was an earth-quake, but God was not in the earth-quake. He will not dwell in a couetous heart, buryed in the furrowes of the earth, and cares of the world. There was a Fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. Hee will not rest in a cholericke angry soule, full of combustion and furious heate. There was a still soft voyce, and the Lord came with it. In a milde and humble spirit the God of heauen and earth will dwell. Esa. 57. 15. The high and lof∣tie One that inhabiteth eternitie, will dwell in the contrite and humble soule. It is a sweet mixture of Greatnesse and Goodnesse; Vt dum nihil in honore sublimius, nihil in humilitate submis∣sius; When the highest in dignitie are the lowest in courtesie. Augustine called himselfe, Minimum non so∣lùm omnium Apostolorum, sed etiam Episcoporum; the least not onely of all the Apostles, but of all the Bishops: wheras he was the most illuminate doctor and best Bi∣shop of his times. Paul thought himselfe 1. Cor. 15. 9. not worthy to be called an Apostle: and behold, he is called The Apostle; ; not Paul, but The Apostle. Abraham that esteemed himselfe Gen. 18. 27. dust and ashes, is honoured to bee the Rom. 4. 11. Father of all them that beleeue. Dauid sits content at his sheepe-folds; the Lord makes him King ouer his Israell. But as Humilitie like the Bee gathers Honey out of ranke Weeds, very sinnes; mouing to repentance. So
Pride like the Spider suckes poyson out of the fairest flowers, the best graces, and is corrupted with inso∣lence. Vna superbia destruit omnia. Onely Pride ouer∣throwes all. It thrust proud Nabuchadnezzar out of mens societie, proud Saul out of his kingdome, proud Adam out of Paradise, proud Haman out of the Court, proud Lucifer out of heauen. Pride had her beginning among the Angels that fell, her continuance in earth, her end in hell. Poore man; how ill it becomes thee to be proud, when God himselfe is humble! Is come. We vnderstand the person, let vs come to his Com∣ming. And herein, Ecce veritatem; behold his Truth. Did God promise a Sonne of a virgin; Emanuell, a Sauiour? He is as good as his word; Venit, he is come. Did the sacrificed bloud of so many Buls, Goates, and Lambes, prefigure the expiatory bloud of the Lambe of God to be shed? Ioh. 1. 29. Ecce agnus Dei; Behold that Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world. Is the Seed of the woman promised to breake the head of the ser∣pent? Behold he breakes the heauens, and comes downe to doe it. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. For this purpose the Sonne of God was manifested, that he might destroy the workes of the Deuill. Did God ingage his word for a Redeemer to purge our sinnes? Math. 1. 21. Call his name Iesus: for he shall saue his people from their sinnes. Against vnbeleeuing Atheists, and mis-beleeuing Iewes, here is sufficient conviction. But I speake to Christians, that beleeue he is come. Hac fide credite ven∣turum esse, qua creditis venisse. Beleeue that he will come againe, with the same faith wherewith you beleeue he is come alreadie. Doe not curtall Gods word, belee∣uing onely so much as you list. Faith is holy and catho∣licke: if you distrust part of Gods word, you prepare infidelitie to the whole. Did God promise Christ, and
in Gal. 4. 4. the fulnes of time to send him? Then since he hath a∣gaine promised him, and Act. 17. 31. appointed a day wherein he will iudge the world by that man, he shall come. As certainly as he came to suffer for the world, so certainely shall he come to iudge the world. Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to beare the sinnes of many, and vnto them that looke for him shall he appeare the second time without sinne vnto saluation. He that kept his promise when he came to die for vs, followed by some few poore Apostles, will not breake it when he shal come in glory with thousāds of Angels. Neither did God onely promise that Christ should come, but that all beleeuers should be saued by him. Ioh. 1. 12. As many as receiued him, to them gaue he power to be the sonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue on his Name. Misit fili∣um, promisit in filio vitam. He sent his Sonne to vs, and saluation with him. Wretched and desperate men that distrust this mercie! Whosoeuer beleeues, and is baptised, shall be saued. Whosoeuer; Qui se ipsum excipit, seipsum decipit. Did not God spare to send his promised sonne out of his bosome to death, and will hee to those that beleeue on him deny life? No; all his promises are Yea and Amen in Christ: may these also be Yea and Amen in our beleeuing hearts. A yeelding Deuill could say, Iesus I knew: yet some men are like that tempting de∣uill. Math. 4. Si filiu: Dei sis; If thou be the sonne of God. Si if; as if they doubted, whether he could or would saue them. Is come. There is a threefold Comming of Christ: according to the threefold difference of Time, Past, Present, Future. As Ser. 3. de Ad∣ventu Christi. Bernard. Venit Ad homines In homines Contra homines. 1. First for the time past, he came among men. Iohn. 1.
1. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs. 2. For Ioh. 1. 14. the present, he comes into men; by his Spirit and grace. Reu. 3. I stand at the dore and knock, if any open vnto me, Reu. 3. 20. I will come into him. 3. For the time to come, hee shall come against men. Rom. 2. At the day when God shall iudge Rom. 2. 16. the secrets of all hearts by Iesus Christ. Or as it is wittily obserued; the Sunne of righteousnesse appeareth in three Dr Boys. Post. Dom. signes: Leo, Virgo, Libra. 1. In the Law like a Lyon, roaring out terrible things with a voice not indurable. Exod. 20. 19. And they sayd to Moses, Speake thou with vs, and we will heare: but let not God speake with vs, least we die. 2. In the Gospell hee appeared in Virgo, an Infant borne of a virgin. Math. 1. 25. 3. At his last Audite hee shall ap∣peare in Libra, weighing all our thoughts, words, and workes in a balance. Reu. 22. 12. Behold I come quickly & my reward is with me, to giue euery man according as his worke shalbe. Is come. He was not fetched, not forced, sponte venit; of his owne accord he is come. Ioh. 10. 18. No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. In Mat. 26. 55. Ambrose on these words of Christ; Are ye come out against a theefe, with swords and staues to take me? Stultum est cum gladijs eum quarere, qui vltro se offrt. It was superfluous folly to appre∣hend him with weapons, that willingly offered him∣selfe: to seeke him in the night by treason, as if he shun∣ned the light, who was euery day teaching publique∣ly in the Temple. Sed factum congruit tempori & personis: quia cùm essent tenebrae, in tenebroso tempore tenebrosum opus excercebant. The fact agrees to the time and Per∣sons: they were darknesse, therefore they doe the worke of darknesse in a time of darknesse. Indeed hee prayes; Father, saue me from this houre: but with∣all hee corrects himselfe; Therefore came I to this houre. But he is said to feare dth. Hebr. 5. What is it to vs
Quòd timuit, that hee feared: nostrum est quòd sustinuit, that hee suffered. Christs nature must needs abhorre destructiue things: but his Rationall ouercame his Naturall will. Hee feared death. Lomb. 3. sent dist. 17. Ex affectu sen∣sualitatis, not Ex affectu rationis. Hee eschewed it secun∣dum se, but did vnder goe it propter aliud. Ex impetu naturae hee declined it; but ex imperio rationis; con∣sidering that either hee must come and die on earth, or wee all must goe and die in hell; and that the heads temporall death might procure the bodies eter∣nall life; behold the Sonne of man is come. Neither was it necessary for him to loue his paine, though hee so lo∣ued vsto suffer this paine. No man properly loues the rod that beats him, though hee loues for his soules good to be beaten. As Augustin sayd of crosses; Confes. lib. 10. cap. 28. Tol∣lerare iubemur non amare. Nemo quod tollerat amat, etsi tollerare amat. We are commanded to beare them, not to loue them. No man that euen loues to suffer, loues that he suffers. Voluntarily hee yeelds himselfe; saluting Iudas by the name of Friend: Amice r venis? He suffered not his followers to offend his enemies, nor commands the Angels to defend himselfe. Ambr. in Mat 27. 40. O blind Iewes; was it impossible for him, de paruo slipite ligni descendere, qui descendit a coelorum altitudine? to come downe from a peice of wood, that came downe from heauē? Nunquid Non venit vt se liberaret, qui sub seruituto non erat; sed vt nos de seruitu redimeret. Ambr. vbi su∣pra. tua vincula illū possunt teere, quem cli non possunt capere? Shall your bonds hold him, when the heauens could not containe him? He came not to deliuer himselfe, that was in freedome: but to deliuer vs, that were in bondage. Is come. Is Christ come to vs, and shall not wee come to him? Doth the Sonne of God come to the Sonnes of
men, and doe the Sonnes of men scorne to come to the Sonne of God? Proud dust, wilt thou not meet thy maker? If any aske; Cant. 6. 1. Whether is thy beloued gone? that wee may seeke him with thee. The Church answers; Ver. 2. My beloued is gone downe into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather Lillies. You shall haue him in his Garden, the Congregation of the faithfull. Wheresoeuer a number is gathered together in his Name. Behold, Venit ad limina virtus, Manna lies at your thresholds; will you not goe forth and gather it? The Bridegrome is come, will you not make merrie with him? The nice piece of dust; like Ido∣latrous Ieroboam, cryes, the Church is too farre off, the iourney too long to Christ. Hee came all that long way from heauen to earth for vs, and is a mile too tedious to goe to him? Goe too, sede, ede, perde; sit still, eate thy meate, and destroy thy selfe: who shall blame the iustice of thy condemna∣tion. But for vs, let vs leaue our pleasures, and goe to our Sauiour. Non sedeas sed cas, ni pereas per cas. Come a litle way to him, that came so farre to thee. Phi∣lip tells Nathanael, wee haue found the Messias: Na∣thanael obiects, Can any good thing come out of Na∣zareth? Ioh. 1. 48. Come and see, sayth Philip. And strait∣wayes Iesus saw Nathanael comming. Christ hath sent many Preachers to inuite vs to saluation: Wee aske, Vbi, where: they say, Come and see: but we will not come; Christ cannot see vs comming. Mun∣dus, cura, caro; three mischieuous hindrers, we come not. Christ himselfe calls; yet Ioh. 5. 40. You will not come vnto mee; that you might haue life. He comes amongst vs, Christians; ad suos: Ioh. 1. 11. Hee came to his own, and his owne receiued him not. Wee say of such things as are vnlike; they come not neere one another: many clothes lie on a heape together, yet because of their
different colours, wee say they come not neare one to another. But of things that are alike, wee say they come nigh one another. Our comming neare to Christ is not in place, but in grace. Not in place; for so the wicked is neere to God. Psal. 139. 7. Whether shall I flie from thy pre∣sence? But in grace and qualitie; being holy as he is ho∣ly. Indeed hee must first draw vs before we can come. Cant. Draw mee: wee will runne after thee. Hee first drawes vs by grace, then wee runne after him by re∣pentance. To seeke. Hee is come: to what purpose? Ecce compassionem; to seeke. All the dayes of his flesh vpon earth hee went about seeking soules. Hee went to Samaria to seeke the woman, to Bethany to seeke Mary, to Capernaum to seeke the Centurion, to Iericho to seeke Zacheus. O what is a man, and the Sonne of man, that the Sonne of God should thus hunt after him! Wee sought not him. Psal. 10. 4. The wicked through the pride of his coun∣tenance will not seeke after God. Behold, he seekes vs. We would not call vpon him, he sends Ambassadors to be∣seech vs. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Wee pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconcised to God. Indeede we cannot seeke him, till he first find vs. Oportuit viam inuenire errantes, errantes enim nequeunt in∣uenire viam. If the Ioh. 14. 6. Way had not found vs, we should neuer haue found the Way. I oe his mercie: Non so∣lum redeuntem suscipit, sed perditum quarit. How ioyfull will hee be to find vs, that is thus carefull to seeke vs! Let this teach vs, not to hide our selues from him. Wretched men, guiltie of their owne eternall losse, that will not bee found of Christ when hee seekes them. How shall they at the last day 1. Ioh. 2. 28. stand with con∣fidence before him, that at this day runne from him? If we will not be found to bee sanctified, wee cannot
be found to be glorified. Paul Phil. 3. 9. desires to be found in Christ: in Christ found, for without Christ euer lost Ioh. 17. 12. Those that thou gauest me, I haue kept; and none of them is lost, but the sonne of perdition. Woe to that man, when Christ shall returne with a Non inuentus. What can the shepheard doe but seeke? nolunt inueniri; they will not be found. What the charmer but charme? No∣lunt incantari, they will not bee charmed. What the Sutour but wooe? nolunt desponsari, they will not bee espoused to Christ. What the Ambassador but be∣seech? Nolunt exorari they will not be intreated. What then remaines? Reu. 22. 11. He that will be vniust, let him bee vniust still: and hee that will bee filthy, let him bee filthy still. If wee will not be found of him when hee seekes vs, hee will not bee found of vs when wee seeke him. Prou. 1. 28. They shall seeke me early, but they shall not find me. Quae∣situs contemnet, qui quarens contemnitur. Hee was despi∣sed when hee sought, and will despise when hee is sought to. Three vicious sorts of men are here culpable. 1. Some sculke when Christ seekes. If there be any bush in Paradise. Adam will thrust his head into it. If there be any hole of pretence, Saul will there borough his rebellion. If Gehei can shadow his briberie with a lie, Elisha shall not find him. When the Sunne shines, euerie bird comes forth, onely the owle will not bee found. These birds of darknesse cannot abide the light. Ioh. 3. 19. because their deeds are euill. Thus they play at All hid with God: but how foolishly! Like that beaste that hauing thrust his head in a bush, and seeing no body, thinkes no body sees him. But they shall find at last, that not holes of Reu. 6. 16. Mountaines, nor caues of rockes, can conceale them. 2. Others play at fast and loose with God: as a man behind a tree, one while seene, another while hid. In the day of prosperitie they are hidden; onely in
affliction they come out of their holes. As some beasts are driuen out of their boroughes by pouring in scal∣ding water: or as Absolon fetch'd Ioab, by setting 2. Sam. 14. 30. on fire his Barley fields. These are found on the Sunday, but lost all the weeke. Like the Deuill, they stand among the Sonnes of God yet deuoure the seruants of God. As Saul at one time prophecied with the Prophets, and at Iob. 1. another time massacred them. Christ cals them to a banket of prosperitie, they cry Hîc sumus, We are here: but if Satan (in their opiniō) offer them better cheare; Tibi sumus, We are for thee. 3. Others being lost, and hearing the seekers voyce, goe further from him. These are Wolues, not sheepe. The sheepe heares his voice, and comes: the Wolfe heares it, and flies. The nearer saluation comes to them, the further they runne from it. Because England tenders them the Gospell, they will runne as farre as Rome for damnation. Christ came to seeke the lost sheepe; Luk. 15. he found it, he layd it on his shoulders, and he reioyced. In his life he seekes the sinner till hee finde him. In his death hee layes him on his shoulders, bearing his sinnes in his bo∣die on the Crosse. In his resurrection he reioyced for him. In his ascension he opens the dores of heauen, & brings him home. Venit & invenit: hee comes to seeke, and he seekes to saue; which is the next poynt, To saue. Ecce Pietatem, Behold his goodnesse. Herod sought Christ ad interitum, to kill him: Christ seekes vs ad sa∣lutem, to saue vs. 1. Tim. 1. 15. This is a faithfull saying, and worthy of all acceptation: that Iesus Christ came into the world to saue sinners. Yeeld to be found, if thou wilt yeeld to be saued. There is nothing but good meant thee in this seeking. Vidimus & testamur, &c. 1. Ioh. 4. 14. We haue seene, and doe testifie, that the Father sent the Sonne to be the Sauiour of
the world. The Fishermens riddle was, Those we could not find we kept, those we found we lost. But Christes course is otherwise: Whom he finds he saues; whom he finds not are lost for euer. It was a Poeticall speech; Amare & sapere vix conceditur dijs. To loue and to bee wise seldome meete. They are met in Christ: he did loue vs, suscepit naturam he became man: he was wise, occîdit peccatum, he killed sinne. In loue he seekes vs, in wisedome he saues vs: here was Amare & sapere. This sweet and comfortable note I must leaue to your me∣ditations: my speech must end his sauing, though of his saluation there be no end. Paruum est seruare bonos: it is a small thing to saue those that are in no danger of spilling; therefore lastly looke to the Obiect; The lost. There Ecce Potestatem, behold his power. He is that Luk. 11. 22.] strongest man, that vnbound vs from the fetters of sin and Sathan. Fortissimus; for caetera excellit, caetera expel∣lit: he excels the rest, he expels the rest. He had need be powerfull, that redeemes so weake man from the hands of so strong enemies. Magnus venit medicus, quia magnus iacebat aegrotus. The whole world was sicke: there had need be a great Physician, for there was a great Patient. Loe where wretchednes lies at the foot of Goodnesse; ecce miserum ante misericordem. What but infinite Miserie should be the fit obiect of infinite Mercie! Here was then the purpose of Christs comming; to seeke the lost, to recall wanderers, to heale the sicke, to cleanse the Leprous, to reuiue the dead, to saue sinners. He Math. 9. 13. Luke 15. came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repen∣tance. He leaues the nintie nine in the Wildernesse, to seeke the lost sheepe. Whether it bee meant of the iust An∣gels in Heauen; as Ambrose, Chrysostome, Hilary, Euthymius thinke. Or those that thought thēselues iust,
as Bucer and Ludolphus; the Scribes and Pharises, that presumed they needed no repentance. He embraceth Publicans and sinners, that confesse themselues sicke, and lacking a Physician; sinfull wretches, and needing a Sauiour. Those worldlings in the Gospell haue better cheare at home; what care they for Christs supper? It is the dry ground that thinkes well of raine, the hungry soule that is glad of sustenance. The mercie of God falls most welcome on the broken spirit. They that feele themselues miserable, and that they stand in need of euery droppe of his sauing bloud, to those it runnes fresh and sweet. They that feele themselues lost, are found. They are least of all lost, that thinke themselues most lost: they are nearest to their health, that are most sensible of their sicknesse. These hee seekes, these he saues: to these Postil. cathol con. 2. dom. 1. Aduent. Nascens se dedit in socium, conescens in cibum, moriens in pretium, regnans in praemium. In his birth he became their companion, in his life their food, in his death their redemption, in his glory their Salua∣tion. Lost; but where was man lost? There are diuerse loosing places. 1. A garden of delights: and there the first man lost himselfe, and all vs: in a Garden therefore our Sa∣uiour found vs againe. We were Lost in a garden of rest, we are found in a garden of trouble. The ser∣pent could neuer take the hare, (he was too light foo∣ted for him) till hee found him sleeping in a garden of sweet flowers, vnder which the serpent lay hidden. Whilst man not onely surfeits on pleasures, but sleepes in them, Satan that old serpent wounds him to death. 2. A wildernesse is a place able to loose vs: and that's this world, a wide and wilde forrest; many lost in it. Wee read of a rich man, Luk. 12. that lost himselfe in one corner of this wildernesse, his very barnes:
strange, to be lost in a barne. And yet how many loose themselues in a lesse roome, their Counting house! The vsurer hath there lost his soule, and no man can find it. It is so long wrapped vp among his bonds, till Satan take the forfeit. The depopulator takes a larger field to loose his soule in; and to make sure worke, that grace may neuer find it, he hedges and ditches it in. 3. Another loosing place is a Labyrinth or Maze. In the Orchard of this world the God of it hath made a Labyrinth; which St. Iohn describes. 1. Epist. 2. 16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. The en∣trance hereinto is easie; as you haue seene in that Em∣bleme of Suretiship, the Horne: a man goes gent∣ly in at the Butte end, but comes hardly out at the Buckall: the comming forth is difficult. It is so full of crooked meanders, windings, and turnings, out of one sinne into another; from consent to delight, from delight to custome, from custome to impeni∣tencie: that in this Labyrinth men soone grow to a maze, and know not how to be extricated. Labyrin∣thus, quasi labor intus: the wicked Wised. 5. 7. wearie themselues in the wayes of destruction. Lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, pride of life. Haec tra pro trino Numine mundus habet. This is the trinitie the world worships. Lust of the flesh. The adulterer looseth himselfe in the forbidden bed. Inter mammillas perditur: he is lost be∣tweene the brests of a Harlot. He that seekes for him, must (as the Pursuivant for the Seminary) not for∣beare the Mistresses bed to find him. Lust of the eyes. Ahab casts a couetous eye at Na∣boths vineyard. Dauid a lustfull eye at Bathsheba. The eye is the pulse of the soule: as Physicians iudge of the heart by the pulse, so wee by the eye. A rolling eye, a rouing heart. The good eye keepes minute-time, and strikes when i should: the lustfull crotchet-time,
and so puts all out of tune. Pride hath lost as many, as any her fellow Deuils. They say, shee was borne in heauen, and being cast downe wandred vpon earth, where a woman tooke her in; and there shee hath dwelt euer since. Indeed E∣say 3. the shop of pride is the womans wardrobe: in this wardrobe many soules both of women and men too are lost. The common studie is new fashions; but it is an ill fashion thus to loose the soule. If we would get out of this maze, we must (as God warned the Math. 2. 12. Wisemen) depart another way. Out of lust we must wind forth by Chastitie, out of couetousnesse by Charitie, out of Pride by Humilitie. Penitence is the clew to guide vs forth: howsoeuer wee came in, we must goe out by Repentance. 4. A fourth loosing place is the multitude of new and strange wayes: wherein men wander, as Saul after his Asses, and are lost. There is a way to Rome, a way to Amsterdam: a way to the sillinesse of ignorance, a way to the fullennesse of arrogancie. None of all these is the way to Sion. In the multitude of wayes multitude of soules loose themselues. 5. Lastly some are lost in the darke vault of ignorance; applauding themselues in their blindnes, and like Bats refusing the Sun-shine. They haue an Act. 17. 23. Altar, but it is Ignoto Deo, to an vnknowne God. Like the Hoast of the King of Syria, they are blind, and lost betwixt 2. King. 6. 19 Do∣than and Samaria. They may grope (as the Sodomites) for the dore of heauen: but let not the Pope make them beleeue, that they can find it blind-fold. Ignorance is not Gods Starre-chamber of light; but the Deuils vault of darkenes. By that doctrine Antichrist fils hell, and his owne coffers. The light that must bring vs out, is Iesus Christ: Ioh. 1. 9. Which lighteth euery man that commeth in∣to the world. And his Psal. 119. 105 Word is a lape vnto our feet, and a light vnto our pathes.
Thus you see, there are many places to be lost in; but one way to be found; and that is this; The Sonne of man is come to seeke and to saue that was lost. O Iesus turne our wandring steps into the narrow way of righteous∣nesse. Come to vs that we may be sought, seeke vs that we may be found, find vs that we may be saued, saue vs that we may be blessed; and blesse thy name for euer. Amen. A GENERATION OF Serpents OR The Poyson of Wickednesse. PSAL. 58. 4. Their poyson is like the poyson of a Serpent, like the deafe Adder that stoppeth her eare. THis verse spends it selfe on a double com∣parison, of Persons, Conditions. The Persons compared are Men and Ser∣pents. The Conditions or Qualities vppon which
the similitude stands, are Poyson and Deafenesse. The former whereof is indefinite; Their Poyson is as the Poyson of a Serpent, any Serpent. The latter is restric∣tiue; Their deafnesse is like the Adders; one kind of Ser∣pents. I will beginne with the Conditions: for if the same qualities be found in Men, that are in Serpents; there will follow fitly, too fitly, a comparison of their Per∣sons. The first Qualitie here ascribed to the wicked by the Psalmist, is Poyson. There is such a thing as Poyson; but where to bee found; Vbi cum{que} fuerit, in homine quis quareret? Where∣soeuer it is, in Man who would looke for it? GOD made mans bodie of the dust; he mingled no Poyson with it. He inspireth his soule from heauen, he breaths no Poyson with it. He feeds him with bread, he con∣vayes no poyson with it. Vnde venenum? Whence is this Poyson? Mat. 13. 27. Didst not thou O Lord, sow good seed in thy field? Vnde Zizaniae? From whence then hath it tares? Whence? Hoc fecit inimicus; the Enemie hath done this. We may perceiue the Deuill in it. That great Serpent, the red Dragon, hath powred into wicked hearts this Poyson. His owne Poyson? Malitiam wickednes, Cùm in∣fundit peccatum, infundit venenum. When hee poures in Sinne, he poures in poyson. Sinne is Poyson. Originall pravitie is called Corruption; actuall, Poyson. The vio∣lence and virulence of this venemous qualitie comes not at first. Nemo fit repente pessimus. No man becomes worst at first dash. Wee are borne corrupt, wee haue made our selues Poysonus. There be three degrees, as it were so many ages in sin. 1. Secret sin: an vlcer lying in the bones, but skin'd ouer with hypocrisie. 2. Open sin,
bursting forth into manifest villanie. The former is corruption, the second eruption. 3. Frequented and confirmed sinne, and that is ranke poyson, enveneming soule and bodie. When it is impostumated to this ripenes and ranke∣nesse, it impudently iustifies wickednes for goodnesse; venenum pro nutrimento; poyson for nutriment. It feeds on, swallowes, digests sinne, as if it were nourishment. As Hemlocke is good meate for Goates, and Spiders for Monkeys. It despiseth all reproofe, Psal. 1. 1. sitting in the scorners chaire: Which for the poyson is called by di∣uines, Sedes Pestilentiae; the Seat of Pestilence. Pecca∣tor cùm in profundum venerit, contemnet. When a wic∣ked man comes to the depth and worst of sinne, hee despiseth. Then the Hebrew will despise Moses: Exod. 2. 14. Who made thee a Prince, and a Iudge ouer vs? Then Ahab will quarrell with Micheah, because he doth not 1. Kin. 22. 18. Prophecie good vnto him. Euery child in Bethel will mocke Elisha, and bee bold to call him 2. King. 2. 23. Bald pate. Here is an originall droppe of veneme swolne to a maine Ocean of Poyson. As one droppe of some Ser∣pents poyson lighting on the hand, gettes into the veines; and so spreads it selfe ouer all the bodie, till it hath stiffled the vitall spirits. In this Poyson there is a double pestilent ef∣fect Inficit, Interficit. It is to them∣selues death, to others a contagious sicknesse. To themselues It is an epidemicall corruption, dispersing the ve∣nime ouer all parts of bodie and soule. It poysons the heart with falshood, the head with lightnesse, the eyes with adulterie, the tongue with blasphemie, the hands with oppression, the whole bodie with intemperance.
It Poysons beautie with wantonesse, strength with vio∣lence, witte with wilfulnesse, learning with dissension, deuotion with superstition, religion with treason. If they be greater gifts, it poysons them with pride; put∣ting Cantharides into the oile-pot. If meaner, it poy∣sons them with hypocrisie, putting Colocinthis into the porredge-pot. And where the Cantharides of Pride, or Coloquintida of hypocrisie are, there is venenum & exitium; Poyson and death. This poyson, faster then a Gangrene, runnes from ioynt to ioynt; as an enemie takes Fort after Fort, till he hath wonne the whole Countrey. 1. It is in the Thought: the Gen. 6. 5. imaginations are full of poison. Euery euil thought is not thus poisonous. There is malum innatum, and inseminatum, sayth Bernard. An euill bred in vs, and an euill sowne in vs. Sinnes, like Weeds, will grow fast enough without sowing: but Qui , he that Gal. 6. 8. sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption: hee that shall sow this venemous seed, poysons his soule. Ier. 4. 14. Clense thy heart from iniquitie, that thou mayest be saued. How long shall thy vaine thoughts lodge within thee? Lodge: he doth not speake of tran∣sient; but permanent sinnes. Such as Mic. 2. 1. meditate mis∣chiefe; studie to bee naught. Whose imaginations sucke poyson out of euery Obiect, yea though it bee good: as the Spider suckes poyson from the sweetest flower. Vanishing thoughts, that passe through a good man without approbation, not without suppression, are pro∣perly Nec mors nec morbus animae, sed deformitas; neither the disease nor death of the soule, but the deformitie. They are imissae; Satans darts shot through vs: in cor∣de, non de corde: in the heart, not of the heart. Which the godly Sentiunt, non consentiunt; feele, but giue no li∣king to. They are our Crosses, not our sinnes. Such a thought is but morbus mentis, the disease of the mind;
the other morsus serpentis; the wound or poyson of the Serpent. The allowed filthy cogitation is the poyson. Thus are the thoughts poysond. 2. From thence it runs to the Senses, and sets open those windows to let in the poisonous aire of wicked∣nesse. The fiue Senses are the Cinque Ports, where all the great traffique of the Deuill is taken in. They are the Pores, whereby Sathan conveyes in the stinking breath of temptation. The eare is set wide open to receiue in the poyson of scurrilous songs, obscene ests, seditious libels. It is not onely an Atheman eare, nouitatis auida, greedie of newes: but a Cretian eare, prauitatis auida, greedie of euill. It listens to heare of ciuill warres, vnciuill trea∣sons: it would faine haue heard the great thunder∣clappe, which the Gun-powder should haue made at the blowing vp of the Parliament house. Here is an eare for the Deuill. Such eares haue the Iesuites: they would faine heare of the ruine of kingdomes. What woulde make others 1. Sam. 3. 11. eares tingle, makes their eares tickle. Aures illae in se sentiant, quod au∣dire de alij cupiunt. Let such eares feele that woe themselues, which they desire so earnestly to heare of others. The Eye-lid is sette open with the gagges of Lust and Enuie. A libidinous eye drawes in much poyson. There be eyes full of adulterie, sayth the Apostle. They fetch in seedes of poyson from the Theater, yea (I tremble to speake it) from the Church of GOD. It beholdes beautie, (Gods rare workemanshippe on a piece of clay) not to blesse the Creator, but to draw a curse on the creature. Like a melancholy distracted man, that drownes himselfe in a cleare Chrystall ri∣uer. O such chast Beautie is like the Bellowes; though it owne breath bee cold, it makes them burne.
There is another kinde of Eye; that deriues poyson to the heart; the enuious eye, that is vexed at the richer furniture, fatter estate, or higher honour of another: thinking his owne not good, because his neighbour hath better. Any mans aduancement is so capitall an offence to his malice, that hee coulde shoote out his owne eyes, so they might bee balles of Wild-fire to consume him. But his malice suckes vp the greatest part of his owne venime; and therewith poysons himselfe, rather then others. A man that sees him, would say, He is poysoned: for his bloud lookes of a yellowish colour, like those that are bitten with Vipers. His gall flowes as thicke in him, as if hee hadde a poysoned stomacke. If hee had, as Seneca wish'd to the Enuious, eyes in euery place; his vn∣containable poyson would soone burst him. As he is, he would bee anothers enemie, but is his owne mis∣chiefe 3. From the Senses it runnes to the Tongue; and sets it a swelling, a swearing, that it infects the aire, and poysons the very Zach. 5. 4. Walles of the house. The excrements of the Iewes spet vpon the face of our Sauiour, were not so feculent. Their blasphemies striue to blast, not onely the plants of the earth, but euen the pla∣nets of Heauen; the Sunne and Starres: and if it were possible, they would make new wounds in the side of Iesus Christ. If any swearer thinke, I doe his tongue wrong; let him read. Rom. 3. Rom. 3. 13. The poy∣son of Aspes is vnder their lippes. If you would know what that pestilent poyson is, the next verse expounds it. Ver. 14. Their mouth is full of cursing and bitternes. They ca∣ry worse poyson in re, in their mouth; then any ser∣pent in caud, in his taile. Iam. 3. 8. Their tongue is full of deadly poyson. 1. They haue poyson. 2. not dead, but deadly; mortall poyson. 3. not a little, but saturitie of it; full of deadly poyson.
Poyson hath thus got from their silent thoughts, to their mouing senses; and from thence to their, lowd and lewd talking tongues. And this bewrayes their venime, as the Serpents Hissing betrayes his malice. Eccl. 21. 26. The heart of fooles is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. Cesar said, hee feared not Anthonie, whose heart was in his tongue; but Cassius, whose tongue was in his heart. A wicked mans tongue dis∣couers him. A bell may haue a cracke, though inuisi∣ble: take the clapper and strike, and you shall soone perceiue it. The vngodly may conceale his wicked∣nesse by silence: but if the clapper strikes, if his tongue walkes, you shall quickly perceiue, he is crack'd. A poysond tongue cannot forbeare to sputter abroad his venime. 4. From the Tongue this poyson runnes to the Hands. Anaxagoras thought Man the wisest of all creatures, because hee hath hands: he might haue thought him the wickedest of all creatures, because he hath hands. No creature doth so much hurt with his teeth or talons, as the wicked man with his poysoned hands. A man doth greatly expresse himselfe by his hands. Paul by becko∣ning his Act. 21. 40. hand, procured silence. Much is done Pers. Satyr. 4. Maie∣state manus, as the Poet; by Maiestie of the hand. The witte seemes to manifest it selfe in the hands: as the Italians say of the Duchmen, that their witte dwells in their fingers end. The power in the hands. An nes∣cis longas Regibus esse manus? Yeeld the hand a principall instrument; yet corruptio optimi pessima. The euill hand doth not so much manifest mans wittinesse, as his wic∣kednes, Mic. 2. 1. They deuise iniquitie, and practise it, because it is in the power of the Hand. The poyson that was conceiued in their thoughts, dilates it selfe into their hands: cogi∣tant, agitant. God reproues the Iewes, that they had Manus san∣guinum, Esa. 1. 15. bloudy hands. And the same Prophet seemes to
liken it to a venemous infection: Esa. 59. 3. your hands are defiled with bloud. And if the tongue can be possibly brought, to smother the in cherished poison, yet manus mani∣festabit, the hand will discouer it. ver. 6. The act of violence is in their hands. The Israelites soone suspected, what a king Rehoboam would be when he threatned Grauita∣tem manus, to make his hand heauy; yea his finger hea∣uier then his fathers Loynes. Ahab quite disgraced him∣selfe for being thought religious, when hee laid a vio∣lent hand on Naboths vineyard. Ieroboam makes it plaine, that he bore no loue to Gods Prophets, cùm ex∣tendit manum; when hee put forth his hand to strike one. Many Landlords seeme Christians, but they haue Rehoboams hand, a heauy hand on their Tenants, many vsurers come to Church, but they haue Ahabs hand, to take the forfeit of the poore debters heritage. Many parishioners seeme to loue their Prophets, but they haue Ieroboams hand, a hand that strikes them, if not in person, yet in estate; vndoing them and their families. This is venenata manus, a poysond Hand. 5. Lastly this poyson hauing got possession of the thoughts, words, workes; it must needs follow that it hath taken the Heart. Esa. 1. 5. Cor dolet, the whole heart is sicke. These corrupted simptomes proue that the heart is rot∣ten Iob. 20. 14. 16. The very meate in their bowells is turned to the gall of Aspes. They sucke the poyson of Aspes. If you aske why they feele it not; Paul sayes; Their sense is lost: Eph. 4. 19. They are past feeling. Their whole selfe is changed into a dis∣ease. Their bodie is no longer Corpus, but Morbus. As Lucan. Totum est pro vulnere corpus. Their whole body is as one wound or sicknes. Neither can wee say so properly of them, that they are sicke, as that they are dead. Nonaegroti, sed defuncti: not diseased, but deceased. And in all this obserue the effect of this Poyson in themselues. For it doth not onely annoy others, but
mostly destroy themselues. And herein their poyson is not onely Tale and Tantum, such and so much as that of Serpents: but Plus & Perniciosius, more, and more dan∣gerous. Seneca sayes, Venenum quod serpentes in alienam perniciem proferunt, sine sua continent. The poyson which serpents cast out to the domage of others, they retaine without their owne periudice. But the poyson of the wicked, dum alios inficit, seipsos interficit; Whilest it in∣fects others, kills themselues. Prou. 5. 22. His owne iniquities shall take the wicked himselfe. Their owne wickednesse, like poyson, hath in themselues these three direfull effects. It makes them Swell. Swill. Burst. 1. It makes them swell with pride, and blowes vp the heart, as a bladder with a quill. 1. Sam. 25. 10 Quis est Dauid? Who is Dauid? and who is the Sonne of Iesse? Yea Iob. 21. 15. Quis est Dominus? Who is the Almightie, that wee should serue him? Thus the Spider, a poysonous vermine, Prou. 30. 28. Climes vp to the roofe of the kings pallace. If he be in prosperi∣tie nothing can hold him to a man. Be hee but a 2. King. 14. 9. Thistle, he sends to the king of Lebanon, for his daugh∣ter to be his Sonnes wife. Though he be but a dwarfe in comparison, he would swell to a son of Anak. Sinne hath puff'd him vp, & he forgets his maker. Ier. 5. 7. The Lord hath fed him to the full, & he rebells against him. We haue then good cause to pray with our Church; In the time of our wealth, good Lord deliuer vs. 2. It makes them swill: the poyson of sinne is such a burning heate within them, that they must still bee drinking. And the deuill, their Physician, holds them to a dyet-drinke: they shall not haue the water of the San∣ctuary, that would coole them: but the harsh, harish, & ill-brewd drinke of damnation. They shall tast nothing but sinne; more poyson still. Which is so farre from
quenching their thirst, that it enflames it. Totis exquirit in agris. Lucan. Quas modo poscit aquas, sitiens in corde venenum. So a man puts out the Lampe by powring in more oyle and extinguisheth the fire by laying on fewel. This may for a small time allay the heate, as cold drinke to a burning feuer. So Ahabs, feruor was a litle delayed, with a draught of wine out of Naboths vin∣yard. But Satan holds his guests to one kind of lycour, and that's ranke poyson; the mudde of sinne and wicked∣nesse. He allowes them no other watring place, but this Puddle-wharfe. 3. It makes them burst, here be the three sore effects of sinne in the soule, as of poyson in the body. Frst it makes a man swell, then it makes him drinke, lastly it it bursts him. Iudas is houen with couetousnes, hee drinkes the money of treason, and then he bursts. Rum∣puntur viscera Iudae. Act. 1. 18. he burst out. This is the catastrophe of a wicked life. Iam. 1. 15. Then when lust hath conceiued, it brin∣geth forth sinne: and sinne, when it is finished, bringethforth forth death. To others. You see how fatall the poyson of the wicked is to themselues. It doth not onely rumperese, but corrumpere alios: burst themselues, but corrupt others. It depriues their owne good, it depraues others good. The hurt is doth to others, consists. in Correptione, Corruptione. in outward harming, in inward defiling them. Outwardly Their Poyson breakes forth in the iniuries of all a∣bout them. They spare neither forreiner nor neigh∣bour.
There be litle snakes in Babilon, that bite only forreiners, and not inhabitants. Pliny writes of Scor∣pions in the hill Caria, that when they sting, onely wound the naturall borne people of the Countrey; but extraneos leuiter mordere, but bite strangers gently, or not at all. These, like fooles, not onely strike them that are nearest, but betweene their poyson in ruinam omnium, to the ouerthrow of all. Such a one cannot sleepe except he haue done mischiefe: nay hee dyes, if others doe not dye by him. Et si non aliqua nocusset, mortuus esset. A mans Land cannot scape the poyson of the depopulator: nor his estate the poyson of the vsurer; nor his children the rauisher: nor his peace the contender: nor his name the slanderer. If their poyson cannot preuaile ad interitum hominis, they will spend it ad interitum nominis. If they cannot murder, they will murmure. They are the Deuills bandogs; as one calls Parsons the Popes Cerbrus. If they can∣not come to bite, they will barke. If their sting cannot reach, their mouth shall sputter out their ve∣nime. Yea some of them doe not onely this mischiefe whiles they liue, but etiam mortui, euen dead. As He∣rod, that caused the noble Sonnes of the Iewes to be slaine post mortem suam, after his death. They write of some serpents, that their poyson can doe no hurt except it bee shot from the liue bodies of them: but these leaue behind them a still euill-working poyson. As wee say of a charitable man, that hee doth good after hee is dead; his almes maintaine many poore soules on earth, when his soule is in heauen: Et quam∣vis ipse sepultus, alit. So these wicked sinne perpetually euen dead. The incloser of commons sinneth after he is dead: euen so long as the poore are depriued of that be∣nefite. He that hath robbed the Church of a tenth, & so leaues it to his heire, sinnes after he is dead: euen so long
as God is made to loose his right. Moriente serpente moritur venenum: but here moriente homine viuit pecca∣tum. As one sayd of a Lawyer that resoluing not to be forgotten, hee made his will so full of intricate quirkes; that his executors (if for nothing else; yet) for very vexation of law might haue cause to remem∣ber him. Ieroboams sinne of Idolatrie out liued him. The vniust decrees of a partiall Iudge may out liue him: euen so long as the adiudged inheritance re∣maines with the wrongfull possessor. The decrees of diuerse Popes; as in curtalling the Sacrament, for∣bidding marriage, &c. are their still liuing sinnes though themselues be dead and rotten. Inwardly. Their poyson doth most hurt by Infection: their companie is as dangerous as the plague: a man can∣not come neere them, but hee shall bee contaminated. Like the weed called Gosses, they make the ground barren wheresoeuer they grow. Their Poyson is got Per Contactum Contractum Compactum Conspectum 1. By touching: he that toucheth pitch, shall be de∣filed. It is dangerous to sport and dally with them: dum ludunt, laedunt. Prou. 26. 18. He casteth firebrands, and arrowes, and death; and sayth, Am I not in sport. As Solomon sayth, Their very mercies are cruell: so their very iest is killing earnest. 2. By companying with them: they hurt by spor∣ting, but worse by sorting. Prou. 1. 14. Cast in thy lot among vs, let vs all haue one purse. They that will quarter themselues with the wicked, must drinke of their poy∣son. If you aske, how happes it that their infection is not smlt: Bernard answers; Vbi omnes srdent, vnius De Consider.
minimè sentitur: one is not smelt, where all stinke. 3. By Confederacie; which is yet a higher degree of receiuing their poyson. The first was alight dallying with their humours, the next a societie with them in some drunken riots and disorders: but this third is a conspiracie with them in their pernicious and deadly plotts. Thus a Seminary comes from Rome, and whistles together a number of traytors: he brought poi∣son with him in a Bulls horne, and they all must drinke it. As they report, that once one scabbed sheepe from Spaine rotted all the sheepe of England. In this maner is the poyson of adultery spread from a Harlot. In selling her flesh shee settes pretium peccati, and takes praemium peccati: either pretium pacti, or prae∣mium facti: she hath her price, and giues her male his reward. This is a damnable combination: hee that goeth after her, poysons himselfe per compactum; he bar∣gaines for his owne destruction. 4. By Sight; as they that looke on ill affected eyes attract some of the anguish by a kind of reflection. So the very beholding of their wicked example, deriues corruption to the heart by resultance. Many sinnes had beene vnknowne, if they had not beene learned by precedent. Great men gracelesse are the deuills speci∣all factors: they haue their new trickes of vanitie to teach others. And they often broach these new fashi∣ons of damnation, not so much out of affection to the thing it selfe, as to bee talk'd of. As Alcibiades cut off his dogs taile, that all the people might talke of his curtall. O the vnspeakable deale of poyson that is thus conueyed into mens hearts: and the innumerable soules, that goe to hell by patterne. Thus they hurt others. But I haue beene too copious in discouerie of their poyson: I should come to their Deafnes; but I am loth to speake of deafenesse till the end of the Sermon.
Their poison being thus compared with the poison of Serpents, let vs now compare Their Persons. They are here sayd to bee Sicut Serpentes; Like Serpents. But Mathew 23. Mat. 23. 33. CHRIST cals the Pharises very Serpents. And Iohn Baptist Mat. 3. 7. a genera∣tion of Vipers. And GOD telles Ezekiel, that he did Ezech. 2. 6. dwell among Scorpions. In these places the Sicut is left out, and the wicked are called very Serpents. Not that the frame and forme of their bodily constitution was Serpentine. It was a foolish opinion among the Heathen, that there were Ophiogenes, or Anguigenae. They write of Ophion, the companion of Cadmus, and builder of Thebes, that he was made by Pallas, of a Dragons tooth. So Ephesus was once called Colubraxia: and the people thereof Ophiussa. I haue read of one Exagon, an Ambassador to Rome, being at the Consuls command cast into a Tunne of snakes; that they licked him with their tongues, and did him no harme. But to conclude hereon that these were of Serpents brood; we might as well say, Daniel was borne of Lyons, because they did not hurt him. They are mysticall Serpents, I meane. And if wic∣ked men thinke scorne to be called Serpents, let them abhorre the qualities of Serpents. I referre you for this doct∣rine to my Sermon vpon Math. 10. 16. Sinne is of that power, that it can worke metamorphoses, and trans∣forme men into beasts and serpents. Let vs now see what Serpents we haue among vs. 1. We haue the Salamander, the troublesome and li∣tigious neighbour; who euer loues and liues in the fire of contention. Whatsoeuer they talke that the Sala∣mander is nourished by the fire; yet Galen and Dio∣scorides affirme, that if it tarry long in it, it will bee burnt, when the humiditie is wasted. Whatsoeuer a
man gettes by the fire of vexation, at last his humour will be wasted, his wealth spent, and himselfe con∣sumed in his owne flames. Let no man thinke to get by his troublesomenesse, as if he could be fed with fire. They talke of a Net at Rome (wherein Christs napkin is preserued) that it is washed in nothing but fire. And Paulus Venetus speakes of a kind of earth in Tartaria; which being spun into a threed, and wouen into cloth, is onely purged from all spots by washing it in the fire. But if euer any man grow rich by his contentiousnes, I will beleeue that fire is nourishment. Some make the Embleme of Strife the Snake. Alecto sent a Snake to moue contention in the familie of Amata. Vnum de crinibus Anguem Conijcit, in{que} sinum praecordia ad intima subdit. Aeneid. 7. Let the vnquiet man, that is still vexing his neighbours with sutes and quarrels, here take his choice: whether he will be a Snake or a Salamander. 2. We haue the Dar; and that's the Angrie man. This is the Serpent that is thought to leape on Pauls hand. Iaculum vocat Affrica. It gathers it selfe into a heape on the toppe of a tree, and so flies at a man, tan∣quam Act. 28. Sagitta; as a Dart. Such a Serpent is the hasty fu∣rious man; he flies vpon another with a sudden blow. Some coniecture (I know not how probably) that these were the fiery Serpents in the Desart. 3. There is the Dipsas, the Drunkard. This Serpent liues altogether in moorish places: the serpent in the fennes, the man at the alehouse. Ovid writes of an old drunken woman. Est quaedam nomine Dipsas anus. Ex re nomen habet. Her name did agree with her nature. It is euer dry sayth Lucan. Medijs sitibant Dipsades vn∣dis. If this Serpent wound a man, it turnes all his bloud into poyson. So the Drunkard turnes his bloud to water, his bread to drinke, his reason to poyson,
his very soule to froth. 4. There is the Crocodile, the Hypocrite. He will sobbe, and sigh, and weepe, to get a man into his clutches. If his hypocrisie can get him into a good house, he will deuour the Patron that breedes him, the maintainer that feedes him: he vndoes the familie where he once sets a foote into theyr dores, or puttes a finger into their purses. Plinie sayth, the Croco∣dile is so delighted with the Sun-shine, that it lies on the earth immoueable, as if it were starke dead. Let the Hypocrite be frank'd vp with prosperitie, and hee sleepes as securely, as if earth had lost all windes, and heauen the thunder. His pamperd body growes so fatte, that his soule lies soft in it, at great ease, and is loath to rise. 5. The Cocatrice, that is sayd to kill with the eyes. Illius auditos expectant nulla susurros. The reason why Nicand. it killes by sight, is thus giuen; because the beames of a Cocatrices eye corrupt the visible spirits of a man; which corrupted, corrupt the other spirits comming from the braine, and life of the heart. Our common Phrase hath found out creatures to match this kind of Serpents; Whores, vsually call'd Cocatrices. I would to God they were beleeued as dangerous as they are, and are named. The Cocatrice is a very hote creature; and there∣fore made with spiraments and breathing places all ouer the body: least the compage and iuncture of the whole composition should be dissolued. The intem∣perate heate of harlots is worse, and in some kind a very reflection from the fire of hell. There is an old tale, that England was once so pesterd with Coca∣trices, that a certaine man found out one onely tricke to destroy them: which was by walking vp and downe in glasse before them; whereby their owne shapes were so reflected vpon their owne faces, that they died.
But it is idle, for it is more likely that the man should dye by the corruption of the aire from the cocatrice, then the cocatrice by the resultance of it owne simili∣tude from the glasse. As the harlot will sooner peruert a man, then he shall conuert the harlot. Indeed they say, if they first see vs, they kill vs: if we first see them, they die. So if we first see the damnation of a Courte∣zan, we saue our selues: if they first see & wound vs, we dye of it. 6. There's the Catterpillar; you all know this to be the Couetous. I confesse that other Serpents are also fit emblemes of the couetous: as the Toad, that eats spa∣ringly of the very earth for feare it should be all wasted & no food left for her. The Germane Painters to signi∣fie Couetousnes, doe picture an old woman sitting vp∣on a toade. Or the Earth-worme: these wormes eate vp the fatt of the earth, toades eate vp those wormes, and dragons eate vp those toades. So lightly pettie vsurers eate vp the fatte of the Countrey, great op∣pressors deuoure those litle extortioners, and at last the great red dragon swallowes those oppressors. But▪ here I especially liken them to Catterpillars. Pline sayth, that litle wormes bred in the green leaues of plants, proue in three dayes catterpillars & eate vp those plants. The Countrey breeds, these couetous wretches, and they deuour her. He writes also that Cat∣terpillars are bred by a dew, incrassated and thicked by the heate of the Sun. It is the warmth of prospertie, that breedes and feeds our vsurers. Others say, that they come of butterflies egs, the which heate of the Sunne hatcheth, working so fit a passiue matter to the forme of a catterpillar. So commonly your vsurer hatcheth, his ri∣ches out of the Butterflies egs, laid abroad by prodigall young gallāts. The Scripture calls them great deuourers Ioel. 1. 4. Martial. Eracam vix pascit hortus vnam. A whole coūtrey wil not content one auarous catterpillar. At last the catterpillars
perish of thēselues (as ours do wilfully) through famine, & are transformed into a bare & emptie bagge or case. If they perish in summer, out of their rind being bro∣ken comes forth a butterfly. Iust as wee see often from the ruines of a dead vsurer, that was a Catter∣pillar; springs a prodigall Heire, that is a painted But∣terflie. 7. We haue also the Aspe that's the traitours Semi∣nary. Lucan writes, that the originall of Aspes was Affrica, and that merchants translated them into Europe. Sed quis erit nobis Lucripudor! Inde petuntur Huc Lybicae mtes, & fecmus Aspida merces. But what is our gaine, sayth hee? We haue made the Aspos a merchandice. So these our Aspes are bred in Italie, and ship'd ouer into England as a precious mer∣chandice. They speake themselues so gentle, that Esa. 11. 8. a sucking child may play  the hol of these Aspes: but wee haue found their boroughs the holes of treason, and their vaults the vaults of gunpowder. There is feud be∣twixt the Ichneumon and the Aspe: they oft fight: if the Aspe bite first, the Ichneumon dyes: if the Ichneumon first, the Aspe dyes. Let vs strike them with punishment, lest they strike vs with death. These Aspes kill many soules in our Land. Aspidis & mersu Loesum dormire fatentur In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt. If the be witched people once receiue their poyson, they sleepe to death: and no helpe preuailes, for they will not come to Church to be cured. 8. There is also the Lyzard, the Embleme of the Slothfull. As is also the Slow-worme, or the serpen∣tine Tortoice. They write of the Lyzard, that hauing laid egges, shee forgets the very place where shee laid them. She will lie still till you cut her in pieces: and then the forepart runns away vpon two Legs,
and the hinder part on other two: liuing apart till they meete againe, and then are naturally onioyned. If the Lazy will follow the qualities, let them take the name of Lisards. 9. There is also the Sea-Serpent, and that's the Pirate: a theefe crosse to all kind of theeues. For other theeues first fall to robberie, and then are cast into prison: but he first casts himselfe into a prison, and then falls to robberie. In a litle vessell, a very iayle, with a large graue round about it, he does all mischeefe. At last when he growes great, he ruines himselfe. They write of a Sea-dragon, that growes to a huge vastnesse: but then the winds take him vp into the aire, and by a violent agitation shake his body to pieces. A noble part of Gods prouidence; to tame that himselfe which his creatures cannot. 10. There is the Stellion, and that is the Extortioner. Extortion and Cossenage is prouerbially called Crimen Stellionatus; the sinne of Stellature. When the Stellion hath cast his skinne, hee greedily deuoures it againe: which sayth Theophrastus, hee doth in enuie, because he vnderstands that it is a noble remedie against the fal∣ling sicknes. So in malice it lines the guts with that couered the backe: & eats that in summer wherewith it was clothed in winter. It destroyes the honey of Bees Stellio saepe fauos ignotus adedit. So the extortioner spoiles the hiues, & deuours al the honey of pooremens gathe∣ring. It is a beast full of spottes. Aptumque colori. Virgil. Nomen habet, varijs stellatus corpore guttis. The spots that sticke vpon an Extortioner are more Orid. innumerable. Cosonage is called Stellature. It were wel if such Extortioners were serued, as Budaus relates a historie of two Tribunes, Qui per Stellaturas militibus multum abstulissent; whom the Emperor commaunded to be stoned to death. 11. The last is the great Serpent of all, Draco the
deuill; who is called the Reu. 12. 3. Great red Dragon. In idola∣trous times and places dragons haue beene worshiped. The common distinction is, Angneb,  Serpentes terrarum, Dracones Templorum. Snakes of the water, ser∣pents of the earth, dragons of the Temple. There are too many wicked worldlings, that still worship this God of the world, the red Dragon. The dragons haunt principally trees of frankincense: Satan loues to haue men sacrifice to him: he tempted the son of God to fall downe & worship him. Nothing but the smoke of Sty∣rax can driue away dragons: not holy water, not cros∣sings, but onely faith in the Lord Iesus can put the deuil to flight. Serpens serpentem derando fit Draco. The diuel at first was but a Serpent; now by deuouring many mil∣lios of these serpēts, the wicked; he is become a Dragon. I should here shew you two things. 1. The remedie to draw out this poyson, and to cure the soule; which is onely Sanguis medici, the bloud of our Phisician. Ioh. 3. 14. As Moses lifted vp the serpent in the wilder nesse, so was Christ lifted vp us a serpent; that what eye of fayth soeuer lookes on him, he may be healed of the sting of those fiery serpents, and haue the damnable poyson of sinne drawne out. 2. That our next course is Repentance for our sinnes. That as the oile of Scorpions is the best remedie for them that are stung with scorpions: so repentance for sin, is the best remedie within vs to expell the poyson of sinne. Thinke of the Wise mans counsell; Eccl. 21. 2. Flie from sin as from the face of a serpent: if thou commest too neare it, it will bite thee: and follow it. Their Deafnesse remaines to be spokē & must remaine vnspoken. How should they be cured, that are deafe to the counsel of their Phisician? Though there be poison in vs, euen the poiso of dragōs, yet God blesse vs from the deafnesse of the Adder. Let vs heare our remedie, & em∣brace it: pray to God for it, and receiue it: and
1. Ioh. 1. 7. The bloud of Iesus Christ clenseth vs from all our sinnes. To this Sauiour let all that are saued, giue prayse and glory for euer and euer. Amen. HEAVEN MADE SVRE OR The Certaintie of Saluation. PSAL. 35. 3. Say vnto my soule, I am thy saluation. THE words containe a Petition for a Benediction. The Supplicant is a king, and his humble te s to the king of kings: the king of Israel prayes to the king of heauen & arth. He doth begge two things. 1. That God would saue him. 2. That God would certifie him of it. So that the Text may be distri∣buted accordingly; In salutem Dei, & cortitudinem rei: into Saluation and Assurance of it. The Assurance Lies first in the words, and shall haue the first place in my discourse. Wherein I conceiue two things; the Matter and the Manner. The Matter is Assurance: the Manner how assured, Dic anima; Say vnto my soule. From the matter or Assurance obserue; 1. That Saluation may be made sure to a man. Dauid
would neuer pray for that, which could not be. Nor would S. Peter charge vs with a dutie, which stood not in possibilitie to be performed. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Make your election sure. And to stoppe the bang throates of all cauilling ad∣uersaries, Paul directly proues it. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Know yee not your owne selues, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except yee be re∣probates? We may then know that Christ is in vs: if Christ be in vs, we are in Christ: if we be in Christ, we cannot be condemned: for Rom. 8. 1. There is no damnation to them which are in Christ Iesus. But I leaue this point, that it may be sure, as granted: and come to our selues that we may make it sure. The Papists deny this, and teach the contrary▪ that Salua∣tion cannot be made sure: much good do't them with their sory and heartlesse doctrine. If they make that im∣possible to any, which God hath made easie for many; Gen. 49. 6. Into their secret let not my soule come. 2. That the best Saints haue desired to make their Saluation sure. Dauid that knew it, yet intreats to know it more. Psal. 41. I know thou fauourest me: yet here still, Psal. 41. 11. Dic anima, Say vnto my soule, I am thy saluation. A man can neuer be too sure of his going to heauen. If we pur∣chase an inheritance on earth, wee make it as sure, and our tenure as strong, as the brawne of the law, or the braine of Lawyers can deuise. We haue conueyance, & bonds, and fines; no strēgth too much. And shal we not be more curious in the setling our eternal inheritāce in heauen? Euen the best certētie hath often in this thought it selfe weake Here wee find matter of consolation, of Reprehension, of Admonition. Comfort to some, re∣proofe to others, warning to al. 1. Of Cosolation. Euen Dauid desires better assurance: to keepe vs from deiecti∣on, behold they often thinke themselues weakest, that are the strongest. Sum Peccatorum maximus, dicit Apo∣stolorum non minimus. He calls himselfe the Chiefest of sin∣ners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. that was not the least of Saints. Indeed sometimes
a deare Saint may want feeling of the spirit of comfort. Grace comes into the soule, as the morning Sun into the world: there is first a dawning, then a meane light, and at last the Sunne in his excellent brightnesse. In a Christian life there is Professio, Profectio, Perfectio. A pro∣fession of the name of Christ wrought in our conuersi∣on: not the huske of religion, but the sap: a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith vnfned. Next there is a pro∣fection or going forward n grace; working vp our sal∣uation in feare and trembling. Last a perfection or full as∣surance, that we are sealed vp to the day of redemption. And yet after this full assurance there may bee some feare: it is not the commendation of this certainty to bee void of doubting. The wealthiest Saints haue sus∣pected their pouertie: and the richest in grace are yet poorest in spirit. As it is seene in rich misers; they possesse much, yet esteeme it little in respect of what they de∣sire: for Plenitudo opum non implet hiatum mentis: the ful∣nesse of riches cannot answere the insatiable affection. Whence it comes to passe, that they haue restlesse thoughts, and vexing cares for that they haue not, not caring for that they haue. So many good men, rich in the graces of Gods spirit, are so desirous of more, that they regard not what they enioy, but what they desire: complaining often that they haue no grace, no loue, no life. God doth sometimes from the best mens eyes hide that sauing goodnesse, that is in their hearts. 1. To extend their desires, and sharpen their affecti∣on. By this meanes he puts a hunger into their hearts after righteousnes; whereas a sensible fulnes might take away their stomaches. Deferred comforts quicken the appetite. 2. To enlarge their ioyes, when they shall finde a∣gaine the consolation, which they thought lost. Defide∣rata diù  venit. What we much wished before it came, we truely loue when it is come. Our Lady had
lost our Lord. Luk. 2. three dayes: who can expresse the ioy of her soule when shee found him! Shee reioyced not onely as a Mother finding her Sunne; but as a sin∣ner finding her Sauiour. Iucundè obtinetur, quod diù de∣tinetur. What was detained from vs with griefe, must needs be obtained of vs with ioy. 3. To trie, whether we will serue God gratis; and be constant in his obedience, though we find no present recompence. Satan obiects that against Iob, Pro nihilo? Doth Iob feare God for nought. Thus put to the Test, Iob. 1. 9. whether our seruice proceed from some other oblique respect; or meerely out of loue to God: when nothing but smart is presented to our instant sense. 4. That our care may be the greater, to keepe this comfort when we haue it. Quod lachrymanter Iugemus ademptum, vigilanter seruamus adeptum. If we so sorrow∣fully lamented the losse, sure we will looke well to the possession. In all this; Deus dona sua non negat, sed commendat. God intends not to deny vs his comforts, but to instruct our hearts how to value them. Citò data viliscunt. If we might haue them for the first asking, their worth would fall to the opinion of cheapnesse and contempt. Wee shall haue it, though we stay for it. And to comfort vs, let vs assuredly know, that this mourning for Gods ab∣sence, is an euident demonstration of his presence. 2. Of Reprehension to others, that say they are sure of the purchase, before they euer gaue earnest of the bar∣gaine. Presumption is to be auoided so well as despaire. For as none more complaine that they want this assu∣rance, then they that haue it: so none more boast of it then they that haue it not. The fond hypocrite takes his owne presumption for this assurance: he liues after the flesh, yet brags of the Spirit. This false opinion a∣riseth partly from his owne conceite, partly from Sa∣tans deceite.
1. From his owne Conceit: he dreames of the Spi∣rit, and takes it granted that it euer rests within him: but when his soule awakes, he finds there no such man∣ner of guest; the holy Spirit neuer lodged there. Prou. 30. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their owne eyes: yet are not washed from their filthinesse. These pure people so vaunt the assurance of saluation; that they will scarce change places in heauen with St. Peter, or St. Paul without boote. The infallible marke of distinction which the Apostle sets on the Sonnes of God, is this: they are led by the Spirit. Rom. 8. Rom. 8. 14. and Gal. 5. 18. So many as are led by the Spirit of God,  sonnes of God. The holy Ghost is their God, and their guide and this Spirit Ioh. 16. 13.  them into all truth: and guides them Psal. 143. 10. into the land of righteousnes. But these men will Spiritum dere, lead the Spirit. They are not ductible; they will not be led by the Spirit in∣to truth and pence; but they will lead the Spirit, as it were, ouer-rule the holy Ghost to patronize their hu∣mours. Let them be adulterers, vsurers, bribe-corrup∣ted; sacrilegious, &c. yet they are still men of the Spi∣rit. But of what Spirit? Nestis: we may say to them, as Christ to hit two hote disciples; Luk. 9. 55. ye know not of what Spirit you are. It is enough, they thinke, to haue oculos in coelo, though they haue manus in fundo, animos in profun∣d. It is held sufficient to haue eyes fixed on heauen, though couetous hands busie on earth, and crafty minds deepe as hell. This ouer-venturous conceite, that hea∣uen is theirs how base and debauched liues so euer they liue, is not assurance, but presumption. 2. This ariseth from Satans Deceite: who cryes like Corah. Numb. 16. 3. Ye take too much vpon you, seeing all the congrega∣tion is ily, euery one of them. You are holy enough, you are sure of heauen: what would you more? You may sit downe, and play: your worke is done. Hereupon they sing peace and Requiems to their soules; and begin to wrappe vp their affections in worldly ioyes: But
Tranquilitas ista tempestas est: this calme is the most grie∣uous storme. This is carnall securitie, not heauenly as∣surance. As the Iewes went into captiuitie with Tem∣plum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, &c. in their lips: so many go to hell with the water of Baptisme on their faces, and the assurance of saluation in their mouthes. 3. Of Instruction, teaching vs to keepe the euen-way of comfort: eschewing both the rocke of presumption on the right hand, and the gulfe of desperation on the left. Let vs neither be Tumidi, nor Timidi: neyther o∣uer bold, nor ouer-fainting. But endeuour by faith to assure our selues of Iesus Christ: and by repentance to assure our selues of faith: and by an amended life to as∣sure our selues of repentance. For they must here liue to Gods glory, that would hereafter liue in Gods glory. 3. In the next place obserue the meanes how we may come by this assurance. This is discouered in the text: Dic animae; Say vnto my Soule. Who must speake? God. To whom must he speake? to the Soule. So that in this assurance God and the Soule must meet. This St. Paul demonstrates: Rom. 8. 16. The Spirit it selfe beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the children of God. The word is , contestari, to beare witnesse together. Nei∣ther our spirit alone, nor Gods spirit alone makes this Certificate; but both concurring. Not our spirit alone can giue this assurance: for mans heart is alwayes euill, often deceitfull. At all times euill. Gen. 6. 5. Euery imagination of the thoughts of his heart is onely euill continually. At some times deceitfull. Ier. 17. 9. The heart is de∣ceitfull aboue all things; and desperately wicked: Who can know it? Non noui animam meam; sayth Iob. Iob. 9. 21. I know not my owne soule; though I were perfect. And Paul con∣cerning his Apostleship. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not hereby iustified. And if Dauids soule could haue made a sufficient testimony alone, what needed he pray Dic animae? say Thou to my soule? Some haue a true
zeale of a false Religion, and some a false zeale of a true Religion. Paul before his conuersion had a true zeale of a false Religion. Gal. 1. 14. I was exceedingly zealous of the tra∣ditions of my Fathers. The Laodiceans had a false or ra∣ther no zeale of a true Religion. Reu. 3. 15. I know thy works, that thou art neither hote nor cold. So that when about this certificate a man deales with his heart singly, his heart will deale with him doubly. No nor doth Gods spirit alone giue this Testimony: least a vaine illusion should be taken for this holy per∣swasion. But both Gods spirit and our spirit meeting together are Concordes, and Contestes; ioynt witnesses. Indeed the principall worke comes from Gods spirit: he is the primary cause of this assurance. Now he cer∣tifies vs by word, by deed, and by seale. By word, ter∣ming vs in the Scripture Gods children; and putting into our mouthes that filiall voyce, whereby wee cry Abba Father. By deed; Gal. 5. 22. the fruit of the spirit is loue, ioy, peace, long-suffering, &c. By these is our 2. Pet. 1. 10. Election made sure, sayth Saint Peter. By Seale; Grieue not the holy spi∣rit of God, by whom you are sealed to the day of redemption. Now our spirit witnesseth with him from the sancti∣tie of our life, faith and reformation. Ioh. 5. 10. He that beleeueth on the sonne of God, hath the witnesse in himselfe. 4. Lastly, this is the sweetest comfort that can come to a man in this life; euen an heauen vpon earth, to be ascertained of his saluation. There are many mysteries in the world, which curious wits with perplexfull stu∣dies striue to apprehend. But without this, he that Eccl. 1. 18. en∣creaseth knowledge, encreaseth sorrow. Vnum necessarium; this one thing is onely necessary: whatsoeuer I leaue vnknowne let me know this that I am the Lords, Qui Christum discit, satis est, si caetera nescit. He may without danger be ignorant of other things, that truely knows Iesus Christ. There is no potion of miserie so embittered with gall,
but this can sweeten it with a cofortable rellish. When enemies assault vs, get vs vnder, triumph ouer vs, ima∣gining that saluation it selfe cannot saue vs: what is our comfort? Noui in quem credidi, I know whom I haue beleeued; I am sure the Lord will not forsake me. De∣ficit panis? thou wantest bread; God is thy bread of life. We want a pillow: God is our Psal. 32. 7. Fulgent. resting place. We may be Sine veste, non sine fide; sine cibo, non sine Christo: sine Domo, non sine Domino. Without apparell, not without faith: without meate, not without Christ: without a house, neuer without the Lord. What state can there be, wherein the stay of this heauenly assurance giues vs not peace and ioy? Are we clapt vp in a darke and desolate Dungeon: there the light of the Sunne cannot enter, the light of mercie not be kept out. What restrained bodie, that hath the assurance of this eternall peace, will not pittie the darknes of the prophane mans libertie; or rather the libertie of his darkenesse? No wals can keepe out an infinite Spirit: no darkenes can be vncomfortable, where the Iam. 1. 17. Father of lights, and the Mal. 4. 2. Sunne of righteous∣nesse shineth. The presence of glorious Angels is much, but of the most glorious God is enough. Are we cast out in exile; our backes to our natiue home, all the worlds our way. Whether can we goe from God? Psal. 139. 7. Whether shall I goe from thy face? or whether shall I flie from thy presence? If I ascend, &c. That exile would be strange, that could separate vs from God. I speake not of those poore and common comforts; that in all Lands and coasts, it is his Sunne that shines; his elements of earth or water that beares vs, his aire we breath. But of that speciall priuiledge, that his gracious presence is euer with vs: that no sea is so broad, as to deuide vs from his fauour: that wheresoeuer we feed, he is our host: wheresoeuer we rest, the wings of his blessed prouidence are stretched ouer vs. Let my soule
be sure of this, though the whole world be traytors to me. Doth the world despise vs? We haue sufficient re∣compence, that God esteemes vs. How vnworthy is that man of Gods fauour, that cannot goe away con∣tented with it, without the worlds! Doth it hate vs much? God hates it more. That is not euer worthie which man honours; but that is euer base which God despises. Without question the world would bee our friend, if God were our enemie. The sweetnes of both cannot bee enioyed; let it content vs, wee haue the best. It may be, pouertie puts pale leannes into our cheeks: God makes the world fat, but withall puts leannesse in∣to the soule. We decay in these temporall vanities, but we thriue in eternall riches. Iob. 5. 22. The good man laughes at destruction and dearth. Doth sicknes throw vs on our weary beds? It is impossible any man should miscarry, that hath God for his Physitian. So Martha confessed to Iesus; Ioh. 11. 21. Lord, if thou hadst beene here, my brother had not dyed. Thy bodie is weake, thy soule is strengthened: dust and ashes is sicke, but thy eternall substance is the better for it. Psal. 119. 71. It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted, that I might learne thy statutes. Lastly doth the ineuitable hand of death strike thee? Egredere anima mea, egredere. Goe forth my soule with ioy and assurance; thou hast a promise to be receiued in peace. Happie dissolution, that parts the soule from the bodie, that it may knit them both to the Lord. Death like the proud Philistine comes marching out in his hydeous shape, daring the whole Hoast of Is∣raell to match him with an equall combatant. The A∣theist dares not die, for feare (non esse) that hee shall not be at all: the couetous vsurer dares not die, for feare (male esse) to be damned: the doubtfull consci∣ence dares not die, because he knowes not (an sit, an
non sit, an damnatus sit) whether he shall be, or be dam∣ned, or not bee at all. Onely the resolued Christian dares die, because he is assured of his election: he knows he shall be happie; and so lifts vp pleasant eyes to hea∣uen, the infallible place of his eternall rest. He dares encounter with this last enemie, trample on him with the foote of disdaine, and triumphantly sing ouer him; 1. Cor. 15. 15 O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? He conquers in being conquered; and all because God hath sayd to his Soule; I am thy Salua∣tion. The poore Papist must not beleeue this: such an as∣surance to him were Apocryphall, yea hereticall. He must lie on his death-bed, call vpon what Saint or An∣gell he list; but must not dare to beleeue hee shall goe to heauen. O vncomfortable doctrine, able to loose the soule! What can follow, but feares without, and terrours within; distrustfull sighes, and heart-breaking grones! Goe away he must with death; but whither he knows not. It would be presumption to be confident of heauen. How should Purgatory stand, or the Popes kitchin haue a Larder to maintaine it, if men might be sure of their saluation? Herefore they bequeath so great summes for masses and Dirge's, and Trentals, to bee sung or sayd for them after they are dead: that their soules may at the last be had to heauen; though first for a while they be reezed in Purgatory. If this be all the comfort their Priests, Iesuites, and Confessors can giue them; they may well say to them, as Iob to his friends; Iob. 16. 2. Miserable comforters are ye all. But he that hath Stephens eyes, hath also Pauls heart, and the Saints tongue. He that with Stephens eyes can see that Act. 7. 55. Sonne of man standing on the right hand of God; as if his armes were open to wel-come and em∣brace him: must needs with Paul Phil. 1. 23. desire to be dissolued, and to be with Christ: and with the Saints cry; Come
Lord; how long! Amen, euen so come Lord Iesus. Thus much for the matter of the Assurance; let vs now come to the manner. Dic Animae. Say vnto my soule. Say: but is God a man? hath he a tongue? how doth Dauid desire him to speake? That God who made the eare, shall not he heare? he that made the eye, shall not e see? he that made the tongue, shall not he speake? He that sees without eyes, and heares without eares, and walkes without feete, and workes without hands, can speake without a tongue. Now God may be sayd to speake diuerse wayes 1. God hath spoken to some-by his owne voice. To Adam; vocem audiuerunt: they heard the Gen. 3. 8. voyce of God &c. To Israel. Deut. 4. 15. The Lord spake vnto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voyce of the words but saw no similitude: onely you heard a voyce. To Christ: Ioh. 12. 28. I here came a voyce from heauen, saying: I haue both glorified it, and I will glorifie it. This S. Peter testifies. 2. Pet. 1. 17. There came a voyce from the excel∣lent glory; This is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased. 2. To omit visions, and dreames, and cloudes and Cherubins and Angells, vrim and thummim: God speakes also by his workes. Psal. 19. 1. The heauens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handie worke. Mnus loquuntur; his workes haue a tongue. Opera testantur de me, sayth Christ: my workes beare witnesse of me. We may thus vnderstand God ex ope∣ribus; his actions preach his will. 3. God speakes by his Sonne. Hebr. 1. God who at sundry times, and in diuers manners, spake in tme past vnto the Fathers by the Prophets; hath in these last daves spoken vnto vs by his Sonne. Hee is therefore called the Word. Ioh. 1 The sacred Scriptures, and say∣ings
of the Prophets, giuen by the inspiration of God; (for 2. Pet. 1. 20. no prophecie is of private interpretation: it came not by the will of man; but holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.) are called Verbum Domini, the word of the Lord. But to distinguish God the Sonne from those words, he is after an eminent sort called , The word, or That excellent word. As also hee is called (not a light, but) Ioh. 1. 8. That light: (not a lambe, but) ver. 29. hat lambe. Not a vocall word formed by the tongue beating the aire; for hee was before eyther sound or aire. But the mentall and substantiall word of his Father; but Ipse Pater , effigies lumen{que} a lumine vero. Pallad. According to that of Paul. Hebr. 1. 3. The brightnesse of his glo∣ry, and expresse image of his person. 4. GOD speakes by his Scriptures. Rem. 15. 4. Whatsoever things were writen aforetime, are written for our learning: that wee through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope. Scripta sunt, they are written. Things that go onely by take, or tradition, meete with such va∣riations, augmentations, abbreuiations, corruptions, false glosses; that as in a Lawyers pleading, Truth is lost in the Quaere for her. Related thinges wee are long in getting, quicke in forgetting. Therefore God commanded his law should be written. Litera scripta manet. Thus God doth effectually speake to vs. Ma∣ny good wholesome instructions haue drop'd from humane pennes; to lesson and direct man in good∣nesse. But there is no promise giuen to any word to conuert the soule, but to Gods word. Without this Antiquitie is noueltie, Noueltie subtletie, Subtletie death. Theologia Scholastica multis modis sophistica. Schoole Diuinitie is little better then meere Sophistrie. Plus argutiarum quam do∣ctrine,
plus doctrina quàm vsus. It hath more quick∣nesse then soundnesse, more fauce then meate, more difficultie then doctrine, more doctrine then vse. This Scripture is the Perfect and Absolute rule. Bellarmine acknowledgeth two thinges re∣quireable in a Perfect Rule; Certaintie, and E∣vidence. If it bee not certaine, it is no Rule: if it bee not euident, it is no rule to vs. Onely the Scripture is both in truth and euidence a per∣fect rule. Other writings may haue canonicall veritie, the Scripture onely hath canonicall autho∣ritie. Others like oile may make cheerefull mans countenance; but this like Bread strengthens his heart. This is the absolute Rule; Gal. 6. 16. And as ma∣ny as walke according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercie, and vppon the Israel of God. O that wee had hearts to blesse GOD for this mercie, that the Scriptures are among vs, and that not sealed vp vnder an vnknowne tongue. The time was when a deuout Father was glad of a piece of the new Testament in English: when he tooke his little Sonne into a corner, and with ioy of soule heard him reade a chapter: so that euen Children became Fathers to their Fathers, and begate them to CHRIST. Now as if the commonnesse had abated the worth, our Bi∣bles lie dusty in the windowes: it is all if a Sunday-handling quite them from perpetuall obliuion. Few can read, fewer do reade, fewest of all read as they should. God of his infinite mercie lay not to our charge this neglect. 5. GOD speakes by his Ministers, expounding and opening to vs those Scriptures. These are Le∣gati a latere; dispencers of the mysteries of heauen. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Ambassadors for CHRIST: as if God did beseech you
through vs, so wee pray you in Christs stead, that you would be reconciled to God. This voice is continual∣ly sounding in our Churches, beating vpon our eares; I would it could pierce our consciences, and that our liues would eccho to it in an answerable obedience. How great should be our thankfullnesse! God hath delt with vs as hee did with Eliah. 1. King. 19. 11. The Lord passed by, and a great strong wind rent the mountaines, and brake in pieces the rockes before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind. After the wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake. After the earthquake, a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire, a still voyce: and the Lord came with that voyce. After the same manner hath God done to this Land. In the time of K. Henry 8. there came a great and mightie Wind, that rent downe Churches, ouerthrew Al∣tarages, impropriated from Ministers their liuings: that made Lay-men substantiall Parsons, and Cler∣gie men their vicar-shadowes. It blew away the rights of Leui, into the lappe of Issachar: a violent wind: but God was not in that wind. In the dayes of King Edward the sixt there came a terrible Earthquake, hideous vapours of Treasons and con∣spiracies, rumbling from Rome, to shake the foun∣dations of that Church, which had now left off louing the Whore, and turned Antichrist quite out of his saddle. Excommunications of Prince and people, execrations and curses in their tetricall formes with Bell, Booke, and Candle; Indulgences, Bulls, Pardons, promises of heauen, to all traytors that would extrpate such a King and kingdome: a Monstrous earthquake; but GOD was not in the Earthquake. In the dayes of Queene Mary came the Fire, an vnmercifull fire: such a one as was neuer before kindled in England, and (wee
trust in Iesus Christ) neuer shall be againe. It raged against all that professed the Gospell of Christ: made bonefires of silly women for not vnderstanding that their ineffable mysterie of Transubstantiation; burnt the mother with the child: Boner and Gardi∣ner those hellish bellowes that set it on flaming. A raging and insatiable fire; but God was not in that fire. In the dayes of Queene Elizabeth of blessed memorie, came the still voyce, saluting vs with the songs of Sion, and speaking the comfortable things of Iesus Christ: and GOD came with his voyce. This sweete and blessed voyce is still continued by our Gracious Soueraigne: GOD long pre∣serued him with it, and it with him, and vs all with them both. Let vs not say of this blessing, as Lot of Zoar; Is it not a litle one? nor bee weary of Manna with Israel: lest GODS voyce grow dumbe vnto vs, and (to our woe) wee heare it speake no more. No, rather let our hearts answere with Samuel; 1. Sam. 3. 10. Speake Lord, for thy seruants heare. If wee will not heare him say to our soules, I am your saluati∣on: wee shall heare him say, Depart from mee, I know you not. So sayth wisedome; Prou. 1. 26. Because I haue called, and yee refused: I will therefore laugh at your calamitie, and mocke when your feare commeth. The gallant promiseth himselfe many yeares, and in them all to reioyce: hee thinkes of Preachers, as the Deuill sayd of CHRIST; that we come to torment him before his time. Well then, Reioyce sayth GOD: Ecel. 11. 9. Let thy heart cheare thee in the dayes of thy youth. But ironice, hee mockes when hee sayes so. Now quod Deus loquitur ridens, tu lege lacrymans: What God speakes laughing, doe thou read lamenting. If God once laughes, itis high time for vs to weepe: They will not heare God when he prea∣cheth
in their health: God will not heare them when they pray in their sicknes. They would not hearken to him in the Pulpit, nor hee to them on their death bed. 6. God speakes by his Spirit: This spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit &c. Perhaps this is that Esa. 30. 21. voyce behind vs; as it were whispering to our thoughts? This is the way, walke in it. This is that speaking Spirit: Math. 10. 20. It is not yee that speake; but the Spirit of your Father, which speaketh in you. It is this Spirit that speakes for vs, and speakes to vs, and speakes in vs. It is the Churches prayer; Cant. 1. 2. Let him kisse mee with the kisses of his mouth. Sanctus Spiritus osculum Pa∣tris. The holy Ghost is the kisse of God the Father. Whom God kisseth, he loueth. Now by all these wayes doth God speake peace to our consciences, and say to our soules, that hee is our Saluation. 1. Hee may speake with his owne voyce: and thus he gaue assurance to Abraham; Gen. 15. 1. Feare not, I am thy shield, & thy exceeding great reward. If God speake com∣fort, let hell roare horrour. 2. Hee may speake by his workes: actuall mercies to vs demonstrate that we are in his fauour, and shall not be condemned. Psal. 41. 11. By this I know thou fauourest mee, because mine enemie doth not triumph ouer mee. 3. Hee may speake by his sonne; Math. 11. 28. Come to mee all that labour, and are heauie laden, and I will ease you. 4. He may speake by his Scripture this is Gods Epistle to vs, and his letters Patent, where∣in are granted to vs all the priuiledges of saluation. An vniuersall Siquis: Whosoeuer beleeues, and is Baptised, shall be saued. 5. He may speake by his Ministers to whom he hath giuen 2. Cor. 5. 19. the Ministerie of reconciliation. 6. He doth speake this by his spirit: he Gal. 4. 6. sendeth forth the spirit of his sonne into our hearts, crying Abba Fa∣ther. By all these voyces God sayes to his elect, I
am your saluation. To my Soule. Many heare God speaking comfort to the corporall care, that heare him not speaking this to the soule. They heare him, but they feele him not. The best assu∣rance is from feeling. Gen. 27. 21. Come neare, let mee feele thee my Sonne, sayd Isaacto Iacob: let me feele thee, my Father; say wee to God. The thronging Iewes heard Christ, but Zacheus that beleeuing Publican felt Christ. Luk. 19. 9. This day is saluation come to thy house. My Soule. There is no vexation to the vexation of the soule: so no consolation to the consolation of the soule. Dauid in this Psalme calls it his Darling. Ver. 17. Rescue my soule from their destructions, my Darling from the Lyons. The same Prophet complained of a great vn∣rest, when Psal. 42. 11. his soule was disquieted within him. Ionas of a grieuous sicknesse, when Ioh. 2. 7. his soule fainted. Io∣seph had a cruell bondage, when Psal. 105. 18. The yron entred his soule. So no comfort to the comfort of the soule. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, Psal. 94. 19. Thy comforts haue refreshed my soule. The wicked heare tell of Gods mercies: communitur audimus verbum salutis: but God speakes not to their soules. Therefore they cannot say with Mary; My soule reioyceth. This ioy, when God speakes peace to the soule, is ineffabile gaudium: a iubilation of the heart, which a man can, neither recitare, nor reticere: neither suppresse, nor expresse. It giues end to all arres, doubts, and differences; ouercomes the world, non-sutes the deuill; and makes a man keepe Hilary Terme all his life. To my Soule. Mine; I might here examine whose this Mea
is; who is the owner of this my? A prophet, a king, a man after Gods owne heart; that confessed him∣selfe the beloued of God; that knew the Lord would neuer forsake him; holy, happy Dauid ownes this meae: hee knowes the Lord loues him, yet desires to know it more; Dic animae Mea; say to My soule. But let this teach vs to make much of this My. Luther sayes, there is great diuinitie in pronounes. The Assurance that GOD will saue some is a fayth incident to Deuills. The very Reprobates may be∣leeue that there is a booke of Election; but GOD neuer told them, that their names were written there. The hungry begger at the Feast-house gate smells good cheare, but the Master doth not say; this is prouided for thee. It is small comfort to the harbourlesse wretch, to passe through a good∣ly Citie, and see many glorious buildings; When hee cannot say; Haec mea domus, I haue a place here. The beautie of that excellent Citie Ierusalem, built with Saphyres, Emeralds, Chrysolites, and such Reu. 21. precious stones: the foundation and walls where∣of are perfect gold; affords a soule no comfort; vn∣lesse hee can say, mea ciuitas, I haue a Mansion in it. The all sufficient merits of Christ doe thee no good, vnlesse tua pars & portio: hee bee thy Sauiour. Happy soule, that can say with the Psalmist. O Lord thou art my portion. Let vs all haue oyle in our Lampes; lest if wee bee then to buy, beg, or borow; wee be shut out of doores like the fooles not worthy of entrance. Pray Lord say vnto my soule, I am thy saluation. I am thy saluation. The Petition is ended: I will but looke into the Benediction: wherein I should consider these foure circumstances; Quis, quid, Cui, quando. Who,
What, to Whom, When. Who. The Lord: to the Lord Dauid prayes. He hath made a good choice, for there is saluation in none other. Hos. 13. 9. Thou hast destroyed thy selfe, but in me is thy helpe. The world failes, the flesh fals, the Deuill kils, onely the Lord saues. What. Saluation; a speciall good thing: euery mans desire: who would not bee saued? Euery man would goe to heauen, though perhaps hee runnes a course directly to hell. Beatus vult homo esse, etiam non sic viuendo vt possit esse. Man would be blessed, though he takes the course to be cursed. I will giue thee a Lordship, saith God to Esau. I will giue thee a kingdome, sayth God to Saul. I will giue thee an Apostleship, sayth God to Iudas. But I will be thy saluation, he sayes to Dauid, and to none but Saints. Indeed this voyce comes from heauen, comes vnto earth: but onely through the mediator betwixt heauen and earth, Iesus Christ. Hee is the alone Sauiour. Worldlings possesse many things, but haue right to nothing, because not right to him, that is Heb. 1. 2. the heire of all thinges, Christ. The soule is the perfection of the bodie, Reason of the Soule, Religion of reason, Faith of Religion, Christ of faith. A man can warrant vs vpon earth, that our land is ours, our garment ours, our money, seruant, beast ours: and that he is a theefe who robs vs of these. But all the men in the world cannot warrant vs our Saluation, but onely Iesus Christ. Therefore that we may haue assurance, that all these are ours, and that wee shall neuer answere for e∣uery bit of bread we haue eaten, and for euery drop of wine we haue drunke; that our possessions are our owne, our gold, robes, rents, revenues are our owne; let vs be Christs. 1 Cor. 3. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or
the World, or life, or death, or thinges present, or thinges to come; all are yours: and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Be sure of saluation, and be sure of all. For Rom. 8. 32. he that spa∣red not his owne sonne, but deliuered him vp for vs all, how shall he not with him also freely giue vs all things? To whom. My saluation; not others onely, but Mine. A man, and a Christian are two creatures: he may bee a man, that hath reason and outward blessings; he is onely a Christian, that hath faith, and part in the saluation of Christ. God is plentifull saluation, but it is not ordina∣ry to find a Cui; to whom. Much of heauen is lost for lacke of a hand to apprehend it. All passengers in this world presume they are going to heauen, but we may guesse by the throng, that the greater part take the broader way. Christ leauing the earth in respect of his bodily presence, left there his Gospell, to ap∣ply to mens soules the vertue of his death and passi∣on: Ministers preach this Gospell, people heare this Gospell, all boast of this Gospell: yet himselfe foretels, that when he comes againe, he shall scarce find faith vp∣pon earth. No doubt he shall find Christians enow, but scarce faith. Saluation is common, as St. Iude spea∣keth. Iud. ver. 3. When I gaue all diligence to write vnto you of the common saluation: but few make it proper to themselues. That God is my saluation, and thy saluation, this is the comfort. When. In the time present, I am. Sum, non (sufficit, quòd) ere. It is comfort to Israell in captiuitie, that God sayes, E∣ro tua redemptio, I will redeeme thee. But the assurance that quiets the conscience is this, I am thy saluation. As God said to Abraham; feare not, I am with thee. Deferred hope faints the heart. Whatsoeuer God for∣beare to assure vs, O pray we him not to delay this;
Lord say to our soules, I am your saluation. To conclude; it is saluation our Prophet desires: that God would seale him vp for his childe, then cer∣tifie him of it. He requests not Riches: he knew that man may be better fed then taught: that wealth doth but franke men vp to death. He that preferres Riches before his soule, doth but sell the horse to buy the sad∣dle, or kill a good horse to catch a hare. He begs not honour: many haue leapt from the high throne to the low pitte. The greatest commander on earth hath not a foote of ground in heauen, except hee can get it by entitling himselfe to Christ. He desires not Pleasures: he knowes, there are as great miseries beyond prospe∣ritie, as on this side it. And that all vanitie is but the indulgence of the present time: a minute begins, con∣tinues, ends it: for it endures but the acting, & knowes no solace in the memorie. In the fairest garden of de∣lights, there is somewhat, quod in ipsis floribus angat; that stings in the midst of all vaine contents. In a word, it is not momentany, variable, apt to ey∣ther change or chance, that hee desires; but eternall; saluation. He seekes like Mary, that better part which shall neuer be taken from him. The wise mans minde is euer aboue the moone, saith Seneca: let the world make neuer so great a noise, as if it all ran vppon Coaches, and all those full of roarers; yet all peace is there. It is not sublunary, vnder the wheele of changeable mor∣talitie, that he wishes, but saluation. To be saued is sim∣ply the best plot: beate your braines, and breake your sleepes, and wast your marrowes, to be wealthy, to be worthy; for riches, for honours: plot, studie, contriue; be as politicke as you can: and then kisse the childe of your owne braines, hugge your inuentions, ap∣plaud your wittes, doat vpon your aduancements or aduantagements: yet all these are but dreames. When you awake, you shall confesse that to make sure your
saluation was the best plot and no studie shall yeeld you comfort, but what hath bin spent about it. What should wee then doe, but worke and pray? worke, sayth Paul; Phil. 2. 12. Worke vp your saluation with feare and trem∣bling: and then pray with our Prophet; Lord say to our soules, thou art our saluation with comfort and re∣ioycing. THE SOVLES REFVGE. 1. PET. 4. 19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their soules to him in well do∣ing, as vnto a faithfull Creator. ATRVE Christians life is one daie of three meales, and euery meale hath in it two Courses. His first meale is Nasc & renasci; to be borne a sinner, to bee new-borne a Saint. Psal. 51. 5. I was borne in iniquitie, and in firme did my mother conceive me; there is one Course. Ioh. 3. 3. Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God; there is the other Course. His second meale is Benè agere, & malè pati; to doe well, and to suffer ill. Doe good vnto all; but especially to those that are of the houshold of Faith; ther's one Course of Doing. c All that liue godly in
Christ Isus, shall suffer persecution; theres the other Course of Suffering. His third meale is Mor & viue∣re; to die a temporall death, to liue an eternall life. The first is his Break-fast, and herein he is naturally Natus & da; borne in sinne, and condemned for sinne spiritually  & ; borne againe in righteousnesse, and iustified from sinne. The last is his Supper: wherein there is one bitter dish; Death. Heb. 9. 27. Statutum est omnibus semel mri; It is appoynted to all men to die once. Omnibus semel, plorisque bis: to all once, to many twice; for there is a Reu. 20. 6. second death And that is truely a dth, because it is mors vita, the death of life: the other rather a life, for it is mors mrtis, the death of death: after which mors non erit vltra; Reu. 21. 4. there shall be no more death. Therefore rise, that you may not fall: rise now by a righteous life, least you fall in∣to an euerlasting death. If the soule will not now rise, the bodie shall one day bee raised, and goe with the soule to Iudgement. The second Course is incompa∣rably sweet; vinere post mortem, to liue after death. I say after death, for a man mst die that hee may liue. So that a good supper brings a good sleepe: hee that liues well, shall sleepe well. Hee that now apprehends mercie, mercie shall hereafter comprehend him. Mer∣cie is the vltimus ; no hope bend it and this is th time for it, the next is of Iustice. The middle meale betweene both thse is our Dinner; and that consists patiendo malum, and faciendo bonum; in doing good, and suffering euill. And on these two Courses, my Text spnds it selfe. First, they that suffer according to the witt of God; ther's the Passion. Secondly, they may trust God with their soules in well doing, ther's the Action. More particularly in the words wee may consider fiue Graduall Circumstances. 1. The Sufferance of the Saints. They that suffer.
2. The Integritie of this Sufferance. According to the will of God. 3. The Comfort of this Integritie. May commit their soules to God. 4. The Boldnesse of this Comfort. As vnto a faith∣full Creator. 5. The Caution of this Boldnesse In well doing. 1. The Sufferance of the Saints. They that suffer. All men suffer: Iob. 5. 7. Man is borne vnto trouble, as the sparkes she vpward. This life is well com∣pared to a throng in a narrow passage: hee that is first out, finds ease: he that is in the midst, is in the worst place and case; for he is hemm'd in with troubles: the hind-most driues out both the former; and if he haue not the greatest part in suffering euill, lightly hee hath the greatest share in doing it. Outward things happen alike to good and bad. Eccl. . 2. There is one euent to the cleane, and to the vncleane; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: to him that sweareth, and to him that fear∣eth an oath. They are both trauellers in the through∣fare of this world, both lodge in one Inne, both haue the same prouision; perhaps the wicked haue the bet∣ter cheare: but in the morning their wayes part. There are common euils, as there are common goods. Pouer∣tie, sicknesse, death spares not the greatest: health, wealth, prosperitie is not denied to the meanest. All haue three Mansns. 1. This earth; there (as in Nos Arke) are the cleane and vncleane, righteous and wic∣ked promiscuously confused. 2. The Graue: this is a common house; a very Pest-house: where all lie toge∣ther vnder the Surgerie of death. It is a cheape and vniuersall house; wee pay no rent for it. 3. But after all are come to this place, there is then a way of par∣ting. Est locus bis partes vbi se via findit in ambas. Some Virg. goe to hell, others to heauen. Ioh. 5. 29. They shall come forth,
they that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life: and they that haue done euill vnto the resurrection of damnati∣on. Some to immortall honour, others to immortall horrour. God giues not all outward prosperitie to the wicked; least they should ascribe it to their owne wittes, or worths: least they should Hab. 1. 16. sacrifice to their net, and burne incense to their dragge. Nor all affliction to the good, least they should fall to some sinister and vnwarranta∣ble courses. Psal. 125. 3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest vppon the lot of the righteous; least the righteous put forth their hands to iniquitie. There is a mixture of good and euill: pro∣speritie and aduersitie haue their vicissitudes. Greg. Praesen∣tis vita nec prosperitas innocentiam testatur, nec acerbitas miseram animam indicat. Neither doe the crosses of this world witnesse a mans guiltinesse, nor the blessings of the world his innocence. But the good haue a larger share in sufferings, then the reprobates. Impius non per∣cutitur nisi a Domino, not ab Is. None strikes the wic∣ked but God; but all the wicked strike and vexe vs. This world, like the earth, is a meere stepdame to good herbes, an owne mother to weeds: no maruell if shee starues vs; all is too little for her owne children. Om∣nes patiuntur plurim, quidam patiuntur omnia. All suffer many kinds of miseries; many suffer all kinds of mise∣ries. Christi est : it is the part of a Christian to suffe wheresoeuer he is, let him expect it. Adam was see vpon in Paradise, Iob in the dunghill: Iob fortior in stoore, quàm Adam in Paradise. Iob was more strong to resist temptations in the miserable dust, then was Ad in that glorious Garden. The Iewes were com∣manded to eate fowre herbes with their sweete Passe∣ouer: bitternes euer treads on the heeles of pleasure. Iacob hath a Sonne, and looseth his Wife: Beniamin is borne, Rachel dies. Our Lady comming from that great
Feast, Luk. 2. 45. lost her sonne Iesus three dayes. Seauen dayes shee had eaten sweet bread: here followed three dayes sowre bread for it. Good things are to be taken with much thankfulnes, euill with much patience. Let this teach vs two duties; First, to prepare for e∣uils before they come: next to make them welcome, when they are come. So they shall neither meet vs with feare, nor leaue vs with sorrow. 1. Preparation to suffer is specially necessary. Sud∣den crosses find weake soules secure, leaue them mise∣rable, make them desperate. Expectatum malum lui∣ùs mordet. A looked for euill smarts more gently. Re∣pentina bona sunt suauiora; sed repentina mala sunt grauiora. Vnexpected ioyes are more gracious, but vnexpected euils are more grieuous. Mischiefes come most com∣monly without warning. They doe not allow, as Ionas did to Niniueh, forty dayes respite: not so much as an Hac noste, this night: which was allowed to the worldling; Luk. 12. 20. This night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee. Happy man that giues himselfe warning: hee that conceites what may be, armes himselfe against what must be. Thou art in health, eatest, digestest, sleepest; Quid si morboso iaceant tua membra cubili? What if sicknesse shall cast thee down on thy weary couch? Though riches allow thee meate for thy stomach, what if sicknes allow thee not stomach to thy meate? How if the very smell, if the very thought of thy best dishes should offend thee? How if after ma∣ny tossed sides, and fted places; nullo poteris requesce∣re lecto? thou couldst find no corner to giue thee ease? How couldst thou take this distemper? Thou art rich: thy throat tasts it; thy belly feeles it, thy backe weares it: how if from no feare of want thou shouldst come to no want of feare? to care for to morrowes prouision, with extreame sweat of browes not to earne bread enough to keepe life and soule together; nakednesse
exposing thy body to the violences of heauen, scor∣ching heate of the Sunne, cold stormes of the ayre? How couldest thou brooke the difference Inter tantam refectionem, & talem defectionem; betweene that abun∣dant opulencie, and this distitute penurie? Thou art at home in peace, singing in thy owne vineyards; thou sittest in a shocke secure, whilest thy reapers fell downe the humble corne at thy foote, and fil thy barnes. What if for religion thou shouldst be sent to exile: where thou mayest weepe with Israel to thy deriding enemies demanding a Song of Sion; Psal. 137. 4. How shall I sing the song of ioy in a strange land? How canst thou digest the iniuries, and brooke the contempt of strangers? These be good thoughts to prearme our soules: nothing shall make them miserable, that haue this preparation. Agabus told Paul, hauing first bound his hands and feet with his girdle; Act. 21. 11. Thus sayth the holy Ghost: so shall the Iewes at Ierusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle. Hereupon the rest of the Saints besought him with teares not to goe vp to Ierusalem. But obserue that bles∣sed Apostles resolued answer; Paratus sum, I am readie. Ver. 13. What meane ye to weepe, and to breake my heart? I am rea∣die, not to be bound onely, but also to die at Ierusalem for the name of the Lord Iesus. The account is past, I am prepa∣red. Men that want this fore-resolution are like a secure citie, that spends all her wealth in furnishing her cham∣bers, and furbishing her streets; but lets her bulwarkes fall to the ground. Here is prouision for peace, none for warre: something for content of friends, nothing for defence against enemies. It is vsuall for young-men with wooden Wasters to learne how to play at the sharpe: they are taught with foiles how to deale with points. He is desperate that ventures on a single com∣bate in the field, and was neuer lesson'd at the Fence-schoole. We shall be vnable to fight with euils them∣selues, if we cannot well incounter their shadowes.
Mischiefes are like the Cocatrices eye, If they see first they kill, foreseene they die. What our foresight takes from their power, it addes to our owne: it enervates their strength and corrobo∣rates ours. For by this both they are made lesse able to hurt vs, and we are more strong to resist them. Since therefore we must passe through this fierie triall, let vs first proue our strength in a gentle meditation: as that martyr tryed his finger in the Candle, before his bodie came to the fire. 2. They must be made welcome, when they are come. Non vt hostes sed vt hospites admittendi. They must not be entertained as enemies, but as guests. Their Rom. 10. 15. feete are beautifull, that bring good tydings: but crosses bring good newes. They assure vs, that we are no bastards. If you endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with Sonnes. But if you be without correction, Heb. 12. 8. then are yee bastards. Aug. Non timeas flagellari, sed exhaeredari. Feare not to be scourged, but to be disinherited. There is so much comfort in sorrow, as makes all affliction to the elect, Greg. Carmen in nocte; a song in the night. Aduersitie sends vs to Christ, as the leprosie sent those Ten. Luk. 17. Pro∣sperity makes vs turne our backes vpon Christ, & leaue him; as health did those Nine. Dauids sweetest songs were his lacrymae. In misery he spared Saul his great ad∣uersary: in peace he killed Vriah his deare friend. The wicked sing with Grashoppers in faire Weather: but the faithfull (in this like Sirens) can sing in a storme. It is a question whether the Sun or the Wind will first make a man throw off his cloke: but by all consent the Sun will first vncloke him. Imagine by the Sun the warme heate of prosperitie; by the Wind the blustring cold of calamitie; by the cloke Christs liuerie, a sincere profession. Now which of these will first vncase thee of thy zeale. The boystrous wind makes a man gather his cloke closer about him: the hote silent Sun makes him
weary of so heauy a burden; he soone does it off. Secure plentie is the warme Sunne, which causeth many to dis∣cloke themselues, & cast off their zeale, as it did Demas, who left Christ to embrace this present world. But the cold wind of afflictio gathers it vp closer to him, & teacheth him to be more zealous. When a man cannot find peace vpon earth, he quickly runs to heauen to seeke it. Plutarch writes, that Antigonus had in his armie a va∣liant souldiour, but of a sickly bodie. Antigonus obser∣ving his valour, procured his Physitians to take him in hand; and he was healed. Now being sound, he began to fight in some feare, to keepe himselfe a good distance from danger, no more venturing into the vanne or for∣lorne place of the battell. Antigonus noting and won∣dring at this alteration, asked him the cause of this new cowardice. He answers, O Antigonus, thou art the cause. Before I ventured nothing but a diseased corpes, and then I chose rather to die quickly, then to liue sickly: I invited death to doe me a kindnes. Now it is otherwise with me, for I haue somewhat to loose. A poore and af∣flicted life makes a man bold in his religio: it is nothing to part with hunger, thirst, cold contempt. But when prosperous fortunes flow vpon him, he dares not sticke so constantly to Christ. Would you haue the rich Mar∣chant find fault with Idolatrie, & stand to iustifie Gods truth? No he hath somwhat to take to; and although he ventures much, he would be loath to bee a venturer in this Yet this somewhat is nothing in regard of what he looseth, because he will not loose his riches. Affliction sometimes makes an euill man good, alwayes a good man better. Crosses therefore doe not onely chalenge our patience but euen our thankes. Thy soule is sicke, these are thy Physicke. Aug. Intelligat hom Deum esse medi∣cum: sub medicamento positus vreris, secaris, clamas. Non audit medicus ad voluntatem, sed audit ad sanitatem. Vn∣derstand God thy Physitian, he ministers to thee a bit∣ter,
but wholesome potion: thy stomach abhors it: thou lyest bound vnder his hand, whiles he workes vppon thee: thou cryest to be deliuered; he heares thee not ac∣cording to thy will, but according to thy weale. 1. Cor. 11. 32 We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not bee condemned with the world. Thou payest the Physitian of thy body though hee cannot heale thee: wilt thou not thanke the Physitian of thy soule that hath healed thee? The child cryes for the knife, the parent knowes it can but hurt him; though he weepe for it, hee shall not haue it. Such children are we to thinke God doth not vse vs kindly, vnlesse he giue vs euery vanitie we af∣fect. In stead of these toyes that would make vs wan∣ton, God layes on vs the rod of correction to make vs sober. Our flesh is displeased, our soule is saued; we haue no cause to complaine. I come now from the Sufferance of the Saints, to The Integritie of that Sufferance. According to the will of God. We haue sufferd enough, except it be according to his will. The manner com∣mends the matter. To goe no further, this point is sufficiently directed by our Apostle, Vers. 14. If ye bee reproached for the name of Christ, happie are you; for the Spirit of glorie resteth vpon you. But let none of you suffer as an euill-doer. For Chap. 2. 19. This is thanke-worthie, if a man for conscience toward God endure griefe, suffering wrongfully. This our Sauiour taught vs. Math. 5. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, (non qui patiuntur, sed qui patiuntur propter iustitiam) for theirs is the Kingdome of heauen. Non mortes, sed mo∣res faciunt martyres. It is not the death, but the cause, that giues the honour of Martyrdome. Indeed there is no man that suffers contrary to the will of God, but many suffer not Secundùm, not according to the will of GOD. In his concealed
will he allowes the sufferings of the Reprobates: this is his iust iudgement. They are smitten, but for their faults. Moerent, & merentur: they lament, and deserue to lament. When the Adulterer is wounded for his lust, he cannot thinke himselfe a patient secundum bene∣placitum Dei, according to the will of God. When the vsurer is fetch'd ouer for his extortion, the depopulator for his enclosing, the slanderer for his libelling, all these suffer, but not for conscience toward God, not according to his will. They onely are said to suffer accor∣ding to his will, that suffer first innocently, then pati∣ently. 1. Innocently; for the wicked suffer: mali malè sed meritò. Euill men beare euill things, but after their de∣serts. The Pope hath made many Saints from this kind of suffering. Straw-saints, such as Garnet was. If they be first drench'd at Tyber, and after hang'd at Tyburne, Martyres sunt; they can be no lesse then Martyrs. Not seldome their names are put into the Rubricke: but they stand there in those red letters for nothing els, but to remember their red & bloudie actions. They may pre∣tend some shew of religion, as if for cause thereof they suffered: but it is not a meene, but a mixt cause: not for faith, but for faction: not for truth, but for treason. It is obserued, that as the Physitians say, none die of an ague, nor without an ague: so none of them suffer for the Romish religion, nor without the Romish religion. Therfore as Aristides dying of the bite of a Weasell, ex∣ceedingly lamented that it was not a Lyoso these Se∣minaries may greatly lament that they die not for the Lyon of Iudah, but for the Weasell of Roe. Not secun∣dum voluntatem Dei, but secundum voluptatem Antichrists: not according to the will of Christ, but according to the lust of Antichrist. But hee can make them amends with Sainting them: men shall kneele to them, pray to them, climbe to heauen by the ladder of their merites.
Alas! poore Saints: the Pope sends them to heauen, but how if they were in hell before? May wee not say of them, as Augustine did of Aristotle: woe vnto them, they are praysed, and prayed vnto where they are not, and condemned where they are. Vnlesse as the vision was to Ormus; that among the Apostles and Martyrs there was a vacant place left in heauen, which sayth he, was reserued for a Priest in England, called Thomas Becket: Martyrol. pag. 229. and this reuelation was full twelue years before Becket dyed. So except the Pope can make them Saints be∣fore they die, I feare his authoritie can doe little after∣wards. Yet indeed the Pope is a great Saint-maker, and hath helped abundance of men to heauen. For he sent them thither through the fire, for the cause of Christ: he condemned, cursed, burnt them to ashes: and thus spight of his teeth, he hath helped to make them martyrs and Saints. For our selues, if wee suffer any wrong of men, let vs be sure we haue not deserued it. Our Inno∣cence cómends our suffering; for this is according to the good will and pleasure of God. 2. Patiently; a murmuring mind evacuates the ver∣tue of thy sufferings. 1. Pet. 2. 20. For what glory is it, if when ye bee buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently: but if when ye doe well, and suffer for it, ye then take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. Let me therefore helpe your patience by two considerations. 1. What Christ our head suffered for vs; bitter words, and more bitter wounds. Obserue him; Heb. 12. 2. Looke to Iesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame. So let vs run with patience the race that is set before vs. If we cannot endure an angry word from our brothers mouth, how would we suffer boyling lead, & boyling coales, as the Martyrs did? How to be crucified as our Lord Iesus was? What would we doe then? Shew me now one dram of this patience. Among gallants a word
and a blow: among ciuill men a word and a writ. The backe of Patience can beare no load. But Luk. 24. 24. ought not Christ first to suffer these things, and then to enter into his glory? First he was crowned with thornes, & then crow∣ned with honours. Caput spinosum in terris, si sit gloriosum in coelis. That head must first weare a wreath of sorrow on earth, that shall weare a wreath of ioy in heauen. 1. Pet. 2. 21. Hereunto are we called: because Christ suffered for vs, lea∣uing vs an example, that we should follow his steps. 2. That all this is according to the will of God. Our blowes come at least mediately from the hand of God. And this hand is guided with prouidence, & temperd with loue. Distressed worldlings cry out, it was my owne folly that ran me into this danger, or the malice of mine enemy vndid me, or surfeit on such meat made me sicke. So the cur bites the stone, which could neuer haue hurt him but from the hand that threw it. Looke vp to the first mouer, O mad man, and discharge the meanes. The Instrument may be vniust in thy wrongs, but the cause is iust from him that inflicted it. What rod soeuer beats thee, consider it according to the will of God, and be patient. His hand sets theirs on worke: I hope thou wilt not dispute with thy maker. The medicine of thy passion is composed by God himselfe: no euils nor deuils shall put in one dram more then his allow∣ance: no man nor Angell can abate one scruple. The impatient man wants eyther wisedome or obedience. Wisedome, if he be ignorant from whom his crosses come: obedience, if he knowes it, and is not patient. This is the Integritie of the Suffering: now followes The Comfort of this Integritie. Let him commit the keeping of his soule to God. Euery man cannot with this confidence: but qui patitur prop∣ter Deum, recurrit ad Deum. He that suffers for Christs testimonie, is confident of Gods mercie. Heb. 4. 16. Let vs come
therefore vnto the throne of grace boldly, that we may obtaine mercie, and find grace to helpe in the time of need. Here let vs obserue three circumstances; Quis, Quid, Cui; Who, What, to Whom. Who They that suffer according to the will of God. Felicitie thinkes, it hath no neede of God. But God is more daintie of spirituall comforts, then to giue them to such as are confident in worldly comforts. The Balme of the Spirit shall not be sophisticated, or mixed veneno mundi, with the poyson of this world. Giue strong drinke to the heauie, sayth Salomon. God will not giue his con∣solations to those that are drunke with prosperitie, mad-merry with the world: but his wine to the heauy heart. He will Esa. 61. 2. comfort them that mourne. Let them that suffer commit, &c. What. The Soule, and the keeping thereof. The Soule is a very precious thing; it had need of a good keeper. Mat. 16. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gaine the whole world, and loose his owne soule. We trust the Lawyer to keepe our Inheritance; the Physitian to keepe our body, the coffer to keepe our money, shepheards to keepe our flockes: but the Soule had need of a better keeper. How∣soeuer it goes with thy libertie, with thy loue, with thy land, with thy life; be sure to looke well to thy soule: that lost, all is lost. The bodie is not safe, where the Soule is in hazard. Chry. de re∣cuperat. Laps. Non-anima pro corpore, sed corpus pro anima factum est. The soule is not made for the bodie, but the bodie for the Soule. He that neglects the better, let him looke neuer so well to the worse, shall loose both. He that looks well to the keeping of the better, though he som∣what
neglect the worst, shal saue both. The Body is the instrument of the soule: it acts, what the other directs: so it is the externall, actuall, and instrumentall offender: Satan will come with a Habeus corpus for it. But I am perswaded, if hee take the Body, hee will not leaue the Soule behind him. To whom. To God; he is the best Keeper. Adam had his Saluation in his owne hands, hee could not keepe it. Esau had his Birth-right in his owne hands, hee could not keepe it. The Prodigall had his Patrimonie in his owne hands, he could not keepe it. If our Soule were left in our own hands, we could not keepe it. The world is a false keeper; let the soule runne to ryot, hee will goe with it. The Deuill is a Churlish keeper, he labours to keepe the soule from saluatiō. The Body is a brittle & incon∣stant keeper; euery sicknes opens the doore, and lets it out. God onely is the sure keeper. Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God. This was Dauids confidence; Psal. 32. 7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shalt keepe mee. The Iewells gi∣uen to thy little children, thou wilt not trust them with but keepe them thy selfe. O Lord keepe thou our one∣ly one, doe thou Psal. 35. 17. Rescue our soule from destructions, our Darling from the Lyons. Trust vs not with our owne soules: wee shall passe them away for an Apple, as Adam did: for a morsell of meate, as Esau did: for the loue of a harlot; as that Prodigall did. Lord doe thou keepe our Soules. Now the Christian patient must commit the keeping of his Soule to God both in Life. Death. 1. Liuing; the Soule hath three places of being. In the body from the Lord, in the Lord from the body, in the body with the Lord. The two last are referred to our saluation in heauen: either in part, when the Soule is glorified alone: or totally, when both are crow∣ned
together. Now the soule must be euen here in the Lords keeping, or else it is lost. If God let goe his hold it sinkes. It came from God, it returnes to God, it can∣not be well one moment without God. It is not in the right vbi, except the Lord be with it. It is sine sua domo, if sine suo Domino. Here be foure sorts of men reprouable. 1. They that trust not God with their soules, nor themselues, but relie it only vpon other men. 2. They that will not trust God with their soules, nor others, but onely keepe it themselues. 3. They that will trust neither God with their soules, nor others, nor keepe it it themselues. 4. They that will neither trust others with their soules, nor themselues, but only God, yet without his warrant that he will keepe it. 1. They that trust their soules simplie on the care of o∣thers: they are either Papists or prophane Protestants. The Papist trusts Antichrist with his soule; he's like to haue it well kept. If Masses & Asses can keepe it, (for so the Iesuites terme their secular Priests) it shall not bee lost. The deuill fights against the soule, the Pope inter∣poseth an armoury of Agnus Dei's, sprinklings, crossings amulets, prayers to Saints. But surely if this Armour were of proofe, S. Paul forgot himselfe in both these Eph. 6. 13. places, where he describes that Panoply, or whole ar∣mour of God. He speakes of a plate of righteousnesse for the breast, shooes of patience for the feete, the shield of P 1. Thess. 5. 6. Faith, the helmet of saluation, & the sword of the Spirit. To the Thessalonians indeed hee somewhat varies the pieces of armour; but in neither place doth he mention Crosses, Crucifixes, aspersions, vnctions, &c. Or they will trust the Saints in heauen with their soules. Sancta virgo Dorothea, tua nos virtute bea, cor in nobis nouum crea. What that Psal. 51. 10. Prophet desired of God; they as if they were Ioth to trouble the Lord about it, and could haue it neerer hand; beg of their Saint Dorothy; to create a new heart within them. Such a rithme haue they to the Vir∣gin
Mary. Virgo mater, maris stella, Fons hortorum; ver∣bi cella, ne nos pestis aut procella, peccatores obruant. But the Saints are deafe: non audiunt. They would pray them to forbeare such prayers, they abhorre such super∣stitious worship. They that were so iealous of Gods ho∣nour on earth, would be loth to robbe him of it in hea∣uen. So our carnall professors onely trust the Minister with their soule: as if God had imposed on him that charge, which the Prophet gaue to Ahab. 1. King. 20. 39. keepe this man if by any meanes he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life. But indeed if he doe his duty in admonishing: Ezek. 33. 9. If thou warne the wicked of his way to turne from it: if he do not turne from his way; he shall die in his iniquitie: but thou hast deliue∣red thy soule. 2. They that will not trust others with their soule, but keepe it themselues. They wrapit warme in the nest of their own presumptuous merits: as if good workes should hatch it vp to heauen. But the soule that is thus kept, will be lost. He that wil goe to heauen by his own righteousnes, and climbers by no other ladder then his owne Iust workes, shall neuer come there. The best Saints, that haue had the most good workes, durst not trust their soules with them. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not hereby iustified. Iam. 3. 2. In many things we sin all: All in many things, many in all things: And the most learned Papists, whatsoeuer they haue said in their dis∣putations, reserue this truth in their hearts: otherwise speaking in their deaths; then they did in their liues. Now non merita mea, sed misericordia tua? not my merits, but thy mercies, O Lord. All our life is either vnprofita∣ble or damnable: therfore O man, what remaines. Anselm. Nisi vt in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam tuā: but that during al thy life thou shouldest lament al thy life, workes can∣not keepe vs, but grace: let them boast of perfection, we cry for pardon: they for merits, we for mercies: they for iustifying workes of their own, we only for our sweet
Sauiour Iesus Christ. 3. They that will neither trust others with their soule not keepe it thēselues: but either do sell it for ready mo∣ney, as Esau sold his Birthright & Iudas  Iesus. Or pawne it for a good bribe, some large tēptation of pro∣fit pleasure or honor, they will not sell it out-right, but morgage it for a while, with a purpose (that sedome speeds) to redeeme it Or loose it; walking negligently through the streets of this great Citie the world, their soule is gone, & they are not aware of it. Or giue away their soule, as do the enuious and desperate & haue no∣thing in lieu of it but terrors without, & horrors with∣in: they serue the deuills turne for nothing 4. They that will trust God with their soule, but haue no warrāt that God will keep it. They lay al the burthē vpon the shoul∣ders of Christ, & meddle no more with the matter. As if God would bring them to heauē; euen whilst they pur∣sue the way to hel: or keep that soule for the body when the body had quite giuen away the soule. He neuer pro∣mised to saue a man against his will. As he doth saue vs by his Son so he comands vs. Phil. 2. 12. to worke vp our saluation with feare & trembling. He that lies still in the myrie pitt, of his sin & trusts to heauen for helpe out, without his owne concurring endeuour may hap to lie there still. 2. Dying; there is no comfort but to trust the soule with God So Dauid, Psal. 31. 5. Lord into thy hands I commit my spirit, So Steuen; Act. 7. 59. Lord Iesus receiue my spirit, with these words our Lord Iesus himselfe gaue vp the Ghost. It is iustice to restore, whence we receiue. It is not presumption, but faith to trust God with thy spirit. The soule of the king, the soule of the beggar, all one to him: Da∣uid a king; Lazarus a beggar God receiues both their soules. From giuing vp the Ghost the highest is not exempted; from giuing it into the hands of God the poorest is not excepted. There is no comfort like this: when riches bring aut nequam, aut nequicquam, ei∣ther no comfort, or discomfort; when the wardrobe,
furniture, iunkets, wine offend thee, when thy money cannot defend thee: when thy doctors feed themselues at thy cost, cannot feed thee: when wife, childrē, friends stand weeping about thee: where is thy helpe, thy hope? all the world hath not a dramme of comfort for thee; this sweetens all, Lord into thy hands I commend my soule; Thou hast redeemed me, O thou God of truth. Our Spirit is our dearest iewell: howle and lament if thou thinke thy soule is lost. But let thy faith know, that is neuer lost which is committed to Gods keeping. Spiritum emittis, non amittis. Duriùs seponitur, sed melius reponitur. That soule must needs passe quietly through the gates of death, which is in the keeping of God. Woe were vs, if the Lord did not keepe it for vs whiles we haue it, much more when we restore it. While our soule dwels in our breast, it is subiect to manifold mi∣series, to manifest sinnes: temptations, passions, mis∣deedes distemper vs: in heauen it is free from all these. Let the soule be once in the hands of God, nec dolore pro peccato, nec peccato prae dolore torquetur; it is neither dis∣quieted with sorrow for sinne, nor with sinne which is beyond all sorrow. There may be trouble in the wil∣dernesse, in the land of promise there is all peace. Then may we sing, Psal. 124. 7. Our soule is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the foulers: the snare is broken, and wee are escaped. In∣uadit Satanas, euadit Christianus. It is there aboue the reach of the deuill. There is no euill admitted into the citie of heauen, to wrastle with the citizens there∣of. Death is ready at hand about vs, we carry deaths enow within vs: we know we shall die, we know not how soone: it can neuer preuent vs, or come too early, if our soules bee in the keeping of God. Man was not so happy when God gaue his soule to him, as he is when he returnes it to God. Giue it cheerefully: and then like a faythfull Creator, that thou giuest to him in short paine, hee will giue thee backe with
endlese ioy. And so we come fittly from the Comfort of our Integritie. The Boldnesse of this Comfort. As vnto a faithfull Creator. Wherein our confidence is heartned by a double argument: the one drawne ex maiestate, the other ex Misericordia: from Maiestie, from mercie. His greatnes, a Creator: his goodnes, a Faithfull Creator. 1. Creator; not a stranger to thee, but he that made the. It is naturall to man, to loue the worke of his owne hands. Pigmalion dotes vpon the stone, which himselfe had carued. But much more naturall, to loue his owne Images, his children, the walking Pictures of himselfe, the diuided pieces of his owne body. God loues vs as our Creator: because his owne hands haue fashioned vs. But creauit & vermiculos: hee also made the wormes: yeeld it, and therefore non odit ver∣miculos, hee hates not the very wormes. Creauit & Diabolum: hee made the deuill: no; God made him an Angell, hee made himselfe a deuill. God loues him (vt naturam) as he is a nature, hates him (vt Diabo∣lum) as he is a corrupted nature, an euill, a deuil. But we are not onely his creatures, the workmanship of his hands; but his children; so Adam is called Luk. 3. 38. The sonne of God. His owne Image; fecit hominem in similitudi∣nem suam: he made Gen. 1. 26. man after his likenes, in his Image. We are more then opus Dei, the meere worke of God: for Imago Dei, the very Image and similitude of God. We may therefore be bold to commend our soules to God, as a faithfull Creator. Diuerse men haue that for their God, which neuer was their Creator. The proud man makes his Honour his god: the couetous makes his gold his God: the vo∣luptuous makes his belly his God Ioann. de combis. Com∣pend lib. 5. cap. 60. now whereas God not onely charged in the first Precept, Thou shalt haue
no other Gods before me: but added further in the next, Thou shalt not make to thee any Image or Similitude of any thing, whether in heauen aboue, or earth beneath, or water vnder the earth, &c. These three sinnes seeme to crosse God in these three interdicted places. For the proud man hath his Idol as it were in the aire: the couetous man hath his Idol in the earth: the drunken Epicure hath his Idol in the water. Let them take their Gods to themselues: let no Rachel that hath married Iacob, steale away Labans Idols. Our Creator is in heauen, boldly giue thy soule to him: who should better haue it, then he that made it? 2. The other argument of our comfort, is that he is Fidelis, a Faithfull Creator, He is faithfull to thee, how vnfaithfull soeuer thou hast beene to him. Hee made thee good, thou madest thy selfe naught? he doth not there yet leaue thee, as man his friend in miserie; but sent his Sonne to redeeme thee. Here was great faith∣fulnesse. He sends his holy Spirit into thy heart, to ap∣ply this redemption of Christ: here is great faithful∣nesse. Thou often turnest thy backe vpon him, and following sinne leauest him: he leaues not thee. Hebr. 13. 5. I will not leaue thee, nor for sake thee: here is great faithfulnesse. He hath promised Poenitenti veniam, credenti vitam to him that repenteth pardon, to him that beleeueth sal∣uation: here is faithfulnesse. Now hath he promised? he is faithfull to performe it. What man or deuill dares stand vp, to chalenge God with vnfaithfulnesse? This infalibilitie Christ knew, when to his Fathers faithfull hands he gaue vp the Ghost. You will say, who might better do it; the Sonne might well be confident of the Father. Not he alone the seruants haue bin faith∣full also in this emission, and found God as faithfull in acception. So Dauid, Stephen, &c. God is faithfull, there is no distrust in him; all the feare is in thy selfe. How canst thou trust thy Iewell with a stranger? God
is thy Creator, and a Faithfull Creator; but how if thou be an vnfaithfull creature? Thou wilt frequent the doores of thy Patron, present gifts to thy Landlord, visite thy friend: but how if to him that made thee, thou makest thy selfe a stranger? How often hath God passed by thee, without thy salutation! In the temple he hath called to thee, thy heart hath not eccho'd, and sent out thy voice to call vpon him. There hath hee charged thee, Seeke my face; thou hast not answered, Thy face O Lord, I will seeke. By his Spirit he hath knock∣ed at thy doore, thou hast not opened to him. Now vpon some exigent thou bequeathest thy soule to him: vpon what acquaintance? Will this suddaine familia∣ritie be accepted? It is our owne ignorance or strangenes or vnfaith∣fullnes that hinders vs. The reprobates thinke Christ a stranger to them; Math. 25. 44. When did wee see thee hungry &c. But indeed they are strangers to Christ, and hee may well say, when did I see you visite me? I was sicke and in prison, and yee came not at me. Would you haue God cleaue to them, that leaue him? Doth a man all his life runn from God, and shall God on his death-bed runne to him? No, you would not know mee; and there∣fore now non noui vos, I know not you. But the faith∣full creature knowes God a faithfull Creator. I know whom I haue beleeued. Thou mayst say with that good father; Egredere anima mea, quid times? Goe forth my foule, goe forth with ioy, what shouldst thou feare? Yea it will go without bidding, and fly chearfully into the armes of God, whom it trusted as a faithfull Crea∣tor. I haue serued thee, beleeued on thee, now I come vnto thee; sayth Luther. I desire to be dissolued, and to be with Christ, sayes Paul. These are not the voyces of worldlings, but of Saints. God will bee a faithfull Creator to receiue and preserue their soules. I haue serued thee, sayth man: I haue preserued thee, sayth
God. In me credis, ad me venis: thou beleeuest on me, thou comest to me. Here is now the Boldnes of our comfort: there is yet A Caution of this Boldnes. In well doing. The wicked man may commit his soule to Gods keeping, but how is hee sure God will take the charge of it? what should God doe with a fowle and polluted soule? The soule must at last bee committed to some: now hee onely is the receiuer of it in death, that was the keeper of it in life. If Satan haue alwayes ruled it, GOD will not embrace it. As Ieptha sayd to the Elders of Gilead: Iudg. 11. 7. Did ye not hate me, and expell me out of my fathers house? and why are yee come vnto me now, when you are in distresse? Did you thrust God out of your hearts, out of your houses, out of your barnes, out of your closets; and shall God open heauen to your soules? They that thus commit their soules to God, God will commit their soules to Sathan. It must be deliuered vp in Patiendo malum, but in faciendo bonum; in suffering that is euill, but in doing that is good. Otherwise if we thrust God from vs, God will thrust vs from him. Thus is God euen with man. They say now to the holy one of Israel, Iob. 21. 14. Depart from vs, we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes. Hereafter God shall say to them, Math. 7. 23. Depart from me, I know you not. Mans soule is but an inmate to the bosome, sent to lodge there for a time; but must not take it vp for a dwelling; God is the Lord of the Tenure, to him it must be surren∣dred. We haue a soule within vs, but it is not ours; (and yet what is ours if our soule be not) it must bee committed to God; either in euill doing as to a Iudge, or in well doing as to a faithfull Creator. Some liue as if they had no soules; more belluino, like humane
beasts. The vicissitude of drunkennesse, whoredome, sleepe, share all their time. Others liue as if they should neuer part with their soule. Therefore Reppnunt in mu∣tos annos they lay vp for many yeares: this was the Cosmopolites selfe flatterie. Luk. 12. Soule bee merry, thou hast much goods laid vp for many yeares. Yet others liue as if their soule was not meerely their owne, but giuen them to spend at their pleasure, without euer be∣ing accountable for it. But the good liue, as if their soule was Gods: to him they commend it in a sweet conuersation with God: corporalier mouent in terris, animaliter viuunt in coelis. Their bodyes moue on earth, their soules liue in heauen. To him they may boldly commend their spi∣rits: for they that fit their soules for God in health, shall neuer find the offer of their death-bed refused. If a man had no soule, if a mortall one, if his owne, if neuer to be required, hee might without wonder be induced to liue sensually: he that knowes the con∣trary, will liue well that he may die well; & commit his soule to God in well doing. Here further obserue; A man may do good, yet come short of this comfort, it is giuen bene facientibus, to them that doe well. It is not doing good, but doing well, that gets God to keepe the soule. You haue serued me, sayes God to Israel, but after your owne lusts. To serue God is do∣ing good, but after their owne lusts is not doing well. To build a Church is a good worke; yet if the founda∣tions of it be layed in the ruines of the poore, their children come not to pray for, but curse the builder. Great and good were the workes of the Pharises, yet all spoiled for want of a Benè. Math. 5. 20. Except your righteous∣nes exceed the righteousnes of the Scribes and Pharises, you cannot enter the kingdome of heauen. Therefore Saint Pauls councell directs vs; 1. Cor. 9. 24. So (not onely runne, but so) runne that you may obtaine. Schismatickes runne,
but they runne out of the Church: they loue the truth, but not in peace. Secure people runne, but they run beside the church: they loue peace, but not in truth: Others follow the truth in peace, but not for the truth: Aug. Dum quaerunt cam, non quaerunt ipsam. They saile in their Sic, they misse this same Well. Prosunt alijs, sibi neutiquam. They doe good to others, but not well to themselues. But wee haue almost lost both Bonum and Bene; Good and Well. It is an ill disiun∣ction, that our fathers had so good workes, and wanted our faith: and wee haue the true faith, but want their workes. This Well is the very forme of a good worke: and Forma dat esse rei, it can not be good without it. Let mee take here iust cause to reproue two sorts of people. 1. Some there are that trust God with their soules, and destroy their owne bodies. But God will take no charge of the soule but in well doing. Those vir∣gins that would kill themselues to preuent rauishments are reproued by iust censure. Satius incertum adulterium in futuro, quàm certum homicidium in praesenti. Better an vncertaine adulterie to be endured, then a certaine selfe-murther to be acted. How can they hope for Gods hand of mercie, that lay on themselues a hand of crueltie. Rhasis in the Maccabees, falling vpon his owne sword, and throwing himselfe downe from the wall, yet committed himselfe to Gods keeping, calling vpon the Lord of life and spirit, &c. The Text sayes twice (with little credite to the owne Iudgement) that it 2. Matt. 14. 46. was done Manfully. But it was magnè, potius quàm benè factum: done with desperate valour; with more ven∣ture then wisedome, temeritie then honesty. This was that the Deuill left out, when he cited Scripture to Christ; In all thy wayes; he made that a parenthesis, which was essentiall to the Text. This the originall Math. 4. 6. testified. Psal. 91. 11. Custodient in vijs tuis: but this
was none of his wayes downe from the pinacle, to shew the people a tumbling tricke, and to breake his necke. So the Deuill labours to secure men of Gods prouidence generally, though they be quite out of the way. He bids men be confident that God will keepe their soules, howsoeuer they walke: so vnder colour of Gods protection, he brings them to destruction. Hee tels a man of predestination, that he is sure of an eter∣nall election to life, therefore may liue at his owne pleasure: so from Gods decree drawes encouragement to a secure life. He tels him of Iustification, that he is acquitted by the bloud of Christ; so emboldens him on the backe of presumption to ride post to Hell, whereas Predestination & Iustification are onely made knowne to vs by well-doing. 2. It is impossible for a man of an ill life, to hope that God will keepe his soule. Hee that liues ill, and hopes well, teacheth his ignorance to deceiue his wic∣kednesse, and them both to deceiue his soule. Esa. 59. 2. Your iniquities haue separated betweene you and your God. But 2. Cor. 6. 17. separate your selues from the vncleane thing, and I will receiue you. Take away the barre, your sinnes: breake off the partition by repentance; then I will keepe you saith God. Commit your soules to the Lordes trust in well-doing, or not at all. If Christ had come downe from the pinacle headlong, and not by the staires; he had neglected the way, and so beene out of the compasse of Gods promise to keepe him. It is an ouer-bold presumption, to charge God to keepe thy soule, whilest thou doest wilfully loose it. Wilt thou clippe the wings of thy soule, and then bid it flie to God? It is all one, as if thou shouldest cut off a mans legge, and then send him on an arrand. Our presump∣tion is able to tie vp Gods armes, that he cannot helpe vs. Hee that will walke in prophanesse, and commit his soule to God; is like him that throwes himselfe
into a deepe pit, to trie whether God will helpe him out, and saue him from drowning. Man is timorous where he should bee bold, and bold where he should be timorous. God bids vs cast our care vpon him for this life: Mat. 6. 31. Take no thought for your life, what you shall eate, or what you shall drinke, or wherewith you shall be clo∣thed: your heauenly Father knowes yee haue need of all these things. Yet wee dare not trust God with∣out a pawne: vnlesse wee haue bread, we thinke wee shall starue. Here we feare, where wee ought not. God tells vs, the bread of heauen must feed our spirits; more necessary to maintaine life in the soule, then is bread to preserue life in the body: we neuer hunger after this, yet presume we haue sound soules, and trust God to keepe them. Here wee doe not feare where wee ought. Wee are so sottish, that wee dare trust God with the soule, the more precious part without well doing, the meanes to haue it saued: yet dare not trust him with our bodyes, vnlesse we can see our barnes full, or at lest our cupbords. But in vaine thou committest thy soule to God, ex∣cept thou obeyest God. There is still a Commaunde∣ment with the promise: if thou keepe not the precept, thou hast no interest in the promise. If thou wilt not performe thy part, God is discharged of his part: if thou refuse to doe well, hee will not keepe thy Soule. The protection of God extends not to vs in lewd courses: we are then out of our way, and the Deuill may take vs vp as Vagabonds. Gen. 4. 7. If thou doe well, shalt thou not be accepted? if thou doe euill, sinne lieth at the doore. If thou doe euill, Sinne is thy keeper, not God. There was a Temple, called the Temple of Trust: God will not be to them a Temple of Trust, that had no trust in their Temples. It is a good thing to haue God keepe the soule, but
the wicked cannot haue this hope. He that hath mo∣ney, layes it vp in his coffers; or if he sends it abroad, like a sterne laylor, he suffers it not to goe without a keeper; sound bonds. He that hath lands makes strong conueyances to his desired heires, that they may bee kept. If children, he prouides to haue them safely kept. He keepes his goods from the theefe, his chickens from the kite, his lambe from the wolfe, his fawne from the hound, his doue from the vermine: yet he keeps not his soule from the Deuill. O wretched man that must die, and knowes not what shall become of his soule. The world would haue it, but hee knowes it must not: himselfe would keepe it, but hee knowes he cannot: Sathan would haue it, and he knowes not whether he shall: he would haue God take it, and he knowes not whether he will. O miserable man, that must part with his soule he knowes not whether. We see what it is to lead an euill life, and to bee a stranger to God. He Ioh. 10. 14. knowes his sheepe, but the goates are not written in his booke. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God standeth sure, hauing the seale, the Lord knoweth them that are his. It is a goodly thing to be famous and remarka∣ble in the world. Est pulchrum digito monstrari, & di∣cier hic est. It is a goodly thing to bee sayd, Esth. 6. 9. this is the man whom the world honours: but perhaps this is not he whom God honours. He that suffers and does ac∣cording to the will of God, the Lord will take that man into his boso, Psal. 149. 9. Such honour haue all his Saints, It is no great matter for men to be knowne to kings and nobles, if the Lord know them not: nothing to ride in the second Coach, as Ioseph; to be next to the Prince, if they bee strangers to the Court of hea∣uen. Therefore let vs all lay hold on well-doing, that we may haue comfort in well-dying. Wee desire to shut vp our last scene of life, with In manus tuas Do∣mine
commendo spiritum meum; Lord, Into thy handes I commend my spirit. Behold while we liue GOD sayes to vs, In manus tuas homo, commendo spiritum me∣um; Man, into thy hands I commend my spirit. As we vse Gods Spirit in life, God will vse our Spirit at death. If we open the doores of our hearts to his Spirit, he will open the doores of heauen to our Spirit. If we feast him with a Reu. 3. 20. supper of Grace, he will feast vs with a supper of Glory. If wee Ephe. 4. 30. grieue his Spirit, he will grieue all the veines of our hearts. When such shall say; Lord, into thy handes wee commend our soules: no sayth God, I will none of your Spirit, for you would none of my Spirit. You shut him out when hee would haue entred your hearts, hee shall shut you out when you would enter heauen. Let vs therefore here vse Gods Spirit kindly, that hereafter hee may so vse our spirits. Let vs in life enter∣taine him with Faith, that in death he may embrace vs with mercy. So Lord, into thy handes wee commend our soules; keepe and receiue them O thou faithful Creator, and God of truth, through Iesus CHRIST. Amen. FINIS.
