14128.3 99848521 13621
THE RATES OF MARCHANDI∣ZES AS THEY ARE SET DOWNE in the Booke of Rates for the Custome and Subsidie of Poundage, and for the Custome and Subsi∣die of Cloathes, the same being appointed by his Ma∣iestie, and Confirmed by the Lorde deputye and Councell, and ordered to be published in Print, for the direction of such as it may concerne in this King∣dome of Ireland. DVBLIN. Printed by Iohn Franckton, Printer to the Kings most excellent Maiestie. 1608.
BY THE LORD DEPVTIE AND COVNCELL. WHereas by an Act of Par∣liament made in the fif∣teenth yeer of the raigne of King Henry the se∣uenth of famous me∣mory, it was at the pray∣er of the Commons or∣dained and established▪ That the said King & his Heires should haue, per∣ceiue and leuie of all and euery xx. s. worth of all manner of Marchandize and Wares brought into this land of Ireland, by any manner of person or persons, to be sould within the same Land, twelue pence, and likewise should haue, leuie and receaue of euery twentie shillings worth of all manner of Marchandize and Wares after the price that they be bought within this Land, and to bee carried out of the same, to be sould by any manner of person or persons beyond the Sea, twelue pence, as in the same Act among other things, more at large is contained; And forasmuch as hitherto the Wares and Marchandizes out of which the said poundage or twelue pence of the pound is to be raised, haue
had not certaine values or Rates set vppon them in this Kingdome, by reason whereof the saide Poundage or twelue pence of the pound hath not been truelie and fully aunswered vnto the Kings most excellent Maiestie, and his Progenitors; Wee haue therefore caused all the goods and Marchandizes chargeable with the said poundage either broght in, or transported out of this King∣dome, together with the seuerall kinds, qualities, numbers, weights, measures and contents of the same, and the values, prices, and Rates thereof to be particularly entred and expressed in this pre∣sent Booke, containing in leaues on both sides to the entent his Maiestie may henceforth bee iustly aunswered of the said poundage, according to the tenor of the said Act of Parliament;
Wherefore we do hereby declare & publish his Highnes pleasure & comandment to be, That all his Maiesties Customers or Collectors of Cus∣tomes or Subsidies within any Port, Hauen or Creeke of this his Highnes Realme of Ireland, for the tyme being shal from & immediatly after no∣tice giuen by these presents of his Highnes said pleasure, leauie and take vp to his Maiesties vse the said poundage or twelue pence vppon the pound, according to the prises, values, & rates mē∣tioned and expressed in this Booke, & not other∣wise, as they and euery of them will aunswere for the contrary, at their perills. Willing further, and hereby commaunding his Maiesties Thresurer & Barons of the Eschec∣quer of this Realme, and the said Comptroullers and Surueyors for the tyme being, within anie Port, Hauen, or Creeke of this Realme of Ireland, and euerie of them, to charge the said Collectors and Customers & euery of them, to see his High∣nes duely aunswered of the said poundage, accor∣ding to the values, prices, and Rates, mentioned in this Booke, and none otherwise. Given at his Maiesties Castle of Dublin the xxiij day of Iune. 1608.
❧ AN ABSTRACTE OF THE RATES OF THE MOST V∣suall Commodities of Ireland, set according to their valewes and worth, vpon view of a Coppie of the saide Rates receiued from thence, conferred by vs with the Booke of Rates for the Commodities of England, and is done by Order from the Lords and others of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuie Councell of England. A ANniseeds the C. weight, cont. fiue score and twelue pound. xxx. s. Allome the C. weight, cont. 112. pound xx. s. B BAcon the Flitch, ii. s. vi. d. Battery or Kettels the C. weight cont. one hundred & twelue pound. iii. l. Brasse Pottes the C. weight. iii. l. Beere the Tunne, xl. s.
Buffins, Moccadoes, Grogarines, and all such Stuffes, as in Eng∣land. Butter the Barrell, i. l. vi. s. viii. d. C Cappes, Of Veluet the dosen i. l. x. s. Of Cloath the dosen i. l. Chequers of sundrie colours, the Packe cont. iiii. C. yeards, vi. score to the C. viii. l. Cheese the C. weight, cont. 112. pound. vi. s. viii. d Coles vocat. Sea-coles, the Chaulder, x. s. Colme to burne Lyme the chaulder, vi. s. viii. d Corne and Graine of all sorts, to pay as in England, that is, Wheate the Quarter, cont. eight Bushels, containing viii. gal∣lons to the Bushel, ii. s. And euery Quarter of other Graine, as Rye, Barly, Malt, Oates, Beanes & Pease, to pay xvi. d. F
Fish HErrings white and full the Barrell, x. s, Salmon the Tunne, vi. l. All other sorts of Fish to be rated as in England. Furres, Martron skinnes the dosen ii. l. Otter skins the dosen i. l. Foxe skinnes the dosen x. s All other sorts as in England. G Glasses of all sortes, as in England. H HIdes of Oxe or Cowe the peece v. s Hawkes of all sortes, as in England. Honney the Tunne, as in England. Hoppes the C. weight, containing 112. pound i. l. Into England, the Horse xiii. l. vi. s. viii. d Horses Into any other forraine part, the peece xx. l. x. s I
Iron the Tunne, vii. l. L Leade the Fodder or Tunne, vi. l. xiii. s. iiii. d M MAnteling the Packe, cont. iiii. C. yeards, 120. to the hundred. xii. l. Manteling or Frizes the yeard. vi. d Mantells Of the best sort the peece xiii. s. iiii. d Of the worst sort the peece, vi. s. viii. d O Oyle of all sortes, as in England, P PEwter the C. weight cont. 112. pound. iii. l. Petticotes of Cotten the dosen ii. l.
R Rugges for Beds. THe best, i. l. All other sortes the peece x. s Blanketting Rugges the peece, v. s S SAckecloath the peece, containing 15 yeards, i. l. Saffron the pound, i. l. Salte, Spanish the Wey, cont. 40. Bushels, i. l. vi. s. viii. d. French the Wey, cont. 40. Bushells xx, s, white the wey cō. 40. Bushels i. l. vi. s. viii. d Silkes of all sorts as in England, Soape the Firkine x. s. Soape Ashes the C. weight iii. s. iiii. d. Spices and Drugges of all sorts, as in England. Slates the thousand vi. s. viii. d. Small Wares of all sortes, as in England. Skinnes, Lambe skinnes the C. cont. 120, white or blacke x, s, Mortkines rawe the C. cont 120 vi. s. viii. d. T
TAllow & Tallow Candles the C. weight, xx, s, Timber The Tunne in great & small pecces vi, s, viii d Pipe staues the M. cont. ten C. 120 to the C. v. l. Hogshead-staues the thousand, xl. s. Barrell Boords the thousand xxx. s. Inche Boords the C. foote, cont. 110. iii. s. iiii. d Two Inche Boords the like C. foote vi. s. viii. d. Three Inche Boords or Planckes the like C. foote x. s. Foure Inche Planckes the like C. foote xiii. s. iiii. d. Thread Blacke or Browne the Boult x. s All other sorts of Thread as in England Tynne the C. weight, cont. 112. pound liii. s. iiii. d W VVAxe the C. weight, cont. 112. pound. iiii. l. Wines of all sorts, for Custome and Subsi∣die, as in England Woole of all sortes, the Stone iiii. s.
Wollen cloath, and all Woollen Stuffes whatsoe∣uer, as in England YArne vocat. Irish Yarne, the hundred weight cont. 112. pound iii. l. vi. s. viii. d All other commodities which shall be ei∣ther brought into or shipped forth of the Realme of Ireland, not being herein mentioned & rated, shalbe valued as in the Booke of Rates made for the valuation of Marchandizes in England, & shal paye custome and Subsidie according to the same. And all other cōmodities whirh are not men∣tioned herein, nor in the said Booke of Rates for England, shal be valued according to their worth: and if the same be to be shipped forth, then to bee valued as the same cost in that Kingdome, and if the same shall be brought in, then to be valued as it cost at the place from whence the same was brought. All herein contained, is to be vnderstood Eng∣lish money.
