1420 99856881 22521
Of the horyble and woful destruccion of Ierusalem And of the sygnes and tokens that were seene before it was destroied: which distruction was after Christes assension .xlii. yeares. To the tune of the Queenes Almayne. AN Emperour Vaspasian Some tyme in Rome there was, Through whom much dolors then be gan Of mortall wars alas, With in two yeares that he did rayne He put the Iewes to myckill payne With fyer and sword both take and slayne, His power brought so to passe, His Sone Tytus hauing no dread His army ouer Iudae spread The people to the Citie flead Hoping to haue redresse. ¶Before Titus Vaspasians sonne Vnto this warres dyd goo Was after Cristes assencion, Longe .xl. yeares and two Then did the Romayns with suche pride Be set theyr land both far and wyde, And hemd them in, on euery side To theyr great payne and wo, They brought the Iewes in such a case The prophesye, to bryng to passe, Spoke by our Lord when he here was The scripture doth saye so. That prudent Iewe Iosephus sayes Who did no wryte in vayne, That he was present in those dayes And sawe this mortall payne, When that Tytus both bold and stout Be set Ierusalem a bout, That none mought in, nor Issue out, No waye but to be slayne. For Tytus his chyef capteyn was The seige when he had brought to passe Great was the cry woe and alas, The story doth saye playne. ¶He stopt their pypes and Conduyts all, That no water mought passe: With famyne they were in great thrall, Moste wofull was their case, They were constraynyd in such need With Horsse, and Asse, them selues to feed Both Dogg, and Catte, this do I reed Most ougle meate it was, The honger ther it was so great, Ones vomit was anothers meate Ther was no waye for to intreate But present death alas. Sixe mounthes the siege it did holde on A bout that Citie great, Whearin was manie a mothers sonne Did starue for lacke of meate, The famous Ladies of that towne That weare before of hie renowne, For fault of foode fell in a sowne Ther was nothinge to geate: The storye this doth specifie, The mothers moste vnnaturally, They slewe their Children rufully, And Rostyd them to eate. This Titus then of hye renowne Most valyently and bold, The walles so stronge he did cast downe Resystaunce waxyd colde, The people in the streetes laye dead, They had no Succour drynk nor bread Muche was the blood that then was shead, Alas lament wee should: The Romains entred with suche might, With Polare, speares, & swerdes so bright They slew all that came in their sight No mercie they did hold. The Gates that couered were with golde They threw them to the ground, That famous Citie to behold For sinne it was confound, A leuen honderid thowsande slaine Through honger, swerde & pestelent paine In this the storie doth not faine, Of manie a blooddy wound, The stinke of carkas in the streete, The feble soules that could not fleete For faint with honger skarce could creepe, Full heauie was their sounde. Then Titus gaue this sentence bliue Which Romayns lykyd well, As many as you fynd a lyue, After this Rate them sell, As Crist was sold for thyrtye pence, By Iudas and his false pretence, So Titus made their recompence The storie thys doth tell, XXX. Iewes for a penie bougt, As manie more were solde for nought Ther owne confusion thus was wrought Because they did rebell. And manie prisoners mo I weene To Egipt they weare send, Fowerscore thousand, and seuenteene In prison all their ende, And Titus in his companie Tooke manie suche as were worthie, And lead them bounde all captiuelie, To Rome with him to wend: Ther was no helpe for to reuoke, As Ihosephus saith in his booke His Chronicles who liste to looke, On truth they do depend. Thirtie years God gaue them space That they mought yet repent, Their liues amend and call for grace For them Christ did lament, This louinge Lord oft did them call By sundrie signes as heare you shall Before his wrath on them did fall Or anger fullie bent, Twelue dayes eclipsed was the moone, That they mought bee conuerted soone, But they wist not what to bee doone, But sinne still did augment. Before the seige or anie warr, the space of all one yeare Ouer that towne was seene a starre, Most blasinge bright and cleare So like a sworde in shape it was, Wher at great feare and wonder was, Yet left they not their wickednes, when these signes did appeare: More ouer in the ayre so light, In plate of maile and armore bright, Were seene men redie for to fight, To shewe theyr time was neare. A festifall daye, in Apriell, To halowe they were dight, And sodainlie amongest them fell A merueylous straunge light, So bright and cleare with suche aleame, Passing the sonne as it did seeme, But what it ment no man could deeme. But were all in sore flyght And whyle the pristes did this in dure To offer a Calfe they did their cure, Whiche Calfe a thinge against nature, Brought forth a Lambe in sight. Suche manie tokens contrarie Whiche doth Prognostikate, And to the Iewes did signifie Their wofull fall and fate, Before that Titus warr be gan Fower yeares of space, this proue I can, How that the sonne of one rude man, Ananias lowe of state, He ran the streates in suche a rage Beinge a child of tender age, To call and crie he did not swage Repente eare it be late. But for his paines he was well beat This had he for his hire, For truthe they did him euill in treate Against him did conspire, But yet he cried and would not blen, While he was able yet to ren, Sayenge wo be to Ierusalem, For kindling of Gods yre: Wo be to thee and to thy land Thou art be set in wofull band, Thy dayes of sorowe is at hand Of famine swerd and fyer. This was that famous Citie then Distroyed with fier and sword, That mightie towne Ierusalem, The Citie of the Lorde: Because their God they would not knowe Christ being .xxx. yeares belowe His word to them plainlie did shewe This scripture doth recorde, That they mought be his chosen firste To liue and raigne a mongst the iust, And to no other for to truste But to belyue his word. Nowe seinge that this Ierusalem, As scripture doth tell true Was plaguyd for the sinnes of men, Which Romaines ouer threw, What shall that Lorde to vs expresse That so doth liue in suche excesse, Of whordome, Pride, and couitousnes More now then did the Iewe, Therfore is our example this, A mend the thinge that is a mysse That we maye haue eternall blisse, By Christe our Lorde Iesue. Finis Qd. Iohn Barker. ¶Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate Beneath the Conduit, at the signe of S. Iohn Euangelist, by Tho∣mas Colwell.
