15066 99842547 7212
The copie of a letter / sent to the ladye Mary dowagire, Regent of Scotland, by Iohn Knox in the yeare. 1556. ¶ Here is also a notable sermon, made by the sayde Iohn Knox, wherin is euydentlye pro∣ued that the masse is and  ben abhomina∣ble before God and Idoe∣latrye. Scrutamini Scripturas
coat of arms or blazon
To the ex∣cellent lady Mary Dougiare Regent of Scotland hir hūble subiect Iohn Knox wi∣sheth grace, mercy and peace frō god y• father of oure lord Iesus Christ with the spirite of perfect iudgement. THe eternall prouidence of the euerlyuynge god hath appointed his cho∣sen children, to fight in this wretched and transi∣tory lyfe a battel difficil, and the manner of their preseruation in y•Gene. . Math. 10▪ Actes. 1▪  sāe battel to be more meruelous. Their victory standeth not in re∣sisting, but in suffering. And how▪
they cbe preserued & not brogh. 1 ▪ 40. l. 51. 90. . to vttermoste confusiō the eye of man perceyueth not: but whose power is infinite by secrete and hidde motions toucheth the har∣tes of such as to mans iudgment haue power to destroye them, of very pitie and compassion to saue his people. As he dyd the hartes of y• egyptian mydwyues to pre∣serue the men children of y• Israe∣lites, when precept was geuen by Pharao of their destruction. The harte of Pharaos doghter to pitie Morses, in his young infancy ex∣poned to the danger of waters. The harte of Mabuchodonasat. Reg. 25. Iere. 52. Daniel. 1. to preserue the captyues alyue, and liberally to norishe the chil∣dren that were founde apte to let∣tres. And fynally y• harte of Cy∣rus to sert at libertye y• people of god after long bōdage and thral∣on: and thus doeth the inuisible
power, and loue of god, manifest it selfe towardes his elect frome tyme to time for two causes: first to comforte his weate warryors, in their manifolde temptations: letting theym to vnderstāde, that he is able to cōpell suche, as some tyme were eneme is to his people, to fight in their cause. And also (as by his prophet Esaie he dothEsai. . promyse) to promote their dely∣ueraūce. And secondarily to gyue a testimony of his fauour to thē that by all apperance did lyue be∣fore (as Gaint Paule speateth)Ephe. 2. wāting god in y• world, strāgers from the common wealth of Isra¦el, and wythoute the legue of his mercy full promes, and free grace made to his church, for who could haue affirmed that one of these persones a fore named, or yet Ra∣habIosua. 2. had ben so louing, faithful & gentle before that occasion was
offered vnto theym to manifeste theym nature and clemency But the wortes of mercye, shewed to the afflicted, haue ls to vs assu∣rances, that God vsed theym as vessels of his honor. For pitie and mercy shewed▪ to his afflicted flocke, as they neuer lacked re∣ward temporal, o if they be con∣tyewd and be not changed into crueltye, are assured signes and sealles of euerlasting mercy to be receyued from God Who by hys holy spirite moueth their harts, to sheme mercye to the people of God oppressed and afflicted. Your grace perchance doeth wō∣der to what purpose these thiges berecyted: and I in very dede cā not wonder ynough that occasion is offered to me (a worme moste wretched) too recyte the same at this present. For I haue looked rather for the sentence of deathe,
then to haue writtē to your grac in these last and manifest wicked dayes, in which Sathan so blyn∣deth the hartes of many. I doubt not, but the, rumors whiche came to youre geares of me, haue ben suche: if all reportes were trew, I were vnworthy to lyue on the earth. And wonder it is, that the voyces of the multitude shoulde not so haue enflammed your g. harte with iust hatered of suche a one, as I am accused to be: that al accesse to pitie should haue ben shut vp. I am traduced as an he∣retyke, accused as a fals teacher and seducer of the people, besides other opprobries, which affirmed by men of wordly honor & estyma¦tion may easely fyndle the wrath of magistrates, when innocēcy is not knowen. But blessed be God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, who by the dewe of hys
heauenly grace hath so quenched the fyre of displeasure in youre graces harte (whiche of late days I haue vnderstand) that Sathan is frustrate of his enterpryse and purpose: Whiche is to my harte no inall comforte, not so muche (God is witnes) for any benefite that I can receaue in this misera∣ble lyfe▪ by protection of any ear∣thely creature (for y• cuppe, which it behoueth me to drynke, is ap∣pointed, by the wysdome of him, whose counes are not chāgea∣ble as that I am for that benefit, whiche I am assured youre grace shall receyue, if that ye contine we in lyke moderation and clemency towardes others, that moste vn∣iustly are and shalbe accused, as that your grace hath begonne to∣wardes me and my moste despe∣rate matter. That is, if by godly wysdome, ye shal study to brydle
the fury and rage of theym, who for maintenance of their worldly pompe, regarde nothing the cruel murdering of symple innocentes.Math. 5. Math. 10. Than shall he, who pronunceth mercy to apperteyn to the merci∣full, and promiseth that a cuppe of colde water geuen for hys na∣mes sake, shall not lacke rewarde, fyrst cause youre happy gouerne∣ment to be praysed in this present age▪ and in posterities to come, & laste recompens your godly pay∣nes and study, with that ioy and glory, whiche y• eye hath not sene, nor yet can enter into the harte of mortall creature. Superfluous & foolishe it shall appeare to many, that I, a man of base estate & con∣dition, dare enterprise to admo∣nishe a princes so honorable, en∣dewed with wisdome and graces singulerly. But when I consider the honor that God commaūdeth
to be geuē to magistrates, which no doubte▪ if it be trew honor, cō∣teyneth. 20. Rom▪ 1. . Pet. 2. in it self, in lawfull thin∣ges obedience, and in all thinges loue and reurce: When further I consider the troublesome estate of Christ Iesus trew religiō, this daye oppressed by blyndnes of men:  last the multitude of flat∣terers, and the rare numbre of thē that bolde and playnelye dareThe state. speake y• naked rit in presence of their princes, and principally in the cause of Christe Iesus: These thinges, I say, considered, whatsoeuer any man shall iudge of my enterprise, I am compelled to say, neles in your regiment & using of power your g. be founde differē frō the multitude of prin∣ces & head rulers, that this pree∣minēce, wherein ye are placed, shal be your deiectiō to tormēt & payn euerlasting. This proposition i
sore, but alas, it is so trew, that i I shoulde concele & hyde it frome your grace, I committed no lesse treason against your g. then I did if I saw you by imprudency take a cuppe, which I knew to de poy∣soned or enuenomed, & yet wolde ot admonishe you to absteyn frōApo. 14. 1 drincking of the same The religiō whiche this day men defende by fyre and swearde, is a cuppe enue nomed, of which whosoeuer dric∣keth (except by trew repētance, he after drincke of the water of lyfe) drincketh there with damnation & death. How & by whome it hath bē enuenomed, if it were no more tediouse to youre grace to reade & heare, then it is paynfull to me to write or reherse, I wold not spare the labor. But for this present I haue thought it sōe discharge of a parte of my duety, If I of very loue admonish your g. of y• dāger:
whiche I do (as God one daye all declare) preferring youre g. saluation, and the saluatiō of the people now committed to youre care, before any corporal benefyt, that can  dounde to my self. Ye thinke peraduenture that the care of religion is not cōmitted to ma∣gistrates, but to the bisshoppes & estate ecclesiastical as they terme it: no no, the negligēce of bisshop∣pes shall no lesse be requyred of ye handes of magistrates (because they foster and maintein them in yanny, them shall the oppression of fals iudges, whiche kynges mainteyn and defend. I doubte not, but your grace doeth wōder, howe that the religiō, that is vni∣uersal receyued, can be so dam∣nable and so corrupted. But if youre grace shall cōsider that euer from the beginning the multitude hath declined from God: yea, cuē
in the people, to whome he spake by his lawe and prophetes: if ye shall consider the complaynte of ye holy Ghoste complayninge that nations, people, princes and kyn∣gesPsalm. ; Acto. 4. of the earth haue raged, made conspiracies, and holden counsai∣les against the Lord, and against his anointed Christe Iesus. Fur∣ther, if ye shall consider the que∣stion, whiche Christe Iesus hymLuc. 16. selfe doeth moue in these wordes: when the sonne of man shal come, shall he fynde fayth in the earth? And last, if youre g. shall cōsider the manifest contempt of God, & of all his holy preceptes, whiche this day raygneth withoute pu∣nishment vpon the face of ye hole earth. For as O seas complaynethO se. 4▪ ▪ there is overitie, there is no mer¦cy, there is no knowledge of God in the earth, but lyes periury, mur ther, theft and adultery ouerflow
al, and bloud hath touched bloud that is, euery iniquitie is ioyned to an other. If depely I say youre grace shall consider, & contēplate the vniuersal corruptiō, that thys day reygneth in al estates: then shal youre g. cease to wonder that many are called & few are chosen. And ye shall begyn to tremble toMath. 20. Math. . . Thes. , folowe the multitude to perditiō. The uniuersall defection, whereof sainct Paule did prophesy, is easy to be sed aswell in religion as in manners. The corrupciō of lyfe is euident.  religion is not mea∣sured with the playne worde of God, but by custome, cōsetude, will, consent and determinations of men But shal he, who hath pro¦nced all cogitations of mans ha to be vayn at all tyme, accept the counsaylles and consentes of men for a religion pleasnge & ac∣ceptable before hym? Let not
youre grace be disceaued: GodDeu. 4. 12. can not deny hym selfe, he hathe witnessed from the begynnynge, that no religion pleaseth hym, ex∣cept that, which he by hys owne worde hath commaunded & esta∣blished. The veritie it elf pronun¦ceth this sentence: In vayne doMath. 15. they worshippe me, teaching doc∣trines, the preceptes of men. And also all plantation, that my hea∣uenlye father hathe not planted, shalbe routed out. Before the cum¦ming of his welbeloued sonne in the fleshe, seuerallye he punished al such as durst entreprise to alter or change his ceremonies or statu¦tes, as in Saule, Vzias, Nadab, &e. 13. 1 Leut. 10. Math. 7 Ac. 1. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 11. Abihu is to be redde. And wil he now after that he hath opened his hole coūsail to ye world, by his on∣ly sōne, whō he hath cōmāded to be hearde: And after yt he, by hys holy spirit speakig in his apostles
hath established the religion,  whiche he willeth hys trew wor∣shippers to abyde to the end, wil he now I say admitte mens inuē∣tions, in the matter of religion, whiche before he reted, for dā∣nable Idolatry? If man oraun∣gels wolde affirme that he will or may do it, his owne veritie shal conuict them of a lye: for this sen¦tence, whiche he once pronunced, shall abyde immutable to ye ende: Not that which appeareth good in thine eyes, shalt thou do to the Lorde thy God▪ but what ye Lord thy God hath commaunded the, that do thou: adde nothing to it, dyminishe nothinge from it: The whiche thinge (sealinge vp hys new testamēt) he repeteth in these wordes: I wil lay none other butApoca. . then vpon you, but that which ye haue holde till I come. And ther∣fore yet again it repenteth me not
to say, that in this point, whiche is chief & principale, youre grace must dissent from the multitude of rulers, or els ye can possesse no portion with Christ Iesus in his kyngdome and glory. An orator & Goddes messinger also iustlye mighte requyre of you, nowe by Goddes hande promoted to hye dignitie, a motherly pitie vppon youre subiectes, a iustice inflexi∣ble to be vsed agaist murtherers & commō oppressours, a hart voyde of auarice and partialitie, a mynd studiouse and carefull, for main∣tenance of that realme & common wealth, aboue whiche God hath placed you, and by it hath made you honorable, with the rest of ye virtues, whiche not onely God∣des scriptures, but also wryters illuminated onely with the lighte of nature requyreth in godlye ru∣lers. But ayn it is to craue refor∣mation
in manners, where the re∣ligion is corrupt. For like as a māNota. can not do the office of a man, ex∣cept first he haue a being or a life: So to worke wotes pleasante in the sight of God the father, cā no man do without the spirite of the Lorde Iesus, whiche doeth not abyde in ye hartes of Idolatrers. And therfore ye moste godly prin∣ces Iosias, , & Iosaphat,. Re. 15. a. Pa. 17. 4. Re. 22 2. Pa. 29 9.  seing goddes faor to rest vpon them & vpon their people, before all thinges began to reforme the religion. For it is as the stomake within ye body, whiche if it be cor∣rupted, of necessitie it infecteth ye hole masse. And therfore (oft I re∣pete that which is most necessary) if your grace pretend to raigne wt Christe Iesus, then it behoueth you to take care ouer his trew re∣ligiō: the which this daye within your realme is so deformed, that
no part of Christes ordinances re¦mayn in their first strength & ori∣ginalNo parte of religion remaineth vncorrupt▪ puritie, the which, I praise god is lesse difficil to me to proue then dāgerous to speake. And yet neither the one, nor ye other I fear partly because the loue of life eter¦nall quencheth the terrour of tem¦porall death. And partely because I wolde with sainct Paule wishe my self accursed from Christe, as touching earthely pleasure, for ye saluatiō of my brethern & illumi∣natiōA peticion of your grace. Which thing work & very dede & not bare word & wryting shall witnes & declare, if I maye purchase the libertie of tunge but fortye daies only. I am not ignorāt how dāgerous a thi it appeareth to ye natural mā to in nate any thing in matters of re¦ligiō.An obiecti¦on of the fleshe And partli I cōsidet yt your gr. power is not so fre as a publik reformation perchance woulde requyre.
But if your grace shal considerAn answer the daunger and damnation per∣petuall, which ineurtably hāgeth vpon all mainteyners of a fals re∣ligion: Then shall the greatest daunger easely deuoure & swal∣low vp the smaller. If your graceMatth. 6.  6. . . 1. shall consiver, that either ye must serue God to lyfe euerlasting, or els serue the worlde to death and : Then albeit man and agel  dissade you, ye will  lyfe and refuse death. And  further ye shall consider, th the very lyfe cōsisteh in the knowledge of the onelye trewe God and of his sonne Christ Ie∣sus: And that trewe knowledgeIohn. 17. Iohn 4. hath red with it goddes trew  and honor, whiche requireth a testimony of his own will, expressed by his worde that  he honor doeth please him. If youre grace, I say, shall ear∣nestly
meditate these thigs afore sayde: Then albeit sodenlye ye may not do all thinges y• ye wold, yet shall ye not cease to do what ye maye. Your grace can not hase¦tely abolishe all superstition, nei∣ther yet remoue from offices vn∣profitable pastors, whiche onely fede them selfs: the which to pub¦lique reformation, are requisite and necessary. But yet, if the zele of goddes glory be feruēt in your graces hart▪ by wicked lawes ye will not mainteyn manifest Ido∣latrye, neither yet will ye suffer y• fury of bisshoppes, to murther & deuoure the poore membres of Christes body. But withall cares full diligence, ye will study how that the trewe worshippinge of God maye be promoted, and the tyranny of vngodly men repres∣sed within the boundes of youre dominiō, to the vttermost of your
power. And if the contrary hereof, ei∣ther by ignorance, or for pleasure of others, ye do or permit to be dō: then except your spedy repētāce) shall ye & your  sodenly fll the depressing hande of him, who hath exalted you. Ye shalbe compelled ▪, wil ye) to know that he is eternal, against whome ye addsse your battel. And thata. 2. Iere. . . . 2. he is alone▪ that deaeth ye ty∣mes, and  kingdomes.   is he, that glorifieth them, that glorifie him. And yt he by his owne power poureth forth cōtēpt vpon all , yt bell against his graces er. And therefore how dangerous soeuer it shal ap∣peare to the fleshe and natural mā o obey God in promoting his re∣ligion, and to make warre against the deuill in emeuinge darknes, pryde & superstition: Yet if youreCoūsaill
grace loke to haue your self, or yet youre sede after you to continue in a worldely honor, and after to possesse the lyfe euerlasting, sub∣mit youre self by time, vnder the hande of hym, that is omnipotēt, embrace his will, despise not hys testament, refuse not hys graces offerre. Nowe when he calleth you, withdrawe not youre care, be not led awaye with that vayn opiniō that youre churche and prelates can not ere: but laye the ooke of God before youre eyes, and lette it bee iudge to their lyues, doc∣trine, and māners: as also to that doctryne, whyche by fyre and swearde moste cruelly they per∣secute. I confesse that I desyre your grace, to entre into a straunge & greuous battel: neuertheles yet
assured I am by the promes of him, by whome kynges do raygn, that if with reuerence and feare ye obey his preceptes, as did Io∣sias the admonitsons of the pro∣phetes,3 Par. 4. that then with doble be∣nediction shall your bauell be re∣warded: that is wisedom, ryches, glory, he or and longe lyfe shall accompany you in this your regi∣ment temporal: and unmortalitie wh oy inestimable shalbe your portion, when the king of all kin∣ges▪ the Lord Iesus, shal appere to iudgemente, before whome ye shall make accompt of this youreMatth. 24 O. 10. . 9▪ regyment▪ when the proude and disobedient shall cry mountaynes ll vpon vs, and hyde vs frome the face of the Lorde. But then it shalbe too late, because they despsed the voyce of him that lo∣ngly calleth.
GOd the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, by the power of his holy spirite, so illumi∣ate youre senses and vnderstan∣ding, that the things, that rudely be here spoken, by youre grace so may be accepted, that they be not a testimony of youre iuste dam∣nation in that greate daye of the Lorde Iesus, to whose mighty protection I vnfaynedlye committe youre grace nowe and euer. Amen.
¶ The fo∣urth of Aprill / In the yeare. 1550. was appoin∣ted to Ihon Knor to geue his con¦fessiō, why he affirmed the masse idolatrye: which daye in presence of the counsell and congrega¦tion, amōgest whome was also present the bisshop of Dureham & hys doctors, on this māner he be∣gynneth. THis day I doe appeare in your presce ho¦norable audience o geue a reason, why so constantly I do affirme, the masse to be and all ty∣mes to haue ben Idolatry & abo∣minatiō before God. And because
men of greate erudition in youre audience affirmed the contrarye: moste gladly wolde I that here th were present, either in proper person, or els by their learned mē, to pōder and ey the causes mo∣uing me therto. For oneles I euy∣dently proue myne entent by god∣des scriptures, I wil recant it as  doctrine, and confesse my¦self moste worthy of greuous pu¦nishment. Howe difficillitis to pul forth of the haries of the people y• thing wherein opinion of holynes stā∣deth, declareth the greate tumult and pro moued against Paul by  and his fellowes who by Idolatry t great aduā∣tae,   priestes haue done by the masse, in times past. The people I say, hearing that the ho∣nor of their great goddes Diana stoode in ioardy, with furious
yces cried, great is Diana of y• phesians: as they wolde saye, e will not haue the magnificēce  our great goddes Diana, whō not onely Asia, but the hole world worshippeth, called in doubt, cū¦in question, or cōtrauersy. Away with all menne intendinge that impietie. And hereunto were the moued by longe custome and fals opinion. I knowe that in the masse hath not onely ben estemed great holy∣nes and honoringe of God, but also the grounde and foundation of oure religion: so that in opiniō of many the masse taken awaye there resteth no trew worshippīg nor honoring of God in ye earthe. The deper hath it persed the har∣tes of men, that it occupieth the place of the last and mistical sup∣per of our Lorde Iesus. But if I all by play and euident scrip∣tures
proue, the masse in her most honest garment to haue ben Ido∣latrye before God, and blasphe∣mous to the death and passion of Christ, & cōtrary to the supper of Iesus Christ: thē good hope haue I▪ honorable audience & beloued brethren, that the feare, loue and obediēce of God, who in his scrip¦tures hath spoken all veritie, ne∣cessary for our saluatō, shal moue you to  place vnto the same. ¶ O Lorde eternall, moue & gouerne my tung to speake ye , and the hartes of the people to vnderstande and to obey the same. That ye maye the better per∣ceyue and vnderstand ye man∣ of my doctrine in this my confessiō, first will I collect & ga∣ther the same therof in a brief and  sylogis, & here after ex¦playn thesame more largely. ¶ The masse is Idolatry.
I worshipping, honoring, or ser¦uice inuēted by ye brain of mā in ye ligiō of God wtout his own ex∣presse cōman̄demēt, is Idolatrie: The masse is inuēted bi ye brain of mā, wtout any cōmēdemēt of god Therfore it is Idolatry. For pro∣bation of the first part, I will ad∣duce none of the gēiles sacrifices in which not withstandinge was les abouinatiō, then hathe ben i our masse. But forth of gods scrip1. Reg. 1 tures, will I bring ye witnesses of my wordes. And first let vs hear Samuel speking vnto Saul after he had made sacrisice vnto the lord vpō moūt Silgal, what time his enmies approched against hi. Thou art become folish (saieth Sa¦muel) yu hast not obserued ye precep¦tes of ye lord, which he hath cōmā∣ded ye. Truely ye lord had prepared to haue stablished thy kyngdome aboue Israell for euer: but nowe thy kyngdome shal not be sure.
Let vs consider what was the offence committed by Saule: his enemyes approching, and he con∣sidering that the people declined from him, and that he had not cō∣sulted with the Lorde, nor offe∣red sacrifice for pacificacion of ye Lordes wrath, by reason that Sa  the principall prophete and  it was not present, offe∣reth himself burt and peace offe¦ringe▪  is the grounde of all h : and of this proce∣deth the cause of hys election frō the , that he wolde ho∣nor God , then was cōmaūded by hys expresse word.  none of the trybe of  by goddes com∣maundemente to make sacrifice, he office not dewe too  which was moste hye abho  before God: as by the punishment appeareth. Consider
well that no exc̄usations are ad∣mitted by enemyes approched, & his owne people departed frome him. He coulde not haue a lawful minister, and gladly wolde haue ben reconciled to God, and cōsul∣ted with him of the ende & chance of that iourney. And therefore he the kyng (anoynted by goddes cō¦maundemente) maketh sacrifice. But none of all these were admit¦ted by God: but Saule was pro∣nunced foolishe and vayn. For no honoring knoweth God, nor will accept: without it haue ye expresse commandemēt of his own word, to be done in all pointes. And no commaundement was geuē vnto the kynge, to make or offerre vnto God any maner sacrifice: whiche because he toke vppon him to do, he and his posteritie was depry∣ued from all honours in Israell. Neither auayled his preeminēce∣the
necessitie wherein he stode,  good . But let s heare more. When commaun∣ was  vnto Saule by . 1  name to destroy  some time  the people of Israel,  Egipt, (Aduerte cute y• peo∣ple of God▪ albet youre paynes  differred, yet are they allredy  of God this people of  not immediatly af∣ter the , done against Is∣▪ but long after thei e to be destroyed , woman, infante, ll, camels, and lly all that lyued in that . de the remem∣ be, to all such as tro∣ suche as wolde fo∣lows the commaundemente and
vocation of God, leauinge spiri∣tuall Egipte, the kyngedome of the Antichriste and y• abomina∣tions thereof. But Saule saueth the Fynge named Agag, and per∣mitteth the people to saue the best and fattest of the bestiall, to the entent sacrifice shoulde be made thereof vnto God. But lette vs heare, howe thys is accepted. Samuel befor admonished of his inobediēce, cōmynge vnto Saule afeth what voyce was it whiche he hearde. The kynge aunswe∣reth the people hathe saued the fattest and best beastes, thereof to make sacrifice, vnto thy God: Here may be marked, that Saule hadde  sure confidence in God: for he speaketh as thoughe God apperteyned nothinge vnto him. Samuel sereth, suffer and I shal declare vnto y•, what y• Lorde hath spoken vnto the this nyghte.
And shortly he rebuketh hym moste sharpele, that he hadde not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde. But Saule standinge in opinion that he had not offended: because he did all of good entent, sayeth, I haue obeyed the Lordes voice, I haue destroyed the synners of A male of, and onely I haue saued the kyng, and the people haue pre¦serued certen be sll to be offer∣red vnto God. And so defendeth h his owne worke to be iust and righteous. But therto answereth Samuel, delyteth God in burnte offering, and not rather that hys voyce be obeyed? The synne of wtche t is not to obei his voice and to be stubborne is the syn of Idolatry. As Samuel wold say, there is nothinge that God more eqeth of man, then obedience to his commaundemente: yea, he referreth obedience to the selfe
same sacrifice ordeyned by hym self. And no syn is more odious in goddes presence, then to disobey his voyce: For yt estemeth God so odiouse, yt he doeth compare them to the two synnes moste abomi∣nable, incantation and Idolatrye. So that disobedience to his voice is very Idolatry. Disobedience to goddes voyce is not onely whē man doeth wickedly contrary to y• preceptes of God: but also when of good zeale or good entente, as we cōmonly speake, mā doeth any thing to yt honor or seruice of god, not commaunded by the expresse worde of God. As in this matter plainly mai be espied. For Saule transgresseth not wickedly in mu ther, adultery, or lyke external syn nes: but saue than aged and impo¦tent king (which thing who wold not call a good dede of mercye) & permitteth the people, as saide is,
o saue certayn be friall to be offe∣red vnto the Lord: thinking that God should therewith stand con∣tent and appleased: because he & the people did it of good entent. But bothe these called Samuell Idolatry▪ First, because thei wereNota. done without anye commaunde∣ment of God: & secondly, because in doyng therof he thoughte hym self not to haue offended. And y• is principal Idolatry, when oure owne inuentions we defende too be righteous in the sight of God: because we thinke them good, lau¦dable and pleasaunte. We maye not thinke vs so free nor wyse, that we maye do vnto God and vnto hys honor, what we thynke expedient. No, the contrary is cō∣maundedDem. 4. by God, sayenge: vnto my worde shall ye adde nothinge, nothing shalye diminish therefrō, that ye might obserue yt preceptes
of your lord God. Which words are not to be vnderstād of the de∣calogue and lawe morall onely: but of statutes, rytes and ceremo¦nies: for equall obedience of all hys lawes requireth God. 3. AndLeui. 10. in witnes therof Nadab & Abihu offeringe straunge fyre, whereof God hadde geuen vnto them no charge, were instantly as they of∣fered punished to death by fyre. Strange fyre, which they offered vnto God, was a common fyre, & not of that fyre whiche God had commaunded to burne daye and night vpon the aulter of burnt sa∣crifice, which onely ought to haue ben offered vnto God. O bishoppes, ye shoulde haue kepte thys fyre, at morne and at euen oughte ye to haue layed fag∣gottes therupō, your selfs oughte to haue clenged & carryed awaye the asshes: but God shal be holde.
In the punishment of these two aforesayd, is to be obserued, that Nadab and Abihu were the prin¦cipall priestes next to Aarō their father, and that they were cōpre∣hended, neither in aduoutry, coue¦tonsnes, nor desyre of worldly honour, but of a good zeale & sim∣ple entent were making sacrifice, desyring no profite of the people therby, but to honour God & to mitigate his wrath. And yet in ye doyng of this self same acte & sa∣crifice were they consumed away with fyre. Wherof it is plain that neither the preemmence of yt per∣son or man, that maketh or setteth vp any religion, withoute the ex∣presse commaundement of God, nor yet the , wherof he doeth the same, is accepted before God. For nothinge in his religion will he admit without his own word: but all that is added thereto doth
he abhorre, and punisheth the in∣uentors and doers thereof, as ye haue heard in Nadab and Abihu, by Gedeon and diuers other Is∣raelites, setting vp some thinge to honor God, whereof they had no expresse commaundement. 4. A story, whiche is recited in the popes cronicles, will I recite, whiche differeth nothinge frome this punishment of Nadab &c. Gregorius magnus in the time of the moste contagious pestilence, wherewith God punished the ini∣quitie of Rome (for nowe was y• wicked horne, that Antichrist, spronge vp, and set in authoritie) in this tyme, I saye, Gregory the pope deuised a new honpringe of God, the inuocation of sainctes, called the Latinie. Wherof in the scriptures neither is there autho∣ritie nor commaundement: vppon whiche sacrilege and Idolatrye
God declared his wrath, euen as he did vpon Nadab and Abihu. For in the instante houre, when first this etanye was recyted in open procession (as they call it) foure score of the principal men, that recyted the same, horriblye were striken by ye plague of God, to death all in an houre. The pa∣pistes attribute this to the conta¦gious ayre and vehemency of the plague. But it was none other thinge but a manifest declaration of goddes wrathe, for inuentinge and bringinge in into the churche a false and diabolicall religion. For whyle we desyre sainctes too make intercession and to pray for vs, what other thinge do werthen eeme the aduocation of Iesus Christe not to be sufficient for vs. And what can be more deuelish? Of these precedents, it is playn, y• no man in earthe hathe power nor
authoritie to statute any thing to the honor of God, not commāded by hys owne worde 5. It profiteth nothing to say,Obiection. the churche hath power to set vp, deuise or inuent honoring of god, as it thinketh moste expedient for the glory of God. This is the con∣tinuall cryeng of the papistes: the church, the church hath al power, it can not erre, for Christe sayeth: I will be with you to the ende of the world: wheresoeuer is two or thre gadered in my name, ther am I in y• myddes of them. Of thys falsely conclude they, the churche maye do all that semeth good for the glory of God, & whatsoeuer the churche doeth, that accepteth and approueth God. 6. I could euidently proue that, which they cal yt church, not to be yt church & imalate spouse of Ie¦sus Christ, which doeth not erre.
But presently Iaske▪ if the church of God be bounde to this perpe∣tuall precept: Not that thinge, whiche appeareth righteous in thyne owne eyes, that shalt thou do, but what God hath commaū∣ded, that obserue and kepe. And if they ideny: I desyre to be cer∣tified, who hathe abrogated and made the same of none effect. In my iudgement Iesus Christe con∣firmeth the same, sayeng my shepe heare my voyce, and a straunger they will not heare, but flye from him. To heare his voyce (whiche is also the voyce of God the fa∣ther is to vnderstande and obey nd to flye frō a strāger, is to admite none other doctrine, worsppinge, nor honoringe of God, then hath proceded forth of his owne mouthe. As he hym self testifieth, sayeng▪ al that is of the ere heare my voyce.
And Paule sayeth, the churche  founded vpon the foundatiō of e prophetes & apostles, whiche foundation no doubte is the law, and the Euangile, so that it maye commaund nothing that is not cō¦eyned in one of the two: for if so t doeth, it is remoued frō y• onely foundation, and so ceasseth to be the churche of Christe. 7. Se∣condly I wold aske, if that Iesus Christe be not kynge and head of his church? This will no man de∣nye. If he be kynge, then must he do the office of a kynge, which is not onely to guyde, rule & defend his subiectes, but also to make & statute lawes, which lawes only are his subiectes bounde to obey, and not the lawes of anye forren princes. Then it becommeth the churche of Iesus Christ to aduert what he speaketh, to receyue and embrace his lawes, and where he
maketh end of speaking or law ge∣uing. So y• al y• power of y• church is subiect to goddes worde. And that is moste euident by the com∣maundement▪ geuen of God vnto Iosua his chosen cpayn, & lea∣der of his people, in these words: be strong and valyant, that thou maid according to the holy law, whiche  seuant oses com∣maunded vnto the: decline not frō it, neither to the righte hande nor to the left c. Let not the boke of the law depart from thy mouth, but  in it bothe daye and night that then maye kepe and do in all thinges accordinge to that whiche is writte therein &c. Here was  not permitted to Io∣su to altr one iote, ceremony, or  in all the law of God: not yet for to  e thereunto, but di∣ligēl for to obseru that, which was commaunded. No lesse obe∣dience requyreth God of vs, then
e did of Iosue his seruaunt. For e wil haue the religiō, ordeined by his onely sonne Iesus Christ, moste straitlye obserued, and not to be violated in any parte. 8. For that I fynde geuen in charge to y•Apoca. . congregation of Thiatira in these wordes: I say vnto you and vnto the rest that are in Thiatira. Who that hath not the doctrine (mea∣ninge of the diabolicall doctrine before rehersed) and who y• kno∣weth not the depene of Sathan: I will put vppon you none other burthē, but y• which ye haue: hold till I come. Marke wel y• y• spirite of God calleth al, which is added to Christes religion, the doctrine of the deuel & depe inuention of y• aduersarye Sathan: as also did Paule writing to Timothie. And Iesus Christe sayeth: I will laye vpon you none other burthē then I haue alredy, and that, which ye haue, obserue diligently.
O God eternal, hast thou laied none other burthens vpon oure backes, then Iesus Christe layed by his worde? Than who hath burthened vs with all these cere∣monies, prescribed fasting, cōpel∣led chastitie, vnlawful voues, in∣uocation of sainctes, and with y• Idolatry of the masse? The deuil, the deuill, brethren, inuented all these burthens to depresse impru∣dent men to perdition. 9. Paule writing of y• lordes supper saieth: Ego accepi a Domino, quod & tra¦didi vobis, I haue receyued and learned of the Lord, that whiche I haue taught you. And consider if one ceremony he addeth or per∣mitteth too be vsed other, then Christe did vse hym selfe: But commaundeth them to vse with reuerence the Lordes institution, vntill his returninge too iudge∣ment.
10. Albeit Moyses was reple∣nished with the sprite of wisedō,  was more familiar with God then euer was any mortall man: yet was there ot of all the cere∣monies referred to his wisedome one iote: but all was commanded to him to be made, accordinge to the similitude shewen vnto hym, and according as y• worde expres∣sed. Of the which precedentes I thinke it is playne, that al, which is added to the religion of God, without his own expresse worde, is Idolatry. 11. Yet must I aū∣swer to an obiection obiected by the papistes: for neuer maye they abyde to be subiecte vnto goddes worde. The apostles (say they) inObiection the counsell holden at Ierusalem, set vp a religiō and made lawes, wherof no iote was conteyned in goddes worde: therfore y• church now may do the same.
That there was any religion (that is honoring of god, wherby they might merit, as ye cal it, any thinge before God) inuented in ye coūsalye neuer are able to proue. Preceptes were geuē, but neitherPreceptes were geuē. suche, nor to that entent that ye al∣ledge. All preceptes geuen in that counsail had the commaundemēt of God: as after shalbe hearde. First let vs heare the cause of theThe cause of the coun¦sail at Ieru¦salem. counsaill. Paule and Barnabas had taught amongest the gentils, y• onely sayth in Christes bloode iustifieth: and a greate multitude of gentils by their doctrine embra¦ced Iesus Christ, & by hym truely worshipped God. Vnto Antio∣chia frō Iudea came certayn fals teachers, affirmyng: that oneles they were circumcysed, according to Moyses lawe, they coulde not be saued: as oure papistes saye this dat, that trew fayth in Chri∣stes
bloude is not sufficient pu∣atiō for our e synnes: oneles also e bye their mombled masses. This contrauersitrobled the har∣es and cōsciēces of the brethern: in so muche that Paule & Barna∣bas were compelled too go vnto Ierusalē vnto Peter and Iames, and others, I thinke, of the apo∣stles. Where a cōuention had: the question was proponed, whether the gentiles shoulde be subiect to obseruation of Moyses lawe, or nor? That is whether onely fayth in Iesus Christ did iustifie, or ne cessarye was also to iustification the law obserued. After great cō∣tention: Peter expoūded: howe yt the house of Cornelius, beyng allCornelius. gentils, had by his preachinge re∣ceyued Iesus Christ, & were decia red in his presence iuste & righte∣ouse before God: for they did re∣ceyue the holye Ghoste visiblye,
not onely without obseruacion of Moses lawe, but also before they had receyued any sacramētal signe of Chrystes religion. Peter conclu¦deth, that to pe a yoke vpon the brethrēs necks, which yoke might none of the Iewes beare thēselfes, was nothyng but to tempte god, that is, to proue if god woulde bee pleased with suche lawes and or∣dinaunces as they would lay vpō the neckes of men wythoute hysConclusiō of the con̄∣sayll. owne worde, whyche were moste extreme impretie: and so cōcludeth he that the gentils ought not to be burthened wyth the law. Hereaf∣ter declared Paule and Barnabas what wonderouse woorkes God had shewen by them amongest the gentils, who neuer obserued Mo∣ses lawe▪ and last Iames, who ap¦peareth vnto me principall in that counseil, for he collecteth the scrip tures and pronounceth the fynall
sentēce, as ye shall heare plainly) declareth that the vocation of the gentiles was prophecied before. And that they should be accepted and accompted to be the people of God, without obseruation of Moses lawe: Adding that no mā ought to enquyre a cause of gods workes. And so pronūceth he the sentence, that their libertie should not be diminished. Aduert now ye cause, the processe and determina∣tion of this counsayl. The cause was to enquyre the veritie of cer∣teyn doctrine. That is, whether the gentils shoulde be charged wt the obseruation of Moses lawe, as was affirmed and taughte by some. In this matter they proce∣ded bi example of goddes works, findinge that he had accepted the gentils without any thraldom or ceremony obserued. Last are pro¦duced scriptures, declaringe so to
before spoken. And accordinge to all this, it is concluded and desy∣ned that the gentilles shall not be burthened with the lawe. What congruence, I praye you, haue theQuestion. Antichristes counsails, with this counsail of the apostles? The apostles gathered to consult vpō the veritie. The papistical coun∣sails are gathered for pryuate cō∣moditie, vpsetting of Idolatry & all abomination: as their deter∣minatiōs manifestly proue. The apostles proceded in their coun∣sails, by consideration of goddes workes, & applienge of thē to the present cause, wheupō delibera∣tiō was to be  & determined as   cōmaūded. But the   their coūsails pro¦cede, according as their wisedō, & foolish b thinkes good & expe¦dient. And concludinge not onely without authoritie of gods scrip∣tures,
but also manifestly cōtrary o the same. And that I offer me moste clerely for to proue, if anye wold deny or alledg y• so it is not.Obiection But yet say thei, the apostles cō¦maunded the gentils to absteyn from certein thinges, wherof thei had no commaundement of God. Let vs heare the thinges▪ inhibi∣ted. Ye shall absteyne, sayeth the epistle sent to Antiochia, frō for∣nication. This is the cōmaunde∣ment of God. So although y• gē∣tils estemed it to be no syn, yet is it expresly forbidden in goddes lawe. But it foloweth frō thinges offerred vnto Idols, from stran∣geled and from bloudde, shall ye absteyn. If the causes mouing the apostles to forbid these thinges be well considered: it shalbe foūd that they hadde the expresse com∣maundement of Iesus Christe so to do,
The sprete of trueth & knowlege, workinge in the apostles with all abundance, shewed vnto them y• nothinge was more profitable & more mighte auaunce the glory of God, and encreace the churche of Christe, than that the Iewes and gentils shoulde vse together in fa¦miliaritie and dayly conuersatiō, that by mutuall companye loue might encreace. One thinge was easy to be espied, that the Iewes coulde not hastely be perswaded, that the eating of meates forbid∣den in Moyses lawe was no syn before God. For difficill it is to pull forth of the hart that, whiche is planted by goddes own word, So that the Iewes wolde haue abhorred the company of the gen∣tils, i they had eaten in their pre∣sence such meates, as were forbid∣den in the lawe. The apostles con¦sidered that the absteyning frome
suche thinges, was nothinge pre∣udiciall too the libertie of Chri∣stians. For with the time, & as the Iewes grew more strong, & were better instructed, they wolde be nothinge offended for suche mat∣ters. And therfore commaunded they the gentils too absteyn for a tyme. For that it was not a perpe∣tuall precept, declareth this day, when no man holdeth eatinge of suche thinges synne. But what precept had they so to do? The last and new precept geuen by Ie¦sus Christ to hys disciples: that euery one loue other as he hathe loued vs. May not Christiā loue commaunde that none of vs do in the sight of other, that which may offende or trouble the conscience of the infirme and weake? So witnesseth Paule, affirming that if a man eate with offence, he syn∣neth. And by vertue of this same
precepte the apostles forbid that the gentils shall eate thinges of∣ferred vnto Idols &c: that bearig some parte with the infirmitie of the Iewes, they might grow toge∣ther in mutuall amitie & Christiā loue. And these are the traditions of the▪ Seniours, whiche Paule commaunded to be obserued. I praye you what similitude haue oure papisticall lawes with thys precept of the apostles? But greatly it is to be maruay∣led that men do not aduerte: thatNota. the boe of the Lordes law, that is of all his ordinaūces, testamēt, promyse and exhibition thereof was sealed and confirmed in the dayes of the apostles, the effecte and contentes thereof promul∣gate and published, so that moste extreme unpietie it is, too make any alteration therein. Yea, and the wrath and fearfull maledictiō
of God is denunced to fall vpon all them, that dare attēpt to adde or diminishe any thynge in his re∣ligion, confirmed and proclamed by his owne voyce. O papistes, where shall ye hyde you frome the presence of the Lorde? ye haue peruerted his lawe, ye haue taken away his ordinaunces, ye haue placed vp iour own statutes in stead of his. Wo and dānation abideth you. Albeit that ye apostles had made Lawes, other then the expresse worde commaunded, what apper teyneth that to you? haue ye the spirite of trueth and knowledge in aboundaunce, as they hadde? was the churche of Christe lefte vnperfyte, after the Apostles dayes? Bringe your selfes to mynde, and be ashamed of youre vanitie.
For all men whose eyes Sathan hath not blynded, may espye that neither wysedome nor authoritie of man may change or set vp any thinge in y• religion of God, with∣out his owne expresse commande¦ment and woorde. And thus I thinke the first parte of my argu∣ment sufficiently proued: whiche is that all worshipping, honoring or seruice of God inuented by the brayne of man, in the religion of God withoute his owne expresse commaundement, is Idolatry. But in vayn will some thinke that all this laboure haue I tak: for no man of hole iudgement any parte of this wolde haue denyed: nor yet doeth it proue any thynge of mne entent. For the masse is not the inuention of man, but the very ordinance of God. Then des∣cende I to proue the masse to be the mere inuention of man, setvp
withoute all commaundement of God. And first of this name, Missa, whiche we call the mase, wold I aske at such as wolde defend that papisticall abomination, of what spirite is it inuented? That missa shall signifye a sacrifice for y• syn∣nes of the quicke and the dead? Of the spirit of God? or of y• spi∣rit of mā? or of what originall is it descended? Some will answer from the Hebrew dictiō, Missah, whiche after some doeth signifye an oblation or a gifte. Lyke as tri¦bute, whiche the inferior offereth or payeth to the superiour. In the Hebrue tunge I confesse my self ignorant, but haue (as God kno∣weth) feruent thirst to haue some entrāce therin, and so of the He∣brue dicion can not contend. But men of great iudgemēt in the same ūge say: y• no where in scriptures
Missah, betokeneth an oblation. But admitting that so it did, what shal they be able to proue there by? My questiō is if the spirite of god hath inuented & pronounced thys dictiō Missa, to signifie a sacrifice for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead: which if they be not able to preue, than must they nedes con∣fesse that it is of mans inuencion, and not of gods impositiō. I cold geue vnto them a more apperante cause and deracion of that dicti∣on Missa: but of y• name I am not greatly sol. Secondly I desire to be certified what they call their masse: Whether the hole actyon wyth all ceremonyes, vsed now of olde, or a part thereof? It wil not satisfie the hartes of all godly to say S. Iames and S. Peter celebrated the firste Masse in Ierusalem or Antioche. If it so wer, one of y• two celebrated first
and the other after: but neither of  two can be proued by scripture. Great meruayl it is, that so mani∣festly men shame not to lie. Peter and Iames (saye the papistes) ce∣lebrated the firste masse. But I shall proue that pope Sixtus was he first, that did institute y• Aul∣ters. elix the firste of that name did consecrate them, and the tem∣ples bothe. Bonifacius commaū∣dedPape qu missam in∣stituerunt. ye aulters to be couered with cleane clothes. Gregorius Mag∣nus commaunded the candels to be lighted at the Euangile: & dyd institute certeyn clothes. Pontia∣nus commaunded Cōfiteor to be sayde. And wherefore shoulde I troble you & myself both, in reci∣ting what euery Pope added? ye may for two pēce haue the know∣lege what euery pope added, vn∣til at last was cōpact & set vp the hole bodi of y• blasphemous Idol∣and
yete shame they not to say S. Peter sayed the firste masse, al∣though that many hundreth yea∣res after hym, no suche abomina∣ble ceremonies were inuented.Euasion. But they say: all thie ceremonies are not of the substance of ye masse but are added for good causes. What commaundement haue thei receyued to adde any thing to the ordinance of God, for any cause appearing to them? But let them certifye me what is the masse. The Canō, wil they answer, with the wordes of consecration. Who is a or of the Canon, can they precysely tell? Be well aduised before ye aunswer, lest by neglec∣ting yourself, ye be proued lyars. Will ye saye that ye apostles vsed your Canon▪ so ye haue affirmed in tymes past.Impro∣tion of the Canon. I the Canon descended from the apostles to y• popes, bolde &
maleparte impietie it had ben to haue added anye thynge thereto. For a Canon is a full and suffi∣cient rule: which in all partes and pointes is perfyte. But I will proue diuers Popes to haue ad∣ded their portions too this holye Canon. If they will deny, aduyse what added Sergius, what Leo, and what added Leo, and what added the two Alexanders? for I ay not abyde presently to recite all. But if they doubte their owne lawe shall certefye them. Secondly, the remembraunce of the names of suche men, who were not borne manye hundreth yeares after the dayes of y• Apo∣stles, declareth the Canon not to haue ben inuented manye yeares after the apostles. For who vsed to make mencion of a man in hys prayers before he be borne? And maysters memory is made in the
Canon of suche men and women, of whose holynes and godly lyfe credible histories make litle men∣tiō, which is an euidēt testimony that your holy Canon is vayne & of none effecte. And if any will take vpon him to defend the same: I will proue that therein is indi∣gest, barbarous, foolish cōgestiō of wordes: imperfection of sen∣tence, vngodly inuocations & dia∣bolicall coinrations. And this is that holy Canon, whose auctoritie ecelled all scriptures. O it was holy, it mighte not be spoken ynly as the rest but secretly it houth i to be whispered. That as not euil deuised, for if all mē d heard it, some wolde haue es∣ed the vanitie therof. But too the woordes of consecration, by whome haue thei that name, Ide sire to knowe? By Iesus Christe will they saye. But no where are
thei able to proue that the words, whiche he pronunced in his laste supper, called he or any of his apo¦stles after him woordes of conse∣cration. And so haue they recey∣ued ye name by authoritie of mā. Whiche are the woordes lette vs heare. Accipite et manducate ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim corpus meum: suiliter et calicē post quā coenauit dicens. &c. Let vs en∣quyre, if any thing be here added to Christes wordes, or if any this be changed or altered therein. Fyrste in whiche of the Euange∣listes are these woordes, Ex hoc omnes, spoken of the breade▪ Ie∣sus Christe dyd speake theym of the cuppe: but not of the bread. O papistes, ye haue madeNota. alteration, not so muche in wor∣des as in dede: and of the selfe ac∣tion cōmaūded to be vsed by him.
Ye permitted all to eat of ye bred, but of the cuppe ye reserued too you clypped in ye crounes & anoin ed vppon the fyngers. And in payn of your great anathematiza¦tion, of your great cursing, ye for∣bad that any layed presumed too drinke therof. But tel me papistes were the apostles be clypped and sinered as you be? Or wil ye then saye that the congregation of the Corinthiā were papist priests? I thinke ye will not. And yet they all drancke of the cuppe, lyke as they eate of the bread. Marke bre¦thren, that of Christes owne wor∣des they make alteration. But let vs procede. They say: Hoc est enim corpus meum. I praye them Newe where fynd they, enim. Is not this their owne inuention, & added of their owne brayn? O, here make they a greate matter, & here lyeth asecrete misterye and
hydde operation. For in fyue wor¦des conceyued the virgyn Mary, saye they, when she conceyued the sonne of God. What if she hadde spoken seuen, tenne, twenty wor∣des? Or what if she had not spo∣ken three: shoulde thereby the de∣terminate coūsail bene impeded? But o papisies, is God a glar? vseth he certeyn numbre of wor∣des, in performinge hys entent? But whereto are ye ascended▪ too be exalted in knowledge & wyse∣dome aboue Iesus Christe. He saieth only: Hoc est corpus meū. But ye, as thoughe there lacked some thinge necessary requisyte, haue added enim: sayeng, Hoc est enim corpus meum. So that your affirmation maketh all perfyte. Consider I exhorte you, beloued bret̄hren, if they haue not added here of their owne inuention too Christes woordes. And as they
adde, so steale they frome them▪ Christe sareth: oc est corpus meum quod pro vobis datur, or frāgitur: This is my body, which is geuen for you, or which is bro∣ken for you. These last woodes, wherin stande oure hole comfort, omitte they, and make no mention of them. And what can be iudged more beld or wicked, then to alter Christes wordes? To adde vnto them, and to dyminishe frō them? had it not ben conuenient, that af∣ter they hadde introduced Iesus Christe speakinge, that his owne wordes had ben recyted, nothing interchaunged, added nor dimy∣nished: Whiche seinge they haue not done, but haue done ye expresse contrary, as before is proued: In vayne I thinke it is further to laboure to proue the reste of thys abominable action, to be inuented and deuised by the foolish brayne
of man, and so can it not be denied to be Idolatry. It shall not profit them to saye the Epistle si Euan∣gely is in the masse: where unto is nothing added. What shall they proue therby? For the Epistle & Euangely, as them selfes do con∣fesse are not of the substance of y• masse. And although they were, it dyd nothinge excuse the rest of that Idolatrye. For the deuil may speake ye wordes of God and hys false prophetes also: & yet therby are they neither better nor more holy. The Epistle and Euangely are goddes woordes, I confesse, but there are they spoken for no edificatiō of the people: but for to be a cloke vnto ye body of y• mische nous Idolatry. All the action is abominable, because it is the inuē¦tion of man, & so a few or certeyn good wordes cā not sanctify that hole masse & body of abominatiō.
But what if I shall admitte to the papises: that the hole action of the masse were the institution and very ordinounce of God, and neuer one iote of mans inuention therein? I admitte it be the ordi∣naunce of God as it is not) yet will I proue it abomination be∣fore God. ¶ The seconde syllogisme. All honouringe or seruice of God, whereunto is added a wicked opinion: is abomina∣tion. Vnto the masse is added a wicked opinion. Therfore it is abomination. The  part, I thinke, no godly man . And if any wolde, I as e what made the self same sacrifice, institute and ordey¦ned to be vsed by goddes expresse commaundement, odiuse & abo∣minable in his sight. As it is writ¦ten, bring vnto me no more youre
vayne sacrifices, your burnt offe∣ringes is abomination, your new moones, sabboths & conuentiōs, I maye not abyde youre solemne feastes, I hate thē frō ye hart. AndEsay. 66. also, who seyeth an oxe in sacri∣fice, kylleth a man: that is, doeth me no lesse dishonour, than if he killed a mā. Who slayeth a shepe sayeth he, choketh a dogge. Who brought meat offringes vnto me, doeth offer swynes bloud. These two beastes, the dogge & swyne, were abominable to be offered in sacrifice, the one for the cruelty, the other for fylthines. But o prie¦stes, your sacrifices are mixed wt the bloudde of dogges & swyne: while that on the one part moste cruelly ye do persecute the profes¦sors of Christes worde: vpon the other parte your selfs lyue moste filthily. The prophete procedeth: who maketh a memorial of encēse
prayseth the thinge that is vayne.Amos. 5. Amos. I hate and detest your so∣lemne feastes, I will not accepte youre encense: your burnt offrin∣ges and meate offeringes are not thankefull before me. And whye all this: because saieth ye prophete Esaye, they haue chosen these inEsai. 66. their owne wayes, and their har∣tes haue delyted in their abomina¦tions. And playn it is that their¦fore sayd sacrifices were commaū¦ded to be done by God▪ and were not inuented, no not one iote ther∣of, by mans wysedom. Reade the bokes of Moyses, Exodus & Le∣uiticus, and thou shalte perceyue them to be very commaundemen∣tes of God, and yet sayeth y• Pro∣phete, they haue chosen theym in their owne wayes. Wherby ye pro¦phet ment and vnderstode, yt they had added vnto them an opinion, whiche made them to be abomina¦ble
before God. This opiniō was as in the same prophet and diuers others maye be espied: That by workinge of the externall worke, they mighte purchase the fauoure of God, & make satisfaction for their sinnes bi the same sacrifices. And that I collecte of Ieremye sayeng: ye beleue false woordes,Iere. 7. whiche shall not profit you. For when ye haue stolen, murthered, committed adultery, and periury &c. Then ye come and stād before me in this hous, whiche hath my name geuen vnto it, and ye say: we are deliuered or absolued, al∣beit we haue done all these abomi¦nations. Thei thought and verely beleued their synnes to haue ben remitted by vertue of their sacri∣fice offered. But Esay asketh ofEsay. 55. them, why spēd ye siluer for that, which is not sure: & cōsume labor, for that, which doeth not sacyat?
Ye do hyde youre selfe with lea∣singes (but they estemed them to haue ben verites) & ye make a bād or couenāt with death, but it shall not stāde, for when destructiō cō∣meth, it shall ouerwhelme you. Their fals prophetes had taughtEsai. 18. them to cry peace peace, when yet there was no peace in their con∣science: for they which dyd eate ye synne of the people (as oure per∣uers priestes haue long done) forOse. 7. Iere. 2. the more wicked men were, the more desyre they had of ye masse: thinking by vertue therof all was purged. The pestilent priestes of Moyses law, as witnessed ye pro∣phetes, caused ye people to beleue, that by oblation of the sacrifice they were iust and innocente, and durst desyre, for suche offerings, plague and the furor of God to be remoued. But it is aunswered vnto them by y• prophet Micheas:
shall I come in his presence with burnt offeringes, and yeare olde ambes? or doeth a thousand ram∣mes please him? or tenne thousād boyt of oyle? Shall I geue my fyrst sonne for expiation of myne iniquitie? Or ye frute of my wōbe a synne offeringe for my soule? Here the prophete plainly witnes¦seth that no externall worke, how excellēt that euer it be, doth purge or make satisfaction for syn. And so of the precedentes it is playn, that a wicked opinion, added too the very worke, sacrifice or cere∣mony, commaunded to be done & vsed by God, maketh it abomina¦tion and Idolatry. For IdolatryNota. is not onely too worship ye thinge, whiche is not God, but also too truste or leane vnto that thing, whiche is not God, and hath not in hytselfe all sufficiencye: and therfore Paule calleth couetouse
men Idolatrors: because their cō∣fidence & trust is in their rydyes. Muche more wolde he call hym an Idolatror, whose hart beleueth remission of synnes by a vayne worke, done by him selfe or by an other in his name. But now let vs heare, if vnto the masse be ioyned a wicked opinion. It hath ben holden in commonOpinion holden of the masse. opinion. It plainlye hath ben taught, by law it is decreed, and in the wordes of the masse it is ex¦pressed: that the masse is a sacri∣fice and oblation for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead. So yt re∣mission of synnes vndoubtedlye was beleued by that same action and worke, presentlye done by the priest. Sufficient it were for me, by the playn woordes of the fore∣said prophetes here for to cōclude it abominatiō: seing they playnly shew y• remissiō of synnes cōmeth
onely of the mere mercy of God, without all deseruinge of vs or of our worke, proceding of our selfs s Esaye writteth sayenge, I am e, whiche remoueth thyne ini∣quitie, & that for myne own sake. But if I shall proue this foresayd opinion, whiche hath ben holden of the masse to be fals, deceyuable and vayne, and that it is no sacri∣fice for synne, shall then eyther cō∣suetude, long processe of tyme, or multitude of papisticall patrons defend that it is not abominatiō and Idolatrye? And firste I aske who offereth this sacrifice, and what is offered? The priest (sayeth ye papistes) offreth Iesus Christe vnto the father. Than demaunde I, if a man can offre vnto God a more precious thing than hym self? And it appeareth that not.
For Paule commaundeth that we offre vnto God a holy, liuely and reasonable sacrifice, which he cal∣leth oure owne bodyes. And Ie∣sus Christ, hauing nothinge more preciouse then hym self, dyd offer vp hym self. If Paule had knowē any other sacrifice, after the death of Iesus Christ (that is, in all the tyme of the new testamente) more acceptable vnto God, then ye mor∣tification of oure owne bodyes, wold he not aduertised vstherof?Nota. If there was any other sacrifice, and he dyd not know therof: then led not ye spirit hī in to all veritie, whiche to saye were blasphemy. If he knew it, and yet dyd not ad∣uertyse vs therof: than dyd he not the dutie and office of a trew prea¦cher: and that to affirme were like imptie. If any might haue offe∣red Iesus Christe, but hym selfe onely: In vayn it had ben to hym
to haue suffered so cruell torment in hys owne person, by oblatiō of hym self. And so to affirme that a mortall man may offer him, who is immortall God: In myne opi∣nion is malepart proudnes. But let vs heare more: Paule saieth byHebre. 10. one oblation hath he made perfyt for euer them, whiche are sancti∣fyed. And also remissiō of synnes once gotten there resteth no more sacrifice. They will not auoyde Paules wordes, althought they saye Paule speaketh of the Leui∣ticall sacrifice. No papistes, he exciudeth all manner of sacrifice, sayeng: Nulla amplius rest at ob∣latio, no more sacrifice resteth. And that testifieth Iesus Christ hym self vpon the Crosse: sayeng, Consuaum est: that is, what euer is requyred, for pacifyenge my fathers wrath, iustly moued against synne: what euer is neces∣sary
for reconciliaciō of mankynd to the fauoure of my eternall fa∣ther: and what euer the purgation of the synnes of the hole worlde requyred, is now complete & en∣ded: so that no further sacrifice re∣steth for synne. Heare ye papis∣tes, two witnes speake agaynste you. How can ye denye the opi∣nion of your masse to be fals and vayn? Ye say it is a sacrifice for syn: but Paule and Iesus Christe say the onely death of Christ was sacrifice sufficient for synne, and after it resteth none other sacrifice speake, or els ye are lyke to be cō∣demned. I knowe ye will saye:Aunswere of papists. it is none other sacrifice, but the selfe same, saue that it is iterated and renewed. But the wordes of Paule byndContra. you more strayte, then that so ye may escape, for in his hole dispu∣tation contendeth he not onelye,
that there is none other sacrificeNota. for synne, but also that the selfe same sacrifice once offered is suf∣ficient, and neuer maye bee offer∣red agayne. For otherwyse of no greater price, value nor estimation, shoulde the death of Christe be, then ye death of those beastes, whiche were offered vn∣der the lawe: whiche are proued to be of none effect, nor strength, because it behoued them often ty∣mes to be iterate. The apostle by comparing Ie∣sus Christe to the Leuitical prie∣stes, and hys sacrifice vnto theirs maketh the matter playne, that Christ might be offered but once. Fyrst the Leuitical priestes were mortall, and therefore it behoued them to haue successours. But Christe is an eternall priest, and therefore is alone,
and nedeth no successour. The Le¦uiticall priestes offered the bloud of beastes: but Iesus Christe of∣fered hys owne body and bloud. The Leuiticall priestes, for impo¦tency of their sacrifice, did iterate the same. But the sacrifice of Ie∣sus Christe, hauinge in itselfe all perfecti nedeth not to be iterate. Yea, to affirme that it oughte (or maye) be iterate, is extreme blas∣phemy. For that were too impute imperfectiō thereupō, cōtrary to ye hole religion, and the playn wor∣des of Paule, sayeng: such is ourHebre. 7. hye priest, holy, iust, ipolute, sepe¦ra from synners, and hyer then the heauens: to whom it is not ne∣cessary euery daye to offer, as did th stes, first offer for their o synnes, and then for ye syn∣nes of the people. For y• he hathe done once, when he offered hym selfe.
What wordes cā be more plain▪ Here Paule sheweth all causes, wherefore it nedeth not Christ to be offered agayn. And wolde con¦clude that he maye not be offered agayn. Yet say they, it repugneth no∣thingPapistes. that we offerre Christe: so that he offerre nothym self. The text sayeth playnly as be∣foreAunswere▪ is shewed, that Christe onely might offerre hym self: which sa∣crifice is sufficiēt, & neuer may be offered agayn. For if it had beho∣ued hym to haue ben oftener offe∣red then once, he shoulde haue suf¦fered often tymes, from the begin¦ninge of the world. But once hathHeb. 9. he appeared for the away takinge of synne, offering hym self. ThatHebr. 10. is, of hys own body once slayne, now lyuing, and may suffre death no more. For by hys onely one sa∣crifice hath he made vs perfyte &
sanctifyed for euer. Here is aun∣swered to that obiectiō, that some obiecte: Men euery day fyn, ther∣fore it is necessary, that euery day be sacrifice made for synne. PaulNota. sayeth by one sacrifice hath he cō∣sūmat vs for euer. For other wais hys death were not the onely and sufficient sacrifice for our synnes: which to affirme, were blasphema¦tion. And so there resteth of oure hole redemption nothing but his second cūming, whiche shalbe to iudgemēt. Where we, depending vppon hym, shall receyue glorye and honour: but hys ennemyes shalbe made a footestoole too hys fete. Not that I meane, that hys death oughte not to be prea∣ched, and the remembraunce ther∣of extolled, and praysed in the right ministration of his supper:
but none of these two be sacrifice for synne. What wil ye aunswere to this,Question. whiche Paul produceth against youre masse? He plainly sayeth, there is no sacrifice for synne, but Christes death onelye &c. And that neither may ye offer him, norPapistes aduerte. Euasion. yet that he maye offer hym selfe any more. Ye will saye it is a memoriall sacrifice, vnder the whiche Iesus Christe is offered vntoo the pre∣sence of God the father by thee churche, vnder the apperaunce of breadde and wyne for remission of synnes. I aunswere with Paule: Ap∣paret nunc in conspectu Dei pro nobis, he appeareth nowe in the presence of God for vs: so that it is not requisyte that anye manne offerre or represente hym too the father.
For that he doeth hym selfe, ma∣kyng continual intercessiō for vs. But let vs consider this doctrine more depely. The church, say thei, offered Iesus Christ vnto God y• father for a memoriall sacrifice, or in a memoriall sacrifice. Is there any obliuiō or forgetfulnes fallen in God the father? Hath he forgotten the death and passiō of Iesus Christ, so that he nedeth to be brought in memory thereof, by any mortall man: Beholde bre¦thern, howe that impetie disclo∣seth and declareth it selfe. Can there be any greater blasphemye, than for too saye God the father hath forgotten y• benefites, which he gaue to mankynd in hys onely sonne Iesus? And who that euer will saye, that they offer any me∣moriall sacrifice or remembraūce therof vnto God: Doeth plainly say that God hath forgotten thē.
For otherwyse, what nedeth a re∣presentation or remembraunce? Aduerte papistes, and consider how Sathan hath blynded you. Ye do manifestlye lye, and do not espy the same, ye do blasphem God at euery woorde, and can ye not repent. They saye it is sacrifi∣cium.Papistes. Speake more: for a memo∣riall sacrifice it can not be. They saye, it is sacrificiū appli¦catorium. A sacrifice, whereby they may and do applye the meri∣tes of Christes passion vnto syn∣ners. They will be layars too of plaisters, but I feare the wounde be not well ryped, and therfore y• the playster be vnprofitable. Ye say, ye maye applye the merytes of Christes passion, to whome ye list▪ This is proudly spokē. Then may ye make peace with God at youre pleasure. But the contrarye speaketh he in these wordes: whoEsai. 27.
may make. Here God saieth ye, as none mai moue his wrath against his chosē (& here of ought ye to re∣ioyce brethren, the Pope nor hys priestes, nor bishoppes, what so∣euer may not cause God to be an∣gry agaynst you, albeit they curse you, with crosse, belle and candel) so maye no man compelle hym too loue nor receyue in fauoure, but whome it pleaseth hys infynyte goodnes. Moyses, I confesse, prayed for the people, when God was displeased with them. But he speaketh not so proudly as you do. But either desyreth God to re¦mit ye offence of ye people, or els to destroi him to gether Wt thē, I fear yt your loue be not so feruēt, he ob∣teyned his petition of God. But wil ye say so it was determinate before in the counsayll of God? Aduyse you well. The nature of God is to be fre & thrall vnto no∣thinge.
For although he is boūd & obliged to fulfill all yt his worde promitteth to ye faithful beleuers, yet is yt neither subiectiō nor thral dome: for frelye he made his pro∣mis, & frely he doeth fulfill the same. I desyre to be certified, where God made his promisse vntoo you papiste priestes: that ye should haue power to appli (as ye speake) the merites of Christes passion, to all & sondry, who tolde or nūbred money to you for yt pur∣pose. Taketh God any part of the profitte that ye receyue? Alas, I haue cōpassion vpō your vanitie: but more vpon ye symple people, yt hath ben deceyued by you & your fals doctrine. Are ye better heard with god then Samuel was? He prayed for kyng Saule, and that moste feruētly, & yet obteined not his petitiō, nor mighte not applye any merites or holines vnto him.
And it is sayde to Ieremy, pray thou not for this people, for my hart is not to wardes it: ne though Moyses and Helyas should prayIere. 14. for them, yet wolde I not heare them: for they loue to go wronge, and do not absteyn fro iniquitie: albeit they fast and cry, yet wil I not heare them. And althoughe they offre burnte sacrifice, I take no pleasure in it: & therfore praye not for this people, nor yet make any intercessiō for them, for I wil not heare the. What say ye to this wordes papistes: the prophete is forbidden too praye. For God sayeth: he neither will heare hym nor yet the people, he will accept none of their sacrifices, & that be∣cause the people manifestly rebel∣led agaynst God, reioyced in ini∣quitie, committed Idolatrye and abomination. And he manifestly sheweth yt nothing maye appease
hym, but true repentance and con¦uet sion agayn vnto God. O priestes, haeth there not as great iniquitie abounded in your dayes, as euer dyd from ye begin∣ninge: Haue ye not ben entysars and leaders of the people too all Idolatrye: Yea, hath not the mis∣cheuous example of youre abomi∣nable lyues, prouoked thousands vnto iniquitie: And yet do ye say that ye maye apply the merites of Christes passion, to whom ye list. Heare ye not that God neuer wil accept prayers nor sacrifice, why∣lest trew repentaunce were foūd? Of that ye were dumme, and al∣wayes kept silence. Your clamor and cryēg was, come, come to the masse, bye with money, substāce & possessions, remission of your sin∣nes. We haue the merites of Chri∣stes passion, we maye offer Iesus Christ vnto the father, whome he
must nedes receyue for an accep∣table sacrifice and satisfaction of all your synnes. Thinke not bre∣thren that I alledge anye thinge vpon them, which they them selfs do not speake: as their owne lawe and masse shall testifye in the be∣ginninge of the Canō. The proud priest lifting vp his eyes, as that he had God euen alwayes boūd to his commaundemente sayeth: we beseche the moste merciful fa¦ther, by Iesus Christ oure Lord: that thou receyue and blesse thys vntsted sacrifice (vnsauerye sa∣crifice truely he might haue said) whiche we offre to the for thyne vniuersall churche. O proude and peruersse papist prelates and priestes, who gaue you that authoritie? Is it not expressely forbidden by the apostle Paule, yt any man should
vsurpe the honor too make sacri∣fice: excepte he be called by God as was Aaron? Haue ye the same commaundemente, whiche was geuen vnto Aaron▪ hys sacrifices are abrogated by Christe. Let vs heare where ye are commaun∣ded to make sacrifice? Serche the scriptures, but serche theym with iudgement. It wil not be, hoc facite, for that is spoken of ea∣tinge, drinkinge, and thankesge∣uing, and not of sacrifice making. Nor yet wil the order of Melchi sedeck, nor the text of Malachias proue you priestes to make sacri∣fice. Aduise with other that haue more appearaunce, to proue your entent. For if these be wel pon∣dered, the weight of them wil de∣presse the proudnes of youre pa∣pisticall priesthode. Now will I collect shortly all
that is sayde for probation that ye masse is no sacrifice for synne. ¶ Aduert. The newe testament is eternal:Esai. 9. Iere. 31. that is once made, cā neuer be dis∣solued, and therefore the cloudde wherwith this testament is cōfir¦med is eternall: for it is the bloud of the eternal sonne of God: onely the bloud of Christ taketh awaye oure synnes. For it is he alone yt taketh away ye synnes of ye world. And who by hys owne bloudde,Collos. 1. Nota. hath reconcyled all. For if other∣wayes synne might haue ben takē awaye, then Christe had dyed in vayne. And if full remission stode not in hym alone, then they yt eate him yet hungered, and they that dranke hym yet thirsted. And yt were contrarye too hys owne woordes. The bloudde of Christe is onceIoan. 6. offered, and is sufficient. For it is
the eternall bloude of the eternall sonne of God, and by hys owne bloud hath he once entered in too the holy place. Therfore the bloude of Christ once offered remayneth for euer, for purgation of all synnes, and so resteth then no sacrifice in the masse. Aduert these reasons precedēt and geue place to the veritie. For while ye scriptures of God shalbe holden of authoritie: neuer are ye able to resolue these argumentes. Consider now brethren, if the opinion of the masse be not vayn, false and deceyuable. Caused the not you to beleue yt it was a sacri¦fice, whereby remission of synnes was obteyned? And ye maye plainly perceyue that no sacrifice there is, nor at any tyme was for synnes: but the deathe of Iesus Christe onely. For the sacrifices
of the olde lawe were onely figu∣res of that very & trewe sacrifice, once offered by Iesus Christ: and in them was commemoration of synnes made: but neither was re∣mission obteyned, nor purgation made by any such sacrifice. What will ye do rite priestes? there esteth no sacrifice to bee offered for synn by you, nor by any mor∣tall man. These are dolorouse tydinges vnto your hartes: and no meruel, for by that vayn opinion, that the masse was a sacrifice for synne, haue ye mosre quietly rested into that floude Euphrates, that is in al worldly felicitie, which flowed vnto you as a continuall floude. But the masse knowen not onely to be no sacrifice but also too bee Idolatrye, the waters appeare to drye vp. And it is lie that he lack some lyquor, to refresh your tūgs,
beyng cruciat with drougthe and heat intollerable. Wolde ye heare glad tidinges? what, if that I shoulde permytte vnto you (as one willing to playe the good fellowe, and not too bee sifnecked) that the masse were a sacrifice for synne, & that ye did offre Iesus Christ for syn, wolde ye be contente that this were per∣mitted vnto you? I think ye wold for therefore haue ye longe con∣tended. Then lette vs consider what shoulde subsequently folow thereupon. A sacrifice for synne was ne∣uer perfyte, vntyll that the beaste offred was kylled. If in youre masse ye offre Iesus Christe for synne: then necessarelye in youre masse muste ye nedes kyll Iesus Christe. Do not esteme beloued brethrē
these woordes shortlye spoken to be vayne or of no small effecte. They are collected of the very grounde of scriptures. For they plainly testify that Christe to be offered, Christ to suffre, & Christ to shedde hys bloudde or dye, are all one thinge. Paule in the epistle to the Hebrues sayeth: he appea∣reth nowe in the presence of God for vs, not to offre hym self often tymes for vs, for otherwyse it be∣houed hym to haue suffred often∣tymes, from the beginning of the worlde. Marke well that Paule maketh, to offre and suffre, bothe one thynge. And therefore pro∣eth he that Christe made but one sacrifice, because he once did suf∣fre the death. Iesus Christ saieth, as is written in Mathew, this is my bloude of the new testament, whiche shalbe shedde for you and for many in remission of synnes.
Marke that remission of synne is attributed too the sheddinge of Christes bloudde. And Paule saieth, Christ is dead for our syn∣nes. And in an other place, by one oblation or sacrifice hath he made vs persyte foreuer. Consider diligently, that remis¦sion of synnes is attributed, some tyme to the sheddyng of Christes bloudde, some tyme to hys death, and some tyme too the hole sacri∣fice, whiche he made in suffering all payn. And why this? whether if there be diuers manners to ob∣teyn remission of synnes? o: but because euer one of these thre necessarily foloweth other: remis∣sion of synnes is commonly ascri∣bed to any of them. For where so that euer Christe is offred, there is hys bloude shedde, & his death subsequently foloweth. And so papistes, if ye offre Christe in sa∣crifice
for synne, ye shedde hys bloud, and thus newly kylhym. Aduerte, too what fyne youre owne desyre shal bring you, euen to be kyllers of Iesus Christ. Ye will saye, ye neuer preten∣ded such abomination. I dispute not what ye entended: but onelye I shewe what absurdite doeth fo∣lowe vpon your owne doctrine. For necessarelye, if ye do offre Christe for synne, as ye confesse, and youre lawe doeth teache, ye cruelly shedde hys bloudde, & fy∣nally do kyll hym. But nowe will I releaue you of this anguish: do∣lorouse it were daily to cōmit mā slaughter, & often times to crucify the king of glory: be not affrayed, ye do it not. For Iesus Christe may suffre no more, shed his blod no more, nor dye no more. For y• he hath dyed, he so dyed for syn, & that once; and now he lyueth, and
death maye not preuayle against hym. And so do ye not kyl Christ, for no power ye haue too doe the∣same. Onely ye haue deceyued the people: causinge them beleue, that ye offred Iesus Christe in sacri∣fice for syn in your masse: whiche is fryuole and fals. For Christe maye not bee offerred, because he maye not dye. I moste gentellye exhorte all desyringe too obiecte agaynste these precedentes: ripely too con∣sider the grounde thereof, whiche standeth not vppon the opinion of man, but vppon the infallible woorde of God. And to resume euery parte of these argumentes, and ley them too the hole bodye of goddes scriptures. And then I doubte not, but all men, whose senses the princes of darcenes, and of this worlde hath not execated, shall confesse
with me, that in the masse can bee no sacrifice for synne. And yet too the great blasphemye of Christes death and open denyall of his pas¦sion, hath it ben affirmed, taughte and beleued, that the masse was a sacrifice for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead. Whiche opi∣niō is moste false, vayn & wicked. And so I thinke, the masse too be abomination and Idolatrye, no man of indifferente iudgemente will denye.☞ Lette no man entend to excuse the masse with the pretext of the Lordes supper. For nowe shortly wil I proue that therwith it hath no congruence, but is expresse cō∣trarye to it: and hath taken the re∣membraunce of the some oute of mynde. And further it is blasphe∣mous to y• death of Iesus Christ. Fyrst they are contrary in institu∣tion, for the Lordes supper was
institute too be a perpetuall me∣mory of those benefites, whyche we haue receiued by Iesus Christ and by hys death. And firste we should call to mynd in what estate we stoode in the loynes of Adā: when that we all blasphemed the maiestie of God in hys face. Secondly that hys owne incō∣prehensible goodnes moued hym to loue vs moste wretched & my∣serable, yea, moste wicked & blas∣phemous: and loue moste perfyte compelled hym to shewe mercy. And mercy pronunced the sentēce whiche was that his onely sonne shoulde paye the price of oure re∣demption. Whiche thinge, beinge righteously called to memorye in the present action of the soupper, coulde not but moue vs to vnfey¦ned thankesgeuinge vnto God ye father, and to hys onely sonne Ie¦sus, who had restored vs agayne
to libertie and lyfe. And this is it which Paule cōmandeth, sayeng: as ofte, as ye shall eate of thys bread and dryncke af this cup, ye shall declare the Lordes deathe tyll he come: that is, ye shal laude, magnify and extolle the lyberall fyndnes of God the father, and the infinite benefytes, whiche ye haue receyued by Christes death. But the masse is instituted, as ye playn woordes thereof, and their owne lawes do witnesse, too be a sacrifice for the synnes of ye quicke and the dead. For doinge of the whiche sacrifice, God is bounde not onely to remitte oure synnes, but also to geue vnto vs what euer we will aske, & that shal testifye di¦uers masses, celebrated for diuers causes. Some for peace, some in time of warre, some for rain, some for fayre wether, yea, and (alas my hart abhorreth suche abomi∣nation)
some for syckenesse of bes∣tyall. They will saye, they seuerally take prayers for obteyning suche thinges. And that is all, whiche I desyre they say: for the obtayning of suche vayne tryfles, destinate they their hole purpose, & so pro∣phane the sacrament of Chrystes bodye and bloudde (if that were any sacramente, whiche they abu∣sed so) whiche shoulde neuer bee vsed, but in memorye of Christes death. Then shoulde it not be vsed to praye, that the touthe ache bee ta∣ken awaye frome vs, that oure Oxen shoulde not take the lowing yll, oure Horse the spauen or far∣sye, and of all manner diseases for our cattel. Yea what was it wher∣fore ye wolde not saye masse, per∣uersed priestes? But let vs heare more.
The supper of the Lord is the yfte of Iesus Christe, in whiche we should laude the infinite mer∣cye of God. The masse is a sacrifice, which we offer vnto God: for doinge whereof we alledge God shoulde loue and commend vs. In the supper of the Lord, cō∣fesse we oure selfs redemed from synne, by the death and bloude of Iesus Christe onely. In the masse craue we remissiō of synnes: yea, and whatsoeuer thyng we lifte, by working of that same worke, whiche we presently do oure selfe. And here in is the masse blas∣phemous vnto Christe and hys passiō. For in so farre as it offreth or promitteth remissiō of synnes: it imputeth imperfection, vppon Christe and hys sacrifice: affyr∣minge that all sinnes were not re∣mitted
by hys deathe: but that a great parte are reserued to be pur¦ged by vertue and the value of ye masse. And also it is iniurius vnto Christe: and not onely speakinge moste falsly of hym, but also vsur pynge too itselfe, that whiche is proper to hym alone. For he affirmeth that he alone hath, by hys owne death, purged the synnes of the hole world: and that no parte resteth to be clensed by any other meanes. But ye masse syngeth an other song, whiche is, that euery day by that oblatiō of∣fred by the priestes is synne pur∣ged, and remission obteyned. Cō∣sider papistes, what honor youre masse geueth vnto Christe. Laste, in the supper of y• Lord▪ we graunt our selfes eternal deb∣tours to God, & vnable any waye to make satisfactiō for his infinite benifits, which we haue receiued.
But in the masse alledge we, God too be a debtour vnto vs for oblation of that sacrifice, whiche we there presently offre, and dare affirme y• we there make satisfac∣tion by doyng thereof, for the sin∣nes of our self and of others. If these precedentes be not cō∣trary, let men iudge with indiffe∣rency. They differre in vse, for in the Lordes soupper the minister and the congregation sat bothe at one table, no difference betwixte them in preminence nor habyte, as witnesseth Iesus Christe wyth hys disciples, and the practyse of the apostles after hys death. But in the papisticall masse, y• priestes (so wil thei be styled) are placed by them selfe at an aultar, and I wolde aske of the authori∣tie thereof, and what scripture cō∣maunderh so to be done? They must be cladde in a seueral habyt,
whereof no mention is made in the newe testament. It will not exeuse them to say, Paule commā∣dethQuestion. all too be done with order, & decently. Dare they be so bolde, as to affyrme that the soupper of Iesus Christ was done withoute order and vndecently, wherein were seene no suche disaguysed vestimentes? Or will they sette vp too vs a∣gayne the Leuiticall priesthode? Shoulde not all be taught by the playn worde? Prelates or Priestes, I aske one question, ye wolde bee lyke too the vestymentes of Aaron in all thinges. Aharon had affixed vnto hys garmentes certeyn belles, which were commaunded too rynge and to make sounde, as ofte as he was cladde therewith.
But priestes, youre belles lacke unges, they rynge not, they soād of nothinge but of the earth▪ No∣thinge vnderstandeth the people of all your ceremonies. Feare ye not the wrathe of God? it was cō¦maunded Aharon, that the sound of hys belles shoulde bee hearde: that he dyed not. ¶ Aduyse herewith, for thys matter apperteyneth vnto you. IN the supper of the Lorde all were equally participante: the bread beynge broken, & the cup beynge distributed amongest all, accordinge to hys commandemēt. In the papisticall masse, the con∣gregation etteth nothing, except the beholdinge of your duckings, noddinges, crossinges, turninge, rplistinge, which all are nothing but a diabolicall prophanatiō of Christes supper. Now ducke, crosse, and nodde,
s ye lyste: they are but your own inuentiōs. And finally brether, ye got nothinge, but gased & behelde while that one did eate & drynke all. It shall not excuse you to saye the congregation is participante spiritually. O wicked antichri∣stes, sayeth not Iesus Christ: Eat of this, and drynke of this all, do this in remembrāce of me? Christ commaūdeth not that one should gase vpon it, bowe, ducke, & becke thereto: but that we shoulde eate, and dryncke therof oure selfs: and not that we should behold others do thesame. Oneles we wold con¦fesse the death of Iesus Christ to apperteyn nothing to vs. For when I eate & drynke at that table, I openlye confesse the frute and vertue of Christs body, of hys bloude and passion too ap∣perteyn to my selfe: and that I am
a membre of his misticall body, & that God the father is appeased with me, not withstandinge my first corruptiō & presēt infirmitie. Iudge brethren what comfort hath this taken frō vs, which wil that the sight thereof shalbe suffi∣cient? I wold aske first, if y• sight of corporal meat or drynke doeth fede & norish the bodye? I thinke they wil say nay. And I affirme y• no more profit receiueth the soule in beholding an other eat & drinke the Lordes very soupper (as for their Idolatry, it is alway dāna∣ble) thā ye body doeth in beholdig an other eate & dryncke, & thou re∣ceyuinge no part therof. But now briefly let this cōtra∣tie be collected. In the Lordes soupper are offerred thankes for the benefites, whiche we haue re∣ceyued of God. In the masse wil the papist compell God to graūt▪
all that he asketh of hym, by ver∣tue of that sacrifice. And so alled∣geth that God should referre thā∣kes vnto him, that doeth masse. In the soupper of the Lorde, ye ac∣tors humbly dyd confesse thē self redemed only by Christes bloud, whiche once was shedde. In the masse the prieste vanted hym selfe to make a sacrifice for ye synnes of the quicke & the dead. In the Lordes soupper, all ye partakers of that table graunted and cōfessed them selfs debtours vnto God, vnable to referre than∣kes for the benefites, whiche wee had receyued of hys liberalitie. In ye papistical masse alledgeth the priest ye God is a debtour too hym, & vnto all thē, for whome he maketh ye sacrifice. For he doth af∣firme remissiō of synnes to be ob∣teyned therby: & in that ye masse is blasphemous to Christes death▪
In the Lordes supper, all sat at one table, no differēce in habyt nor vestiment betwene the mini∣ster and the congregation. In the papistical masse the prie¦stes are placed bi them selfs at an aultare (as they call it) & are clad in disaguysed garmentes. In the Lordes supper fynally all did eate of one bread, & drincke of one cuppe. But in the mischeuous masse one  did eate and dryncke all. Consider now beloued brethrē, what hath the fruytes of ye masse ben, euen in her greatest puritie: the masse is nothinge but the inuē¦tion of man, set vp without al au∣thoritie of goddes worde, for ho∣noringe of God: and therfore it is Idolatry. Vnto it is added a vain false, deceyuable and moste wic∣ked opiniō: that is, that by it is ob¦teyned remission of synnes, and
therfore it is abomination before God. It is contrarious vnto the supper of Iesus Christ, and hath taken awaye bothe the righte vse and remembraunce therof: & ther∣fore it is blasphemous to Christes death. Maynteyn or defend the papi∣sticall masse who so lifte: this ho∣nor and seruice vnto God did all, whiche vsed the same. And here I speake no of the moste abomina∣ble abuses, as of byeng & sellinge vsed nowe of late by the mische∣uous priestes: but of the masse in her moste hye degre, and most ho¦est ▪ yea, euen of ye great Gaudeamus songe or sayde by Gregory the greate, as papistes do call hym. Let no man thinke, that because I am in the realme of Englande, that therfore so boldely I speake agaynst this abomination: naye,
God hath taken that suspiciō frō me. For the body lyenge in moste pafull bond amongest y• mid∣des of cruell tyranes, hys mercy and goodes prouided that y• hād should wryte and beare witnes to the confession of the hart, more a∣bound antly than euer yet the tūg spoke. And here I call my God to re∣corde, that neither profitte too my self, haued of any person or per∣sons, nor affection or fauour, that☞ I beare towardes anye pryuate man, causeth me this dai to speake as ye haue hearde: but onely the obedience which I owe vnto god in ministration, shewinge of hys worde, & the common loue, which I beare to your saluation. For so odious and abominable I knowe he masse to be in goddes presece, that onles ye decline frō the same: to lyfe can ye neuer atteyn.
And therfore brethren, flye frō☜ that Idolatry rather, then frome the present death. Here wolde I haue spoken of the diuersitie of sacrifice, but ney∣ther doeth tyme, nor the wicked∣nesse of myne owne flesh, permit that so I do: I will ye obserue y• where I saye there resteth no sa∣crifice, nor yet is there anye prie∣stes, that I meane that there res∣teth no sacrifice too be offred for synne, nor yet is there any priests hauynge power to offre such ob∣lations. Otherwise I do knowe that all true Christiās are kynges and priestes, and doe dayly offre vnto God a sacrifice moste accep∣table, the mortification of their af¦fections: as Paule commaunded the Romayns. But here of may not I remayne too speake pre∣sently.
Suche doctrine, as was taught in youre audience vpon Sonday before noon: I wil proue, as opor¦tunitie shall permitte, by goddes scriptures, not only vnprofitable: but also erroneous and deceyua∣ble. But firste, accordinge too my promes, I will seude vnto the tea¦cher the extracte therof, to adde or diminishe, as by hys wysedome shalbe thought moste expediente▪ For God knoweth, my mynde is not captoush too tryppe men in wordes. But my onely desyre, beynge that ye my audience bee instructe in the veritie: where frō dissenteth some doctrine taughte you (if truelye I haue collected) moueth me to speake againste al, that maye haue appearaunce of lyes and superstition. And praye with me brethren, that the spirite maye be ministred
vnto me in aboundance, to speake at all times, as becommeth a trew messenger. And I will lykewyse praye, that ye might heare, vnder∣stande and obeye with all reuerēce, the good wil of God, decla∣red vntoo the worlde by Ie¦sus Christ, whose omnipotente spirite remayn with you for euer▪ Amen.
¶ Here is briefly declared in a sumine, accordynge to the holy scriptures, what opi∣nion we Christians haue of the Lordes supper, called the Sa∣cramente of the bodye and bloudde of oure sauy∣oure Iesus Christ. FIrste we con∣fesse that it is an holy ac∣tion, ordeyned of God, in the whiche the Lorde Iesus, by earthely and visible thinges sette before vs, lifteth vs vp vnto hea∣uenly and inuisible thinges. And that whan he hadde prepared hys spirituall banet, he witnessed ye he hym self was the lyuely bread, wherewith oure soules bee fedde vnto euerlastinge lyfe. And therefore in settinge forthe breade and wyne to eate & drynk,
he confirmeth and sealeth vp too vs hys promisse and communion (that is, that we shalbe partakers with hym in hys kyngedome) and representeth vnto vs, and maketh playne to oure senses his heauēly giftes, and alsoo geueth vnto vs himself, to be receiued with faith and not with mouthe, nor yet by transfusion of substaunce: but so throw the vertue of ye holy Ghost that we, beynge fedde with hys fleshe, & refreshed with his bloud maye be renewed, both vnto trew godlines and to immortalitie. And also that here with the Lord Iesus gathereth vs into one vi∣sible body (so that we be mēbres one of an other, and make altoge∣ther one bodye, where of Iesus Chrste is head) And finally that by the same Sacrament, the Lord calleth vs to remēbraunce of hys deathe and passion, too styrre vp oure hartes to prayse his moste
holy name. Sarthermore we acknowledge that this Sacramēt oughte to become vnto reuerētly, considering there is exhibited and geuen a te of the wonder∣full soctie and uyttinge toge∣ther of the lord Iesus and of the receyuers, and also that there is included and conteyned in this sa¦crament, that he will preserue his churche: for herein we be commā∣ded to shew the Lordes death vn∣till he come. Also we beleue that it is a con∣fession, wherein we sheroe what kynd of doctrine we professe, and what congregation we toyne our selfes vnto. And lykewise that it is a bōde of mutuall loue amōgst vs. And finally we beleue that, al the commers vnto thys holy sup∣per muste bringe with them their conuersion vnto the LORD, by vnfayned repentaunce in faythe
and in thys Sacramente, recey∣ue thee seales and confirmation of their faythe, and yet muste in nowise think, that for this works sake, their syns be forgeuen. And as concerning these wordes, Hoc est corpus meū, this is my body, on whiche the papistes depend so much, sayeng: that we must nedes beleue that the breade & wyne bee transubstanciated intoo Christes body & bloud: We acknowledge ye it is no artikel of our fayth, which cāsaue vs, nor which we are boūd to beleue vpō payn of eternal dā∣nation: For if we should beleue y• hys very naturall body, both flesh and bloude, were naturally in the bred & wyne, that should not saue vs, seinge many beleue that, & yet receyue it to their damnation. For it is not his presence in the bread, that can saue vs: but his presence in our hartes through fayth in his bloud, which hath washed out our
synnes, and pacified the fathers wrath towardes vs. And agayne if we doe not beleue hys bodielye presence in the bread & wyne, that shall not damne vs: but the absēce out of our hart thorow vnbelefe. Now if they wolde here obiecte,Obiection that though it be trueth that ye ab∣sence out of the breade coulde not damne vs, yet are we bounde to beleue it, because of gods worde, saying: thys is my bodye, whiche who beleueth not, as muche as in him lieth, maketh God a lyar, and therfore of an obstinat mynd not to beleue hys worde, maye be our damnation. To this we aunswereAunswer. that we beleue gods worde, & con¦fesse that it is trew, būt not so too be vnderstande as the papistes grossely affirme: form the Sacra¦mēt we receiue Christ spiritually,1. Cor. 11. as dyd the fathers of the olde te∣stament, accordinge to S. Paules sayeng. And if men wolde well
wey, how that Christ, ordeyning this holy sacrament of hys bodye and bloud, spoke these wordes sa∣cramentally, doubtles they wolde neuer so grossely & foolishely vn∣derstand them, contrary to all the scriptures, and to the exposi∣tion of saynct Augustyn, sayncte Hierome, Ful∣gentius, Digilius, Origenes, and many other godly wri¦ters.
