16829.5 34382486 28990
ARTICLES made and published by the King of France, touching the re-establish∣ment and re-appeale of the Iesuits to their Liberties in France. With A Sentence or Decree made and published against them, by the Court of Parliament in Paris, the 23. day of December last past, 1611. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold in Popes-head Palace. 1612.
ARTICLES made and publi∣shed by the King of France, touching the re-establishment and re-appeale of the Iesuits to their liber∣ties in France: With a Sentence or De∣cree made and published against them, by the Court of Parliament in Paris, the 23. day of December last past. 1611. HENRIE, by the grace of God King of France and Na∣uarre: To al men to whom these presents shall come greeting. These are to let you and euery one of you, to know and vnderstand, that desiring to hearken vnto and to grant the request made vnto vs, by our Holie Father the
Pope, concerning the reestablishment of the Iesuits in this our Realm of France, and for certaine good and great conside∣rations vs thereunto mouing. We haue caused these our letters pattents to bee made, signed with our owne hand, and of our speciall grace, full power and au∣thority Royall, doe giue and grant vnto all the societie and companie of Iesuites free liberty and power to dwell and re∣side in such places where at this present they finde them selues to bee established within this our Realme of France, that is in the Townes of Tholoze, Agen, Rhode, Londem, Perigeux, Linoges, Tournon, Le pois, Aulenat, Beziers and besides these places at the request of his said holinesse and in regard of the sin∣gular affection which we beare vnto him, wee haue further granted, and permit them to place and reestablish themselues in our Townes of Lyon, Dijon, and parti∣cularly in our house of La Flesche in An∣iou? There to continew and establishe their residence, neuerthelesse vpon these conditions and prohibitions following. 1 First, that they shal not erect any Col∣leges nor places of Residence in anie Towne or place of this our Realme, Countries, or Lands, and Seigniorie,
vnder our obedience, vnlesse it bee by our expresse licence and permission, vpn paine to forfet and lose the benefit of these their letters pattents of the said reestablish∣ment. 2 That all those that are of the said Societie within our said Realme, as also their Rectors, and Prouisors, shall bee naturall French men borne, and that no stranger shall bee admitted to be amongst them, or to haue any place within their Colledges and Residencies, without our said licence and permission. And if there be any such at this present amongst them, they shalbe bound within three monthes after the publication of these presents, to withdraw themselues into their own Countries. Neuerthelesse we doe by these presents let you know, that wee in this word Stranger, comprehend not the Inhabitants of the Towne and Countie of Auignon. 3 That the said societie of Iesuites shall ordinarily haue one of their said fellowshippe, sufficientlie authorized by them, to be our Preacher and to make ac∣count vnto vs of the proceedings of their said Societie, vpon occasions ministred touching them. 4 That all those that at this present
are within this our Realm, and that here∣after shall be admitted and receiued into the said Societie, shall take their oathes before our officers of the places where they are resident, nor to vndertake, nor doe any thing, contrary to our obedience, nor the publike peace and tranquillitie of this our Realme, without any excepti∣on or reseruation whatsoeuer. And that our said Officers, shal sed the acts & pro∣cesse of their said oathes worde for worde vnto our right deare and trustie Chancel∣lor. And if any of them, that are now at this present admitted, or those that here∣after shall be permitted, doe, or shall re∣fuse to take the said oath, they shall be for∣ced, and presently constrained to goe out of this our Realme of France. 5 That from henceforth, all those of the said Societie, as well they that haue made simple vowes only, as the rest of them neither shall, nor may not get, nor procure vnto themselues within this our Realme of France, any moueable goods, and chattels, either by buying, gift, or o∣therwise, without our speciall licence and permission. 6 They shall not take nor receiue a∣ny succession, either direct, or collaterall, no more then other religious persons,
neuerthelesse if it fall out hereafter, that they are licenced by the saide companie, they may receiue into their Rites, as be∣fore. 7 They shall neither take nor receiue any vnmoueable goods or lands, of those that from henceforth shal enter into their Societies, but they shall be reserued vn∣to their heires, or to those to whom they shall haue disposed the same, before their entrance into the saide Society. 8 They shall also be subiect in all things, and in euery point vnto the lawes of our Realme, and punishable by our Of∣ficers, in such maner, as all other ecclesi∣asticall and religious persons are sub∣iects vnto them. 9 They shall not vndertake, nor doe any thing (either spirituall or temporall) to the preiudice of any Bishops, Chap∣ters, Cures, and Vniuersities, nor of any other religious persons, but shall con∣forme them selues to the common Law. 10 They shall not preach administer the holy sacraments, nor heare any mans confession, but only of those that are of their owne Society, if they be not per∣mitted thereunto by the Bishoppes of those places, of the Courtes of Parlia∣ment where they are established, that is at Bordeaux, and Diion, (Neuerthelesse the
said permission is not to be vnderstood of the Parliament of Paris,) vnlesse it be in the Towne of Lyon, and La Flesche, wherein they are permitted to reside and exercise their functions, as in the other places which are granted vnto them. 11 And to the end that those of the said Society, which are at this present re-established, may haue meanes to main∣taine them selues and to liue in their Col∣ledges and residencies, we haue permit∣ted and by these presents doe permitte them to enioy their rents and reuenues both present, and also that which hereto∣fore they haue had and enioyed, and if the same hath been seased vpon to our vse, it is our will and pleasure, that they shall be fully and freely restored vnto them a∣gaine, without any let or interruption. And to that end we will and com∣mand all our welbeloued and faithfull Subiects, and seruants of our Court of Parliament, to allow of these our Let∣ters Pattents, and to cause them to be read, published, & recorded, and that the said company and Society of Iesuites, may freely enioy and vse their priuiled∣ges in the said Letters Pattents, specifi∣ed and set downe, and to cause al Roules & Empeachments touching the same to
end, & to bee left off, for such is our plea∣sure, and to the end that it may continew and remaine firme, and stable for euer, we haue hereunto put our seale, reseruing vnto our selues, our owne right and pre∣heminence as well in this as otherwise. Giuen at Roan, in the moneth of Sep∣tember, Anno 1603. and in the 15 yeere of our Raigne. Signed HENRIE: and vnderneath by the King sealed with the great Seale in greene waxe and silke strings. Registred. The Kings atturney general being here, after most humble decla∣ration made by him, vnto the saide Lords of the Parliament of Paris. The second of Ianuarie. Signed Voisin. The Sentence or Decree made by the Court of Parliament of Paris, against The Iesuites, vpon the 23. day of December last past. THe Court of Parliament, vpon the inrouling of the said Letters Pat∣tents, ordaine that their Counsell shall correct, and amend their Bils, and adde
thereunto whatsoeuer they shall thinke conuenient within eight daies, and that they shall produce and giue contradicti∣ons and exceptions within the said time prescribed, and then to receiue sentence. They further ordaine, that the prouin∣ciall and the rest of his company deman∣dants in the case, and his assistants shall presently subscribe vnto the Submission, made by their prouinciall, to conforme themselues vnto the Doctryne of the Sor∣bonists, specially in that which concer∣neth the preseruation of the Kings most sacred person, the maintaining of their authority Royall, and the liberties of the Church of France, which hath alwaies and most anciently been obserued, and kept within this Realme of France, that being seen and communicated vnto the Kings Attourny general and the Coun∣sel on both sides they may haue iustice as Law and reason requireth. In the mean time, they haue and do make defence and straight prohibitions vnto the said So∣ciety, not to innouate, do, or vndertake a∣ny thing contrary or to the preiudice of their Letters Pattents of reestablishe∣ment, nor of the decree or sentence of the verification of the same, as also not to meddle or take vpō them either by them
selues or by any other persons appoin∣ted by them, to teach children within the City of Paris, in any wise whatsoeuer, neither yet to exercise the function of Scholars, vpon paine of forfeiture of their Letters Pattents of reestablish∣ment, reseruing cost and charges. Pro∣nounced the 23 of December, 1611. The King of France Letters of com∣mandement to the Court of Parliament, for the verification of the said Letters Pa∣tents, and Articles aforesaid. HENRIE, by the grace of God King of France: and Na∣uarre. To our welbeloued and faithfull Subiects, the Officers of our Court of Parliament of Paris, greeting. About a month since, we grāted our Letters Pat∣tents in maner of an edict, for the reesta∣blishmēt of the Iesuites in certain places of this our Realme, with certain excepti∣ons & conditions therein mentioned, for verification whereof, according to our good will and pleasure, it is our will and desire that you shall content your selues, with the demonstrations and reasons which we haue set downe, and conside∣red
of, with the best aduice and counsell which may be giuen by such persons as are altogether led and prouoked there∣unto with a good and entire affection, besides that for our owne parts we haue such pregnant reasons that moue vs thereunto, that they ought not in any wise to be debated. Wee see & know bet∣ter then any other, what course we are to hold, and seeing that it hath pleased God by his grace to giue vs the meanes, to preserue this vessell from the stormes and tempests past, we meane still to guide the Ruther, that it may saile the happelyer by the aid and helpe of God. We haue not granted them this reestablishment but vpon very good and materiall consi∣derations, from whence we cannot swarue, without a most notable inte∣rest and preiudice to the good of our e∣state: for this cause therefore we will, & expresly command and enioine you by these presents, signed with our owne hand, that presently and without delay, you shall ratefie and confirme those our said Letters Pattents of edict, accor∣ding to the forme and tenure thereof, without any refusale prolongation, mo∣deration or difficultie whatsoeuer, or without attending or looking for any o∣ther
or more expresse commandement therein, either by word of mouth, or wri∣ting, then these presents, which shal serue you for the first second and finall Com∣mission, which you may expect to haue from vs, without referring your selues vnto the reasons which haue moued you, to make the said declaration vnto vs, or which hereafter may moue you to doe the like, which we haue well considered, but notwithstanding the said declarati∣on, and without any respect thereof. It is our will and pleasure, that you shall proceed to the said verification, for such is our pleasure. Giuen in Paris the 27 of December, in the 15 yere of our raigne, signed HENRIE: and a little lower by the King, sealed with the priuie Seale in yellow waxe, Registred. The Kings Atturney generall, being heere vpon most humble declaration, made vnto the said Lords of the Court of Parliament in Paris the 2 of Ianuarie. Signed Voisin. FINIS.
