16944 99844598 9427
TO THE RIGHT Honorable Lord, the Lord GORING, Baron of Hurster-point, and Mr. of the Horse to the Queenes Highnes. Right Honorable: YOur BrothersLieute∣nant Co∣ronell Goring. real worth she∣wed to mee in the Warres abroad, im∣boldned me to present this new borne babe to your Protection, not
doubting but to finde the same Reality of worth in your Selfe in the Court at home, as I found in Him in for∣raigne Leagers: The Subiect is new & Mer∣ry, the fitter eyther for Court or Field. It was conceiued and perfect∣ed in ten daves space; and how desires tuiti∣on vnder your Lord∣ship. It is the Emblem of my affection, and so hopes to be lou'd & lik'd the better & soo∣ner;
it is the first, but not perhaps to bee the last. I had thought to haue presented it vnto your Lordship, before this time in Print, as I did in the Manuscript, had not eyther some maleuolent spirit, or enuious Planet crost me in my designes. I wish that it may bee e∣steem'd nere the worse, though from so meane a hand, and so vnwor∣thy a person as my self. Lend it a fauourable
smle to comfort and cherish it, and it shal be the highth of my de∣sires; thus presenting my selfe, it, and what is, or shall be mine, to your Honor. I hum∣bly take my leaue. your Honors Obliged: D. Lupton.
To the Reader. IF Courteous, I loue thee; if o∣therwise, I feare not, deale by me, as thou wouldest haue others doe to thy selfe: if the matter prooue as pleasant, as the Subiect is New, I doubt not thy approbation: 'tis one comfort, thou canst
not say, I am the first Foole in Print, nor as I thinke, shall bee the last. Friends perswasions pre∣uaile much, had they not, I had not showed my self in this kinde: I am in Presse, do not ouer-presse me with preiudicate Opi∣nions. I desire thy smile and benigne aspect; yet feare not much thy frown. If thou sayest, 'tis idle, know it came not into the World to worke much; Like it and Loue it if thou Please, leaue it is
thou wilt; tis all I say, if thou Louest mee, and my Childe, I loue thee, and Thine as thou art mine. D. Lupton.
In Commendation of the Author. TAke in good part what here I offer, T is my maiden louing proffer; I wonder at thy strange deuice, That thus thou shouldst Charactize: And how alone that thou shouldst finde, These two new Subiects to thy minde. Braue Ouerbury, Earle, nay none Found out this Plot but thou alone. But most of all, I wonder yet, How in ten dates thou finish'd it,
The Mirth, the Wit, the Stile, the phrase, All giue thee a sufficient praise. Hee that thy Booke shall buy and read, Shall finde I'ue spoken truth indeed. Thine Iohn Barker. To his louing Friend, D. Lupton. FEare not Momus, though hee Carpe, Nor Zoylus though hee snarle or Barke; Mirth is the Subiect of thy Booke,
Citty and Country here may looke, Wonder at thee, and praise thy paine, That labour'd hast Sans hope of gaine? Thy Wit and Learning I Commend, To thee Applause, I freely lend: The wise will like, I wish the rest To spare their Censure, it is best: Theyle hurt themselues with their owne tong, Their Snarling can do thee no wrong. Per Samuel Perkings, Philomath.
The Table. OF London. 1. The Tower. 2. St. Paules Church. 3. The Bridge. 4. Of the Thames. 5. Exchanges Old and New. 6. Cheapeside. 7. Innes of Court, and Chan∣cery. 8. Smithfield 9. Bridewell. 10. Ludgate and Counters. 11. Newgate. 12. Turnebull-streete. 13. Hounsditch and Long∣lane. 14. Charter-house. 15. Christs-hospitall. 16. Paris-Garden. 17.
Artillery Garden. 18. Bedlam. 19. Play-houses. 20. Fencing-Schooles. 21. Dancing-schooles. 22. Fisher-woemen. 23. Scauengers and Golde∣finders. 24. OF the Countrey. 1. Hospitality. 2. Enclosures. 3. Tenants by Lease. 4. Tenants at will. 5. Country Schoole masters 6. Country Vshers. 7. Country Chaplaines. 8. Ale-houses. 9. Apparators. 10. Constables. 11. or weekely Newes. 12.
London and the Coun∣trey Carbonadoed and Quartred into seue∣rall Characters. SHE is growne so Great, I am almost affraide to meddle with Her; She's certainely  great World, there are so many little worlds in Her: She is the great Bee-hiue of Christendome, I am sure of England: Shee swarmes foure times in a yeare, with people of al Ages, Natures, Sexes, Callings: Decay of Trade, the Pestiletice, and a
long Vacation, are three∣scar-Crowes to her; Shee seemes to be a Glutton, for shee desires alwayes to bee Full: She may pray for the Establishing of Churches, for at the first view, they are Her chiefest Grace: she seemes contrary to al other things, for the older she is, the newer and more beau∣tifull. Her Citizens should loue one another, for they are ioyn'd together; onely this seemes to make them differ; they liue one aboue another: most commonly he that is accounted richest liues worst. I am sure I may call her a gally-mophrey of al Sciences, Arts, & Trades:
She may be sayd to bee al∣wayes with childe, for shee owes greater euery day then other; she is a Mother well stored with daughters, t none equall to Her for reatnesse, Beauty, wealth: she is somewhat politicke, r she inlarges her bounds ceedingly, in giuing way  make Cities of Common ardens; and it's thought r greatnes doth dimi∣sh her Beauty. Certaine∣ shee is no Puritaine, for er buildings are now Conformitant; nor shee  no Separatist, for they re vnited together: shee ath a very great desire tis ought to bee good, for
she is alwayes mending: she may be called a great Book faire Printed, Cum Priui∣legio Regis: She is the Coun∣try-mans Laborinth, he can find many things in it, but many times looseth him∣selfe; he thinkes Her to bee bigger then Heauen, for there are but 12. Caelestiall signes there, and he knowes them all very wel, but here are thousands that he won∣ders at: well, she is a glory to her Prince, a common gaine to her Inhabitants, a wonder to Strangers, an Head to the Kingdome, the nursery of Sciences, and  wish her to bee as Good  Great.
2. The Tower. FOwre things make it to be remarkeable. Ma∣, Antiquity, Scituati∣on, Strength, an head fit∣ting so great a body, a Royall residence hath gra∣ced it: it stands principally, now for Defence, Offence, and punishment of Offen∣ders. Anger it, and you shall heare it thunder far∣ther then you can see it. Time seemes to bee a little angry with her, for shee striue to ruine her beauty, ere it not supported by  hand of Maiesty. Gold nd Siluer the  of
our Land receiue their a lowed formes from hence A Coronation day is brau ly exemplified here. It i faithfull, for what is put i here is surely safe: they tha are within need not muc feare, for they are sure t be kept well, I cannot say they shall presently be forth comming. The me that keepe it are no slug gards, but are very ready for they Watch and War continually. I wish it may be my prospectiue for plea∣sure, but not my abode by compulsion, I had rather bee an honest poore man without it, then other∣wise neuer so Great, and
in it: I thinke it to be  Changling, for shee still epes the old fashion, It ay bee sayd to bee the Schoole of Morall Philo∣sophy, for it ciuilizes Ly∣ons and other Wild beasts: the Officers ought to bee faithfull Stewards, for they are much trusted, they had eed be wise, for they doe ot onely keepe themselues but others too. Those that are in it are reserud, still, and well stayed men: those that keepe it, are well payd, for it keepes them: Those that come to see it, rather dmire at euery thing  eight any obiect. It is th ublick Megazine for war∣lick
prouision, it doth seeme terrible to those that doe offend her Prince, for her owne part she hath ta∣ken Allegiance, and with∣all Loyalty intends to keepe it. This Land hath affoorded this place many brethren, strong fortified Castles; but through rebel∣lion, through times malice, and the frownes of Prin∣ces, they cannot bee knowne almost but by their ruines, this kept her obe∣dience to her Rulers, and so escaped as yet destructi∣on. To conclude shee is the glory & strength both of City and Kingdome.
3. Of S. Paules Church. OH Domus Antiquae, a fit obiect for pitty, for Charity; further Reported of then knowne, it is a com∣pleat Body, for it hath the hree dimensions of Longi∣ude, Latitude, and Profun∣dity, and as an excellent O∣er-plus famous for height. It was a maine poynt of Wisedome to ground Her ppon Faith, for Shee is the more likely to stand ure: the great Crosse in the middle, certainly hath bin, and is yet ominous to this Churches Reparation. S. Paul called the Church, the
pillar of Truth, and surely had they not beene sound, they had fallen before thi time. The Head of this Church hath beene twice troubled with aburning Fe∣uer, and so the City to keep it from a third danger, let it stand without an head. I can but admire the Charity of former times, to Build such famous temples, when as these Ages cannot finde Repaire to them, but then the World was all Church, and now the Church is all World: then Charity went before, and exceeded Prea∣ching; now there is much Preaching, nay more the euer, yet lesse Charity; o
fore-Fathers aduanc'd the Church, and kept their Land: These times loose their Lands, and yet decay the Churches: I honor An∣tiquity so much the more, because it so much loued the Church. There is more Reason to suspect the pre∣cise Puritaine deuoyd of Charity, then the simple Ignorant fraught withgood Workes. I thinke truly in this one point, the ends of their Actions were for good, and what they aimed at was Gods glory, & their owne happines. They buil∣ded Temples, but our de∣generating Age can say▪ Come, let vs take them in∣to
our hands and possesse them: Amongst many o∣thers, this cannot be sayd to bee the Rarest, though the greatest. Puritaines are blowne out of the Church with the loud voice of the Organs, their zealous Spi∣rits cannot indure the Mu∣sicke, nor the multitude of the Surplices; because they are Relickes, (they say,) of Romes Superstition. Here is that famous place for Ser mons, not by this Sect fre∣quented, because of the Ti∣tle, the Crosse. The mid∣dle Ile is much frequented at noone with a Company of Hungarians, not walking so much for Recreation, a
neede; (and if any of these meete with a yonker, that hath his pockets well lined with siluer, they will relate to him the meaning of Ty∣cho Brache, or the North∣Star: and neuer leaue flat∣tring him in his own words and sticke as close to him, as a Bur vppon a Trauailers cloake; and neuer leaue him til he and they haue saluted the greene Dragon, or the Swanne behind the Sham∣bles, where I leaue them.) Well, there is some hope of Restoring this Church to its former glory; the great summes of money bequea∣thed, are some probabili∣tles, & the charity of some
good men already, in cloa∣thing and Repayring the inside, is a great incourage∣ment; and there is a speech that the Houses that are a∣bout it, must be puld down, for Paules Church is old e∣nough to stand alone. Here are prayers often, but sini∣ster suspition doubts more formall then zealous; they should not be worldly, be∣cause al Church-men; there are none dumbe, for they can speake loud enough. I leaue it and them, wishing all might be amended. 4. The Bridge. IT is almost Arts wonde, for strength, length, beau∣ty,
widenesse, height: It may be sayd to be Polypus, because it is so well furni∣shed with legges: Euery Mouth is foure times filled in eight and forty houres, and then as a Child it is still, but as soone as they be empty, like a Lyon it roares, and is wondrous Impatient: It is made of Iron, Wood, and Stone, and therefore it is a won∣drous hardy Fellow. It hath changd the forme, but as few doe now a dayes, from worse to better: cer∣tainely it is full of Patience, because it beares so much, and continually: It's no Prison, for any one goes
through it: It is something addicted to pride, for ma∣ny a Great man goes vnder it; and yet it seemes some∣thing humble too, for the poorest Peasant tread vpon it: It hath more Wonders then Arches, the houses here built are wondrous strong, yet they neyther stand on Land or Water: It is some praeiudice to the Water-mans gaines; many goe ouer here, which o∣therwise should row or sayle: It helpes many a Pennilesse Purse to passe the water without danger or charges: nothing afrights it more, then Spring-tides or violent inundations: It
is chargeable to keep, for it must be continually Repay∣red: it is the onely chiefe crosser of the water, his Ar∣ches out-face the water, and like Iudges in the Parlia∣ment are plac'd vpon woole sackes: one that liues heere neede not buy strong Wa∣ter, for heere is enough for nothing: it seemes to hin∣der the Water-bearers pro∣fit, for the Inhabitants easi∣ly supply their Wants by Buckets: He is a setled fel∣low, and a maine vpholder of houses; hee is meanely plac'd, for there are diuerse aboue him, and many vnder him, & his houses may wel bee called None-such, for
there is none like them, and to conclude, he pertakes of two Elements, his nether parts are all for Water, his vpper for Land; in a word, it is without Compare, be∣ing a dainty streete, and a strong and most stately Bridge. 5. Thames. THis is a long, broad, slip∣pery Fellow; Rest hee affects not, for he is alwaies in motion: he seemes some∣thing like a Carrier, for he is stil eyther going or com∣ming, and once in sixe or eight houres, salutes the Sea his Mother, and
then brings Tydings from her: He followes the dis∣position of the VVind, if that be Rough, so is the VVater; if that calme, so is this: and hee loues it, because when the VVinde is at highest, then the VVater will best show her strength and anger: it is altogether vnsteedy, for it commonly is sliding a∣way. Mans vnconstant state, and Vncertayne frayle condition, is true∣ly Resembled by this, al∣wayes either ebbing or flo∣wing, beeing in a trice high and low: he will not be a Martyre, for he will turne, but neuer burne:
Resolution is absolutely his Guide and Counsellour, for he will run his course; hee cannot be sayd to be a Wel or Spring without Water, for he is puteus in exhaustus. Merchandize hee likes and loues; and therefore sends forth Ships of Trafficke to most parts of the Earth: his Subiects and Ihabitants line by oppresion like hard Land-lords at Land, the greater rule & many times deuoure the lesse: the City is wondrousl beholden to it, for shee is furnished with almost all necessries by it: He is wondrously crost, hee is the maintainer of a great company of Water-men;
he is a great , for he works as much in the night as the day. Hee is led by an vnconstant Guide, the Moone: he is cleane contra∣ry to Smithfield, because that is all for Flesh, but this for Fish; his inhabitants are different from those vp∣on Land, for they are most without legges: Fisher-men seeme to offr him much wrong, for thy rob him of many of his Subiects; he is seldome without company, but in the night, o ough weather: H meets the Sun but followes the Moone: e seemes to complaine a the Bridge, because it hath in∣truded into his bowels, and
that makes him Roare at that place: to speake truth of him, he is the priuiledg'd place, for Fish and Shippes▪ the glory and wealth of the City, the high way to the Sea, the brnger in of wealth and Strangers, and his busines is all for water, yet hee deales much with the Land too: he is a lit∣tle Sea, and a great Ri∣uer. 6. Exchanges Old and Neu THe one of these came from Antwerpe, the o∣ther from a Stable; the one was Dutch, yet made Deni∣son; the other was not lo
at the beginning, but did Exchange his name and na∣ture. The Merchants are men generally of good ha∣bite, their words are vsually better then their Conscien∣ces; their Discourse ordina∣rily begins in Water, but ends in Wine: the frequen∣ting of the Walkes twice a day, and a careles laughter, argues that they are sound: if they visit not once a day, tis suspected they are crack∣ing, or broken: their Coun∣tenance is ordinarily shap'd by their successe at Sea, ey∣ther merry, sad, or desperat: they are like ships at sea, top and top gallant this day, to morrow sincking: the ea is
a Tennis-court, their State are Bals, the Winde is the Racket, and doth strike ma∣ny for lost vnder Line, and many in the hazard: They may seeme to bee acquain∣ted with Athens, for they all desire Newes: Some of them do keepe two brittle Vessels, their Shippes and their Wiues: the latter is lesse ballast, and that makes them so light: the Mer∣chants Respect the former most, for if that sinke or be ouer-throwne, they fal, but the fall of the latter, is of∣tentimes the aduancing of their heads: Conscience is sold here for nought; be∣cause it is as old Sermons, a
dead Commodity: they wil dissemble with, and co∣zen one another, though all the Kings that euer were nce the Conquest, ouer∣looked them. Here are v∣sually more Coaches atten∣dant, then at Church∣doores: The Merchants should keepe their Wiues from visiting the vpper Roomes too often, least they tire their purses by at∣tyring themselues. Rough Seas, Rockes, and Pyrats, treacherous Factors, and leaking ships affright them: they are strange polititians, for they bring Turkey and Spaine into London, & car∣ry London thither. Ladies
surely loue them, for they haue that which is good for them, Farre fecht, & dear bought: they may proou stable men, but they must first leaue the Exchange. It is a great House full of goods; though it be almost in the middle of the Citty, yet it Stands by the Sea. There's many Gentle-wo∣men come hither, that to helpe their faces and Com∣plexions, breakes their hus∣bands backs, who play foule in the Countrey with their Land, to be faire; and play false in the City: the place to conclude, is thought to bee a great Formalst, and an hazardable Temporizer,
and is like a beautifull Wo∣man, absolutely good, if not too common. 7. Cheapeside. TIs thought the Way through this streete is not good, because so broad, and so many go in it; yet though it be broad, it's very streight, because without a∣ny turnings: it is suspected here are not many sufficient able men, because they would sell all: and but little honesty, for they show all, and some think, more some time then their owne: they are very affable, for they'le speak to most that passe by:
they care not how few be in the streets, so their shop bee full: they that bring them money, seeme to b∣vsed worst, for they are sure to pay soundly: their Bookes of accounts are not like to their estates; for the latter are best without, but the other with long crosses▪ there are a great company of honest men in this place, if all bee gold that glisters: their parcell-gilt plate is thought to Resemble them selus, most of them haue better faces, then hearts; their monies and coines are vsed as prisoners at Sea, kept vnder hatches. One would thinke them to bee
good men, for they deale with the purest and best mettals, & euery one striues to work best, and stout too, for they get much by knoc∣king, & especially by lean∣ing on their Elbowes. Pu∣ritans doe hold it for a fine streete, but something ad∣dicted to Popery, for ador∣ning the Crosse too much. The inhabitants seeme not o affect the Standard; the Kings and Queenes would bee offended with, and pu∣nish them, knew they how these batter their faces on their coynes. Some of their Wiues would bee ill priso∣ers, for they cannot in∣re to be shut vp; and as
bad Nunnes, the life is so solitary: there are many ver∣tuous and honest Women, some truly so, others are so for want of opportunity▪ they hold that a harsh place of Scripture, That women must be no goers or gadders abroad in going to a lecture many vse to visite a Tauern: the young attendant must want his eyes, and change his tongue, according as hi mistresse shal direct, though many times they do mistake the place, yet they will re∣member the time an houre and halfe, to auoyd suspiti∣on. Some of the men are cunning Landerers of plat and get much by washing
that plate they handle, and it hath come from some of them, like a man from the Brokers that hath casheer'd his cloake, a great deale the lighter. Well, if all the men be Rich and true, and the women all faire and honest, then Cheapeside shall stand by Charing-Crosse for a wonder, and I wil make no more Characters. But I proceede. 8. Innes of Court, and Chancery. THese were builded for Profit, Grace, Pleasure, Iustice: the buildings grace
City, the Men grace the Buildings, Iustice & Lear∣ning grace the Men: These places furnish our Land with Law: Here Nobility, Learning, Law, Gentrey, haue their Residence; here are Students and Profes∣sors; here are Students that will not be Professors▪ here are Professors & Students: here are Professors yet not Students; & here bee some that are neyther Students nor Professors: Many hold, that for an excellent Cu∣stome, in the Temple, im∣munity, from danger of Serieants or such like pro∣ling Vermine. Some liue here for profite, others for
Grace, some for pleasure, some for all, yet most for profite and pleasure: They that meane to liue by Law, desire not so much the The∣ory as the Practicke part: though many here follows the Law, yet all keep it not, but some transgresse: They are the Seminaries of Iudge ment and Iustice; hee that is most expert in the Law, is the most fitting for pub∣licke imployment, and the Magistracy; these cause Cae∣sar to haue his due, and giue the Subiect his Right: that Land is likely to flourish where Religion and Iustice are honour'd and practis'd: take away Iustice, and Reli∣gion
wil halt; remooue Re∣ligion, and Iustice will de∣generate into tyranny; let Moses and Aaron Rule, and our Israel will prosper: these places Moralize, Ciuilize the younger, aduance the Learned: their Founders in∣tended the stablishing of Peace, and confirming of Religion: many things that begin with blows, & would end in blood, are by these Professors mediated, and Christian agreement made▪ their number, Vnity, great imployment, makes the admired, to conclude, the are Rich Megazines for Law, store-houses for po∣licy, Bulwarkes of Equity,
let them euer flourish, as long as they are Deo, Regi, Patria; for God, their King and Country. 9. Smithfield. YOu may haue a faire prospect of this square Fellow, as you passe from the streights of Pie Corner; this place is wel stored with good harbours for Passen∣gers to put into for flesh & drinke, and fish it is admira∣ble; but fish harbour ap∣peares now but two dayes in seauen aboue water: here thrice in a week one may see more beasts then men. But∣chers that haue money make this their Hauen, or
Rendeuouz: Men that are downe-fled, and better fed then taught, may see many like themselues, boght here for the slaughter: Butchers surely cannot indure Cuck∣olds, because they kill so many horn'd beasts. Some I suppose, may bee sayd to buy themselues, such as trafficke for Calues: though the place besquare, yet here is much cheating in it: here Land-pirates vse to sel that which is none of their own: heere comes many Horses, (like Frenchmen) rotten in the ioynts, which by tricks are made to leape, though they can scarse go; he that lights vpon a Horse in this
place, from an olde Horse∣courser, sound both in wind and limbe, may light of an honest Wife in the Stews: here's many an olde Iae, that trots hard for't, that vses his legs sore against his will, for he had rather haue a Stable then a Market, or a Race: I am perswaded that this place was paued without the consent of the Horse-courses company: this place affords those lea∣ther blacke-coates, which run so fast vppon Wheeles, they shake many a young Heire out of his stocke and meanes: the men that liue here, may be said to be wel fed, for here's meat enough;
this place  what Rich Countrey England is▪ and how well it breedes Beasts, a man that considers their number and greatnes and how soone Consumed▪ may thinke there are a World of mouthes, or else that Englishmen are great eaters. Well, I will speake this of Smithfield, it is the greatest, fairest, rich∣est, squarest market place of this great City or King∣dome. 10. Bridewell. HEre comes many that haue beene at many a Dance, but neuer affected
the Bride-Well; heere's a Pallace strangly Metamor∣phosed into a prison: in the outward Court were Carts not for the Husband-man, but for those that haue vsed the vnlawfull game of Ve∣nery; it seemes to be con∣trary to nature, to make those draw which were made to beare, a strange in∣uention to haue such a new punishment, for such an old sinne. Me thinkes the house complaines, Oh quam a dispari Domino: It may be sayd of it, that it hath beene Eminent, Great, and Maiesticall, so much may bee sayde of it yet, that the Court is where
it was: It should maintaine Vertue, for it punishes vice, they are seuere Gouernors, for they are most vpon cor∣rection: when men haue here done their work, they are sure of their wages, a whip: they are temperate here, for they eate not o∣uer much; for their drinke, if all were to follow their course, it would make Male cheape, for it's water. It may be sayd of this, as of the Palatinate, would it was restor'd In statu qu prius: some say there are many idle persons in it; strange! yet work so hard: It' is thought there's scarse a true fellow in it, for they
all lye hard: there's none can say hee workes for no∣thing, for they are all se of payment. It's the only Remembrancer of AegyptsThe lash. slauery, they haue task∣maisters to holde them to their worke: their whippe∣maister is like a Countrey Pedagouge, they many times whippe better, then himselfe, and both take a pride in their office, they inflict that vppon others, which they deserue them∣selues: they that come out of it neede not feare Purga∣tory, for it's thought to be a place of more ease. This is a two fold comfort vnto them, that they may once
come out, and then they can scarce light of an har∣der maister, or a worse ser∣uice: they may be Papists, for they fast often, haue their bodies afflicted, are shut vp from the World, seeme wondrous penitent, onely they pray not so of∣ten. I leaue the place, wi∣shing they may come out, amend, and neuer more come into it. 11. Ludgate and Counters. ILe ioyne all these toge∣ther, because their natures are not much diferent, some of the Officers make the places worse then they
would be, if a man cannot by monies or good security pay his debts, yet hee may le for them here▪ the Pri∣soners are like Apprentices, desire hartily to bee Free∣men: Certainly, they haue beene men of great credite, for they haue beene much trusted: they hate three persons, an extream Credi∣tor, a cunning Lawyer, and a biting Serieant: these three are all fishers of men, the Creditor ownes the Net, the Lawyer places and spreads it, the Serieant als and drawes it to a purse: the Serieant seemes to bee most of trust, for hee hath the Whole
businesse put into his hands, and if he can, concludes it: the Lawyer next to him, for hee is trusted with the Bonds: the Creditor him∣selfe is of least note, for he will not be seene in his owne busines: yet the Cre∣ditor is Lord of the Game, the Lawyer is his Huns∣man, the Serieant his blood Hound, the Yeoman his Beagle, and the Debtor is the wild Hare; if hee be ta∣ken, most commonly hee is tamed in one of these M∣ses: a Serieant is worst when most imploied, & a Lawyer when most trusted, the Cre ditor when without pitty, and the Debtor when pro∣digality
and ill courses haue procured this Cage. The Attourney and Serieant may be termed Hang-men, they procure and serue so many Executions: These places are fullest when men break their bonds, & make forfeitures; they may bee called Dens, the Serieant Lyons, and the Debtor the Prey. It is a ancient Gate, yet not affected by Citi∣zens, though a closet for safety. For the Counters, they teach wandrings Ni∣tingals the way vnto their Nests, and learne them to sing the Counter-Tenor: the Counters seeme very cour∣teous, for they will open
almost at any houre in the night, they would not haue men lye in the streets: wel, they are places that are too full, the more pitty that men eyther haue not better Estates, Consciences, or manners, to pay their Debts, & lie vprightly and orderly. 12. Newgate. IT may well answere to the name, and thanke the City for her care and char∣ges: It is now well fac'd and heāded, Charity helps much to a decayed Estate: but that Saint Pauls is a Church, and so to beare no
anger or grudge, it would enuy the prosperity of the Gates, and be angry with the Citizens for not think∣ing vppon her old age and pouerty. Newgate is gene∣rally a place of safety, and few comes hither, but by merit: the captiues are men that once would not, now must liue within com∣passe, they should be men of worth, for the Keeper will not, dare not loose one of them. When they are forsaken euery where, then this place takes them in, for feare their heeles should bee as quicke as their Hands haue beene: Hee layes them in irons,
that he may be the surer of them: they are, or may be supposed to be sound men, for they seldome break out: as long as they stay heere, they cannot be sayd to bee vnstayd fellowes or Va∣grants, for they are sure of a place of stay: they are quicke-sighted, for they can see through iron grates: some of them seeme to be Eminent men, for they are highly aduanced; they are like Fish, haue a long time nibled away the baite, but are now caught: Certainly they are no Libertines, and are conuicted of Free will: they are vncharitable, for they seldome loue their
Keeper; they haue the power of life and death in their owne hands, and put many to be prest to death.Lice. By seeking others goods they procur'd their owne hurt. They liued without any thought of Iudgement, now it is the onely thing they feate: They hold a Triangle to be a dangerous Figure. Of all places they hold Holborne-hill an vn∣fortunate place to ride vp. It seemes they goe that way vnwillingly, for they are drawne: They cannot misse their way to their Iourneys end, they are so guarded and guided. Lice seeme to bee their most
constant Companions, for they'le hang with them for company: It seemes these men were not made for Examples, for at their Confession they wish all men not to follow their courses: and most are easi∣ly perswaded, for ther's ve∣ry few dare do as they haue done. Well, I passe from them, thus much you may bee sure of, once a Moneth you may heare, know, and see if you please; whether they liue, or dye 13. Turnebull-streete. IT is in an ill name, and therefore halfe-hang'd:
here may bee some Proba∣bility of Honesty, little or no demonstration, especi∣ally a Priory. Heere are Lasses that seeme to hate Enclosures, for they would lay all open, they may seeme good Subiects, for they loue standing or lying for the Common: They hold it was a good Age, when Woemen practis'd Astronomy. They seeme to bee Pritans, for they loue priuate Conuenticles: They are not altogether vnpractif'd in the Law, for they know and loue Fee∣lings: The Aspect here is the Conjunction, and they hold a noune Substantiue, a
Preposition, an Interiecti∣on & Coniunction the best parts of speech. They haue learn'd thus far in their Ac∣idences, that femin ludifi∣cantur viros. They seeme to bee no whit addicted to pride, for they desire to be below: they loue not Lent, because they delight more in flesh: they seeme to bee well-wishers to Lawyers, and to the Citie, for they loue Terme-times, and pray against the decay of trading. Their chiefest de∣sire is to bee well mann'd, they keepe open houses: It is hazardable to trust them because they are much ad∣dicted to Lying: They
affect a Cannoneire well, because hee will force a breach, and enter the pas∣sage. They Ioue not to wrastle, they had rather take a fall, then giue one. When this Streete was builded, surely Mars and Venus were in a Coniuncti∣on. Here are very few men, but they are well arm'd: Nay the Woemen haue receiued presse-mo∣ney, & haue performed the Seruice: woemen though the colder vessels by Na∣ture, yet these are the hot∣ter by Art: they may bee thought to be great Schol∣lers, for they pertake of all the liberall Sciences, for
Grammar they know the Syntaxs, and the Figure cal'd Apollo P. For Logic they haue skill in the Ante∣praedicaments & the Fall∣cies; for Musicke they a not affected with Vnisons▪ but are skilfull in Chroches and quauers, & loue Ela because the highest Note and makes them squeake for Retoricke, they kno the Metonomia adiuncti, and Apostrophe; for Areth∣meticke, the loue addition, and deuision; for Astrono∣my, they know the motion of Venus, and are obseruers of Mars; for their skil in Geography, they know the Tropickes and the Torrid
Zone, and o being thus ex∣perienc'd in these Sciences, they are much frequen∣ted and sought too. I wish all in this Streete to take heed of their Cellars, least they fire first, and to lay their Trading downe, or else it will lay them downe. 14. Hounsditch and Long-lane. THese two are twinnes, they haue both set vp one Profession; they will buy a mans Suite out of his hands, but it shal be hang'd or prest for't. A man that comes here as a stranger
would think that there had beene some great death of men and woemen, here a∣bouts he sees so many suites & no men for them. Here are Suites enough for all the Lawyers in London to deale withall: the Inhabi∣tants are men of many out∣sides, their faults are not seene easily, because they haue so many cloakes for them: they should be well affected to the Romane Church, for they keepe, & lay vp old Reliques: They are beholden to the Hang∣man, for he furnishes their Shops: And most of their Creditors wish that they may furnish his three cor∣ner'd
shop, which often comes to psse; and as ma∣ny say, the oftner the bet∣ter: Broke Currs they are in two respects, most of them were broke before they set vp, & Currs for bi∣ting so sore euer since they set vp: his shop is a Hell, he the Diuell in't, & torments poore soules: the Iayler & Broker are Birds of a fea∣ther, the one Imprisons the Body, the other the Cloaths, both make men pay deare for their lodg∣ing: The Broker seemes somwhat the kinder, for he layes the cloaths in Lauen∣der: he is much of a Seruing mans nature, liues much
vpon the Reuersion of cast cloathes: the Seruing-man hath them the cheaper, but the other keepes them the better, they many times do make a bargaine: Hee loues those birds best, that oftnest cast their Feathers: to conclude, he is no Trads∣man, if the whole bunch of them be weighed, you shal not scarse finde a dramme of honesty, for a pound of craft. 15. Charter-house. THis place is wel descri∣bed by three thinges, Magnificence, Munificence, and Religious gouernment:
Magnificence is the ermi∣nus a quo, good Orders the Terminus mediari, Muni∣ficence and Charity the Terminus ad quem: the first showes the wealth of both Founder and Establisher: the second showes the eanes to make the good thing done, durable: the third demonstrates his in∣ent that thus Establisht it: had it beene great without good gouernment, it had long ere this time come to ruine: or had it bin great & yet deuoyd of Charity, it would haue bin laught at & derided; but now Charity showes it is well gouerned, and the good Gouernment
keeps it firme, and make it famous: Souldiers and Schollers, I thinke, beginne their loue here, that they continue hereafter firme & solide, by liuing together▪ callings both honorable, & here bountifully maintay∣ned: It is a Reliefe for de∣caied Gentlemen, old Soul∣diers, and auncient Seruing∣men: tis to bee pittied, that such Religious, Charitable houses, increase not in num∣ber: this one place hath sent many a famous mem∣ber to the Vniuersities, and not a few to the Warres: I wil not censure as some do, that many places are heere sold for monies, nay the re∣uersions
also: Ile rather ex∣ort the Gouernors to dis∣charge a good conscience, (and not to suffer their men, or any other whom they affect, to get thirty or forty pounds for the pro∣mise of the next vacant place for a youth to come in,) and to obserue their first Institutions; and those that so suppose, I wish them that they speake not that with their mouthes, which they know not in their hearts. The deede of this man that so ordered this House, is much spoken of, and com∣mended: but there's noneSyon Col ledg ner Criple∣Gat. (except onely one) that as yet, hath eyther striuen to
equall or imitate that, and I feare neuer will: there's many that will not doe any such good Workes, and giue out that they smell something of Popery, and therfore not to be imitated: well, I durst warrant thus much, let the Ouer-seers liue Religiously, gouerne Ciuily, auoid Bribery, keep their Cannons directly, and this House shall stand to vp∣braid this Iron Age, and see many brought to beggery for prodigality, when they shall be satisfied, and haue enough: Well, this is my o∣pinion of it, that the Foun∣der is happy, and so are all his Children that liue here;
if they degenerate not, and rne from fearing God, o∣beying their Prince, and from liuing in loue amongst themselues. 16. Christs-hospitall. THe former place and this are much of one nature, yet some difference there is; Charter-house is the younger for time, but exceedes for reuenews: It was erected by one, this by many Citizens. Christs∣hospitall is principally for Childrens education, that are fatherlesse and mother∣lesse, the other for Mens and Childrens too. The
former is for any, as well as Citizens, the latter not, that onely, it is for Children; seemes to be conformable to Christs will, Suffer little Children to come vnto mee: None that are in this place can be sayd to bee without portions, for they haue E∣ducation: the Cities Cha∣rity is the lesse, for shee Re∣licues but her owne. It's a good means to empty their streetes of young beggars, and fatherlesse Children: She doth no more then the Lawes of the Land seeme to enioyne, to keepe those that were borne within her: it's a good policy to p them young to this place,
because they may learne Vertue before Vice: And ordinarily, if youth be wel seasoned, it is the more hopefull to be good in age. The City doth deserue ve∣ry great commendation for this action, because it's rare to see so great a Company ioyne together, for the good of the poore, and last out. You may easily know the Children that belong vnto this place, by their Azure liueries, and their Sable head-peeces: This House may be termed the Childrens Common∣wealth, and to speak truth, it's well gouerned by good Lawes, I wish the City not
to be proud for her Chari∣ty, nor to be weary of wel doing; and the Hospitall to remember their Bene∣factors, and the Children to liue and learne well, for feare of Correction. 17. Paris-Garden. THis may better bee termed a foule Denne then a faire Garden. It's pitty so good a piece of ground is no better imploi∣ed: Heere are cruell Beasts in it, and as badly vs'd; heere are foule beasts come to it, and as bad or worse keepe it, they are fitter for a Wildernesse then a City:
idle base persons (most commonly) that want im∣ployment, or else will not be otherwise imploy'd, frequent this place; and that money which was got basely here, to maintaine as bad as themselues, or spent lewdly; here come few that either regard their credit, or losse of time: the swaggering Roarer, the cunning Cheater, the rot∣ten Bawd, the swearing Drunkard, and the bloudy Butcher haue their Rende∣uouz here, and are of chiefe place and respect. There are as many ciuil religious men here, as thei're Saints in Hell. Here these are
made to fight by Art, which would agree by Na∣ture: They thriue most when the poore beasts fight oftenest: their imployment is all vpon quarrels as vn∣lawfull, as vnseemely, they cause the Beasts first to fight, and then they put in first to part them: It's pit∣ty such beastly Fellowes should bee so well main∣tain'd, they torment poore creatures, & make a gaines and game of it. The Beasts come forth with as ill a will, as Beares to the stake. A Beare-ward and an At∣turney are not much vn∣like, the Atturney seemes the more cruell, for these
baite but Beasts; but these men, their Clients: The Beareward striues to reco∣uer the hurts of his Beasts, but the Atturney regards not the dammages of any, and they both follow the Trade for profit. Well, I leaue the place, and when I intend to spend an houre, or two, to see an Asse and an Ape, to losse and char∣ges, I may perhaps come hither: But as long as I can haue any imployment elsewhere, I will not come to see such a great Compa∣ny so ill occupied, in so bad a place.
18. Artillery. THis place is the Cities Campe, and Mars his Schoole: Here are foure braue Flowers in this Gar∣den, Manhood, Courage, Actiuity, Armes. The vse and expert skill of Warre may be seene here in peace: Decency, Nimblenesse, Skill, Vniforme order, and Experience, the fiue quali∣fications gracing Military Discipline, are vsually here to be view'd. In their exer∣cising how many little bo∣dies may you see, that by their proportionable moti∣on make a great body?
and that suddenly alterede into any Forme: Here are braue Martiall Blades, that at three words, and three motions will giue fire: here are more armes then heads or feete: Yet when one moues, like Wheeles in a Iacke they all moue. They are men that must not en∣croach into one anothers ground, but as they are com manders, so they must keep distance; & they seeme not affect Confusions, for they all striue to keepe order: is no maruell why Souldiers desire so to fight, for they are alwayes in Diuisions. You may know by their Marchinge where euer
either the best Gentleman, or the ancienest Souldier is plac'd, for hee is euer in the Right before, or Left behinde: They are strange men; for in tenne yards space of ground they can all turne their faces a∣bout: there's thought to bee no steadinesse in them, for like Fortunes wheele, they many times suddenly alter & turne: they are ge∣nerally men of good Or∣der and Ranke, they then are at compleatest view, when their length and breadth agree, ten euery way. They are most disli∣k'd, when they are either out, or off their Files. They
vse to put their worst Pei∣ces in the middest. They seeme to bee suddenly an∣gry, for one word moues them all. Obedience and Silence they must practise, to doe as they are com∣manded, and to harken vnto their charge. A good Souldier must be like a true Maide, seene but not heard: Hee's more for actions then words. The City did well to prouide Mars a Garden, as well as Venus an House. No question, but when these meete, they will be at push of Pike, and often discharge. Before I leaue this honourable place, I may speake this of it:
that's excellent the oftner vs'd, the best when 'tis ful∣lest, and most Eminent Wisedome, Courage, Ex∣perience, Policy, bee the foure Coronels; and the foure Regiments consist of Patience, Obedience, Va∣lour, and Constancy; and their Colours Deo, Regi, Gregi, Legi, for God, their King, Law, and Countrey, flourishing all in the field of Honor and Victory. 19. Bedlam. HEere liue many, that are cal'd men, but sel∣dome at home, for they are gone out of themselues:
Nature hath bin a Steppe∣mother to some, and mise∣ry and crosses haue caused this strange change in o∣thers: they seeme to liue here, eyther to rectifie Na∣ture, or forget Miseries: they are put to Learne that Lesson which many, nay all that will be happy, must learne to know, and be ac∣quainted with themselues: this House would bee too little, if all that are beside themselues should be put in here: it seemes strange that any one shold recouer here, the cryings, screechings, roarings, brawlings, shaking of chaines, swearings, fret∣tings, chaffings, are so ma∣ny,
so hideous, so great, that they are more able to driue a man that hath his witts, rather out of them, then to helpe one that ne∣uer had them, or hath lost them, to finde them againe. A Drunkard is madde for the present, but a Madde man is drunke alwayes. You shall scarce finde a place that hath so many men & woemen so strange∣ly altered either from what they once were, or should haue beene: The men are al like a Shippe that either wants a Sterne, or a Steres∣man, or Ballast; they are all Heteroclites from Na∣ture, either hauing too
much Wildnesse, or be∣ing defectiue in Iudgment. Here Art striues to mend or cure Natures imper∣fections and defects. Cer∣tainely, hee that keepes the House may be sayd to liue among wilde Creatures: It's thought many are kept here, not so much in hope of recouery, as to keepe them from further and more desperate Inconue∣niences. Their Facul∣ties and Powers of their Soules and Bodies be∣ing by an ill cause vitia∣ted and depraued, or de∣fectiue. The men may be said to be faire Instruments of Musicke, but either
they want strings, or else though beeing strung are out of tune, or otherwise want an expert Artist to order them: Many liue here that know not where they are, or how they got in, ne∣uer thinke of getting out: there's many that are so well or ill in their wits, that they can say they haue bin out of them, & gaine much by dissembling in this kind: desperate  that dare make a mocke of iudgment: well, if the Diuell was not so strong to delude, & men so easily to be drawne, this house would stand empty, and for my part, I am sorry it hath any in it.
20. Play-houses. TIme, Place, Subiect, Actors, and Cloathes, either make or marr a play: the Prologue and Epilogue are like to an Host and Ho∣stesse, one bidding their Guests welcome, the other bidding them farwell: the Actors are like Seruing∣men, that bring in the Sceanes and Acts as their Meate, which are lik'd or dislik'd, according to euery mans iudgment, the neatest drest, and fairest deliuered, doth please most. They are as crafty with an old play, as Bauds with olde faces;
the one puts one a new fresh colour, the other a new face and Name: they pra∣ctise a strange Order, for most commonly the wisest man is the Foole: They are much beholden to Schol∣lers that are out of meanes, for they sell them ware the cheapest: they haue no great reason to loue Puritans, for they hold their Calling vn∣lawfull. New Playes and new Cloathes, many times help bad actions: they pray the Company that's in, to heare them patiently, yet they would not suffer them to come in without pay∣ment: they say as Schollers now vse to say, there are
so many, that one Fox could find in his heart to eate his fellow: A player often changes, now he acts a Mo∣narch, tomorrow a Beg∣gar: now a Souldier, next a Taylor: their speech is loud, but neuer extempore, he seldome speaks his own minde, or in his own name: when men are heere, and when at Church, they are of contrary mindes, there they thinke the time too long, but heere too short: most commonly when the play is done, you shal haue a ligge or dance of al trads, they mean to put their legs to it, as well as their tongs: they make men wonder
when they haue done, for they all clappe their hands. Sometimes they flye into the Countrey; but tis a sus∣picion, that they are either poore, or want cloaths, or else Company, or a new Play: Or do as some wan∣dring Sermonists, make one Sermon trauaile and serue twenty Churches. All their care is to be like Apes, to immitate and expresse o∣ther mens actions in their own persons: they loue not the company of Geese or Serpents, because of their hissing: they are many times lowzy, it's strange, and yet shift so often: As an Ale∣house in the Country is be∣holden
to a wilde Schoole∣master, so an whoore-house to some of these, for they both spend all they get. Well, I like them well, if when they Act vice they will leaue it, and when ver∣tue, they will follow. I speake no more of them, but when I please, I will come and see them. 21. Fencing-Schooles. HEere's many a man comes hither, which had rather work then play, though very few can hit these men, yet any one may know where to haue them, vpon his guard: his Schol∣lers
seeme to bee strangely taught, for they do nothing but play; his care seemes to be good, for he learnes men to keepe their bodies in safety. Vsually they that set vp this Science haue bin some Low-countrey Soul∣dier, who to keep himselfe honest from further incon∣ueniences, as also to main∣tayne himselfe, thought vp on this course, and practise it: the worst part of his Science is, hee learnes men to falsifie: hee is glad to see any Nouice that reads his Orders with his hat on, for then he hopes for a forfei∣ture; there are many blows giuen and taken, yet little
or no blood spilt, the more he beates, the better man he is held to be, he will make many daunce about his Schoole, as a Beare about a stake. A little touch vpon your elbow, is commonly his first acquaintance and salutation: he hath his Dis∣course ordinarily of single Combates, and then will show you his Wounds, and cause you to heare his oaths which are his familiar Re∣toricke: He is for the most part a potter and piper and if he be well in age or not, you may know by the san∣guine complexion of his nose, and the number of pearles that are vsually a∣bout
it, accompanied with Rubies and Saphires, show that hee is some Ieweller. His Schoole is an introdu∣ction to blowes, and hee makes many mans head to ee the pillow of his Cud∣gell: one must not trust to his lookes, for he lookes at one place, and strikes at a∣nother: you must bee sure to keepe him off, for hee is most dangerous when nee∣rest to you: hee seldome strikes downe right, but ei∣ther back- wards or for∣wards: He that loues figh∣ting in earnest, let him goe to the Wars; he that loues to fight in iest, let him come hither.
22. Dancing-schooles. THey seeme to be places Consecrated, for they that vse to practise heere, put off their shoes, & dance single-sol'd; they are not exceeding men, for they teach and delight in Mea∣sures: they seeme to be men of spare dyet, for they liue vpon Capers: their trade is not chargeable to beginne withal, for one treble violl sets it vp: they should bee good players at Cards, for for they teach men to Cut and shuffle wel: their schol∣lers armes are like pinion'd Prisoners, not to reach too or aboue their heads: their
heeles seem to hinder their preferment, & that makes them to rise vppon their roes: whatsoeuer their acti∣ons bee, they must carry their bodies vpright: The Schollers are like Courti∣ers, full of Cringes: And their Master seemes to bee a man of great Respect, for they all salute him with hat in hand, and knees to the ground: the num∣ber of fiue is the dauncing A, B, C, both Maister and Schollers seeme to loue Newes, for they both consist much of Curran∣toes: their eyes must not see what their feet do, they must when they Daunce,
be like men that haue the French disease, stiffe in the Hammes; they are guided by the Musicke, and there∣fore should be merry men. What they may seeme to intend, is that they hope to dance before Gentle∣women: But in the next Iigge you shall bee sure to haue them turne like Globes all round. They like a Fiddle better then a Drumme, and hold Venus to bee a more auspicious Planet then Mars. When they are in the Schooles they are Antickes, when they are out, I thinke you will iudge as I doe, they loue the Faeminine gender
more then the Masculine: Generally, these Schooles learne men to begin mer∣rily, leaue off sighing, and therefore they are players of Tragedies, not Come∣dies; I thinke hee that sel∣dome dances, liues well; but he that neuer, liues best. When I intend to shew my bodies strength, and my mindes weakenesse, I will bee one of their Profici∣ents: I had rather haue my body not dance here, for feare my Soule should not like the Musicke: Giue me that place whereall is Mu∣sicke, but no Dancing.
23. Fisher-woemen. THese Crying, Wan∣dring, and Trauailing Creatures carry their shops on their heads, and their Store-house is ordinarily. Bilings gate or the Bridge∣foote, and their habitation Turnagaine-lane, they set vp euery morning their Trade afresh. They are easily set vp and furnish't, get something, and spend it Iouially and merrily: Fiue shillings a Basket, and a good cry, is a large stocke for one of them. They are merriest when all their Ware is gone: in the mor∣ning they delight to haue their shop ful, at Euen they
desire to haue it empty: their Shoppe's but little, some two yards compasse, yet it holds all sorts of Fish, or Hearbs, or Roots, Straw∣berries, Apples, or Plums, Cowcumbers, and such like ware: Nay, it is not destitute some times of Nutts, and Orenges, ad Lemmons. They are fre in all places, and pay no∣thing for shop-rent, but onely finde repaires to it. If they drinke ou their whole Stocke, it's but pawning a Petticoate in Long- or themselues in Turnebull-streete for to set vp againe. They change euery day almost,
for Shee that was this day for Fish, may bee to mor∣row for Fruit; next day for Hearbs, another for Roots: so that you must heare them cry before you know what they are furnisht withall, when they hau done their Faire, they meet in mirth, singing, dancing, & in the middle as a Parenthe∣sis, they vse scolding, but they doe vse to take & put vp words, & end not till ei∣ther their money or wit, or credit bee cleane spent out. Well, when in an euening they are not merry in an drinking-house, it is suspec∣ted they haue had bad re∣turne, or else haue payd
some old score, or else they are banke-rupts: they are creatures soone vp, & soone downe. 24. Scauengers and Goldfinders. THese two keep al clean, the one the streetes, the other the backe-sides, but they are seldom clean them selues, the one like the hang man doth his worke all by day, the other like a theife, doeth their's in the night: the Gold-finders hold the sense of smelling the least of vse, and do not much care for touching the businesse they haue in hand, they both carry their burdens out into the ieldes, yet sometimes
the Thaes carries away their loads: they are some∣thing like the Trade of the Barbars, for both doe rid a∣way superfluous excrements The Barbers profession is held chiefe, because that deales with the head and face, but these with the ex∣crements of the posterio∣rums. The Barbers trade & these haue both very strong smels, but the Gold-finders is the greatest for strength, the others is safest & swee∣test: the Barber vseth wash∣ing when hee hath done, to cleanse all, and so do these: the Barber vseth a looking glass, that men may see how he hath done his work, and
these vse a candle: they are all necessary in the City: as our faces would bee foule without the Barber, so our streets without the Scauen∣ger, and our back-sides with out the Gold-finder: The Scauenger seemes not to be so great an Officer, as the Gold-finder, for he deales with the excrements chief∣ly of Beasts, but this latter of his owne Species: well, had they beene sweeter fel∣lowes I would haue stood longer on them, but they may answer, they keepe all cleane, and do that worke which scarse any one but themselues would meddle withall.
The Country Carbo∣nadoed and Quartred into Characters. 1. Of the Countrey. THis is the Circum∣ference of London: It is the Embleme of the City in Folio, and the City of it in Decimo sexto: the Country iustifies that Verse to be true, that Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Faemina, Luna. It doth now of late begin to complaine that the Citty offers her wrong in harbor∣ing her chiefe members of Nobility, and Gentry: her
Gentry for the most part of late are growne won∣drously vndutifull that will scarse otherwise then vpon compulsion, come and liue with their mother & main∣tayner: Shee allowes these more meanes a great deale, then shee did their Grand∣fathers; yet these young Storkes flye from her; the other alwayes liu'd with her, and lou'd her: she doth much suspect their Faith & Loue towards her, because she being as beautifull, as bountifull, as healthy, and as rich, as euer, should be thus fleighted of her yon∣ger sonnes, yet three times or foure in a yeare, perhaps
they will vouchsafe their mother their presence, but it is to be suspected, that ei∣ther a publicke proclamati∣on, or a violent plague, or to gather vp their racke∣rents moouethem from the City, or else the pleasure of Hawkin or Hunting, or per∣haps it is to show his new Madame some pritty Lon∣don bird, the credit of his fa∣thers house, but his owne discredite to let it stand for Iack-daws to domineere in: well, this Country is the Map of the world, the bea ty of Lands, and may wel be cal'd the rich Dyamond gloriously Plac'd t may be emblem'd by these 9. parti∣culars,
a faire great Church, a learned Colledge, a strong rich ship, a beautifull Wo∣man, a golden fleece, a de∣lightfull spring, a great mountaine, a faire bridge, & a goodly mn, to conclude, it is the life of the City, & the store-house of al Chri∣stendome, for peace, War, Wealth, or Religion: they that will know more, must eyther trauayle to see, or reade the desription of it by Geographers. 2. Hospitality. THis true noble hearted fellow is to be dignified and honor'd, wheresoeuer he keeps house: It's thought that pride, puritans, coache
and couetousnesse hath cau∣sed him to leaue our Land: there are sixe vpstart tricks come vp in great Houses of late which he cannot brook Peeping windowes for the Ladies to view what doings there are in the Hall, a But∣try hatch that's kept lockt, cleane Tables, & a French Cooke in the Kitching, a Porter that lokes the gates in dinner time, the decay of Blacke-iackes in the Cellar, and blew coates in the Hall: he alwayes kept his greatnesse by his Cha∣rity: he loued three things, an open Cellar, a full Hall, and a sweating Cooke: he alwayes prouided for three
dinners, one for himselfe, a∣nother for his Seruants, the third for the poore: any one may know where hee kept house, other by the Chim∣nies smoak, by the freedom at gate, by want of whirli∣gige Iackes in the Kitchin, by the fire in the Hall, or by the full furnish'd tables▪ he affects not London, Lent, Lackaies, or Bailifes, there are foure sorts that pray for him, the poore, the passenger, his Tenants, and Seruants: hee is one that will not houd vp all, nor lauishly spend all, he ney∣ther rackes or rakes his Neighbours, they are sure of his Company at
Church as wel as at home, and giues his bounty as wel to the Preacher, as to others whom hee loues for his good life and doctrine hee had his wine came to him by full Buts, but this Age keepes her Wine-Celler in little bottles. Lusty able men well maintayned were his delight, with whom he would be familiar: his Te∣nants knew when they saw him, for he kept the olde fashion, good, commenda∣ble, plaine: the poore about him wore him vppon their backes; but now since his death, Land-lords weare and wast their Tenants vp∣pon their backes in French,
or Spanish fashions. Well, wee can say that once such a charitable Practitioner there was, but now hee's dead, to the griefe of all England: And tis shroud∣ly suspected that hee will neuer rise againe in our Climate. 3. Enclosures. THe Land-lords that in∣close their Villages, are affraid that either the Townc, or the Land would runne away, or rebell a∣gainst them. Therefore they bleaguer it with deep Trenches and Thorn-roots for Pallizdoes: they could not make thir Trenches
so easily, if all wer ue within: But the person he is like a false Canoniere, that came by his place by Simoniacke meanes, and perhaps is sworne, either not to molest the enemie at all: or else if hee doth giue fire, either to shoote ouer, or short, or vpon the side, neuer direct: or else he is poore, couetous, hopes to haue some crackt cham∣ber-mayde, or some by preferment, and so giues leaue to the exacting Land∣lord to doe as hee pleases. In this businesse the Land∣lord he is as Lord-general, the Person is as his Horse that he rides, galls, spurres
on, and curuetts with as h pleases: turnes him and rules him any way, by a golden Bit, a strong hand, and ticking Spurres. The Bayliffe is his Intelligen∣cer, which if hee was ei∣ther strapt, or hang'd out∣right it was no great mat∣ter for his newes. The Surueyor is his Quarter∣master, which goes like a Beare with a Chaine at his side, his two or three of the Parishoners, who walke with him, and helpe him to vndoe themselues. The poore of the Parish and other places are his chiefe Pioneres, who like moul∣dy Worps cast vp erth▪
the Parish hee eyther winnes by Composition, or famishes by length of time, or batters downe by force of his lawlesse Engines: Most of the In∣habitants are miserably pil∣laged and vndone, he loues to see the bounds of his boundlesse desires; hee is like the Diuell, for they both compasse the earth a∣bout: Enclosures make fat Beasts, & leane poore peo∣ple; there are three annoy∣ancers of his Flocke, the Scab, Thieues, and a long Rotte: Husband-men hee loues not, fot he maintaines a few shephards with their Curres. Hee holds those
that plough the land crell oppressors, for they wound it hee thinkes too much, & therefore he intends to lay it downe to rest: Well, this I say of him, that when hee keepes a good house constantly, surely the World will not last long: There's many one that prayes for the end of the one, and I wish it may bee so. 4. Tenants by Lease. THere compasse ordina∣rily is three Prenti∣shippes in length, one and twenty yeares. Once in halfe a yeare they must bee sure to prepare for pay∣ment.
New-yeares day must not passe ouer without a presentation of a gift: If the Land-lord bee either rich, good, religious, or charitable, hee feasts their bodies ere Christmas runne away. If they see the La∣dies or Gentlewomen, or my Ladies Parrat, Babone, or Monkey, you may know what their talke is of with wonder when they come home againe: many fill their Tenants bodies once, but empty their purses all the yeare long. They take it for no small grace, when the Groome, or the Vnder∣cooke, or some such great Officer conuay them to the
Buttry to drinke, they haue done Knights eruice, if they haue drunke to the ppermost Gentlewoman: And it's a maruaile if they they stand not vp to per∣forme this point of Ser∣uice, or else blush a quar∣ter of an houre after; they eeme merry, for most eate simpering: They dare not dislike any meate, nor scarce venter vpon a dish that hath not lost the best face or piece before it come thither, many of them Suppe better at home, then they Dine here: It's their owne fol∣ly. Hee seemes to bee a Courtier compleate, that
hath the witte or the face to call for Beere at the Table: their Land-lord fetches their Charges out of them ere halfe the yeare passe, by getting them to fetch Coale, Wood, or Stone, or o∣ther burthens to his House. The Land-lord, Bayly, and other Informers are so cunning, that the Te∣nants shall but liue to keep Life and Soule together, if through Pouerty and hard Rents they forfeit not their Leases. You may know where they liue ordinarily, for Leases runne now with this clause vsually i them,
they must not let or sell away their right to another. Well, he that hath a good Land-lord, a firme Lease, and good ground, prayes for his owne life, and Land∣lords▪ and wishes hee had had a longer time in his Lease. 5. Tenants at will. THese are Continuers onely vpon their Mai∣sters pleasure▪ their owne behauiour, or ability. They are men that will take short warning a quarter of a yeare, they are like poore Curats in the Countrey that stand at the old Par∣sons Liberm arbitrium.
They must study how to please before they speake; when they are discharged, they are like Souldiers ca∣sheir'd, both want a place of stay or preferment, as they depart suddenly, so they are sure to pay extrem∣ly: they are not vnlike cour∣tiers, for they often change places: their Land-Lords loue to bee vppon a sure ground with them, for vsually they'le haue their Rents before hand, if they come not to bee censured for inmates they may abide the longer, they must al∣waies bring security where they intend to stay: London is one of the freest places
for their aboad, without questioning them what they are, for if they pay for their lodging and other charges, they neede not re∣mooue: they are like vnto Seruants gone vppon a dis∣charge, and they should reckon their places of a∣bode, no hritage: If they be imploy'd in worke, and if they will stay at it, they are then most likely to hold their house the longer: they are a degre aboue a beggar, and one vnder a Tenant by Lease: many of them will not stay too long in a place, lest they should being▪ ill, be too wel known: vppon their iournies many prooue
true Carriers, for they beare their goods, Children and some houshold stffe: wel, they are Tenants at wil, but whither good or bad, you that would know must aske their Land-lord or them. I wish that yet they may come to be Snailes, haue an house of their owne, ouer their heads. Winter's the worst quarter to them to shift in. 6. Countrey Schoole∣maisters. IF they be well Gound & Bearded, they haue two good Apologies ready made; but they are behol∣den
to the Taylor and Bar∣ber for both: if they can pouide for two pottles of Wine against the next Le∣ctue-day, the Schoole be∣ing voyde, there are great hopes of preferment: if he gets the place, his care next must be for the demeanure of his Countenance; hee lookes ouer his Schollers with as great and graue a countenance, (as the Empe∣rour ouer his Army:) He wil not at first be ouer-busie to examine his Vher, for feare hee should prooue as many Curats, better Schol∣lers then the chiefe master. As he sits in his seate, hee must with a grace turne his
Mucatoes vp; his Scepter lyes not farre from him, the Rod: He vses Marshall law most, and the day of exe∣cution ordinarily is the Fri∣day: at ixe a clocke his ar∣my all beginne to march; at eleauen they keepe Ren∣deuouz, and at fiue or sixe at night, they take vp their quarters: There are many set in Authority to teach youth, which neuer had much learning themselues; therefore if hee cannot teach them, yet his lookes and correction shal affright them: But there are some who deserue the place by their worth, and wisdome, who stayd with their Mo∣ther
the Vniuersity, vntill Learning, Discretion, and Iudgement had ripened them, for the well mana∣ging of a Schoole: these I loue, respect, and wish that they may haue good means eyther here, or somewhere else: These come from the Sea of Learning, well fur∣nished with rich prizes of Knowledge, and excellent qualities, ballasted they are wel with graity and iudge∣ment, well ster'd by Rel∣gion & a good conscience; and these abiities make them the onely fit men to gouerne and instruct tender age; he learnes the Cradle to  seueral languages &
its them for places of pub∣licke note: being thus qua∣lified, 'tis pitty hee should eyther want meanes or im∣ployment. 7. Country Vshers. THEY are vnder the Head-maister, equall with the chiefe Schollers, and aboue the lesser boyes: hee is likely to stay two yeares before hee can fur∣nish himselfe with a good cloake: They are like vnto Lapwings run away from the Vniuersity, their Nest, wth their shels on their heads. Metriculation was an hard terme for him to
vnderstand: and if he pro∣ceeded it was in Tenebris: the Chancellors Seale and Lycense for the place, is a great grace to him: At a Sermon you shall see him writing, but if the diuision of the Text be expressed in Latine termes, then hee could not eyther heare, or not vnderstand, and só of∣tentimes looses the diuision of the Text: it's no small credite for him to sit at the neather end of the Table with the Ministers; he sel∣dome speaks there amongst them, vnlesse like a nouice he be first asked, and then hee expresses his weaknesse boldly: he goes very far, if
he dare stay to drinke a cup of Ale when one houre is past: His discourse ordina∣rily is of his exployts when he went to Schoole: hee hath learn'd enough in the Vniuersity, if hee knowes the Figures, and can Re∣peate the Logicall Moods: vsually he makes his Sillo∣gismes in Baralipton, if hee can make any: Hee holds Greeke for a Heathen lan∣guage, and therefore ne∣uer intends to learne it: for Latie, his blacke cloathes are sufficient proofes to the Country-fellowes, that he is wel furnisht: For Hebrew it would pose him hard to make a difference in writing
betwixt Hebraeus and E∣brius; in a word, he is but a great Schoole boy with a little Beard and blacke∣cloathes, and knowes bet∣ter how to whippe a Schol∣ler then learne him: if hee had beene fit for any thing in the Vniuersity, hee had not left her so soone: Yet I confesse there are some that deserue better prefer∣ment then this, yet accept of it; but its pitty that Virtu and Learning are so slightly regarded, and that so rich a iewell should bee no better plac'd.
8. Country Chaplaines. THey must do as Mary∣golds, immitate their Master, as these do the Sun: they are men of Grace be∣fore and after Dinner and Supper; they are men that seeme desirous of prefer∣ment, for they rise before their Lord and Maister: their habite is neate, clean∣ly, if not too curious its wel. In a well gouern'd house, they performe praier twice a day, to be commended for, because it showes and teaches Zeale, Godlinesse. Their Sermons are not long, but generally good &
pithy▪ their Lords Respect and fauour, makes the Ser∣uants to Respect and loue them; graue modesty and Learning, with an affable carriage, winnes them re∣gard and Reuerence: the more priuate their persons be, the moe publicke their prayse: Their Studies ge∣nerally are their best Clo∣sets, and their Books their best Counsellors: Such as these deserue to bee made o▪ but there are o∣thers of the same professi∣on, yet much different in Nature, who striue to satisfie and please, euen by smothering, counter∣etting, or immitating,
their Maisters faults, and loue the strong Beere Cel∣lar, or a Wine-tauerne more then their Studies: whose ambition is to bee conuersant with the Gen∣tle woemen, and now and then to let an oath slippe with a grace; whose ac∣quaintance and familiari∣ty is most with the Butler, and their care to slippe to an Ale-house vnseene, with the Seruants. Their allow∣ance is good if it bee 20. Marke, and their Dyet. If they bee Married they must be more obsequious and industrious to please, if they come ingle, it's a thousand to one but they
either bee in Loue or Mar∣ried before they goe away: I honour both Lord and Chaplaine, when they are Godly, and Religious; but I dislike, when either the Lord will not bee told of his faults, or the Chaplaine will not, or dare not: I loue the life when Zeale, Lear∣ning and Grauity are the gifts of the Preacher. But I dislike it, when by re∣spects Conniuency or Ig∣norance with Pride keepe the Chappell. If they be wise, they will keepe close, till they haue the Aduou∣son of a Liuing, the better they are liked of their Ma∣ster, and the more store he
hath of Liuings, they haue the more hopes of a pre∣sentation. It's a great Ver∣tue in their Patrone if hee doe not geld it, or lessen it before they handle it. 9. Ale-houses. IF these houses haue a Boxe-Bush, or an old Post, it is enough to show their Profeshion. But if they bee graced with a Signe compleat, it's a signe of good custome: In these houses you shall see the History of Iudeth, Susana, Daniel in the Lyons Den, or Diues & Lazrus pain∣td vpon the Wall▪ It may
bee reckoned a wonder to see, or find the house emp∣ty, for either the Parson, Churchwarde, or Clark, or all; are doing some Church or Court-businesse vsually in this place. They thriue best where there are fewest; It is the Host's chiefest pride to bee spea∣king of such a Gentleman, or such a Gallant that was here, and will bee againe ere long: Hot weather and Thunder, and want of company are the Hostsses griefe, for then her Ale sowres: Your drinke vsual∣ly is very young, two daies olde: her chiefest wealth is seene, if she can haue one
brewing  another: if eiher the Hostesse, or her Dughter, or Maide will kisse handsomely at part∣ing, it is a good shooing∣Horne or Bird-lime to draw the Company thi∣ther againe the sooner. Shee must bee Courteous to all, though not by Na∣ture, yet by her Professi∣on; for shee must enter∣taine all, good and bad; Tag, and Rag; Cut, and Long-tayle: Shee suspects Tinkers and poore Souldi∣ers most, not that they will not drinke soundly, but that they will not pay lustily. Shee must keepe touch with three sorts of
men, that is; the Malt-man, the Baker, and the Iustices Clarkes. Shee is merry, and halfe made, vpon Shroue-tuesday, May-daies, Feast-dayes, and Morrice dances: A good Ring of Bells in the Parish helpes her to many a Tester, she prayes the Parson may not be a Puritan: a Bag-piper, and a Puppet-play brings her in Birds that are flush, shee defies a Wine-tauerne as an vpstart outlandish fel∣low, and suspects the Wine to bee poysoned. Her Ale, if new, lookes like a misty Morning, all thicke; well, if her Ale bee strong, her reckoning right, her house
cleane, her fire good, her face faire, and the Towne great or rich; shee shall sel∣dome or neuersit without Chirping Birds to beare her Company, and at the next Churching or Christ∣ning, shee is sure to be ridd of two or three dozen of Cakes and Ale by Gossip∣ing Neighbours. 10. Apparators. SPirituall busines is their Profession, but Carnall matters are their gaine and reuenewes. The sinnes of the Laity holds them vp, Ember-weekes, Visitati∣ons and Court-dayes shew
their Calling and Imploy∣ment, then shall you see them as quicke as Bees in a Sommer day: Surrogates, the Arch-deacon, and the Chancellor, they dare not offend: they liue vpon In∣telligence; they haue much businesse with the Church∣wardens and Sides-men, they ride well furnish't with Citations, and some∣time Excommunications: They are glad if they can heare of any one that tea∣ches Schoole, or read Prayers in that Diocesse without a speciall Licence, they are to Peccant Wen∣ches, as bad Scar-crowes, as Bailiffes be to desperate
Debtors. The Curate must reade Prayers on Wednes∣dayes and Fridayes forma∣liter, sub paena of a further Charge: they are sworne to their Office before ad∣mitted, but being admit∣ted, oftentimes they dis∣pense with the Oath: some∣times they haue eyes, and are tongue-tyed; some∣times they haue tongues, and are blind: But with∣out Fees they will see too much, and speake more; and fetch men into their Courts with a Coram no∣mine. Yet though they doe much abuse their of∣fice, they make many af∣fraide to sinne, either for
feare o shame, punishment, or charges: Whatsoeuer shift a man or woman make for monies, yet they are sure to pay for their faultes here. And if hee bee any thing in Age, thn in the Court hee weares a furr'd Gowne, and ordinarily cryes Peace, peace there, when in his heart he means no such matter.  are like a company of strag∣ling Sheepe, or vnruly Goates, for they will neuer agree, or bee vnder one Shephard. Most common∣ly when they go to the Visi∣tation, they Ride on poore Iades, and their accoutre∣ments an old Saddle, one
Stirrope, a Spur without a Rowell, a blacke boxe, and an Office Seale: if the Wench that's in fault, want monies to pay her Fees, they'le take their penny-worths in flesh: Well, their Office is none of the best, and yet is it oftentimes too good for the Maister. When all Wenches prooue Honest, they may begge, but as long as Venus Rules, they will bee sure to finde imployment.
11. Constables. THere names imply that they should be constant and able for the discharge of their Office: They haue the command of foure pla∣ces of note, the Stockes, the Cage, the Whipping post, and the Cucking-stoole: they appoynt & command the Watch-men with their rusty Bils to walke Circuit; and doe also send hue and cryes afer Male▪ factors. They are much imployed in foure occasions; at Mu∣sters, at pressing foorth of Souldiers, at quarter Sessi∣ons, and Assizes: their Of∣fice
many times make them proud and crafty: if they bee angry with a poore man, hee is sure to be pre∣fer'd vpon the next Ser∣uice: The Ale houses had best hold correspondency with them: they are Bug∣beares to them that wan∣der without a Passe. Poore Souldiers are now and then helpt to a Lodging by their meanes: They'le visit an Ale-house vnder colour of Search, but their desire is to get Beere of the Com∣pany, and then if they be but meane men, they Ma∣ster them; and they an∣swere them, Come pay, with this vsuall Phrase, yo
re not the men wee▪  for; and demand of the Hostesse if shee haue   in her h∣uing got their dere, they  with this Comple∣ent▪  if  businesse     , we would    we must   plces vp∣ , it is ▪  ▪   King▪ and so  with the  of the hone Com∣ny, & laughter  them∣. It's a  to one if they     ▪ but they will   Bills  sixe∣▪ and  downe layd    such
matter; a fine tricke to get money by their place. They should seeme to bee either very poore, or co∣uetous, or crafty men; for they put their Charges al∣wies vpon the Parish: If an accompt happen to bee among the Parihioners when such a thing, or such a thing was done; they'le answere, in the same yeare, o there abouts, I was Con∣stable, in thinking thereby to set forth their owne Credit. I leae them, wishing them to bee good in their Offic, it is not long they hue to stay in it.
12. Currantes r eekly Newes. THese commonly begin with Vienna and end wih Antwerpt: The Spa∣nish & French affaires must not be left out: The three names that grace their Let∣ters, are the Sweds, Tillies, or Imperialists: ordinarily they haue as many Leyes as Lines, they vse to lye (as weather-beaten Souldiers) vpon a Booke-biders stall, they are new and old in sie dayes: they are busie fel∣lows, for they meddle with other mens Affaires: No Pope, Emprour, or King,
but must bee touched by their pen: Nay they vse to interline some great exploit at Sea betwixt the Hollan∣der and Dnkerker, or else betwixt the Hollander and Spaniard, at the Cape or the straights of Magel∣lan, and vsually they con∣clude with this Phrase, The Admirall or Vice-Admirall of our side, gaue a road side to the vtter ouer throw of the Spaniard, with so many men hurt, such a Rich prize taken, such a Ship sunke, or fired: Being faithfully trans∣lated out of the Dutch cop∣py, with the first and se∣cond Part, like Ballads. And these are all conceites
ordinarily, which their owne idle braine, or busie fancies, vpon the blockes in Paules, or in their Cham∣bers inuented: They haue vsed this trade so long, that now euery one can say, its euen as true as a Currantoe, meaning that it's all false. Now Swedens and the Em∣perors War in Germany, is their Store-house, with how , Hamburgh, Leipsich, Breame, and the other Hans-Townes affect the Kings Maiesties procee-dings: If a Towne be Be∣leagured, or taken, then they neuer take care, but how they may send thei Leyes fast enough, and far
enough: Well, they are po∣liticke, not to be descried, for they are asham'd to put their names to their Books. If they write good Newes of our side, it is seldome true; but if it be bad, it's al∣wayes almost too true. I wish them eyther to write not at all, or lesse, or more true; the best newes is when we heare no Newes. FINIS.
