19459 99845882 10811
A GARDEN OF FLOVVERS, WHEREIN VERY LIVELY IS CONTAINED A TRVE AND PERFECT DISCRIPTION OF AL THE FLOVVERS CONTAINED IN THESE FOVRE FOLLOWINGE BOOKES. AS ALSO THE PERFECT TRVE MAN∣NER OF COLOVRINGE THE SAME VVITH THEIRE NATVRALL COLOVRES, BEINGE ALL IN THEIRE SEASONS THE MOST RAREST AND excellentest flovvers, that the vvorld affordeth: ministringe both plea∣sure and delight to the spectator, and most espetially to the vvel affected practisioner. ALL VVHICH TO THE GREAT CHARGES, and almost incredible laboure and paine, the diligent Authore by foure yeares experience, hath very Laboriously compiled, and most excellently perfor∣med, both in theire perfect Lineaments in representing them in theire coper plates: as also after a most exquisite manner and methode in teachinge the practi∣sioner te painte them even to the liffe. FAITHFVLLY AND TRVELY TRANSLATED OVT OF THE NETHERLAN∣dish originall into English for the comon benifite of those that vnderstand no other langua∣ges, and also for the benifite of others nevvly printed both in the Latine and French tongues all at the Charges of the Author. Printed at Vtrecht, By Salomon de Roy, for Crispian de Passe. 1615.
The Booke to his Readers. C Ome hether you that much desire, R are flowers of dyvers Landes: I represent the same to you, ❧ S et downe vnto youre handes. P resentinge them vnto your vew, I n perfect shape, and faire: A nd also teach to coloure them, N ot missinge of a haire. V singe such couloures as requires, A master workemans will: N ot swarvinge thence in any case, ❧ D eclaringe there his skill. E ach flower his proper lineament, P resentes from top to toe: A nd shewes both Roote, budd, blade, and stalke, S o as each one doth growe. S paringe no paines, nor charge I have, E ach seasons flower te passe: I n winter, Somer, Springe and fall. ❧ V ntill this compleate was. N ow vse this same for thy delight, I nioy it as thou wilt: O f blotts and blurrs most carefully R efraine, or else t'is spilt. Thomas Wood. FINIS.
To the Reader Salute. FOr the avoydinge of all confusion, I haue thought it good. (gentle Reader) in this description of the Coloures, to follovv the order of the flovvers, like as they are noted and marked by theire Cypher or letter in this Booke, Follovvinge herein the tyme and season of the yeare. First begininge vvith those flovvers vvch are presented vnto vs in the springe tyme, in regard that by the Consent of all vvryters, it is placed as the begininge of the yeare, even as Nature it selffe teacheth vs the sa∣me. For the Earth beinge burthened, then Laboureth and trauaileth daily to be deliuered of that Burthen of her marvailouse and admirable fruites, the vvch for a longe tyme had bene suppressed by the violence of the vvynters colde. Thereby addinge the greater delight to the vnderstandinge & occuler aspection, by that vvonderfull and maruailous alteration and multiplicities of varieties, vvch therein may be observed. Intreatinge both the Courteouse readers and also the diligent practi∣sioners acceptably to receaue and entertaine these my laboures, and profitably to make vse of them. Fare vvell. From Vtrecht this 23.th of Aprill 1614. Stilo magnae Brittaniae. Saint George's day. Youres in these or the like to doe you all Service. Crispian de passe Iunior.
THE FIRST BOOKE, CONTAYNINGE A VERY LIVELY AND TRVE DISCRIPTION OF THE flovvers of the springe. Thy wearied mynde with others paines, Come recreate and see: How Lively Natures grouth (by Arte) Presentes it selffe to thee. 1. The dubble blew Hepatica: or noble Liuerwort. THe dubble blew Hepatica, hath a flower of many leaues verie Conveniently composed together, being of a very sad blew ten∣dinge towardes purple, and may be painted with a very high Ashcoloure, or else with a faire blew Azure mingled with a little lack in gomme water, in such sorte that the naturall glosse may seeme to appeare, it may well be shadowed with indigo. The leaffe and steale there of may best be coloured with Aschcoloure and sad yellow wel mingled to¦gether, and shadowed wth the same beinge made somewhat more sadder, the steale may be rounded with Lack, the roote is of the coloure of maidē haire coloure, and may be best represented with red and omber mingled. The single Hepatica, or vvhyte Livervvort. The flower of the whyte Hepatica is white as snowe, and the little seedes there of are yellowish yet tendinge to a pale red, the little heades there∣of are greenish with some little white stipples, and may be coloured wth pure whyte coloure and shadowed with florey. 2. Lenten Saffron with smale purple flowers. THe flower of the smale Lenten Saffron is almost of the Coloure of the purple violett, yet somewhat paler aboue, and Coloured by the steale of a sadder purple, the three threedes of Saffron wch stand vpon the seed bole, are of a very faire yellow, and may be shadowed & Iagged with menie, the steale is white vpon red, and may be shadowed with ash∣coloure & masticott well mingled together. The sheathes or Codds where the flowers springe out & bud are also of a ruddy, or a reddish coloure, and may be painted with a sad yellow, and shadowed with a little omber, the leaues are smale & of a grasse greene, and may best be represented in co∣loures with sad yellow and ashcoloure mingled to gether and furrowed or channeld downe with a white line or strake through the middle. The flovver of the naples Saffron. This is greater, yet in fashion like vnto the former, not differinge in the coloure, havinge his seedebole of a golde yellow wth white furrowes in the middle, garnished with little knobs, at the end of a bright yellow coloure, turninge vp at the end, and smelling very pleasantly.
3. The dubble Narcissus, or dubble yellow Daffodile. THis flower is very thick of leaues, in regard where of it wanteth that Stockett wch some other flowers have in the middle, the leaues there∣of may be Coloured with masticott, and may be shadowed with oker or a darke yellow, the steale with verdegreece, and shadowed with Sap-greene, and the leaffe in like manner minglinge the verdegreece with a littel berry-greene both together. The Daffodill vvith the triple sockett. This flower is of a very faire golde yellow Coloure. 4. The greate dubble Narcissus of porrett. THe leaues of this flower are of a very pale yellow, and may be painted with light masticott, a little white beinge mingled vnder the same, but the middle sockett, is of a faire golde yellow, and may be shadowed with omber. The greatest Nacissus vvith the dubble leaues. This flower is of the same Coloure as the former is, and differinge onely in the pluralitie of the leaues. 5. The pleasant muscari, or the yellow grape-flower. THe flower of this muscari is exceedingly Commended because of his pleasant smell, and is of a perfect yellow Coloure, and therefore may be painted with faire berry yellow, beinge illustrated with faire light ma∣sticot, and shadowed with sad yellow beinge mingled with a little lack and greene together, the stipples are blewish of indigo and white ming∣led together, the steale may be painted with mountaine greene and white together so farre as the flowers hange downewardes, but lower with ver∣degreece, beinge sprinckled all over with smale spotts of purple and lack mingled together, the leaffe may be painted with mountaine greene, and shadowed with verdegreece. The vvhyte muscari, or the vvhite grape-flovver. This flower is onely differinge in Coloure beinge of a more vnplea∣santer, sullied, or sadder white. 6. The Radiall Iacynth of Guienne. THe flower of this Iacynth is of a blewish purple and may be Colou∣red with lack and ashcoloure with a little white beinge mingled there vnder, the seedes there of Coloured with indigo and lack as likewise the smale scutchion wch standeth in the middle thereòf, the smale braun∣ches whervpon those flowers doe stand are somwhat blewish, the steale below may be painted with spanish greene and masticot together, the tops thereof with a little white and verdegreece together, and shadow∣ed wth sapgreene, those thinne skinns at the end of the flowers are greene and shadowed with indigo. The Radiall Spanish Iacynth. The flower of this Radiall Iacynth, & the leaues of the spanish Lillies both in forme and fashion doe agree with the former, the leaues beinge fully as longe, and are of a very pure whyte Coloure. 7. The English dubble prime rose. THe flower of this primula veris (so called in Lattine) in this season doe appeare, they are of a yellow Coloure, and may be painted with faire masticot yellow, beinge topt with light masticot, and shadowed with Saffron or a sad yellow. The seedeboles are of the coloure of moun∣taine greene, the stalke is whitish and may be shadowed with mountaine greene & sad yellow tempered together. The leafe is of a light greene som∣what yellowish▪ & may be painted with mountaine greene mingled wth a little masticott, the furrowes of the leaues may be painted with sad ash∣coloure sad yellow and a little sapgreene all mingled together, or else alone with sapgreene, the pointes or the height of the leaues with a lit∣tle whyte and sad yellow tempered together, and about the very end of the leaffe, the Rbbes may be represented with lack Coloure, as also the steales of the leaues are towardes theire endes somwhat reddish.
The dubble Covvslipp. The other twise dubble flower is in forme and fashion much differin∣ge frō the former, as consistinge of tvvo perfect single flowers, the one co∣minge out of the middle of the other, yet in Coloure like vnto the former. 8. Auricula vrsi, or yellow Beares-eares. THe flower of this first Beares-eare is perfect straw-Coloure, or brim∣stone Coloure, havinge in the middle within it, a whyte ringe, from whence there ariseth out of a little rounde hollow some few smale spriggs Coloured yellow about that rounde, the Sockett of this flower is of a pale yellow somwhat greenish, and may be painted with light masticott and ash-Coloure, the steale downewardes is of a pale greene, and as it were sprinckled over with meale. The leaffe thereof is very like the leaffe of the primerose, but smooth without any veines, appearinge also somwhat whyte as if they were strewed over with meale. The violl at Coloured beares-eare. The forme and fashion of this flower is almost agreeinge with the for∣mer, but somewhat greater, of a faire Violet Coloure, havinge in the middle thereof a cercuite of a pale yellowish Coloure, and in the middle of that a smale rounde, of a sadder violett Coloure, and may be painted with lack and a little indigo mingled therewith. 9. The flagg-flower deluce, with broade leaves. THese are here represented in two seuerall sortes, the first hath flowers of a blew violett Coloure beinge stript throughout with a sadder blew thē the flower is, and is shadowed also in the same fashion, but topt somwhat lighter. The leaff agreeth almost with the leaues of the comone flower de luce. The other sorte of these flower deluces are of a more sad∣der purple, espetially in the three nethermost depēdinge leaves, wch seeme somewhat roughe, as sad purple velvett, havinge from bellow vnto the middle rysinge vp a hayrie fringe, like vnto faire yellow silke, the leaves that stand vpright are of a pleasanter Coloure. 10. The Orientall Iacynth. THe first Orientall Iacynth, hath his flowers of a purple blewish Co∣loure, beinge topt with a little whyte and blew, and shadowed with indigo and lack mingled together, within they seeme to be a little whyter, and toward the knopes somewhat more purple, the steales where vpon the flowers doe depend are of a tomone greene, and the great steale may be painted with verdigreece, beinge there with all topt and shadowed as is most convenient for thē, yet the little sports at the rysinge out of the steale is almost whyte. The Bole is of Ash-coloure mingled with a little omber, and shadowed with lack and indigo mingled, a little whyte added thereunto serues for the toppinge of it. The leaffe may be painted with sad yellow and ash-Coloure, and shadowed with sapgreene, and for the toppinge of them take mountaine greene mingled with a little whyte. The other Orientall Iacynth. This other hath his flowers somewhat greater, and is of a more paler purple Coloure, yet otherwise very like vnto the former. 11. The Orientall Iacynth with the leaved stalke. THis Iacynth with the leaved stalke, hath his flowers very like in Co∣loure to the former, but the longe leaues vpon the stalke must be pain∣ted with sapgreene. The dubble orientall Iacynth. But this dubble oriētall Iacynth hath at his first cominge greene flowers, wch afterwardes appeare somwhat blewish, and beinge full blowne, are whyte yet somewhat greenish, yet those, stripes or veines that goe through the leaues are very greene. 12. The Imperiall Crowne. THe dependinge flowers of the Imperiall Crowne may be painted with oker and a little meny mingled together, and the rares thereof, with lack and sad yellow mingled together, yet for the expressinge of the brow∣nesse at the endes of the leaves take a little indigo amonge the former, the clappers that hange within with the knopps, Coloure them with a pale yellow mingled with a little oker, and may be topt somewhat bright, and shadovved vvith lack, the steale may be both topt and shadovved very conveniently vvith verdegreece.
13. The comon purple Anemone: or wynde flower. THese three severall sortes of wynde flowers, with the smale leaues are of all other flowers most differinge in Coloure from each other. The first flower of them is of a faire violett Coloure, topt with light azure, the seed boles are sad purple, the budds are of indigo coloure. The Scarlett Coloured Anemone: or vvynde flovver. The second sorte of them is of a perfect Scarlet Coloure, and may be painted with vermilion, and topt with lack and white both mingled toge∣ther, the grounde of them is of a silver Coloure stript with smale crimson coloured veines, the budds are of a blew purple, thiere little steale is bloode red, and the middelmost bole is of a sad purple almost black, and is topt with a Russet Coloure. These (as also all the wynde flowers comonly) in Colouringe them must be very well gomde and varnisht for the better de¦monstratinge of the glance and shyninge brightnesse thereof. The stal∣ke is greene vpon red vp to the very flower, but belowe is more greenish painted with mountane greene, and may be shadowed with ash-coloure and sad yellow mingled, and topt with whyte and masticote. The princely vvynde flovver: or Anemone. The thirde sorte of these flowers, by reason of theire exceedinge beauty are called the princely wynde flower, and may be painted with vermilion and lack tempered together, the grounde thereof is somewhat lighter with spreadinge raies throughout even vnto the seedes (wch are of Azure blew) and a little whyter, the seedbole is of the coloure of indigo shadow∣ed with a little Lambe black the coloure of the steale is as verdigieece & a little masticott amonge the same. The leafe may bepointed with moun∣taine greene and verdigreece together, and shadowed with ashcoloure & sad yellovv mingled together wch a little sapgreene, but towardes the steale it is alwaies of a lighter coloure somevvhat towardes yellow, and topt wth mountaine greene. 14. The wynde Flower of a smale leafe, or the smale-leafed-wynde∣flower being dubble and of a maydens blush. THese two sortes of wyndeflovvers beinge very dubble and vvith smale leaues, are in forme very little differinge from each other, yet the for∣mer of them is of a maydens blush, but at the bottome of the leaues a sad∣der red, and may be topt with whyte and blevv, and may be shadovved with lack and blew both beinge mingled together. The Crimson coloured vvynde flovver. But the other of these dubble flowers is of a faire Crimson coloure, and may be painted with faire vermilion, shadowed with lack, and topt with lack, and white mingled together. 15. The broade leafde wynde Flower. THese three followinge wynde flowers, are very much differinge both in theire leaues, coloure, and fashion. The first of them is of a faire ver∣million & a little lack tempered the vnder with an appearance of a pur∣ple couloure shyninge or glancinge vpon it, the grounde beinge whyte, vvith exceedinge smale veines of a yellow coloure, the seede bols black, the threedes or seedes are of the coloure of Indigo tempered with a little vvhyte, the steale is garnished vvith stripes of white omber, or a sad yel∣low beinge tempered vvth a little lack. The leafe is coloured vvith moun∣taine greene and shadowed vvith verdegreece. The spanish vvynde flovver. The seconde sorte is of an carnation coloure like vnto the roses of pro∣vance, the grounde of the leaues is of vvhitish yellow, the little knopes are of a sad blew, and the mdelmost bole is yet more sadder. The Oringe Coloured vvyndeflovver. The thirde sorte of these flowers is of a perfect Oringe tawney coloure, and may be painted with faire vermillion and masticott appearing in the ground thereof, shadovved with lack, and with the veines which shoote through the leaues may be dravvne, the little knopes of an Azure blevv, and may be shadovved vvith Indigo, and topt vvith vvhyte. 16. The single peacocks wyndeflower. THese tvvo sortes of broade leafde vvyndeflovvers, are comonly called by the name of peacocks. And the first of them is single leafde, and of a faire red couloure. The dubble peacocks vvyndeflovvers.
The other dubble vvynde flower is of a faire scarlet coloure, and may be painted with pure vermillion, being topt with lack & a little white, and shadowed onely with lack, the grounde which compasseth the middle-crowne is a light masticot yellow, the knopes must be of a willow greene, and the middle bole bloode red somwhat tendinge towarde a murrey, the steale with mountaine greene, but yet aboue to wardes the flower some∣what reddish, and the middle leafe stript through with a whyte veine, the leaues are coloured with mountaine greene, ad shadowed with verdigreece and ashcoloure. 17. The Chalcedonian wyndeflowers. THese two very faire dubble wynde flowers are very rare, and called by the name of Chalcedonian & very delectable to beholde, the first of them is of a faire bignesse adorned with many leaues, where of 8 or 10. of the outtermost are greene, besett with veines of a vermilion coloure, the other leaues are smaler and of a faire vermilion coloure mingled with meny, and endinge with some prettie white flames as braunches, havinge in the middle certaine curled leaues in the place of the seedbole, coveringe the heades wch are of a pale yellow and meny, and yet somevvhat lighter at the bottome. The other Chalcedonian vvyndeflovver. The other flovver of these tvvo, is somewhat lesser yet very dubble being at the grounde somevvhat vvhytish, the leaues flaminge vvith lack, whyte and vermilion coloures one throughe another, the innermost seedes are of light masticot, the steale is light mountaine greene, the leaues are mountaine greene, shadowed with verdigreece, the outtermost side is of a sadder coloure. 18. Adonis flower: or Eranthemum. THe first of these comonly called Adonis flovver, is of a faire bloode red coloure, and may be coloured vvith lack and vermilion mingled together, and shadowed onely vvith lack, the bole is of a decaied lack red, or as it vvere withered, being topt with lack and white, the seedes are of Indigo coloure mingled with a little oker, the steale is mountaine greene mingled vvith masticot, and so is the leafe also but somewhat more gree∣nish and is shadowed with sad yellow, ashcoloure and sapgreene al min∣gled together. The other of these comonly called the cowe eie is yellow and garnished in the midle with spriggs of a reddish saffron coloure. 19. Narcissus flower, or the Oxe eie. THese two sortes of the smale leafd' Narcissus, are in coloures of theire flowers very different, the first flower consistinge of six white leaues havinge a longe hose or challice that extendes it selffe far out, garni∣shed about with a red border, the middle knopes are withered yellow and sometymes somewhat reddish, the steale is mountaine greene, the leafers mountaine greene mingled with ashcoloure. The shadowe is of verdi∣greece and sapgreene, and topt with a little white amonge the same. The skin or huske from out of wch the flower proceedeth is of a russett coloure, shadowed vvith ashcoloure and mingled inflames with omber. The other Narcissus hath a very yellovv sockett, with a saffrō coloured border about the edge, very curled, and may be painted with pale oker, and somewhat greenish with in, the little wattels are brimstone coloure, the white leaues may be coloured with white leade and a little bright masticot mingled, & shadowed with Lambs-black. 20. Narcissus Flower with the longe Sockett. HEre are shewed two sortes of broade leafd' Narcissus flowers, whereof the first consistes of six white leaues as the former flowers doe, but the sockett is very longe and greater, of a faire yellow coloure, havinge six spriggs of a pale yellow about the bole of it where vpon hange the knopes beinge of a darker yellow. The other Narcissus flovver. The other Narcissus flower differeth but a very little from the former, but that oftentymes there comes two flowers out of one steale. 21. The white Narcissus Flower. THe first of these Narcissus flowers are little, Snow-whyte, with a pure white Sockett, havinge in the midst three or foure knopes of a light
yellow, and are shadowed with mally or lampe black, the steales of the flowers are of a sad greene, the lower steale is mountaine greene and sha∣dowed with verdigreece, and the leaves may be Coloured with the some. The dubble narcissus flovver. The other narcissus flower is greate and faire, and the leaves are very vvhite, havinge in the place of the Sockett six other white leaves, smaler then the other, where there runneth veines of yellow through the same. 22. The greatest Narcissus flower. THis first narcissus flower is very faire and the greatest, havinge russet leaves, somewhat like vnto the whitest brimstone, the Sockett is of yellow oker mingled with masticot, shadowed with omber, and topt with faire masticott, the border thereof resemblinge a faded red Co∣loure. The leafe and steale may be Coloured with mountaine greene, and shadowed with spanish greene accordinge as is requisite. The Italian narcissus flovver. The other Italian narcissus flower is faire and greate, and of a pale brim∣stone Coloure or a honey yellow, havinge a Sockett of a golde yellow Coloure. 23. The yellow Rushie Narcissus flower. THe first of these Narcissus flowers according to his proportion hath a great Socket of golde yellow coloure, the leaues are yellow, and likewise also the knopes hanging vpon the yellowish spriggs, and yet every yellow is a little different from another. The vvhite Rushie Narcissus. The other Rushie or rather Reedelijke leaued Narcissus flower, is of a perfect white coloure havinge some leaues curled or turned vp like vnto the fashion of the flower caled Cyclamen or sow-breade, with a longe Sockett standinge out, (within the which are three white spriggs with saf∣fron coloured knopes at theire endes,) which compasseth the feedebole. 24. The thick Rushie Narcissus flower. THe first of these Narcissus flowers which are set downe here, is full of leaues, without either socket or seedebole, being of a faire golde yel∣low coloure, and shadowed with omber and browne masticort. The Narcissus flovver vvith the great socket. The other of these is single leaued, and of a yellow coloure and may be painted with masticort, and shadowed therewith in like manner, these are of the greatest sorte, with Reedie leaues, havinge in the middle of them a greate sockett which farre stretcheth out it selffe, of a yellowish saffron coloure. 25. The Persian Lilley. THe Persian Lilley bringes forth many flowers of fiue of six leaues a peece, hanginge downewardes like bells, theire coloure is of a vvithe∣red or stayned purple coloure, like vnto the coloure of the resinges of the sonne, and may be painted with Indigo and lack vvith a little smair mingled together, and may be shadowed with the same coloure, and may be topt at the very ende with white, a little blew and lack, being all ming∣led together. 26. The tymely flowringe Tulipa. THese three tymely or earlie Tulips which are here represented are painted as followeth. The first flower hath leaues of a pale purple co∣loure, mingled with ashcoloure, lack and whyte: shadowed with lack and topt with white: the leaffe is mountaine greene, shadovved vvith sapgreene and topt vvith mountaine greene mingled with a little white. The vvhite flovver'd tymely Tulipa. The Seconde is pale and somwhat yellovvish topt vvith pure vvhite, and shadovved vvith a very darck greene. VVolfsvvinckel Tulipa. The thirde sorte of these is of a purple Coloure, vvith vvhite borders, and may be shadovved vvith lack Coloure, as most agreeing vnto the same Coloure, and topt vvith vvhite. 27. The persian Tulipa.
THe persian Tulipa hath six leaues standing vpright, the one of a bright purple, and the other very vvhite: the vvhite leaues may be shado∣vved vvith black and blevv, and purple and lack Coloure, and the bor∣ders may be topt vvith a little white beinge mingled there vvith, the mid∣dle seede bole is greene, and the spriggs that stand about it are blacke. The Candian Tulipa. The other Candian Tulip is a flovver of purple Coloure mingled vvith vvhite strypes, shadovved vvith lack and topt vvith vvhite in the middle there of both asvvel vvith in as vvithout, beneath it is sprinckled vvith menny, the knopes vvithin are of the glance of a very sad purple. 28. Tulipa pumilus, or little Tulipa. THe little Tulipa flovver is Coloured with menny topt with masticot or yellovv oker, and shadovved vvith lack. Tulipa Bononiensis. The Tulipa of Bonnonia is of the Coloure of masticot, shadovved vvith sad aker, and the middle strype that is in the leafe is of verdegreece as also the seedes, the knopes or budds that stand so far out are shadovved vvith menny. 29. Tulipa ducis. HEre are presented three sortes of Tulip flowers, the first is like vnto cloth of golde, and may be painted with faire yellow, topt with ma∣sticot and shadowed with lack, the roote is of a pale soet colour, topt with white, and shadowed with browne. The other is of a straw coloure, topt with a little white, and shadowed with a little black. Tulipa alba. The thirde sorte of these is like vnto a white rose, of lack and white mingled together, the topping and borderinge of the same is straw co∣loure, the lower most parte towardes the steale is white, and shadowed throughout with lack, yet the middle ribbe of the leaffe is perfect yellow. 30. Tulipa sanguina. THe first of these flowers is bloode-red, and may be painted with lack and vermillion mingled together, and shadowed with a sadder lack, and topt with vermillion and a little menny, these coloures may be wel gommed the better to shew the glance of the leaues. Tulipa Cinna: The other flower is white, flamed throughout with menny and ver∣milion, shadowed with a little lack, and is below towardes the steale some∣what greenish out of a white. 31. Tulipa Honnesti. THese three Tulip flowers are very faire and delectable, the first is ve∣ry great and best knowne by the name honesti, beinge very cunnin∣gly spotted interlaced and flamed with lack and white the one amonge the other, and betweene them here and there some greater stripps and flames of lack, beinge below at the bottom of the leafe somwhat yel∣lowish, and now and then some appearances of yellow coloure. Tulipa Nivea. The seconde is a smaler flower, of a white coloure, and in the middle of the leafe hath a faire strype of lack, and garnished about the edge with pretty little flames of the same coloure. Tulipa alba: The thirde sorte of these is also white, with somwhat broder strypes and flames cleane throughout of lack coloure. 32. Tulipa alba cum rubris flam: THese two which are here placed, are not inferior to any of the former, the first is white mingled with brimstone coloure, flamed throughout with lack, somewhat paler below, & aboue of a Scarlet red, the glance is gi∣ven by a thinne white stroke vpon it. The other hath asmuch yellow vnder the white, and his strippes and flames are of a nother manner, like as the picture of the flower and the shadowinge thereof very lively expresseth. 33. Checkered daffodills, & white.
THese two sortes of Checkered daffodills have different coloured flo∣wers: the first flower is milke white, but a little towardes the steale is a little greenish, somthinge one of a yellow, the Ribbes which goe about this flower are greenish, the steale and the leaues may be painted with ashcoloure and sad yellow tempered together the toppinge of mountaine greene and white together, the shadowe neerest vnto the lack coloure, the seedebole and thee seedes are white with yellow knopes. The other of these two is whitish, but the vppermost edges and parte of the flower is Checkered with red spotts of lack, the Ribbes that swell out are of a sadder red, and greene about the steale. 34. Other Checkered daffodills. THese two sortes are greater then the preceedinge flowers are. The first hath his leaues of a golde yellow very finely garnished with spotts of bloode red, and a greenish Ribbe goeinge through every leafe. The other being the greatest is speckled with the like coulored spotts, but more thicker, yet tendinge towardes a purple coloure. 35. Orinthogalum, or the starre of Bethlehem. THese two staire flovvers here expressed, are onely differinge in big∣nesse from another, the flovvers are vvhite, and the little knopes (vpon the spriggs that are vvhite,) are masticot yellovv, the leaues thereof vpon the outside haue a greenish circle of a grasse greene coloure somevvhat broade, all tending tovvardes greene, the steales are mounta ne greene broken vvith vvhite, shadovved vvith vedigreece, the little leaues that hang onder the steale are vvhitish, havinge an ere of greene vpon theire right sides, and may be shadovved vvith lambe black, the leafe is of a grasse greene tempered vvith masticot, vvhite, and sadd yellovv, to his proportion. 36. The great white Asphodill flower. HEre are represented two sortes of Asphodill flowers, the first hath leaues of the coloure of sopps in wyne, the strippe that goeth through them, and the hindmost knopes are of oker and lack together, the knopes and seedes are of a sad oker coloure, the stalke is mountaine greene sha∣dowed with verdigreece, the little side steales are mountaine greene and sad oker mingled, the little leaues vpon them are of sad oker and lack, topt with white. The leafe is like vnto the stalke, of a mountaine greene, sha∣dowed with verdigreece. The yellovv Asphodill flovver. This other is very like vnto the former, but of a yellow coloure, & the leafe is somwhat blewish. 37. Columbines. THe first of these his called after is proportion the Rose columbine, is of a a sad purple coloure, and may be painted with browne blew and lack and red mingled together, taking very little browne blew there vnto, lesse it shoulde be too sad, and darken the purple as much as may be. The head in the middle is of a light greene, and the knopes about it are whitish the vpper parte of the steale is somewhat like vnto purple. The Starrey Columbines. The Coloure of the Starrey Columbines are also of a sad purple and may be painted vvith Indigo & lack, and minglinge a little white vnder it even to the middle of the leafe, and so towardes the end of it a more pa∣ler blevv, the seed codds are greenish topt with masticot, the knopes or budds are white, the steale is of a pleasant greene of verdigreece and white mingled together, the leaffe is blewish of mountaine greene and verdi∣greece mingled together, shadowed with sapgreene, and the edges topt with greene and white. 38. Crowes-feete or Bachelers buttons. THese two sortes of Crowes-feete flowers are very different from each other. The first consistinge of single leaues after the manner of the Anemone or wynde-flower, of a faire red coloure, and hath in the middle a round seedebole, the kernells that stande about the same may be pnted
with sad yellow; and shadowed with omber, and the middlemost knopes being of a sad purple are of lack and indigo mingled together, the leaffe is mountaine greene, shadowed with sap-greene, and the steales also, that parte where the flower hangeth vpon may be painted with white, red, and greene tempered altogether. 39. White Crowes-feete flowers. THe first of these Crowes-feete flowers, hath a whyte flower and very dubble in leaues, wherein appeares certaine straines of a pale greene, the vppermost edges are somewhat reddish. The great round Crovves-feete. The other hath a great flower, the leaues alwaies bendinge inwarde, be∣ing of a faire yellow coloure, and may be shadowed with sad yellow and a little vermilion mingled, & topt aboue with bright masticot, the knopes or budds that looke out from with in, are masticot yellow, the leafe is of a sad greene, topt with omber, and ashcoloure, and a little white together, and shadowed with sapgreene, the steale is somwhat brighter, and may be topt with masticot. 40. Satyrion, or male foole-stones, or hare-stoons. THe male Satyrion hath flowers like vnto friars hoodes being white, but the covers have stripes of a greenish purple scarce appearinge, the stea∣les and the leaues whereon the flowers doe hange, are of a pale verdigreece and white mingled together, the leaffe is also verdigreece and white toge∣ther, and a little masticot amonge the same, and may be shadowed vvith, verdigreece, and vpon the leaffe may be marked a kynde of smale spotts glancnge throughout the same. The female Satyrion. The flower of the female Satyrion which is here first placed, is like vnto a pale rose coloure, shadowed with lack and indigo, and topt with white and lack together, the spotts and threedes are of a sad purple red, the little steales are of the berrie yellow, laced with verdigreece, and shadowed with sapgreene, the smale leaue, betwixt the flowers are of a greenish purple, the lower steale is mountaine greene sprincled with white, the leaues may be coloured with masticot and mountaine greene; the covers, with ver∣digreece and sapgreene mingled together, and the toppinge of it with ma∣sticot, the flackes or sports are black vpon greene. 41. The Rushie Narcissus flower. THese 2. sortes of Rushie Narcissus flowers, differ nothinge but in the greatnesse from each other, And called by the spaniards Ioncquilles, somewhat smaler thē the comō Narcissus or oxe-eie, & is of a faire yellow coloure, shadovved vvith omber and sad masticot, the Sockett is more yellovver, vvherein grovveth three or foure smale spiggs, the steale is yellovvish even to the knope, but aftervvardes it is of sapgreene and ver∣digreece mingled together, shadovved vvith omber, the leaff is moun∣taine greene shadovved vvith verdigreece. Here endeth the Springe Flowers.
Meridies depiction of garden
Lati. Hepatica trifolia coeruloea polyanthos. Germ. Dubbelen blawen Hepatica. L. Hepatica trifolia flore niveo. Ge. Edel Levercruyt met witte bloemen. depiction of flowers
L. Crocus Neapolitanus flo: purp: major. Ge. Saffraen vanden Lente met gro: purp: bloe: L. Crocus Vernus purpureus minor. Ge. Saffraen vanden Lēte met kley: purp bloe: depiction of flowers
L. Pseudo Narcissus calice ple: multipl: colore luteo Dod:. Ge. Dubbelde geele Tytloosen. L. Narcissus duplice tuba. flo: lut: Clus:. Ge. Narc: met die dubbel trompet. depiction of flowers
L Narciss, maxi: dupl: folijs. Ge. Grooten dubb: Narcisz. L. Narcissus omnium maximus. G. Narcissus nom pareille. depiction of flowers
L. Muscari flore luteo. I. Muscio graeco. Ge. Welriekende discadi. L. Muscari obsoleto, colore Albo. 1. dod:. Ge. Weisse Muscari. depiction of flowers
L. Hyacinthus stellatus Aquitanic{us} coeruleo flore. Ge. Hyacinth van Guienne met blawe bloemen. L. Hyacinthus stell: hisp: flo: albo. Ge. Spaensch Hyacinth met witte bloemen. depiction of flowers
L. Primula veris Anglica pleno flore. I. Fior de primavera. G. Brayes de Cocu doubl: Ge. Dubb Schluetel-bloemē. L. Primula veris flore gof an ca depiction of flowers
L. Auricola vrsi flo: lut:. Ge. Geele Beeren oor. L. Auricola vrsi flore violaete. Ge. Beeren ohr violbraun. depiction of flowers
L. Chamaeiris colore coerulaeo violaceo. Ge. Leech Lisch met blaw violette bloemen. L. Chamoeiris colo: purp saer. Ge. Leech Lisch. I. Iride. G. Iris basset. depiction of flowers
L. Hyacinthus orientalis coerul I. Iacinto orientale. Ge. Orientael Hyacinth. L. Hyacinthus orientalis pall. purp. G. Iacinthe oriene. depiction of flowers
L. Hyacinthus orienta caulefoli:. Ge. Orietaclschen Hyacinth. L. Hyacinth' orien ple flo. G. Jacinthe orien: double. depiction of flowers
Corona Jmperialis classe duplici florum. depiction of flowers
L. Anemone tenuifolia violaceo. It. Cocles. G. Coquelourdes. Ge. Kuchenschel. L. Anemone coccineo. I. G. Anemone princesse sangui. depiction of flowers
L. Anemone tenuifol: plen: flor: pallido rubro. L. Anemone tenuifol: plen: flor: coccineo. depiction of flowers
L. Anemone latifolia Verdunia. L. Anemone latifolia hispanica Carneo Colore. L. Anemone latifolia flo: simpl: orengiaca. depiction of flowers
L. Anemone pavo flore simplici. L. Anemone pavo Major. depiction of flowers
L. Anemone latifolia Chalcedonica maxima polyanthos. L. Anemone calcedonica cacumen. depiction of flowers
L. Eranthemum Dod: flore sanguineo. G. Fleur du vent. Ge. Brunettekens. L. Buphalmum. I. Occhio de bue. G. Oeil de beuf. Ge. Gessum. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus medio purpureus. I. Narcisso. G. Narcisse. Ge. Narciss. L. Narcissus medio luteus Ge. Narciss int midden geel. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus oblongo calice. L. Narcissus medius lute amplo cal clusij. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus totus albidus. L. Narcissus flore multiplici. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus maximus griseus caliee flavo. L. Narcissus maior medio lure' Jtalics. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus Iuncifolius amplo cal: lut:. L. Narcissus Iuncifolius albo flore reflaexō. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore pleno. L. Narcissus maximo cal flo: lu. depiction of flowers
Lilium Per∣sicum. depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa praecox flore purpureo. L. Tulipa praecox flore albo. L. Tulipa praecox wolfswinckel flor: purp: et marg: albo. depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa Persica. L. Tulipa Candia. depiction of flowers
Tulipa pumilus. L. Tulipa Bononiensis. G. Tulipa de Montpeliers. depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa Duris. L. Tulipa lutea. L. Tulipa alba et rosea col: mixta. depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa cinab: et alb. flamm. L. Tulipa sanguin:. depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa Honesti. L. Tulipa alba coccineis flammis. L. Tulipa nivea cocc: col: satur: depiction of flowers
L. Tulipa alba cum rubr: flam: et fun: lut: Willem Pass. f depiction of flowers
L. Frittillaria flo: albo. L. Frittillaria flore purpureo. depiction of flowers
L. Frittillaria flore luteo. L. Frittillaria maxim: polyanthos. depiction of flowers
L. Ornithogalum minus. L. Ornithogulum maius. depiction of flowers
L. Asphodelus albus maior. L. Asphodelus luteus. depiction of flowers
L. Aquilina rosea flo:. G. Ancoiles. L. Aquilegia flo: stell:. Ge Akeleyen. depiction of flowers
L. Ranunculus Asi:. simpl:. Ge Hanenvoet L. Ranunculus Grum: dupl:. G. Bassinets. depiction of flowers
L. Ranunculus albus flore pleno. L. Ranuculus flore globoso niaxi:. depiction of flowers
L. Satyrion Basilicum foemina. Ge. Handchenskruyt. L. Satyrium Basil mas. Ge. Creutzblun. depiction of flowers
L. Narcissus Iuncifol: maior. L. Narcissus Iuncifol: minor. depiction of flowers
TRAICTE COMPENDIEVX ET ABREGE DES TVLIPANS ET DE LEVRS diverses sortes & espeçes, avec vne certaine maniere; comme on les peult semer, planter, & lever, qui est vne chose vtile & profitable a tous ceux quy sont amateurs de telles excellentes fleurs. Apertient á le premier livre en fin du saison printeniere. A My lecteur & Cureux amateur des plus riches & precieux joiaux, resse∣vrez au Cabinet de la dilligente & tresnoble de esse flora. l'ay bien voulu choisir l'un d'sceux pour en escrite aucune chose selon mon petit pouvoir & congnoissance que j'en ay acquise pour vous en faire participantz estant a vous seulement ansquelz s'adresse ce mien petit labeur & non à autres, esperant que vous aurez agreable ce que j'ay escrit du Tulipan de la beauté d'icelluy, de ses diverses espeçes, de la maniere, de le semer, planter, & leuer, & du moien de les entretenir, selon quelles sont descriptes & distinguees par ce tresdocte homme Monsieur Charles de lecluse en ses livres tressingulieres des plantes Rares, ou il en remarque de trois espeçes, seulement, dont les premiers sont appellez precoçes, les secondz Midionelles, & les troisiesmes sont dicts tardifz, a cause comme j'estime quilz fleurissent les derniets, & ces premiers dicts précoçs sont comme loigine, dont tous les autres procedent estantz de diverses couleurs, les vns en∣tiers en leurs couleurs, & les autres variez sy comme jaunes, rouges, pourpres, blancz, blancz-ensoul∣phrez, pourpres avec des bords blancz, incarnatz rayez de blanc, rouges raiez de jaune avec le fondz noir, & autres diversement raiez & variez, les touges Cramoisis rayez de jaune à fonds blanc, un qu'on appelle les Escus de lecluse, desquelz selō l'experience des Curieux Amateurs procedent les plus Excelentes estima∣ble fleurs, les pourpres a blanc bord & fondz bleu, les verds, les blancz, le ducat & le na, quy sont ceux entre tous les autres quy sont les plus recherchez & plus desirez pour femer d'icelle. De la Culture & maniere de planter les Tulipans. POur avoir bonne terre & proppre á bien noutrir, eslever, & entretenir les Tulipes & garder aussy quand & quand que les taulpes ne les mengent ou endommagent, il est necessaire de les planter en bonne terre & grasse, parmy laquelle il fault messer des Cendres de boys de vigne avec du tan, dont se servent les tanneurs pour habiller les cuits, & ne le fault planter trop avant dans terre, car le Tulipa est de tele nature qu'il se jette plus dans terre que dehors, puis quand il a jette ses fleurs, il fault auoir le soing de tre les boulles hors de terre, & les garder en lieu sec, carelles se porroyent gaster sinon celles dont vous attender les semēces. Puis apprez quand on les veult replanter en la mesme maniere, cela se dobt faire enui∣ron la fin de l'automne, & ainsy en ce faisant vous conserverez tousiours vos tulipans beaux & sans estre endommagez, negastez, & se pourrez aussy dilater les petitos raçines facillement, pour en multiplier & nourrit de nouvelles plantes. La maniere de semer la semence des Tulipans. ET d'autant que le Tulipan est vne fleur qui abonde en semence, & que pour son excellence elle est dige deste semee a cause mesme des belles & diverses fleurs quy en procedent. I'ay biē voullu vous enseigner la maniere de les semer qui est telle, vous ferez faire un Auge de boys longue & large a discretion felon que vous voudrez en semer & l'emplirez de bonne terre preparee en la façon cy de∣vant
descrite puis vous seerez vostre semence de Tulipans la dedans envirō sur la fin de l'automne ayan le soing de la tenir tousiours vis à vis du soleil, & la bien garder du vent septemtrional qul ne donne essus, & pour le choix de la semence prendre tousiours de celle que l'on verra estre, la plus belle, mere, & eux norrye, ce qu'ayant observe, vous aurez de plantes a vostre souhai, & aurez pour maxime de prende tousiours les semences que vous voudrez semer de ceux. Dont 'ay cy devant escrit, cat celles sout les plus digses d'estre semez & sans d'oubte vous aurez de belles deurs d'icelles. De la nature & proppriéte des Tulipans & de leurs Corruptions. POur bien escrire de la propprieré des Tulipans & de leur corruption ou multiplication il fault sça∣voir quilz ne a pas fort abodantz en ses fleurs mais sont accidentelles, mais neantmoins de nature assez dure, estant en les raçines de soy mesmes asses abondant a se multiplier augmentant ses raçi∣nes tous les ans de deux ou trois, voules mais d'autāt que la taulpe est vne beste fort dommageable á elles raçines, il est bien necessaire que les personnes quy sont Amateurs d'entreteni de telles fleurs pour en avoir le plaisir dans leurs jardins, soyent foigneux de les bien garder decét animal, comme aussy de grandes humiditez, & pourtant il est bon voire aussy necessaire, aussy tost que les flurs sont passees qu'on tire les boulles de ses Raçines hors de la terre pour les garder en lieu sec & propre sinon celle duquel vous voles se∣mer. Secret pour garder les Raçines desfleurs lesquelles la taulpe menge volontiers. SY vous voulez preserver vos fleurs & les Raçines d'icelles du dommage de la taulpe, prenez de la ter∣re grasse & la messez avec du tan que les flamens appellent run/dont les tanneurs se servent pour tan∣ner leurs cuirs & de la cendre de boys de vigne, & enterrez vos boulles ou Raçines soit de Tulipes en autres fieurs la dedans vn demy pied en avant dans terre, & ne craignez plus que la taulpe vienne menger vos Raçines, car elles haissent vne telle terre & n'entretont jàmais dedans. Contre vn autre acçident arrivant aulx Tulipans. ET d'autant que les raçines des Tulipes peuvent estre endommagez par plusieurs & divers accidentz, qui tournent souvent au grand desplaisir & mescontentement de ceux quy les ayment & qui les pos∣sedent, je les ay bien voullu advertir d'un, entre plusieurs acçidentz qui peuvent arriver a cela qui est assez dangereux, assavoir, que les boulles ou raçines se trouvent souventefois endommagez des vers ou lombris qui les font mourir. Ce qui je peult remedier en ceste façon, quand elles seront levées hors de la terre, & quae l'on verra quil y aura quelque dommage des vers en icelles ou en aucunne, vous la met∣trez au soleil avec du sablon a l'entour & les laisserez ainsy par quelques jours ainsy elles seront garantyes.
NECESSAIRE INSTRVMENT POVR REPLAN∣TER TOVTES SORTES DE FLEVRS AVEC VNE FACILE & tres excellente maniere de retirer vn Tulipan hor de terre sans faire dommage a la fleur. depiction of flower planter Treschers & bien aimez de la noble deesse flora & Curieux amateurs, entre autres Richesses de son Cabinet, des delectables fleurs des Tulipans, puis-que mon intention á este desere aucune choses el∣les pour vostre contentement te nay peu delaisser de vous faire participantz de cest instrument quy est vne chose tresproppre, lequel ma este monstre par les Curieux amateurs & diligentz en telles recherhes, Albert & Guillemme de Heulum avec la maniere de seu servir.
POur done sçavoir lsage & maniere de se servi de cest instrument, tu le feras en ceste sorte,  as quelque fleur que tu desitaste mettre d'une place en l'autre affin de la point gaster ny endommager, tu pendras le susdict instrument & en estraignant par dessus la teste de la fleur te perseras jusques a c que tu pense estre en terre jusques au dessoubz de la boutte & raçine, puis le leve hos de s place, & le remerz ainsy au trou que tu auras premierement faict au lieu ou tu la voulois avoir avec l'autre Instru∣ment, puis l'ayant ainsy replanté, tu retireras ton Instrument avec la brochette ou fet pointu dehors, & ta fleur demeurera ferme dans la terre sans aucun dommage. Façon de l'Instrument 1. Le Cuiure. 2. L'agraphe. 3. La Brochette. La maniere de retenir les Tulipans longuement en fleur. POur garder ou retenir longuement les Tulipans en fleur, il les fault garder fort soingneusement & dilligement que la pluye ne tumbe dessus la nuict, & pour ce faire vous prendrez du parchemin & en ferez des petits capuchons de grandeur ptoppres pour ouvrir vos Tulipans, puis les ayant atta∣chez a des petitz bastons, vous les ficherez auprez de vos fleurs, de sorte que le capuchn sera droict pendant sur vostre Tulipan pour le couvrir justement fa fleur qu'and il pleuvera soit de nuict ou de jour, ou quand le temps sera pluvieux, ou quand il fera trop de froid, & cecy á cesté experimente de sorte que l'on peult en ceste façon conservir vn Tulipan en sa plaine fleur bien six ou sept sepmaines, quy autrement ne du∣re pas plus longuement que 12. ou 14. jours. FINIS. Registre des plus estimes Tulipans, qui pour le present sont recherches & de grand valeur, qui soient a recouvrir facile∣ment avec semence dor. TVlipa Cattelijn. Tulipa le Admirael. Tulipa le Svvitser. Tulipa Quackel. Tulipa Del pont. Tulipa St. Cromhout. Tulipa Doelman. Tulipa Kouckebacker. Tulipa Palton. Tulipa St. Garret. Tulipa Mulmans. Tulipa Laproc. Tulipa de Goyer. Tulipa Honnest. Tulipa Duc. Tulipa pourpre a bort blanc. Diverses. Tulipa St. Iacobi bommi. Diverses. Tulipa Toc de argent. Diverses. Tulipa Ernest. Tulipa Toc dor. Tulipa de pourpre a font blange jaune. Tulipa de Persica. Tulipa Candia. De pourpres precoces. Amis Amateurs s'il y a quelques Tulipa aupres quelques amateurs qui me soit cognu, j'espere avec le temps de porter en lumiere. Avec cecy ie vous offres mon oeure vostre Treshumble Crispian vande Pas le Ieune.
Tulipa Doelmani argente Coloris ruberis flammis ornata depiction of flower
Tulipa Gomhaudi alba rubris flammis logan vti plum: Ornata Tulipa Rommerlandi Elegan fondo alba orie purpurie rubert: ornata depiction of flowers
Tulipa Gerardi Jacobi luteà cum rubris flammis Tulipa Johannis Semmii argent. Coloris cum purpuris flammis distinct depiction of flowers
Tulipa Jacobi Bommi lutei Coloris coccines flammis diuisa et ornata depiction of flower
Tulipa mayor Do Jacobi Bommij lutei Coloris rubris flammis des tincta depiction of flower
Tulipa Octauiani Del Pont: niuei Coloris Sanguine: flammis ornata. Tulipa Elegant lut: Coloris cinabris flam: ornatus. depiction of flowers
Tulipa Andrea ob Holsdinge argentea rubris maculis punctaca Tulipa Iacobi bomi alba rub flamis diuisa. depiction of flowers
Tulipa Hugoni de Goyer lucea Color: rubris flammis diuisa Tulipa Erust Janssoni lutea Col ad latera rubera depiction of flowers
Tulipa alba rubris flammis dispersa, alias Couckebackeri. depiction of flower
Tulipa Adriani Bilsi lutea rubris flammis Elegan: ornata Tulipa Nob: viri Johan a Seulen alb. rubris maculis punct depiction of flowers
Tulipa Jacobi verbec argente Coloris rubris macul: destincta Tulipa Johannis Deby luteri Coloris rubris maculis aspersa depiction of flowers
Tulipa lutea oris rubris Genata. Tulipa Johannis de Rijc purpurei Color▪ margin: albo depiction of flowers
AESTAS HORTI FLORIDI, INQVA PRAECIPVI AESTA∣TIS FLORES EXCELLENTI, CR. PASSAEI STYLO ADVIVVM AD∣MODVM INGENIOS EXPRIMVNTVR. VLTRAIECTI. Ex Officina Hermanni Borculoi. ET Prostant apud Ioannem Iansonium Bipliopolam Arnemiensis.
Index AESTIVVS. Vcl secundae partis Horti Floridi. PAEonia femina, mas. Fol. 1. Iris maior Dodonaei. Fol. 2. Iris Susiana. Fol. 3. Iris Angustifol: Clusij. Fol. 4. Sisynrichium maius, & Iris bulb: latif: Clusij. Fol. 5. Iris flore lut: & Iris Hispanica. Fol. 6. Moly mont: latif: flavo fl: Moly angustifol. Fol. 7. Lilium montanum. Fol. 8. Lil: Martagon Pomponij. Fol. 9. Lilium Rubrum Bulbi ferum. Fol. 10. Gladiolus Narbon▪ & Gladiolus vtrimq: florife∣rus. Fol. 11. Rosa pleno flore albo, & R: rubra Praenestina. Fol. 12. Rosa centifol: Bat: & Rosa versicol: Fl: Fol. 13. Campanula Flore caerul: & Campan: flo. albo. Fo. 14 Papaver, flore pleno. Fol. 15. Lychnis Coron: fl: rubro pleno, & L flore albo. Fol. 16. Caryophylleus flos minor, vel Superba. Fol. 17. Caryophyll: flore albo punct: fl: sanguineo, fl: niveo. Fol. 18. Melanthium sativum, & M. pleno flore. Fol. 19. ANAGRAME Du nom de l'auteur. Sur son liure de rares Fleurs. CRISPIAN DE PASE. PRIS DE SAPIANCE. Timante en peignent son enorme Cyclope. Apelles sa Venus, Zeuxe sa Penelope. Nom aquis tel renom parleur divine science. Que DE PASE en ses Fleurs qu'ale PRIS DE SAPIANCE. Iacques Chioze. Orangenis.
THE SECONDE BOOKE CONTAININGE THE FLOWERS OF THE SVMMER QVARTER ACCORDINGE TO THEIRE SEASON, AS THEY FIRST GROVVE IN SVC∣CESSION OF THEIRE MONTHES, BEGININGE WITH THE FIRST OF THE SOMMER FLOWERS. How carefull-diligent I haue bene. These coloures to expresse: In painefull paintinge of the same Good reader vse no lesse. 1. The female peionie flower. THis greatst female peionie flower, consisteth of very manie leaues and my be painted with lack and a little vermilion mingled with it, shadowed with glancinge browne lack, and topt with white and a little lack thereby. The leaffe may be coloured with ashco∣loure, mticot, and a little sad yellow all mingled together, and shadowed with sapg ene. A little white added vnto the former coloures wil serue for the toppinge of it, the budde is of a faire red like vnto the flower, but somwhat sadder, the pillinges thereof are as the leaffe of the flower, the steale is a pale teene, the toppinge thereof is sad yellow, and the shadowe is of verdige 2. Iris maior Dodonaei: or the field flower de luce. THis great flower de luce expressed by Dodonaeus, hath his three nther most dependinge leaues, beinge vnder pale and of a faire blew purple aboue resemblinge the violet with white stripes takinge theire begininge from the golden fringe, ouer the vvhich are smale pale purple coloured leaues hanginge, the three leaues that stand vpright are of a light purple▪ and are shadowed there vnto as is fittinge. 3. The flower de luce of Susa.
THe flower deluce of Susa is a Brownish ashcoloure, beinge full of blackish spotts and veines, (as the picture well declareth, his lesser leaues which are in the middle haue a purple border through the middle of them. The leafe and the steale may be painted with mountaine greene and verdigreece, and shadowed with sap-greene with his stripes in e manner as is fittinge. 4. The Narrow leafde flower deluce. THis is also a very delicate flower deluce, & the leaues stāding vpright may be painted with a sad blew ashcoloure and lack mingled toge∣ther, shadowed with Indigo and purple lack, the downe-warde ben∣dinge leaues are stript with sad purple flames, and towards the edge is ap∣pearance of light aker & lack, the middle leaninge leaues beinge but smale are a sad purple, the steale is verdigreece with mountaine greene, and a little berry yellow mingled together. The short steale wherevpon the flo∣wers doe growe is ashcoloure and sad yellow, and shadowed with sap-greene. 5. Sysinrichium maius. or the Bastard flower deluce. THe first of these two here expressed flower deluces, is of a very pleasant coloure, havinge his extended leaues of an Azur blew and a little lack appearing nder the same, the other stripps are lack and Indigo, the in∣nermost leaues may be shadowed with lack and indigo, the thick sheathes where-out the flower cometh are berriegreene, and the flames that spread aboue them are of lack and sad yellow mingled together, the steale that goeth betwixt, is verdigreece and berry yellow tempered together. Clusius his broad leafde bastard flovver de luce. The other flower deluce with broade leaues, hath a pale blew flower, more paler then the former, both topt and shadovved as is most fittinge, the leafe is pale mingled with ashcoloure and sadyellovv, the bole is pale and somwhat blackish. 6. The yellow flower deluce. THese two flower deluces are much differinge in coloure, for the first is a very faire perfect yellow, and may very conveniently be topt and shadowed as the picture it selffe declareth the mouthe leaues are whitish be a somwhat tendinge towardes blew, yet the vpper ribbe appeareth to pale masticot coloure. The spanish flovver deluce. The other hath whitish leaues, and the borders may be expressed vvith a little lack and ashcoloure mingled, the leaues that stand vpright vvithin are more blewer▪ spread abroade with purple flames. 7. Moly, or the Sorcerers garlieke. THese two seuerall sortes of Moly, are both in the flowers and the leaues very different, for the first sorte hath yellow starre-lyke flo∣vvers, faire vvithin, but without of a more paler yellovv, the knope vvithin is greenish, the spriggs and knopes that stand at the end of them are faire yellow, the leaffe is of a brownish greene, which may be coloured vvith ashcoloure and sad yellow, and shadowed vvith sapgreene, and the steale may conveniently be shadowed vvith mountaine greene. Mountaine Moly. The other sorte hath purple lyke leaues and may be painted with white and soetblack, and shadowed with the same, the inner knopes are of ma∣sticot yellow, standing about a head of light greene, the inclosed knopes are reddish, the steales are a light greene, of verdigreece and mountaine greene mingled together and topt with white. 8. The Mountaine Lilly. THe mountaine Lilley hath his flower of a vvithered purple coloure, & shadovved accordingly, and garnished with certaine sad purple spots, the steale hath certaine spotts, but more darkly appearinge. 9. Martagon, or Mountaine Lilly. THe Lilly Martagon, called after the name of pomponeus. Is a faire Origne ravvncy, and may be painted with saffron, and shadowed with lack, and the Ribbes topt vvith white, the spotts are black, and the spriggs
and knopes are white Masticot, the steales are mountaine greene mingled with a little verdigreece and the leaues also shadowed with sapgreene. 10. The red Lilly. THe red Lilly may be coloured with high masticot and menny, and shadowed with vermillion and lack; the spotts are black, the blade or bodekin is oker yellow, & somwhat reddish towardes the pointe, the spriggs are vermillion coloure with a little masticot there vnder, the steale is mountaine greene mingled with verdigreece; as also those leaues that are vpon the steale. The edges are topt with white, the shadowe may be tempered of sap-greene and verdigreece, the toppinge of masticot and mountaine-greene. 11. Gladiolus Narbonen▪ or Corne-flagge. THe Corne flagg flowers which are here represented are little differinge from each other. But this, the one bringes flowers forth but on one side; and the other on both sides▪ without they are of a Reddish red, shad∣dowed vvith lack, appearinge tovvardes the bottom of a pale yellowish coloure, and at the ver end are redd. The steale is mountaine greene, as also the leaues that are on it, yet the spotts or stipples vpon them are somevvhat reddish, a may be shadowed with sapgreene. Cornes-flovvers leaued on both sides. This flower is also of le red vvithin, and at the mouth thereof there is a pale whitly stripe, v a garland of a bloode red coloure about it, the middlemost bodkin is of a whitish coloure tendinge towardes red, and the shorter spriggs appeare more yellovvish. 12. The dubble white rose. THis first being a pleasant and vvell smellinge rose may be painted with leade vvhite, and shadowed with a little florey, the middle seedes are of a brovvne oker yellovv toucht onely vvith a little sad yellow and lack, the steale is verdigreece onely broken vvith a little masticot, and also the side leaues, the veines vvhich goe throughe them are masticott, shadowed vvith verdigreece. The leaues are to be coloured vvith sad yellovv & ash∣coloure and a little florey beinge mingled amonge the same, topt vvith a little vvhite amonge the aforesaide colours, and shawed Lambe-black, the steales of the leaues are somevvhat lighter and tendinge tovvardes yellovv. Rosa Rubra. The other rose is of a faire light red, and may be shadovved vvith faire lack, the seedes are masticott yellovv, shadovved vvith brovvne oker, the coloure may be tempered vvith comon lack, and topt with vvhite lack. 13. The Hollandes rose of 100. leaues. THe Hollandes rose of a hundred leaues is of a faire and goodly shco∣loure, and may be painted vvith lack and vvhite, and shadovved vvith lack, and topt vvith vvhite and a little lack amonge the same. The steale is of mountaine greene and a little verdigreece mingled therewith, shado∣vved vvith verdigreece and lack, and the little budds may be painted vvith the same. The leaffe may be painted vvith sad yellovv and light ashco∣loure mingled. The Ribbes vvith verdigreece and sapgreene and in some places tempered vvith a little lack. The Changeable Rose. The other Changeable coloured rose, is of a light red and vvhite strypt one within another, and may far better be expressed by the draught of the pensill, then described vvith the penne. 14. Bell flowers. THe flowers of the first Bell flovver, may be painted vvith light smal blevv, and shadowed vvith a little lackmoes, the spriggs are vvhitish tendinge tovvardes yellovv, and vvithin is the flower more paler and vvhitte liar about the knope. The white Bell flovvers may be painted vvith vvhite and lamb black, the spriggs vvithin are blewish as the former is, the middle knope vvhere the spriggs doe growe vpon is vvhitish greene and hath a pleasnt greene circle about them. The leaffe is mountaine greene, shadowed vvith ver∣digreece, the sprigges that stand out are more paler, and topt with white and masticot mingled vnder the aforesaide coloures.
15. Poppie flowers. THese two sorts of Poppie flowers which are here exprest, the first is white; and the second carnation coloure, beinge very dubble and consistinge of very many leaues, and may be painted vvith menny & vermillion, being topt vvith vermilion and vvhite, and shadowed vvith faire lack and a little vermilion amonge the same, but the lovvest shadowe may be drawne with faire vermiliō, & for the better glansinge of them the middle knope is of yellow oker, & in the middle of it mountaine greene. 16 Wilde rose Campion, being dubble. WIlde rose Campion beinge dubble leafde is very delectable to be∣holde, and may be painted with rose red, and topt vpon the endes of the flames with a little lack onder the same. The shadowe is like vnto black velvett, and spotts or stripes coloured vvith highcoloured lack. The leaff is light mountaine greene and white mingled together, topt vvith white, and shadowed with verdigreece and mountaine greene. The single VVild-rose Campion. The single one is of a white coloure, aswell in the leaues, as the teeth in the middle. It may be shadowed with thinne black florey the veines beinge somewhat greenish. 17. Whyte Sweet Williams. THe first of these flowers is white, and may be coloured with leade white and a little redd in such wise that it very hardly may be perceived, the garland is of a faire blood red and towardes the middle a little russett, the aggs are white with a little lack coloure, the garland may be shadowed with a little browne red, the seedebole is of light mountaine greene the spriggs are somewhat a light yellow. The leaff is of mountaine greene and ashcoloure, and shadowed with verdigreene. Single svveete VVilliams. The other is fleshcoloure or cornation red, and towardes the middle it is almost white, the jagges are at the endes of a carnation coloure, the seede bole is mountaine greene, and shadowed with verdigreene, but the knope or bdde at the end is lack coloure, the sheath of the flower is like vnto the seedebole, the steale is verdigreece, and the leaues are somewhat lighter. 18. Carnations or: cloue gilleflowers. THese three very faire great dubble Carnations or clouegille flowers, are exceedinge pleasant to looke vpon, most differing in the diversitie of theire coloures, the first is white with some red lack spotts finely adorned. The Iaggs are also white, the Socquet or sheath of the flower is mountai∣ne greene, and shadowed with verdigreece. The steale is verdigreece sha∣dowed with sapgreene, the leaff is of a pale mountaine greene, appearinge somewhat blewish. The red Carnation. The middle flower of the three is perfect blood red. The vvhite Carnation. The last of these is white as snow, & may be coloured vvith leade white, and lightly shadowed with browne blew. 19. The flower Gith: or nigella. THe flower Melanthium or Nigella, and called in dutch Narduszaet, is here represented in two severall formes. The first hath single flowers, being whitish & tendinge towarde a blew ashcoloure, havinge blew vei∣nes with white lagges and sprigges, the seede bole beinge of a pale greene, beinge curled in the middle. The dubble Nigella. The other sorte bringes forth a flower that is dubble like vnto the for∣mer in coloure, but about the seedebole the leaues are more purple like. The steale and the leaues may be coloured with light ashcoloure and sad yellow, and topt with white, and shadowed with verdigreece, the forme of the flower is much after the fashion of the blew dubble ruffes that are dub∣ble sett about mens necks. 20. The great dubble Carnations or Gilleflowers. THe greatest dubble Gilleflower, or dubble carnation, is a very faire and goodly flower to looke vpon. So that the first of these two is of a faire fleshcoloure & spred over with a little whiter fleshcoloure, the shaddow of pale lack coloure tempered with a little vermilion very softly and dili∣cately hādled, but in some high shadowes, onely toucht with a browne red, there doe fall in sōe smale spotts of lack coloure, but cā hardly be observed. The greatest changeable Carnation flovver. The other is besides his faire greatnesse very fairely stript & may be pain∣ted with leadewhite, somewhat silverlike, and dravvinge the flames vvith faire lack, the broader somewhat lighter, & the narrower somewhat sadder. The shaddow being tempered of blew, and the seedebole is of mountaine greene, shadowed with verdigreece, but at the knope there is a smale be∣sprincklinge of lack coloure, the steale is somwhat sadder, & betweene the ioyntes are some lighter spottes of verdigreece, the leaffe is also mountai∣ne greene▪ shadowed with spanish greene, and topt vvith a little white. Here endeth the Summer Flowers.
Meredies depiction of garden
L. Paeonia foem: maxim:. depiction of flower
1. L. Iris maior. I. Giglio. G. Glacyul. Ge. Lisch. depiction of flowers
3. L. Iris Susiana maior. depiction of flower
L. Iris angus ti folio Clusij. depiction of flowers
L. Sysinrichium maius. L. Iris Bulbosa latif: Clusij. depiction of flowers
.6. L. Iris bulb: flore luteo. L. Iris Hispa bulb. depiction of flowers
7. L. Moly latifolium mont: flore flavo. L. Moly mōtan: angustifolium. depiction of flowers
.8. L. Lilium montanum. I. Giglio salvatico. G. Lis jaulne. Ge. Cymbels. depiction of flowers
.9. L. Martagon Pomponeum. depiction of flowers
L. Lilium rubrum bulbiferum. I. Giglio rosso. G. Lis orengé. Ge. Roode Lelien, ofte Gold gilgen. depiction of flowers
11 L. Gladiolus vtrim{que} floriferus L. Gladiolus Narbonen:. depiction of flowers
.12. Rosa alba ple: flo: L. Rosa rubra praenestina. depiction of flowers
13 L. Rosa centifolia Batavica. L. Rosa versicoler. depiction of flowers
14 Belvedere. L. Campanula flo coerul:. L. Campanula flore alba. Ge. Cloxkens. depiction of flowers
15. L. Papaver flo: multipl:. G. Pavot. Ge. Heul. L. Papaver flo: plen: jncarn:. depiction of flowers
16. L. Lychnis coronaria flo: rub: ple:. I. Lychnide. G. Oillets. Ge. Christus oogen. L. Lychnis flore albo. Ge. Himmelrösslein. depiction of flowers
17 L. Superba alba. L. Superba flo: simp:. depiction of flowers
18. L. Caryophilus flore albo punctato. L. Cariophilus flore sanguineo. L. Caryophylus flore niveo. depiction of flowers
19. L. Melanthium flore simplici. L. Melanthium flore pli depiction of flowers
.20. L. Cariophylus maximus col: carneo. L. Cariophylus maximus variegatus. depiction of flowers
THE THIRDE BOOKE CONTAININGE THE DISCRIPTION OF THE FLOVVERS IN AVTVMNE, MADE BY THE AVTHOR AFORESAIDE. If that these workes shall well content, Thy curiouse mynde and Sense: Be mindfull of the Authors praise And iudge of his exspence. 1. Clematis, or the travellers ioy. CLematis is a twiggie growth, and this flower is called by Clusius a seconde woodbyne, first the flower cometh vp like vnto red Ivy, and afterwardes groweth more twigg-like, the branches are of a Chesnut coloure, the smaler braunches or steales where vpon the leaues depende and growe vp, are very smale and tender, and are very brit∣tle. The flower is very tender, and withereth assoone as it is broken of, as experiece teacheth vs, it is inclosed in longe knopes that are of a very light skie coloure and purple like. This flower openeth in the middle, and it hath 3. furrowes in it, which almost by the knope is of a light greene: And this flower may be painted after this manner, first take faire lack coloure, put therevnto a little Lambeblack, because the purple may falle somewhat sad, the spotts are light greene mingled with ashcoloure and masticot, the syde leaues are of a lighter greene, the leaues are of a light ash coloure mingled vvith sad yellovv, the steales of the leaues are greene, the braunches or twiggs that beareth the flower are chesnut coloure. 2. The muske rose. THis rose is perfect white a little tending towardes a whay coloure, within it hath yellow veines, the leaffe and steale is euen, and smooth, with very few prickes, which are of a chesnut coloure the steale is a lighter greene then the leaues are, the leaues may be painted with sad yel∣low and ashcoloure and shyninge, and vpon the wronge side, not so sad a greene but somewhat lighter beinge mingled with white and mountains greene, the steale of the rose is of a Chesnut coloure, & it may be painted vvith a little lack and oker. 3. The mary golde of the sonne. THis great and faire sonne marigolde cometh late, not before Septem¦ber,
and althoughe this be a very great flower, yet it groweth yearely vp, of a smale seede, and must be new sowen every yeare. The lesser marigolde of peru. This smaler is in all thinges like vnto the former, but is of a shorter growth, and there ariseth of these three or foure of them vpon one steale and of one seede. The leaues that stand rounde about are of a faire masticott coloure, and if the masticot be not of a high coloure, it must be tempered with a little lack, made shyninge, and shadovved with sad yellow, the innermost must be of a berry yellow there must be regard had in toppinge the starrs vvith light masticott, the laggs must also be topt with the former coloure, the cowne within is the saddest of all, the leaues that come after the yellovv leaues, must very evidently appeare, because they are greene, these leaues and the steale must be shadowed vvith sad yellow and ashcoloure, and topt with white and masticott. 4. The Indian Reede. THe flower of this Indian Reede, is golde yellow and spotted with black spotts, the leaues are like vnto white niesinge pouder, and may be co∣loured with mountaine greene & masticott, the middle ribbe is somewhat whiter, the strepes thereof are of sapgreene, & shadowed with a little ver∣digreece amonge the other, the roote is of a Chesnut coloure, the tvvo reedes are coloured with the sap of berry yellow, and shadowed vvith sad yellow and ashcoloure. 5. The great Affricaen, or french Marigolde. THis great french marygolde is of a very faire growth, and hardly will growe in this clymate by reason of the colde, for it growes vp very slowely, with single leaues spreade abroade, sett like a ruffe, and must be coloured with operement, and topt with masticott, and shadowed with lack & sad yellow, the middle crowne is of a straw coloure or light yellow, tendinge towardes masticot, and shadowed with sad yellow. The steale and leaffe must be coloured with the sap & iuice of verdigreece and shadowed vvith verdigreece and sapgreene, the budde is mingled vvith a little ope∣rement at the toppe, and is shadovved as is a foresaide, the steale belovv hath some reddish stripes. 6. The dubble french Marygolde. THe great dubble french Mary golde differeth nothinge from the for∣mer, but onely that it is thicker of leaves and hath a shyninge glosse, and must beshadowed brightly. 7. The little french Marigolde. THe little french marigolde is of a high and bright coloure shyninge, topt with operement and masticot resemblinge golde, the shadowinge of the leaues vpon the sides appeareth like red velvett, and of some there fore they be called velvett flowers, in the temperinge of the coloures, there must be vsed good lack, a little vermilion, and operement, the greater of these two sortes resembleth much velvet: as is aforesaide. The borders of the leaues are of masticot yellow, the leafe is of a yellow oker and ashco∣loure mingled, and it must be shadowed accordingly, the steales of the leaues are lighter then the leaues themselues, the great stalke is sadder then the leaues, the knope is more yellowish, the roote is somewhat reddish. 8. Mallowes, or dubble hollihock. THe dubble hollihock, is a very pleasant coloured flower, of a vvhitish fleshcoloure, the edges more lighter then the middle, with some smale stripes in the middle like vnto the vermillion coloure, sprinckled with a little lack: the highest toppinge of this flower must shyne white like vnto silver coloure. The leaffe is of a Comon greene somewhat yellovvish, the knopes are of a paler greene more whiter, the steale is more yellower, and all these must be tempered accordinge to theire owne proprietie, the pointe of the openinge budde must be topt a little whyter then the leaues, the lagg of the buddes be of lighter greene then the leaues be aboue. The other sorte of this full leafde flower is of the coloure of a Rubie, it is painted with lack and vermillion, and topt with white and vermillion,
and shadovved vvith faire sad coloured lack. The buddes where they ap∣peare throughe are as faire red as the flovver, the steale and the leaffe is like vnto the former. 9. French curled Mallowe. THe French curled Mallovve, is of a very strange and crooked grovvth, the flowers in the huskes are hardely te be espied, of a red fleshcoloure, the huskes are greene, of masticot and light ashcoloure, the leaues are of the same coloure, yet somewhat sadder, the shaddow sapgreene, the curled edges, are topt more whiter then the leaffe is, and also the veines of the leaues too. The steales are light ashgreene and shadowed with sapgreene. 10. Palma Christi, or kick. KIck, is a verry strange & vnusuall growth, the steale is like vnto wood, the leaues thereof a sad and vnpleasant greene (it is called of some the mole or the moldwarps herbe because they eate there of) it may be painted with sad yellovv and florey for it is a blackish morphen coloure, and yet in the reflection there may be seene a whitish coloure at theire vppermost toppinge; The vppermost budds at the top are of a berrie greene, and are shadowed with sad oker and omber, the appearance of the buddes at the top are of a purple coloure, the open budds at the sides and the flower is of light masticot. The great budds at the sides which is the seede is the braun∣ched budds, being of a sad mountaine greene coloure, the steale is of a Bra∣sill coloure strewed as it were with white meale, the Ioyntes are reddish of lack coloure and the steales of the seede buddee are greene. 11. The Mexican flower, or the wonder of peru. THis vvonder of peru, is found in India, and is in our daies by the ma∣tiners (that are this may addicted) brought into these countries, and is reckoned and esteemed for a vvonder in regard of the alteration of the coloures, there are of them of dyvers sortes, some of theire flowers of sad lack coloure, and also the great budds, and are topped vvith lack and white together, the veines and the knopes are a little blewish, the little budds are greene like vnto the leaues, and the steales of some of them ap∣peare red, like vnto the flower of the buddes as the others doe. The leaffe and steale is greene, of ashcoloure and masticott, and are shadowed vvith verdigreece. The other flower of this sorte, is checkered, some of the leaues within are of lack coloure, and others are of white and masticott, and so are they that are folded hanging downewardes, and are marbled with some stripes or veines of pale lack coloure. The steale of the flower, euen to the flower, is coloured as the flower is, the stalke and leaues are greene like vnto the o∣ther. 12. Tobacco, or Henbane of peru. TObacco in these Countries is more comon then in the daies of out forefathers, it is of a high growth, the leaues may very well bepainted vvith sad yellow and ashcoloure, and shadowed vvith verdigreece, the budds are of a sad greene when they first appeare, & when the flowers she∣wes it selff, then are they of a masticote greene, the flower is vnderneath a pleasant greene, almost a yellow greene, the flower is within lack coloure and white, in the hallownesse of the flower it is a yellowish greene, vvith a blewish greene budde. 13. Rounde Sowbread. THis flower is called the Italian Swynes breade, and that because of the roote thereof, the coloure tendes tovvard a purple lack, and about the bottom where the leaues springe out it is somwhat sadder, the leaues to∣wardes theire endes are somwhat brighter, the wrethen steales are chesnut colour, the leafe is a pleasant greene, havinge whitish, flames, in the middle somewhat darker, and not so shyninge as the others are. These leaues must be painted with browne ashcoloure, & sad yellow mingled together, shad∣dowed with sapgreene, the white flames are of masticot and leade vvhite mingled together, the topping a little brighter and whiter, and a little sad greene in the middle. The Roote of this Italians Sow breade is of a Chesnut coloure, the vp∣permost spriggs aboue are somwhat lighter the steales of the leaues are, the
shaddow is a black red, or of omber and black and browne red together, the toppinge is a little white mingled vnder the aforesaide coloures. The little leaues are like also vnto the former little leaues of the flower. 14. Ivy Sow breade. THe Sowbread wth many leaues, is the greatest of all these yt are knowne by that name. The coloure of these flowers is painted with fleshcoloure, and shadowed with purple lack coloure, and that in speciall towardes the lower heades of the flowers, they are topt with a pale purple coloure, the steales are a chesnut coloure and somewhat purple like, the buddes betwixt the leaues are greene, and when they are spronge out, they be of a purple coloure, Concerninge the leaues, they are much at one with the leaues of the former Sowe breade, but yet theire greene is tendinge somewhat to∣wardes mountaine greene, and althoughe that greene be the lightest, yet the spotts are the saddest. The Roote of this sow breade is almost like vnto the former, but that it is more blacker, and it may be painted with lampe black and red-black ve∣ry thinne layde vpon it, and shadowed somewhat sadder. The steale and leaues are as it is saide in theire discription, but the buddes that are a little open may be seene a little light red appearinge out, the shaddowe of the bole is as the former but a litte sadder, the toppinge is of white and a little lamblack, and the veines are more blacker. 15. The great winter Daffodill: or Narcissus flower. THis Narcissus cometh in the harvest and is called the great winter daf∣fodill. The one is thicker of leaues then the other, the single one is of the coloure of masticot being thinly laid on, shadowed vvith sad yellovv, the knobes in the flower are like vnto masticott, but the spriggs wherevpon the little knobes doe stand are of a light greene. The steale or stumpe where the flower comes forth of, is of a pale masticot yellow at the vpper parte of it, but below it is of a pale greene, & is painted with sad yellow & ashco∣loure, and shadowed with omber and sad yellow and a little black red alto∣gether, and the veine must well be observed that passeth throughe the mid∣dle of the leaues, because of there shyninge glance. Narcissus, or the dubble vvinter Daffodill. The dubble one, is like vnto the last mentioned daffodill in coloure, no∣thinge differing therein, but that it is more thicker of leaues, and fevver greene leaues then the other hath. 16. The winter Iacynth. THis Winter Iacynth, may be coloured with Indigo & lack mingled to∣gether, but at the sharpe endes of the flowers, there be certaine stripes of a sad browne coloure, and the more inwarde the more lighter: the threedes that stand within the flower are almost as sad indigo, the steale is of a pale verdigreece coloure, the smale spriggs wherevpon the flowers growe, are aboue almost like vnto indigo, and below are greene, and when the buddes beginne to open, it is reddish vnder the steale it is of a reddish purple, the seedebole is red, and topt with white, the two longe leaues are yellovvish. The bunche and the steale is as the other aforesaide is. The greater vvinter Iacynth. The coloure of this great winter Iacynth, is, (concerninge the coloure), agreeinge to the former, onelie it it of a greater proportion, and hath tvvo steales, the one against the other, and the budds black, the seedebole is like the former, but somewhat whyter. 17. Fever few, or fedder few. THe single and the dubble of these are both of one coloure, the middle crowne is sad yellow, mingled with a little white, the leaues are almost white, the braunches are lightgreene, and the leaffe is a sadder greene, and is painted with sad yellow and ashcoloure, or the lightest masticott and ashcoloure. The dubble is like vnto the former, of a pure white & very many smale leaues, in the crowne of it there is a spott of a faire greenish yellow.
18. Doggs bane, or purple medow saffron, or the sonne before the father. THis flower commeth in harvest, is of a faire red & purple colour, it may well be painted with tournesol and white tempered together and sha∣dowed with lack, there goeth a white stripe within throughe the leaues, the spriggs that stand within the flower are vvhitish, the little knopes on the end of those spriggs are oker yellow topt with masticote. The steale is to the bottom of a silver colour, the budds when they opē are whitish co∣loured. The vvhite meddovv saffron. The other sorte of these flowers is pure white, and is painted with white leade, and topt with that white whichs is called the schillffer white, and shaddowed very thinne with a blewish black, the tongues have theire heades of a masticott yellow; and the spriggs of those tongues are whitish. The steale of the flower is white from the top to the toe, and the budds likewise, onely the vppermost parte of the steale hard by the flower is a maidens blush coloure. 19. Saffron of constance, with broad leaves. THis flower when it first appeareth is of a red purple coloure marked with spotts of a sad lack coloure, but havinge stoode a while opē, thē are those spotts very euen, so that they can hardely be marked where they were, the coloure towardes the ende of the steale is of a white silver coloure the neck is of a vvhitish yellow, but more lower it is of a reddish yellow, and agreeinge with the coloure of the drie earth. Checkered saffron flovvers. This Spanish saffron that is so checkered, is a speties of the Constanti∣noples saffron, but his leaves are much lesser, and with sad red lack spotts checkered like the checkered daffodill the seede bole is almost of the same fashion, the flower may be coloured with a flesh coloure grounde, being lightly laide on with faire red stryped checkers and spotts devided so to∣wardes the end of the flower, the steale is perfect white as the comon saf∣fron is. 20. Spanish mountaine saffron flowers, of divers colours. SAffron of dyvers coloures groweth close to the grounde with three or foure flowers together, as though it were all but one flower, but standing platted as it were the one leaffe purple, an other halffe purple, another per∣fect white another but halffe white, as in the figure you may perceiue: de∣vided with spotts and shaddowes, the outtermost leaffe is very beautifull, flamed cleane through with murrey flames, whichs in the middle of the leaffe are all even so that no flame can be seene, the coloure of this flower, is a purple tending towardes a tournisol the pointinges even and thinne, and shadowed with pale lack, and in some places shadowed more sadly, the pesteales are masticot yellow; the huske where out the flowers doe come forth of, is of a reddish coloure. Mountaine saffron. The spanish saffron is of a more sadder coloure thē others are, but yet of one proportion, but for changinge of the purple coloure you must take ashcoloured lack and white leade together, and shaddow these accor∣dingly as is aforesaide, the clappers that come in the middle, temper them with a little oker and sad yellow, the leaves are topt with white and verdi∣greece, the greene colour that goeth over the cod is an evē whitish greene but the cod or the sheath it selffe is more greener, the steale is reddish, the bole may be painted like roest or browne red. The least & shortest portugals saffron, the leaues without are of a faire flesh coloure drawne throughe the middle with one line of Indigo and with in of a whiter flesh colour in the line appearinge a greene shynings throughe the other coloure, the oudd at his first arysinge is maydens blush coloure with springinge out spriggs with yellow knobes, the bole is as the former. 21. Saffron of naples. NAples saffron is of a reddish purple, painted with ash coloure and lack mingled together, and topt with a little white leade amongst the for∣mer, this flower hath some spotts but they are very hardly seene, and are of a faire lack coloure, the steale is silver coloure, the knopes are of oke yellow, topt with masticott.
Dubble leafde saffron. This is of a pale purple, and here and there hath white flames and some∣tymes browne flames or raies; the buddes are masticot yellow, the steale is almost white; and topt with silver white, but towardes the bottom it is more lighter. 22. The vnpleasant, whitered or decayed Iacynth. THis is a strange and a rare Iacynth, it hath white leaves, and must be painted with ocket-yellow and purple mingled together, and a little ash colour amonge the same, the buddes are of the same colloure, and the shadowinge is well represented in the figure it selffe, the laggs below are ash-coloure, and within the flowers are of a shyninge ash coloure, the steale is of the same coloure, with a shyninge shadowe, and so are the leaves. The leaffe is mountaine greene, shadovved vvith sad yellovv and ash coloure, the boles coloured vvith ashcoloure and shaddovved with omber, the other half are milkwhite leaves, the steale is of a light greene, and the leaves like vnto the other. 23. Comon Saffron. THe flower of this Comon saffron, is of a blewish purple somevvhat light, mingled with sad purple flames cominge by degrees frō the mid∣dle, they are of a light ashcoloure mingled with lack and white leade, the flames are indifferent sad, and may be painted vvith Indigo and lack, but towardes the middle somewhat sadder as like vnto red purple. The spriggs are almost blood red. For the Saffron is vermillion red and shadowed with lack, the middle spriggs are masticott yellow, and topt somewhat lighter. The other is like vnto this, but is a little lighter. 24. Constantinoples mountaine saffron. THis saffron hath a very odd flower, and may be coloured with faire tournisol, mingled with a litle white lead, and topt with the same, the shadow of Indigo and lack, the huske from whence the flower cometh out of, is like the same. The bole is of a pale yellow, vvith white spotts, and shadowed vvith omber. The longest huske tends toward a silver co∣loure, it hath a short steale, and at the lower end it is whitish. 25. The strange daffodill: or the vnknowne Narcissus. THis strange & vnknowne Narcissus, is called by Doctor Clusius, Nar∣cissus Lafolio Major, and is of a purple coloure, somewhat tendinge tovvardes a skie coloure, havinge two white hornes, with reddish yellovv seedes, the steales of the flowers are of a shyninge, yet a withered greene coloure. The huske that inclosed the flower is of a pale greene. The bole is as bigg as a mans fiste, but therein there is no difference betwixt this & the Comon Narcissus, and may be painted with a little white and oker to∣gether, the shadowe is of omber and browne blew, the veines are like the earth & are shaddowed vvith omber, the vpper neck is devided into shilf∣fers which must be seperated vvith a little omber from the other parte, the vppermost top is a yellovvish vvhite. Here endeth the flowers in Autumne.
Meridies Septentrio Oriens depiction of garden
1 L. Clematis altera Purpureo flore Gu Viorne H. Gormadera Ge. Braeckcruyt, ofte Waldrebe depiction of flowers
2 L. Rosa Moscata alba pleno flore I. Rosa Moschetta magiore G. Rose musquee double Ge. Dubbelde moscaet Rose depiction of flowers
3 L. Chrysanthemum Peruvianum maius. I. Trombad Amore. P. Gigante. Ge. Groote sonne bloeme. Sonnenkron. An. Indien Goldē sonne. L. Chrysanthemū Peruv: minus Ge. Kleyne Sonnenbloeme. depiction of flowers
4 L. Arundo Indica florida. I. Canna d' Jndia. G. Roseau d' Inde. Ge. Indiaensch bloyende riet, ofte Blumenrohr. depiction of flowers
5 L▪ Flo▪ Aphricanus maior. I. Garoffano Indiano. G Grand Oeillet d' Jnde. Ge Groote Thunis blom, oste Gross Indianisch Negelein. depiction of flowers
6. L. Flos Aphricanus maior multifoli{us}. I. Girofano Jndiano magiore. G. Grand Oeillet d'Inde double. Ge. Grote dubbelde Thunis blom. depiction of flowers
7 L. Flos Tunetensis minor. I. Girofani de India. G. Oeillets d'Inde. Ge. Kleyne fluweel bloemen, oste Jndianisch Negelein. depiction of flowers
.8. L. Malua rosca multiplex. I. Malua magiore. G. Rose d'outer mer double Ge. Dubbel Winter rosen. depiction of flowers
.9. L. Malua crispa. I. Malua crspo. G. Maulue crespu. Ge Gecronckelde Malue. Krauss Pappelen. depiction of flowers
10 L. Ricinus. I. Girasole. G Palme de Carist. Ge. Mollencruyt ofte. Wunderbaum. depiction of flowers
11 L. Flos Mexicanus. I. Gelsemino Indico. Ge Iasmyn van Indien ofte. Ge. Gescheket Indianisch blum. G. Merveille d'Inde a diverses conieurs. depiction of flowers
12 L. Hyoscyamus Peruvianus. I. Negotiano. G. Nicotiane. Ge. Taback ofte. Bilsen cruyt van Peru. depiction of flowers
13. L. Cyclaminos Italica rotundifolia. I. Pan porcino. G. Pain de porceau. Ge. Verckensbroot. Erdapfel. depiction of flowers
14 L. Cyclamen folio hederae. I. Pan porcino. G. Pain de Porceau. Ge. Verckens broot met veylbiaderen Erdscheib. depiction of flowers
14 L. Radix Cyclamini folio hedera. Ge Eertrape. 13 Radix Cyclamini praecocis sive Italici Wortel van het ronde Jtaliaens verckens broot. depiction of flowers
15 L. Narcissus Autum: maior flore luteo. I. Narcisso de Autonno mag: G. Narcisse d' Autumne. Ge. Grosse herbst-Narcissen. Ge. Dubbelde groote herfst-Nariassen. depiction of flowers
16. L. Hyacinthus Autum minor. G. Vaciet d'Automne. Ge. Klein herbst Hyacint. Cleyn Hyacint vā dē herfst L. Hyacinthus Autumnalis, sive serotinus maior. I. Cipolle camino d'Autonno. depiction of flowers
17 L. Solis oculus. I. Marella. G. Maroine. L Parthenium pe: Ge Matercruyt ofte. Nutterkraut. depiction of flowers
18 L. Colchicum purpureum. I. Colchico. G. Tuechien. Ge. Zeitlosen. L. Hermodactylus Ge Weiss Zeitlosen depiction of flowers
19 L. Colchicum Byzantinū multiflorum. Ge. Colchicum van Constant met brede bladeren. L. Colchicum lusitanic: reticulatum. Ge. Portugaelsche Colchicum fritillare glyck. depiction of flowers
20 L Colchicum flore Versicolore. Ge. Colchicum met verscheide vervige bloemē. L. Colchicum hispanicum montanum. Ge. Spaensch Berch Colchicum. L. Colchicum lusitan: serotinum. Ge. Spade portugaelsche Colchicum. depiction of flowers
21 L. Hyacinthus Hisp: obsoletior. Ge. Wynterschen witten orientael Hyacinth. L. Hyacinthus brumalis. lobey depiction of flowers
22 L. Colchicum Neapolitanum Ge. Colchicum van Napels. L. Colchicum polyphyllantes Ge. Dubbel-bloemige Colchicum depiction of flowers
23 L Crocus.  Zaffrano. G Safran. Ge Saffraen. L. Crocus Montan, Ge. Berch herbst Saffraen. depiction of flowers
24. L. Crocus Byzantinus Ge. Berch Saffraen van Constantinoplen L. Crocus Montanus hispan. Ge. Purper Spaens Berch Saffraen depiction of flowers
25 L. Narcissus marinus exoticus. Ge. Vremde zee Narcis. depiction of flowers
2 L. Bulbus Narcisci Marini. Ge. Den Bol van den Jndi: Zee Narcis. depiction of bulb
THE FOVRTH AND LAST BOOKE CONTAININGE A DIS∣CRIPTION OF THE FLOVVERS OF THE WINTER QVARTER. If hethertoe (my frende) you haue, Performde the taske in hand: With ioy proceede, this last will be The best, when all is scande. 1. Mountaine Pepper. THese two sortes of Pepper, the first beinge called a lawrell Pepper, because of the likenesse of these leaues with the lawrell leaffe, the one resemblinge the other, but yet the lawrell Pepper-flovver hath a smale longe leaffe of a pale greene coloure. The leaues both in forme fashion and coloure agree with the leaues of the lawrell tree, the braunches are of a sad haire coloure, and may be painted with omber, and white mingled together, and are shadowed and topt, as such requireth. Mezereon. The other which is called Mezereon, hath both smaller leaues and flo∣wers, of a shyninge light purple, vvhich may be painted with vvhite and lack coloure mingled together, the budds are of a sadder lack coloure, the steale is as the former is. 3. Black neesinge pouder, or pellitorie of spanie. THe flower of the Helleborus, or black neesinge pouder is white, onely vpon some sides there is an appearance of maidens blush coloure, and the leaues at theire endes are of the same coloure. The veines are snovv white, but they haue smale spotts of a light masticot yellow, & the grounde of them is greenish, the steale is of berrie greene, shadowed vvith sap∣greene, the leaues agree with the leaues of the lawrell tree▪ and are a little Iaggd from the middle vnto the pointes of them. 3. Bastard black Hellebor. THe flower of this Bastard Hellebor, is of a yellowish greene, and may
may be painted with berrie greene, very thinne lay de vpon it, and shadow∣ed vvith sapgreene, but vvith great consideration of the veines and smale stripes, that they be not too grosly handled, the toppinge must be of light masticot, the seedes in the middle are as the former, the steale is of a light greene, and the leaues somewhat sadder, and may be painted with ashco∣loure and sad yellow together, and with the same both shadowed and topt by discretion. 4. Bulbed violetts, or bulbed stockgillo flowers. HEre is expressed three sortes of stock gilloflowers, differinge, but very little frō each other, the first hath a white flower of six leaues, whereof the three outermost are longer then the other, & the three middle most beinge shorter are cloven in the middle, and garnished with a border of a light greene coloure. The steale & the leaffe is of a pale greene, the boles are of a light maiden haire coloure tendinge somewhat whitish. The Seconde of these, is called by the name of the Constantinople violetts or stockgillo flowers, beinge (thoughe smaller,) both in the flower, leaffe and steale resemblinge the other greater. The thirde & last of these, is differinge from the two former in the leafe, and in the flower, the vpright standinge leaues, are of a sad greene, and may be painted with sapgreene and indigo, & sad yellow for the shaddow of it, the flower is pure white and shaddowed with a sad blew, the spriggs within are of a faire yellow, standing round about a smale white hole, the steale as also the leaues are all of one coloure. 5. Yellow winter woluesbane. THis winter woluesbane hath a yellow flower, & is topt with masticot, and is shadowed with yellow oker, and omber mingled together, the knopes are greenish. The steale may be coloured with ash-coloure and sad yellow beinge lightly mingled together, and is of a lighter greene then the leaues be, the leafe that is folded downewardes is yet somewat lighter, the yonge ones at there first cominge out of the ground are more yellower The roote is of a verry deepe and sad browne ruddy coloure. 6. Golden trefoile, or 3. leafde liverworte, or the herbe Trinitie. OF these trefoiles beinge of partie coloures that is of red and blew. The first hath a flower of six leaues of a faire red coloure, and may be co∣loured with a thinne brasill red, and may be shadowed with lack & blew mingled together, the knopes & spriggs in the middle are white, the seedes are a light greene and garnished with pearles that are white, the onder∣most leaues are vvhite, vvith a little appearame of red amonge the same. The steale is of a light Sapgreene, but harde at the leaves (vvhich are of a sadder coloure of an ash-coloure and sad yellovv mingled together) are somewhat reddish tendinge towardes the lack colour, the roote is maydē∣haire coloure, and may be represented with red and omber mingled to∣gether. The blevv Hepatica, or trefoile, &c. The other of these flovvers is of a skie coloure, & is topt and shaddo∣vved as is requisite, in all thinges like vnto the former exceptinge the co∣loure. 7. Saffron with a silver coloured flower. THese Saffron flowers which are here represented, are of two severall coloures, and of either sorte, they are single, and dubble. The first are of a light white coloure, and are so on the outsides, but are garnis∣hed with stripps of a tawney coloure euen to the steale. Saffron vvith golden strypt leaues. The other are of a golde yellow colour with sad purple strypes, the boles are of ashcoloure, &c. 8. The little Narcissus. THese little Narcissus flowers, all of them are reckoned amonge the Bastard Narcissus flowers. The flowers are withoutt smell, of the
coloure of faire masticott yellow. The leaffe is of a light greene, of masticot and ashcoloure mingled, and is shadowed as is requisite. Saffron vvith golden strypt leaues. This great one, is like vnto the little one in colour, and may be topt with light masticott, and shadovved with saffron, or else vvith a little sad yellow and lack coloure. 9. The dubble yellow Rushey bastard Narcissus or Daffodill. TWo severall sortes of bastard Narcissus are here represented, that are Rushey. They differ most in the coloure of the flowers, for the first hath a yellovv sockett, and may be painted vvith light masticott, vsinge therevnto a more sadder coloure for the shadowinge of it. The other of these two flowers is white, and needeth no discription for the paintinge of it, the knopes vvithin are yellow, onely of ocker coloure, the skinne or sheath from whence the flovver cometh forth, is of a light mayden haire coloure, the sheath is light greene. The leaues and the steales are of a sad greene like vnto Russhes. 10. Red Doggs teeth. THe coloures of the flowers of Doggs teeth, are of tvvo dvvers sortes, that spreade abroade theire leaues at the sonne rysinge. The first e of these is of a light purple or lack coloure, shadowed vvith a sadder lack the spriggs are white vvith little knopes, of a sad purple colour almost black, the clapper is a lightgreene. VVhite Doggs teeth. THe other flower is perfect white, and shaddowed with lambesblack, hav nge sometymes certaine little spotts of omber or of a very sad yel∣low, the laggs are rounded with sad omber, and topt with a little white vn∣der the omber, in the middle of those Iaggs there ariseth a manner of a clapper of a pale greene, shadowed with greene, and topt with masticote. The steale there of is a sad red, of lack, oker and a little greene tempered all together, shadowed with a little omber the leaves are of a cypres greene, and are marked with spotts of lack and saffron mingled together, the out∣termost parte of the leaffe is somewhat sadder, and comonly throughout, they are as the spotts are that are vvithin. 11. Comon Grape flowers. HEre is expressed three sortes or severall fashions of the Grape flowers or grape Iacynthes. The first of these hath a sad blew coloured flower, painted w th sad ashcoloure, shadowed with lack moes and indigo, where in is to be observed that the vppermoste flowers vvhich stand at the top aboue shew somewhat lighter, and the ondermost must be vvhite vpon the edges but those that are not fully blowne and open, needed to be made white vpon the edges. Skie coloured Grape flovvers. The Second sorte of these is of a skie coloure, and may be painted with the comon iddle sorte of ashblewe, and shadowed with lack moes, with same observation to be vsed as is spoken of in the former, which must be referd to the discretion of the painter in vsinge consideration for the coloures vsi ge either, the flower it selffe for his direction, or else so as it is here expressed which of all is the surest way. The vvhite Grape-flovvers. The thirde sorte of these flowers, is milke white, the steales may be co∣loured with mountaine greene, and shadowed with mountaine greene, or ashcoloure and sad yellow mingled together, but yet at the topp, touht with lack or a red purple ouer the greene, the leaues are mountaine greene shadowed wi h a little verdigreece, the vppermost edges are like vnto ver∣digreece, and at the bottom are of light purple. The bole is almost white and is shadowed vvith red and purple.
12. The Germaine, or the Orientall Iacynth or lilly. TWo sortes of false or bastard Lilleys or Iacynthes are here expressed. The first hath leaues standing vp like vnto the fashion of a lilley, and may be painted with ashcoloure mingled with a little lack, but the flame falleth throughout the same a little sadder, the shaddowinge and the top∣pinge of it must be applyed as it is conveniente for these coloures, at the discretion of the painter, the knobes are of indigo blew, the heades, or the seed-curchions are of a blewish purple, the smale threedes about the same are whitish, the skinne or huske that the flowers come out of, is almost of a mountaine greene, and a little blew appearinge amongst the same. The dubble Orientall Iacynth. The other Iacynth is very copious of leaves, which are of an ashcoloure, tendinge towardes a blew, otherwise in forme and shape not much diffe∣ringe from the former. FINIS. The translator to the Readers, or practisioners. THe Curteous practisioner shall please to vnderstand, that these beinge (by earnest request) cōmitted to mee to be transtaed, and the names of the colours so much differinge from the originall language, that neither by search of bookes, not conference with painters, not marchants beyonde the seas, could sufficientlie expresse the same to an Englishmans vnderstandinge. Yet by some that made profession of that arte, beinge perswaded that they all had one generall name; whereof I my selffe know better, have done them all, or the most parte of them, to be vnderstoode of any Englishman, onely in one coloure which the dutchmen call Schijt-geel which translated signifieth a shtter yellow. I have in place thereof (because of not offendinge modest eares) called it throughout the whole booke a sad yellow. It is that which the Lattines, french, and spanish, call Buxus, that is box coloure, which is a ad or dead lyke yellow. Thus committing you to the protection and direction of the father of all goed spiritts, I rest. From Vtrecht this 12 of September 1615. Yours E. W.
WHat others with expences great, And toile to passe have brought In searchinge out most forraigne landes, And longe experience sought: And ventured have both liffe and good, To satisfie theire mynde: Makinge the chieffest still theire choise, And rarest of that kynde. Which havinge founde, have carefull bene, With curious arte to expresse: In perfect lineaments the same, As here you will confesse. If well you please to take a vew, From th'top vnto the toe: Of every flower, both stalke and roote, Expressed here in show. You will confesse and graunt with mee, This youth deserves much praise: Whose whole delight from infancie. Hath laboured most alwaies, His knowledge still for to augement, In this his painefull trade: Vntill by industrie at last, This booke was fully made. Which here to you this passe presents, With passinge free good will: Surpassinge all such former sortes, In workemanshipp and skill. Receave then these as his first fruites, What after shall ensue: Of other subiectes, tyme will shew, So for this tyme a deu. T. W. FINIS.
HORTVS FLORIDVS HYEMALIS CR. PASSAEI FIL. LABORE ET INDVSTRIA NVNC PRIMVM IN LVCEM EDITVS ANNO M.DC. XIIII. VLTRAIECTI. Ex Officinâ Calcographicâ CR. PASSAEI.
INDEX. HORTI FLORIDI HYEMALIS. MEzereon & Piper montanum. Fol. 1. Helleborus niger. Fol. 2. Pseudo Helleborus niger. Fol. 3. Leucoion trium generum hulbosum. Fol. 4 Aconitum. Lut: hyem. Fol. 5. Hepatica Trifolia. Fol. 6. Crocus flore argent Crocus aureo purpureo striato Flo∣re. Fol. 7. Pseudonarcissus Luteus Maior Hispan. Narcissus Pu∣milis. Fol. 8. Pseudo Narcissus Iuncifolius minor, flore luteo. Pseudo Narcissus Iuncifolius Flore albo. Fol. 9. Dens Caninus albo Flore Dens caninus rubro purpureo Flore. Fol. 10. Hyacinthus Botryodes Fol. 11. Hyacinthus Germ: Liliflorus Stellaris Hacinthus. Po∣lyanthes cineritio Flore. Fol. 12. Non Hyemis potuêre rigentia frigora nimbis Candentiq́ue adeò constringere grandine ter∣ram, Quin medias interq́ue nives interq́ue pruinas Conetur varias Florum proferre figuras. Nam Boreae coeliq́ue minas industria vicit Humana, ignotasq́ue novo traduxit ab Orbe Plantas, quas docuit nostris assuescere ventis. Has nobis PASSAEE tuo nunc exprimis aere, Spectandas clauso pulcrè praebesq́ue cubili: Pro quo florentem optamus tibi munere vitā, Perpetuumq́ue aetatis ver, viridemq́ue senectā, Et tumulum nullo careat qui floribus aevo. A. B. Meridies Septentrio Oriens depiction of garden
L. Piper montanum. I. Olivella. G. Laureole. Ge. Klein Lawerbaum. L. Mezereon. G. Boys gentil. Ge. Kellerhals ofte. Boeren peper. depiction of flowers
L. Helleborus niger. I. Elleboro nero. G. Viraire noir. Ge. Christwurtz. oste S. wart Niescruyt. depiction of flowers
3. d L. Pseudo Helleborus niger. Ge. Elleboro nigro. L. Ellebore noir bastard. Ge. Wrangecruyt. depiction of flowers
L. Leucoion bulb. Triphyllon. G. Witte Tyde: losen. L. Leucoion Triph. Byzant:▪ L. Leucoion secund. Dod. depiction of flowers
5. d L. Aconitum lut: hyem:. G. Tuc lup jaune. Ge. Winter geel Wolfswortel. depiction of flowers
6. d. L. Trifolium aureum. I. Herba Trinita. G. Hepati{que} fleur rouge. Ge. Gulden Klee. L. Hepatica Trifolia caeruleo flore. depiction of flowers
7. d. L. Crocus flore argent: violac: lincis striato. L. Crocus arg: striato polyphyllo flore. Ge. Saffraen met dubb: argentin: gestrep: blu:. L. Crocus flore aureo purp: striato. Ge. Saffraen met goutgeel gestrepte bloemen L. Crocus pleno aureo flore striato. depiction of flowers
8. d. L. Narcissus pumilus. L. Pseudo Narcissus hisp: ma G. Coquelourde. Ge. Geel Tytlo osen. depiction of flowers
d. 9 L. Pseudo Narcissus juncifoli, min: flor: lut:. Ge. Geele Narcissen met biesblader:. L. Pseudo Narcissus juncifo:. Ge. Witte Ionquillos. depiction of flowers
d 10 L. Dens Caninus rubro flo. L. Dens Caninus albo flo. depiction of flowers
d. 11 L. Hyacinthus botryoid: vulg:. G. Barreletz. L. Hyacinthus botry oicerul:. L. Hyacinthus botryi lac. depiction of flowers
d. 12. L. Hyacinthus Germ: Inliflo: L. Hyacinthus polyant: cinerit: flo:. depiction of flowers
ALTERA PARS HORTI FLORIDI IN∣QVA PRAETER FLORES, VARIA ETIAM REPERIVNTVR ARBO∣RVM FRVCTIFERARVM, FRVTICVM, PLANTARRVM QVOQVE ET HERBA∣RVM MEDICINALIVM GENERA. Per CRISP. PASSAEVM in lucem, edita.
AD LECTOREM. EGressus, benigne lector, hortum priorem, tot florum varietate conspicuum, tot co∣lorum mixturâ varium, tantáque diversitate formarum commendatum, ingredere hunc alterum, qui non minore voluptate te afficere poterit, abundantē non tantum flo∣rum delitijs, sed & frugum, fructuum, herbarum, fruticumq́ copiâ; adeò vt nihil desideres, praeter vnum odorem, quem tamen diuturnitate sua largè compensat. Ha∣bes ntotius anni flores herbas, fruges & fructus, in vnum eum{que} exiguum locum veluti compendio coactos, nullis frigoribus, nulla hyemis aut ventorum intemperie obnoxios; tutos{que} ab omnibus ver∣miculorum ac animantium reliquorum insidijs, a vetustatis corruptione liberos; at semper in eodem decore constanter permanentes. Non hic avium rapacitas, quadrupedum gulositas, neq: reptilium depastio metuenda. Spontè omnia proveniunt & perennant, nihil fossione opus habet, nullâ rigatio∣ne, nullâ insitione, nullâ stercoratione aut purgatione indiget; nulla{que} insuper huius horti timenda sterilitas est; qui semel Passaei labore consitus, aeternitatem secum adducit. Hoc igitur perfruere per∣petuò florente, & paruo aere constante; & authori similia aut meliora vobis paranti, faue.
COGNOSCITE LILIA AGRI QVOMODO CRESCANT, NON LA∣borant, neque nent: attamen dico vobis ne Salmonem quidem in vniuersa gloria sua sic a∣mic tum fuisse vnum ex his. Matth: 6. cap. Formulis Crispiani Passoei et Joannis Waldnelij. engraved epigraph
I. CHAMAEMELON FLORE SIMPLICI. CHamaemeli herba vulgaris licet sit, ejus tamen flores non vltimā laudem, cùm ob formā, tū ob aptissimum Medicinae usum, merentur. Nomē verò in∣de procedit, quod in floribus mali odor deprehendatur, ex quo fere verum & legittimum esse Chamaemelum conijcere licet, quod & ipsae facultate levi∣dentiùs ostendunt. Lassitudini, si quid aliud cum primis confert; doloresq́ue sedat & mitigat; praeterea tensa remittit & laxat, ac teste Dodonaeo, mediocriter dura emollit, constipata rarefacit; nihilq́ue notius aut frequentius in pharmacopolarum officinis occurrit; omnium quippe medicamentorum seré praeludium, & graviorum purga∣mentorum praeparamentum in se continens. II. OXYACANTHA SILVESTRIS. OXyacantha ab acutis videlicet ramulorum spinis sic dicta, nascitur passim in fru∣tetis locisq́ue asperis, silvestri ferè pyro similis, nisi quod minor est & spinosa: Fructū sert myrto non dissimilebā, rubentem, fragilem, nucleos intus habentem; soli∣um mali cydonij sed angustius, viridius teneriusq́ue: Et praeter vim astringendi, varios in Medicinâ usus habere creditur.
2 L. Chamaenolum G. Cameille  Caille A. Chamomill Ge. Calln. L. Oxyacantha G. Epinis Vnoette A. Barberyes Ge. Versich. depiction of plants
III. SIRINGA CERVLEA. SYringa caerulea alijs Lillach Matheoli, frutex est multorum ramorum rectus, tenuis, nodulis suis distinctus, levi intus medullâ repletus: folia se invicem adversa ex singulis gemmis erumpunt ferè gemina, lata, viridia mucronata. marginibus crenatis: Flores exigui sunt & multi coloris caerulei diluti. Exig∣ni in re medicâ nostrorum vsus, quod vires eius minus adhuc cognitae, lateant. IV. ANDROSAEMVM. ANdrosaemon quasi dicas  id est viri sanguis, quod attritū semē eius sive flo∣res, humorem, humanum sanguinem referentem, emittant; Germani Kunrath ap∣pellant. Erutarū genere esse & Hyperico annumerari volunt: folijs tamen multò majo∣ribus: provenit in locis incultis & asperis; floretq́ue in Iulio & Augusto mensibus cale∣faciens & desiccans; semen vim expurgatoriam habet; officinis tamen minus est notum.
3 L. Syringe cerulea G. Syringe  A. Blew pip 4. L. Androsemum G. Tte saine A. Tutsans or parke leanis depiction of plants
V. SILIGO. SIliginem frumentaceam, sive secundum tritici genus Colummellae, nostrum esse vulgare roggem plerique existimant, nasciturvero stipite culmoq́ue triti∣ceo recto sed graciliore & proceriore geniculis vt plurimùm quatuor, spicâ innocentioribus aristis horrente: Excale facit magis quàm triticum, & mi∣nus refrigerat quàm hordeum. Tota ferè Germania hodie & maxime borealior pars hoc frumento nutritur. VI. MALICA HORTENSIS. MAlua Hortensis grandescit saepe in arborem, & baculi vsum prabet; est q́ue folijs amplis, rarioribus, in ambitù segmentis divisis; caudex simplex luxuriosae proce∣ritatis attollitur, a medio fere ad verticem pulcherrimis floribus decoratus, brevi ad∣modum pediculo dependentibus, qui venustate rosis non cedunt, & si suppeteret odor, de principatu merito certarent.
6 L. Siligo G. Seigle A. Rye Ge. Roggen. L. Malica hortensis G. Rose d'outer mer A. Holli hoke Ge. Winter rosen. depiction of plants
VII. CAPRIFOLIVM. PEriclymenos Graecis a convoluendo dicta; Latinis, Volucrum maius, vulgò Caprifolium, & Lilium inter spinas, Germanis VValdgilgin oder Geyssblatt dicitur; frutex est juxta Dioscoridem simplex in aruis & sepibus nascens, vici∣nis se adminiculis convoluens folia habens per intervalla, subcandida, hede∣racea: inter folia surculi exeunt, in quibus baccae hederae similes: flos fabae, candidis longiusculis foliolis cavis rotundus, & quasi in folium procumbens. Vis eius est cali∣da & sicca vehementer, cujus stillatitius liquor oculorum inflammationibus & jecoris aestui medetur. VIII. RVBVS IDAEVS. RVbus Idaeùs sive  Germanis Hindelbern dicitur; Idaeus verò ab Idâ mon∣te, ubi nascitur copiosiùs: Rubo est longè tenerior & minoribus spinis horrens. In siluis frequens invenitur Vehemens huic refrigerandi facultas inest; commodior verò & gratior ob odorem quem refert violaceum est liquor stillatitius qui inde dedu∣citur.
7 L. Capifolium G. Cheurefueille A. Honisuckles Ge. Geiszbart. 8 L. Rubus Idaus G. Framboise A. Raspis Ge. Brem-beer. depiction of plants
IX. CORYLVS. COrylus Germanis Haselnuss, fructus hujus Graecis dicuntur  quod e Ponto venerint; Latinis nuces Avellinae sive Avellinae ab Abellâ oppido an∣tiquo Campaniae, item Praenestinae ac Heracleoticae, a locis circa quae olim fre∣quentiùs crescerent. Haec nostra silvestris est, quae sponte vbique nascitur, minoresq́ue fructus profert quàm sativa, qui contra scorpionum venena valere perhi∣bentur. X. FLOS ARMERIVS. HIc altera Dodonaei Armeriorum speties exhibetur, folia circum caules genicula∣tos ferens latiora, majora & crebriora nec non candidiora, quàm prima, Constan∣tinopolitani floris folijs haut multùm dissimilia. Flores in vmbellâ vnâ plures simul congesti pulcri, rubentes, exiguis candidulis punctis ornati; In petrosis collibus & as∣peris sabulosisq́ue locis apud Germanos & alubi nascitur: a Belgis a: m hortis scritur, vbi secundo anno cum alijs Cariophylleis aestate floret.
9 L. Corylus siluestris G. Noiselles A. Haselnutts Ge. Haselnuss. 10 L. Armeria rubr G. Gyrfflees res A. Sweete Williams G. Stein negli. depiction of plants
XI. MALVA SILVESTRIS. MAlua silvestris a sativâ nonihil differt & pulchritudine & magnitudine: lo∣cis nascitur incultis; folio fere rotundo, pingui, paucis in ambitù serrato seg∣minibus, intercepto; floribus propemodum purpurascentibus; radice can∣didâ. Est esui ac alueo subducendo cum lactucâ conveniens, vnde Mar∣tialis. Vtere Lactucis, & mollibus vtere Maluis. XII. OLEA. OLea Minervae tribuitur, quod semper vireat; & pacis est symbolum, viuax quoque est, & diutissimè durat, adeo vt Theophrasto teste, ad 200. perveniat annum: Ve∣teribus vt probata, sic & nostris vsibus frequens, nec a Medicorum Pharmacis aliena: Vnde quoq: Martialis ejus fructus olim in delitijs fuisse videtur hoc disticho innuere: Haec quae Picenis venit subducta trapetis Inchoat, atque eadem claudit Oliva dapes.
11 L. Malua syluestris G. Mals sages A. Mallowe Ge. Wilde pappelen. 12 L. Olea Lateua G. Oliue A. Olyues Ge. Oliuen. depiction of plants
XIII. PIMPINELLA. PLura referuntur Pimpinellae genera: Sanguisorba verò Italica Pimpinella creditur, a miris in sistendo sanguine viribus sic dicta, quae tamen ab hac no∣strâ nonnihil diversa, quam lonicerus Daucum Creticum Dioscoridis ee pu∣tat, & Ruellius a Germanis Pimpinellae nomine vocari tradit. Semen ejus ca∣lefaciendi vim habere scribitur; Meminit quoque ejus Bapt: Fiera ineleganti suâ caenâ, hoc disticho. Vesicae lapides si Pimpinella remollit, Ignita est, iecori sana, lien{que} tibi. XIIII. ANTIRRHINVM. ANtirrhinum Belgae orant vocant, cui caules sunt rotundi, glabri, fragiles & ramo∣si; folia multa, vt plurimùm oblonga & acuminata, Linariae similia, sed majora: Flores secundum caules superiori parte ordine digesti, formâ oblongi, anteriori parte la∣tiores; qui aperti hiantis leonis rictum referunt, vnde Columella, Nascissi{que} comas & hiantis saeva leonis Ora feri. colore roseo rubentes, aut candidi, vel ex candido purpurascentes, non rarò etiam sublutei; quos deinde capitulum sequitur, oblongum, anteriore parte angustius & foraminosum, narium vituli similitudine; in quo semen parvum & sub ingricans. Vires contra venesicos habere tradit Dioscorides.
13 L. Sanguisrba G. Pimpenelle A. Burnet Ge. Pimpernell. 14 L. Antirrhinum G. Teste de Veace A. A snap dragon Ge. Ka kps. depiction of plants
XV. IRIS. IRis dicta ab coelestis arcus similitudine, quem flores ejus referunt, Germa∣nis autem VeielvvurtZ appellatur, non quod violae sit radix, sed quod ejus radix violae odorem imitutur; Estq́ue multiplicis in medicinâ vsus. In hor∣tis passim est obvia, nec alibi apud nos reperitur. XVI. OXYACANTHAE SPECIES. IS frutex qui nobis Haechdoorn, Lonicero Cynosbatus Theophrasti ee creditur & Latinè rubum caninum dici posse existimat. Certè descriptio Dioscoridis non valdè ab hoc nostro differt: Frutex (inquit) est arboris instar, rubo longe major, folia fert multo latiora Myrto, firmis circa ramos spinis, flore candido, fructu oblongo, nucleo Olivae simili, qui per maturitatem slavescit ac rubescit, & flocculos intus continet.
15 L. Iris G. Flambe  Glyeul A. Flower de luca Ge. Bl Gilgen. 16 L. Oxyacanthus G. Arbespine A. Hauthorne Ge. Weisser Hagdorn. depiction of plants
XVII. LYCHNIS SILVESTRIS PLENO FLORE. HAec Lychnis silvestris ex Verbasci specibus ee videtur quam sic Lomcerus describit: In silvis & mōtibus crescens, folijs mollibus & canis, e cujus me∣dio flos erūpit, Cyano per omnia similis, sed major & plenior, caule palmū vix alto. Omnibus ferè pectoris vitijs mederi creditur, & tussientibus pro∣desse. XVIII. MESPILVS. MEspilus Aronia (vt putant) Dioscoridis, arbor est mali vulgaris altitudine infe∣rior, ramis in gyrum comosis asperisq́ue; folio promisso, tenui, & longo pedi∣culo; flore subherbaceo, Amigdalae formâ; fructu, dum pubescit, viridi & duro, vbi ma∣turùerit fulvo ac molli, circa verticem cristato vel potius coronato, quatuor imò quin∣que intus nucleis lapideis, vnde divulgaris apud Germanos versiculus. Kein Ionckfrou vvard ne so reyn, Ass sie drei nespelen, gib sie von ihr funfftzen stein. Est tamen & propriè Mespilus quae tricoccos a tribus granis quae malo ejus in sunt dicta, haec Germanis minùs cognita.
17 L. Lychims syluestris multiplex G. Oeillets on Oeillets Die A. Double campion Ge. Frawen röslein. 18 L. Mespilus G. Nesples A. Medler Ge. Mespelen. depiction of plants
XIX. SVPERBA. CAryophylleus minor, Superba etiam Officinis dicitur, & Belgis pluymkens, a flosculorum folijs fimbriatis & plumarum similitudine dissectis. Hifloscu∣li apud nos hortorum sunt delitiae, in Germaniâ etiam sponte in pratis & montibus nascuntur. Vsus horum in medicinis olim nullus, sed in coronis frequentissimus fuit: Nunc autem calculo atterendo ac educendo, comitiali etiā mor∣bo laborantibus succum vtilem credi, scriptum Fuchsius reliquit. XX. MALVS CITRIA. MAlus citria vel Assyria ab odore commendatur Amat loca calida, quae causa quod in Germaniâ rara sit; folium fert Lauri, perpetuâ frondens comâ, intercursanti∣bus in ramulis spinis, fructu perenni: Arbor omnibus horis est pomisera, alijs cadenti∣bus, alijs maturescentibus, alijs vero subnascentibus pomis. Huius poëtarum apud nos princeps sic meminit in Georgicis: Ipsaingens arbos, faciem{que} simillima Lauro, Et si non alium latè iactaret odorem, Laurus erat; folia haud vllis labentia ventis; Flos apprima tenax: animas et olentia Medi Ora fovent illo, & senibus medicantur anhelis.
19 L. Caryophyl{us} minimus G. Gyrosskes petites A. single Red pinck Ge. kleine Nge. 20 L. Limonia mala G. Limons A. Limons Ge. Limonen. depiction of plants
XXI. PRVNVS SILVESTRIS. TAntùm abest yt hîc expressus frutex conveniat prunis suo in genere op∣tùmis, & a primo nativitatis loco, Damascenis dictis, quod silvestribus oio annumerari debeat, nostri Belgae slee prùmen vocant: Hujus fructus astringendi vim habet, vt ex viribus ejus & gustu satis est manifestum. Temperamento est frigido. XXII. LEVCOIVM. LEucojon a foliorum non florum colore sic dictum, vt olim veteribus non incog∣nitum, & a Theophrasto quoque descriptum, ita & hodie in nostris hortis frequens est, vocantq: Belgae stockviolieren, multiplici, tam magnitudinis, quàm colorum in flo∣ribus, differentiâ. Habet suos etiam in Medicinâ vsus, febricitantibus n. & maximè pue∣ris ac infantibus subvenire creditur.
21 L. Pruna Damascena G. Pruncaux de Damas A. Damsons Ge. Pframen von Damas. 22 L. Leucoium G. Violiers blaes A. Stok gilloflower Ge. Weiss e Violen. depiction of plants
XXIII. MVSCIPVLA. MVscipula sine viscaria haec, Clusij videtur esse Lychnis silvestris altera, flore muscoso; quae Germanis Lymcruyt dici posset, ob viscosum quo abundat suc∣cum, qui non solum tangentium digitis adheret, sed & muscas praetervolan∣tes ad se trahit, & veluti reti quodam involuit, vnde & Belgae ei nomen vlie∣genet, vt Latinum exprimerent, dederunt. Habet caules geniculatos; folia lata & ve∣nosa, e singulis fere geniculis bina; flores in summo multos & odoratos, colore pulcro roseo rubentes, vel dilutè purpurascentes. Et quamvis nullas ejus in re medicâ vires agnoscat Dodonaeus, sunt tamen qui adversus pestem valere arbitrantur. XXIIII. ACVLEIFOLIVM. Aquifolium vel potius Aculeifolium Agriam ee Theophrasti credidit Tragus, & Lauri silvestris speciem; quod aliquando arborescit, & in majorem excrescit cras∣sitiem: ramos habet nihilominus teneros & flexibiles, ex duro tamen ligno nigrescen∣te & ponderoso, quod lapidis instar in aquas conjectum mergitur, cortice verò tegitur aequali: Folia etiam sunt & aequalia & nitida, saturè virescentia, a Lauri folijs non multùm distantia, sed minora, & acutis in ambitu spinis armata, quae cum arboris aeta∣te minuuntur. Flosculos producit candidos & odoriferos, fructus rotundis instar pisa∣rum, & rubentes, quorum nucleus est subalbidus & ingrati saporis, qui colicis prodesse creditur.
23 L. G. A. 24 L. Agri folium G. Hous A. Hollye Ger. Hulsen. depiction of plants
XXV. CINIRA SATIVA. HAEc cardui species mensarum ferè nostrarum delitium est, folia habens Chamaeleonis & Acanthae albae, sed nigriora & crassiora, subpallida, acule∣ata, acincisa; caulem oblongum, pollicis crassitudine; capitulum oblongū spinosum, corticosis vnguibus turgens, spicisq́ue squammarum coagi∣nentatum, in formam pini fructus; florem in purpureo rutilantem, vnde Columella: Nunc piceâ vertice pungit. Graeci Ciniram vocant a Cinirâ puellâ, quam vis & Athenaeus aliam ejus appellatio∣nis causam afferat. Bapt. Fiera hujus quoq: mem. Hispida ponatur Cinira quae dulcis Iaccho Potanti veniat. XXVI. LYCHNIS SATIVA. LYchnis coronaria sive sativa, folia gerit, (vt hic exprimitur) oblonga, pollicis latitu∣dine aut paulo latiora, mollia, lanosa, cana, caules cubitales, rotundos, geniculatos, canos quoque & lanuginosos, in plures breves alas divisos; in quarum summo singuli flores e calycibus suis, aspectu pulchri sed inodori, colore subpurpureo aut dilutè ru∣benti fulgentes, ex foliolis vt plurimum quinis constantes, Lychnidi vim inesse contra schorpionum venneum Dioscorides testatur.
25 L. Cinaca satina G. Artichaux A. Artichoke Ge. Strabeldn d Artischocken. 26 L. Lychuis satiua G. Oeillets priuez A. Rosa Campion Ge. Zame fraren röselein. depiction of plants
XXVII. PRIMVLA VERIS MINOR. PRimula Veris minor Betonicae (vt quibusdam placit) species esse videtur, ob similitudinem foliorum. Haec cum ex primis anni floribus prodeat, nomen suum invenit, quamvis & officinis herba Paralysis dicatur, quod nervorum doloribus prestantissimum remedium prabet. Floris color est ferè melleus, sed & aliorum colorum flores in hortis curiosorum man∣gonio inveniuntur. XXVIII. PYRVS. VVlgaris arbor Pyrus, quae nihilominus gratissimos orbi fructus profert, infinita differentiâ varios, nec ea dissimilitudo formâ tantùm, sed pyra & bonitate constat: Stomacho grati sunt & desiccant, plus tamen astringunt silvestria, quamvis minus gra∣ti saporis, ideòque in fluxibus valentiora domesticis creduntur.
27 L. Primula veris G. Prie vere ou Blaies de Con A. Primrose Ge. Schsel blmen. Z 8 L. Pyrum G. Du poires A. Peare Ge. Biren. depiction of plants
XXIX. ERICA. ERica frutex apud nos frequens Myricae similis, sed longè minor; flores Au∣tumno in candido purpureos profert, quorum odorem serpentes ferre ne∣queunt, Dioscorides quoq: tam comam quàm flores Ericae Serpentum ictibus mederi tradit: Apes verò plurimùm Ericae floribus delectantur in∣deq́ue optimum mel conficere comperiuntur, ita vt probare non possim Dioscoridis sententiam, qui apes reprobum mel ex hisce floribus colligere scriptum reliquit. XXX. LINARIA PVRPVREA. LOnicero haec herba linariae est species, virgas habens tenues lentasq́ue in quibus foliola sunt oblonga ceu lini, nigra initio, deinde colore mutato subrubescentia; nascitur in locis aridis & juniperos ferentibus, flore lini subcaeruleo & purpurascente, vnde & quidam Heydens Vlas vocant. Variae huic vires a Medicis tribuuntur, oculorum∣q́ue imprimis inflammationes ac rubores succo suo sanare perhibent.
29 L. Erica Caliculata G. Bruyere A. Chalie hearth Ge. Heyde. 30 L. Linaria purpurea G. Lin sauuage bleu A. purpel Tode flax Ge. Harukrant. depiction of plants
XXXI. SABINA. SAbina Graecis  dicta, folijs est Cupressi vel potius Myricae, sed spinis horri∣dior; graviter olens, acris ac feruens, coactae brevitatis arbor, & in latitudinem magis se effundens, comâ virens perpetuâ; florem fert, vt inquit Lonicerus, puniceum absque fructu: Dodonaeus verò baccas Iuniperi baccis similes tri∣buit. In hortis sicut buxus plantatur, vulgíque opinione infamis habetur, quod mu∣lierum pudori non sine scelere subvenire credatur. XXXII. PAPAVER, FLORE PLENO. PApaver notissimum inquietudinis remedium, & multâ florum varietate conspicu∣um; vnde & hortorum apud curiosulos decus audit: nec tantùm colores in flori∣bus mutare, sed & multitudine foliorum luxuriare solet, ejus praeterea dotes non incle∣ganter Bapt: Fiera in suâ caenâ expressit hoc carmine: Lurida Niliacis nigra exsiccata sub hortis, Pessima, Laethaeum quae genuere opium: Candida sint profugos latura Papavera somnos, Ni modo sint oculis noxia turgidulis: Lenimen querulae tussis, sistentia fluxus Quosque, sed in calidis commodiora focis Trita calescenti super inducenda podagrae, Prosunt insipidae ni gula parcet aquae.
31 L. Sabina G. Sauine A. Sauni Ge. Seuenam. 32 L. Papauer multeple G. Pauor dble A. Double poppie Ge. Magsa. depiction of plants
XXXIII. SEDVM MAIVS. _ Dioscoridis, Latinis sedum majus & Semperviuū Graeco ety∣mo dictum, hoc nominis a re ipsa imposito, perpetuo n. virescit, nec vlla frigoris iniuriâ offenditur. Ab Apuleio vitalis & Semperflorium dicitur. Caules habet cubitales vel majores, pollicis crassitudine pin∣gues, virentes: folia pinguia carnosa, longitudine pollicis, in cacumine linguae similia, in circuitu tenuiter crenata. Flores circa cacumina plu∣res ex tenuioribus ramulis prodeunt lutei coloris steliae formam imi∣tantes. Nascitur in montanis locis, in tectis quoque domorum seritur, vnde & Ger∣manicum nomen invenit: refrigerat autem & restringit plurimum. XXXIIII. VERBASCVM. VErbascum Graecis  vel vt alij , quod caulibus ejus pro Ellychnijs vtātur quâ ratione candelariam hodie vacant. Officinis Tapsus dicitur barbatus: folia habet hirsuta & lata; flores habet flavescentes quinque foliolis constantes. Est a. ver∣bascum multâ varietate insigne, album n. & nigrum a foliorū colore nominatur, illud quoque sexu distinguitur. Praecipua ejus in Medicina vis, ab hujus facultatis professo∣ribus expressa.
33 L. Sedum maius G. Joubarbe A. Housleeke Ge. Hauswurtz. 34 L. Verbascum G. Bouillon A. Nullein Ge. Wulkrant. depiction of plants
XXXV. VICIA. VIcia à vinciendo M. Varroni dicta; vel quod capreoles vt vitis habeat, qui∣bus sursum serpit, aut quicquid attigerit apprehēdit. Nascitur locis maxi∣mé siccis, cubitali altitudine, folijs Aphaces, sed amplioribus, flore pisi; mi∣nutis nigricantibusq́ue in siliquâ granis. De satione & cultu eius plura Columella & M. Cato in libris de re rusticâ. calefacit mediocriter, exsiccat verò in secundo ordine. Serpentum etiam ac canum morsibus medetur. XXXVI. MILLEFOLIVM. MIllefolium à foliorū multitudine, Graecis verò  dicta quasi militaris, quod milites in castris ad vulnera potissimùm sunt hâc vsi, frutex est exiguus, palmi al∣titudine, folijs avicularum pennas imitantibus, brevi admodum dissectoq́ue foliorum exortu, silvestri cumino similibus, praesertim brevitate & scabritie, vmbellâ densiore & pleniore. Surculos in cacumine gerit exiguos, & capitula in modum anethi; flores par∣vos candidos vel etiam purpureos. Nascitur in solo macriusculo & circa semitas maxi∣mè, totâ florens aestate.
35 L. Vicia G. Vesce A. Tares Ge. Wicken Jt. Veccia saluatica. 36 L. Mille folium G. Mille fueille A. Yaccow Ge. Hasengarb. depiction of plants
XXXVII. CERASVS. CErasi fructus vbique obvius, praeter aspectum quo oculos adficit, grato admo∣dum sapore palatum recreat; propter sanitatem & bonitatem suâ laude mini∣mè privandus, quem non neglexit in eleganti suâ caenâ Fiera, his versibus il∣lum celebrans: Iam dedit è Ponto nobis triapoma Lucullus, &c. His aluus fluida arcetur, famis improhus ardor Crescit adempta fitis, quam gula docta coquit. XXXVIII. PSEVDO-NARCISSVS. PSeudo-Narcissi non vna species, aut cognomenti causa est, verum Narcissum imita∣tur, adeo vt in certamen cum ipso praecipuo flore, diligenti cultorum industriá sae∣pissime descendat. Horum supra benigne lector, in priore libro desciptiones & differen∣tias habes, ad quem te mitto, ne acta agere vel dicta dicere in hoc verborum compendio cogar,
37 L. Cerasia G. Cheriss A. Cherys Ge. Kierechen. 38 L. pseudo-Narcissus G. Narcisses A. Daffodill Ge. Hrge bln. depiction of plants
XXXIX. VIOLA MARIANA. VIola Mariana ceu rapū silvestre Dioscoridis, folia primùm habet oblon∣ga, lata, subnigra, aspera, nonnihil hirsuta, vulgaris Buglossi folijs nigrio∣ra, minora, minusq́ue aspera. Caules deinde secundo anno profert rotun∣dos, rectos, ramosos, aliquantulum hirsutos. Flores in summis virgis exe∣unt oblōgi, cavi, rotūdi, per oras incisuris quinque sed non profundis di∣visi; coloris vt plurimùm in caeruleo purpurei, subinde candicantes, in quibus stamina duo aut tria candida; qui priusquàm dehiscunt quinquangulares sunt. post flores capi∣tulum nascitur, superiore parte latius, quinque quoque angulos habēs, quinque loculis hirsutis deorsum pendentibus circumvestitum, in quo semen exiguum subruffi prope∣modum coloris. Radix esui est apta, & astringentis potentiae. XL. ELATINE. VIdetur Helxines species, Elatine dicta, Germanis Kletten kraut; folia tamen habet minora & rotundiora, pilosa; tenuibus ramulis foliosis caulis ornatur, gustuastrin∣gentibus; flores eius sunt stellari formâ, mellei coloris. Viridis herba tusa, frontiq́ue im∣posita, aestum & inflammationem, item fluxus oculorum sistit. Cum vino rubro cocta, intestinorum ex dysenteriâ affectionibus medetur.
39 L. Ʋiola mariana G. Mariettes A. Couentry belle 40 L. G. A. depiction of plants
XLI. HYACINTHVS ORIENTALIS. QVanta Hyacinthorum sit varietas, & quantùm flos ille vt olim in fabulis poe∣tarum celebratus, ita & nunc hortorum ac florum cultoribus in delitijs habi∣tus, nemini, vt credo ignotum est; quare ad superiora cupidum lectorem re∣mitto, & ad caetera properando vlterioris desiderij spem adgredior. XLII. IVNIPERVS. SOla fere arborum Iuniperus foetus suos in biennium prorogat, qui ne maturescunt quidem novis supervenientibus; simile tamen de Grano (ita vocant piperis rotun∣di speciem, quae plurima in Africae littoribus nascitur) nostri mercatores referunt; quod is fructus secundo demùm anno perficiatur. Baccae eius Arceuthides Dioscoridi dictae, stomacho vtiles sunt, contra pectoris vitia, tussim, inflammationes, tormina, serpentum ictus, & vt nostri putant pestilentis aeris infectiones efficacissime sumuntur. Fiera non praetermisit sed hoc carmine virtutes eius expressit. Gratia Iumperi baccis sitientibus ingens, Pulmonem stomachum{que} igne tepente iuvant. &c. Iumperus flammis vsta, venena fugat.
41 L. Hyacinthus Orientalis G. Zacte d'Orut A. ew Jacinth Ge. erezen blmen. 42 L. Juniperus G. Gure A. Juniper Ge. lter. depiction of plants
XLIII. LYCHNIS SILVESTRIS. LYchnis silvestris geniculatis caulibus, folijsq́ue mollibus coronariae satis similis, minus tamen cana; Folijs item angustioribus, & caulibus tenerio∣ribus, pluresq́ue alas facientibus; floribus etiam minoribus, colore can∣didis aut rubentibus; calycibus tamen majoribus. Iuxta pratorum a∣ruorumq́ue margines, & alibi suâ sponte exit; transfertur etiam in hor∣tos, in quibus quandoque florum foliolia multiplicat; plurima aestatis parte, & in Au∣tumnum vsque floret. Scorpionibus venenum est, adeo vt teste Dioscoride haec herbà ipsis appositâ, ad laedendum redduntur inefficacis. XLIIII. LILIVM RVBRVM. LIlium rubrum puto illud quod purpureum vel ferruginei coloris a Dodonaeo de∣scribitur; & Hyacinthi species aliquibus videtur, eoq́ue fere nomine a poëtis cele∣bratur, sic n. Ovidius, Metamorph. lib: x: Ecce cruor qui fusus humo signaverat herbas, Desinit esse cruor, Tyrio{que} nitentior ostro Flos oritur, formam{que} capit quam Lilia, si non Purpureus color his, argenteus esset in illis. &c.
43 L. Lycii silestris G. Oeillet se A. Wild campion Ge. de f rsli. 44 L. Lilium rubrum G. Lis res A. Red lillie Ge. Rote lilie. depiction of plants
XLV. RIBESIVM. RIbesium fructu rubro, officinis Ribes, frutex est omnibus fere cognitus, & in hortis frequens, hujus fructus quòd circa solstitium aestiuum sit matu∣rus vulgò Germanorum S. Iohans bessen vocatur; spinis caret, & ramulis fruticat multis, lentisq́ue: cortice puniceo; folijs vitis, sed minoribus; florē profert mense Majo vel etiā Aprili, subluteum, stellatum; acinos ro∣tundos, virides primùm, cum verò maturuerint rubentes, saporis acidi, sed non ingrati. Fructus & folia refrigerant & exsiccant in secundo gradu, & vis ijs inest astrictoria. XLVI. ACANTHIVM ALBVM. ACanthium album folio est albi Chamaeleonis, angustiore tamen, & candidiore; subdenso, subaspero & aculeato; caule binos cubitus excedente, pollicari aut ma∣jore crassitudine, subalbo, intus cauo; capite in cacumine aculeato, Echini Marini simi∣litudine, minore tamen, floribus purpureis. Nascitur in montibus & locis silvestribus, ac etiam in hortis plantatur; dentibus adfectis medicinam praebens.
45 L. Ribes G. Graiseilles A. red Currans Ge. S. Johan beri oder tre i. 46 L. Acantlium album G. Chardon argin A. White cotton thistk Ge. Weisse wegdistel. depiction of plants
XLVII. PRVNVS DAMASCENA. INter omnia prunorum genera prestant Damascena, de quibus Theocritus Eidil. VIII, interprete Hesso: In terram depressi pondere rami Prunorum, Syriae quae mittunt rura Damasci. Haec Germani quetschen vocant, nigra magnaq́ue & oblonga: culinis are∣facta maximè commendantur, habentq́ue non paruum in Medicinâ vsum, vnde Mar∣tial: Pruna peregrinae carie rugosa senectae. Sume, solent duri soluere ventris onus. XLVIII. FLOS CARYOPHYLLEVS. CAryophyllei flores, ab aspectu & odore plurimùm laudantur, etiam magnitudi∣ne: Horum colores & mixturae ferè infiniti sunt, ita vt nihil ad nouitatem & cum eâ varietatem inducendam humana industria rellinquat intentatum, quae quotidie no∣vos florum partus, & prioribus in visos producere non cessat.
47 L. Prun, mirabolan{us} G. Prunier A. Plunnes Ge. Pflaen. 48 L. Caryophyll{us} G. Gyrff leés A. Jagged pincks Ge. Negeli oder Grasblumen. depiction of plants
XLIX. ANAGALLIS AQVATICA. _ Graecis haec herba , id est, concutiendo, quòd excutiendi vim ha∣beat, siquidem calculos a renibus pellere, vrinam & menses ducere traditur. Latinis & lauer a lauando fortè, quod aquis adnatum sem∣per eis elui gaudeat. Anagallis etiam aquatica, quòd flore Anagallidi foeminae sit similis. Frutex est pusillus, pinguis, rectus, folijs latis & o∣doratis; Gaudet riuulis, mense slorens Iunio. L. HORDEVM. HOrdeo nihil notius, optumum esse candidū purumq́ue Dioscorides tradit, illud∣q́ue minus quàm triticum alere. Plurimus ejus in decoctione vsus; atque ex hoc frumento cereuisia nostra ferè constat, vt & antiquorum ptysana Plinio summopere probata. Panem verò ex hordeo antiquis vsitatum, delicatior inde vita damnavit, & servorum ac quadrapedum tradidit refectibus
49 L. Anagallis aquatica G. Mor aquatique A. Water pimpernell Ge. Wasser pgen. 50 L. Hordeum G. Orge A. Barlye Ge. Gerste. depiction of plants
LI. VIOLA MARTIA. VIola flos natus est ex eâ vnde nomen habet, apud Graecos n.  appellatur. Etenim Iupiter Ion puellam amauit, & ex amore couit, & vt Iunonem res lateret, vnde cognosci potuit, naturae transmutationem fecit. Depre∣henus n. Iupiter, & factum caelare cupiens, hominem in buculam trans∣mutavit. Terra verò in honorem dilectae Iovis florem protulit, qui ju∣venculae pabulum esset, & sanè flos ex ipsa nomen tulit, & ejus fortunā coloribus suis adumbravit. Martia haec nostra dicitur, quod Martio mense prodeat, tota purpurea, & rarò vltra illum perduret. LII. MALA AVRANTIA. MAla Nerantia sunt ex generibus fructuum Medicae arboris: Eadem n. fere est ar∣boris horum pomorum cum Medicâ seu citria forma, fructus verò nonnihil dif∣ferunt, qui totus est orbiculatus, absque omni callo, immaturus viridis, maturus aureo totus colore fulget. Atque hunc per aurea Hesperidum mala poetae intellexisse viden∣tur; vide plura in Vortumno Becani, & singulari de hoc malo tractatu N. Monardi Bapt: Fiera sic expressit in caena. Proxima sunt, Itali dixere Nerantia, primis, Vincunt pelle parum, frigidus humor inest. Verticibus miro sunt haec gratissima odore, Dulcè sapit melius pectoribus{que} favet Sint folia arborihus servata virentibus ipsis. Caetera sunt mensae commodiora tua.
51 L. Viola martia G. Violette de Mars A. march Violetts Ge. Mercz Violen. 52 L. Mala arantia G. Orenges A. Orenges Ge. Pomerantzen. depiction of plants
LIII. MELO. TErtium Cucumerum sativorum genus est, quod vulgò hodie Melo∣nem vocant, Germanice Melaus; Pepone est rotundior, mali coto∣nei effigie, mitior item ac suavior: in reliquis cum eo convenit. Ex hoc genere Melopepones vocant eos, qui non pendent, sed humi rotundantur, & sessiles procumbunt: vocabulo ex malo & pepone facto Inflammationibus prodesse creditur; & nucleus ad strangu∣riam, renum, vesicaeq́ue mala est remedio. Veneris stimulos minuit; Quin & semina cum ejus succo cocta & farinâ mixta, formata in pastillos, & in sole ex∣siccata, ad facei maculas extergendas; cum vino prosunt. Adde quae Florentinus lib. VII. de Agriculturâ, cap: xx. scripta reliquit. LIIII. DIGITALIS. DIgitalis a formâ florum appellatur, huic longa, lata & per ambitum crenata sunt folia, quae hîc non satis aptè, expressa, Verbassi quodammodo similia, minora tamē, minusque lanuginosa; caulis rectus rotundus, a medio sursum versus, compluribus flo∣ribus gravidus, ab vno caulis latere supra invicem dispositis, deorsum dependentibus, formà oblongis, intus cauis dactyliothecis propemodum similibus, colore ex rubore purpureis punctis quibusdam candidis intercursantibis. Dodonaeus in Medicamentis nullius ee vsus scribit, florem que solâ pulcritudine suâ placere.
53 L. Melo G. Mels A. Muske melon Ge. Melone depiction of melon
54 L. Digitalis G. Gtes nostre dames A. Foxe glowe Ge. Flgert. 55 L. Napellus G. A. Helmet Ge. Tes, Je tlein, vnd Narkappes. Jt. Napell. depiction of plants
LV. NAPELLVS. NApellus Aconiti species caulem habet erectum, tres pedes altum; circumda∣tum folijs variè scissis, saturè virescentem, ab ejus medio sursum versus flo∣res apparent caerulei, qui cùm galeri vel cuculli aut galeae formam referunt, apud Germanos Eisenhutlm & Munchskaffen appellantur. Oculos quidem hi suâ formâ recreant; caeterum Lethale in se venenum haec herba conti∣net, quodmiserabili multorum exitu comprobatum est. LVI. PISVM SATIVVM. PIsum a loco, vrbe videlicet pisa, vbi maximus ejus fuit provētus, id nominis ee adep∣tum quidam tradunt. Notissimum hodie omnibus legumen, loca amat aprica & tepida. Sunt diversa ejus genera, magnitudine colore nonnihil etiam formâ differentia, sunt sativa quae magis probantur sunt & silvestria; Mediocritatem in refrigerando & exsiccando obtinent, aliasq́ue in re medicâ vires habere creduntur.
56 L. Pis satinum G. Pis domestiques A. Garden pease Ge. Grosse Erbeen Jt. Peso maggiore. 57 L. Cyanus G. Bluet A. blew bot Ge. Krublumen. depiction of plants
LVII. CYANVS. CYanos a caeruleo floris colore nomen habet, Baptiseculam vocant Itali, quod secantibus & metentibus officiat, seculam n. veteres falcem dixe∣re; meliùs Blaptisecula a , id est nocendo ex opinione loniceri dice∣retur; Blaveolam Galli vocant a colore. In agris & frumentis passim nascitur formâ omnibus vt obviâ ita & cognitâ. Sed & in Hortos a flo∣rum cultoribus translatus, multiplicare in floribus, folia, & variare co∣lores didicit. LVIII. FICVS. FIcus  Graecis nota est arbor, non admodum procera, quanquam amplissimae etiam quaedam inveniuntur, pyri arboris aemulantes magnitudinem. Candice brevi, me∣dullâ carnosâ, leui cortice, folio perquā magno vmbrosoq́ue, profundè admodum La∣cinato, sine flore; pomo quod supra folij pediculum nascitur, turbinati molli, intus granoso, succo cum maturescit lacteo, postea melleo. Loca amat calidiora & aprica, fri∣gus auersatur, vnde rariores apud nos fructus profert, qui tamen magna copia ex Hispa∣nijs, Gallijs, alijsq́ue locis adferuntur.
58 L. Ficus G. Figus A. Figges Ge Fege. 59 L. Aquilegia G. Aucholies A. Columbine Ge. Ackeley. depiction of plants
LXI. ROSA RVBRA. DE Rosâ, vt sanguineum colorem ex cruore veneris imbiberit vulgata est fabula: alij tamen de Nectare effuso; haec tradunt: cùm in caelo. Dij con∣vivarentur, & nectar multum adstaret, Amorem choream duxisse, ac sal∣tasse, & cum alâ crateris pulcrum concussisse, eumq́ue evertisse; atque sic Nectar in terram effusum Rosae, florem rubicundum reddidisse. Medicam quoque vim Rosis inesse scribunt; Nam & vnguentum inde non malum conficiunt, & dolentibus oculis sunt auxiliares. LXII. LYCOPSIS. BVglossae vel Anchusae haec species ee creditur à Graecis  dicta, quamvis alij Ly∣copsim veram, cynoglosium esse velint. Hanc Dioscorides folijs lactucae longiori∣bus, asperioribus, crassioribusq́ue ad radicis capùt recidentibus describit: caule item lon∣go recto scabro, flore purpureo, radice rubrâ, quae cum oleo illita vulneribus medetur.
62 L. Lycopsis G. Buglese sage A. Wild Buglosse Ge. Welde Oxenzng. 63 L. Ruseus G. Bruse A. Butchers Brome Ge. Meusdor. depiction of plants
LIII. RVSCVS. RVscus, Dioscoridi  id est filvestris myrtus. Locis gaudet opacis, nec alibi temerè nascitur; folijs myrti latius tamen & in formam lanceae mucronatis. Baccae per maturitatem rubescunt rotundae, a medio folio de∣pendentes, ossea intus nucleo: radicem habet graminis, gustu astringen∣tem, acerbum & subamarum. Folia & baccae in vino potae Vrinam cient, menses pellunt, vesicae calculos frangunt, stillicidio vrinae medentur, dolores capitis sa∣nant. Caulicali recentes Asparagorum vice, in cibo sumuntur: Venetisque haec herba ad scoparios vsus frequens est, & propter asperitatem, ad fugandos Verspertiliones, ad carnes supenditur. LXIIII. PAPAVER RHOEAS. , Latinis Papaver fluidum seu erraticum, a flore sic dictum, qui ei protinus decidit. Folium habet Dioscoride teste Erucae; junceus ei caulis rectus cubitalis, asper: Flos silvestris Anemones, caetera satis notum. Folia cum calijcibus illita, inflam∣mationes sanant. Eorundem fetu & perfusione somnus allicitur.
L. Papar Rhas G. Panot sanages A. Wild peppis Ge. Wilder ram oder Klpper rs. 65 L. Faba satiua G. Feue A. Garden bea Ge. B. depiction of plants
LXV. FABA DOMESTICA. FAbae sativae forma notior est, quàm vt descriptionem longiorem requirat; Graecam  vocant Pythagorico dicto nobilitatam. Gaudet solo pinguis∣simo & bene stercorato. Simeon Sethus parum videtur Fabarum esum pro∣bare, quòd inflant & totum corpus distendunt, sensusq́ue Hebetare dicun∣tur. Decoctum nihilominus Fabarum pectis lenit, sed cum aceto sumptum ventrem sistit: item calculos in vesicâ & renibus ne gignantur, prohibent aliosq́ue in∣fuper in medicina vsus obtinent. LXVI. DELPHINICVM. HAnc herbam pleriq: eruditi Consolidam vocant regalem, & Valerius Cordus cal∣catrippam, quod ad calcaris veterum similitudinem tendit. Nascitur in segetibus, caule simplici cyanus; sicut ramulis multis, tenuibus; folijs longiusculis, lacinatis; flore violae ferè purpureae nisi quod ex alterâ parte in acutum desinens, inde nomen invenerit. Liquor ejus stellatibus oculorum inflammationibus ac hebetudine medetur; quin & semen calculo luborantibus prodest.
66 L. Delphinicum G. Pied d'Alonette A. Larkes Heele G. Ritter sporen. 67 L. Morum Celsi G. Meure A. Mulberye Ge. Maulberbe. depiction of plants
LXVII. MORVS. MOrus quasi  quibusdam dicitur quod nigra sit: alij a mora a. tarditate de∣riuant, quod arborum postrema floreat: Vnde & prudentiae symbolum ge∣rit. Naturam ejus sic expressit Plinius. Novissima inquit, vrbanarū germinat, nec nisi exacto frigòre, obid dicta sapientissima arborum: sed cum coepit, in tantum vniversa germinatio erumpit, vt vna nocte peragat etiam tum strepitu. Multi∣plicis est in Medicare vsus; aestuanti iecori prodest, alium laxat, contra Aconitum reme∣dio est. Adustionibus medetur, dentium dolores mitigat; Viridibus quoque Mori folijs Bombyces victitant, & inde materiam hauriunt; principum olim vestimentis tantùm, nunc etiam infimorum hominum luxui feruientem. LXVIII. SESELI SECVNDVM DODON.. SEseli secundum Aethiopicum & herbaceum Dodonaei a communi seseli distat, & nostris incognitum esse credidit lonicerus; Idem cum Theophrasti libanotide pu∣tant: caulem habet tres quandoque pedes altum, sed herbaceum, qui non ante hyemē perit; folia sunt ampla, & ad margines crenata in modum fij vel Hipposelini; ornatur in vertice coronato floribus parvis, candidisq́ue semen Angelicae odorem habet: Vires verò edem ei cum Seseli Masciliensi tribuuntur.
68 Libanotis L. G. A. Herb francumsence 69 L. Tanaletum G. Tanette. A. Tanfie Ge. Reinfarn. depiction of plants
LXIX. TANACETVM. TAnacetum hoc nostrum, tertium esse Artemisiae genus Dioscoridis putant; quod sic describit libro 3. cap. 108. Sunt qui in mediterraneis vnicaulis nomine appellant, tenuem herbulam, simplici caule & mi∣nuto, floribus scatentem tenuibus, flavo colore: iucundiore caeteris odore, Belgae quoque VVormcruyt appellant, quòd Lumbricos ex∣pellat. LXX. NVX AVELLANA MAIOR. NVx Avellina major sativa a Germanis etiam Rotnuss, & Belgis nostris Cuelsche Ha∣selnoten dicitur; haec fructum fert oblongiorem silvestri, & totum ceu barbato pu∣tamine tectum & vestitum, cujus nucleus ruffâ membranâ cingitur; ejus esus parum probatur. Suspensus Avellanas nuces Scorpionem ex eo loco arcere Plutarchus resert; vnde & Scorpionum morsibus easdem mederi aiunt.
70 L. Nux auellana G. Notiettes A. Filbird nutts Ge. Hasel Nuse. 71 L. Rosa G. Roses A. Rose Ge. Rosen. depiction of plants
LXXI. ROSA ALABANDICA. ETiamsi raritatis commendatione plerique hodie flores superbiant; Rosam tamen florum fere omnium notissimam suo hactenus gradu depellere nul∣li potuêra prestat vero in ijs quae Praenestina vel Alabandica olim, nunc Provincialis vulgò dicitur, sive fuavissimum eius odorem sive gratissimum etiam aspectum expendas. Hanc diviniole naturâ participare sibi persua∣sum habuit Didymus, quòd (vt ait) vnguentum non malum componat & dolentibus oculis sit auxiliaris. LXXII. AMYDALA: FLoret prima omnium Amygdala mense Ianuario, Martis verò pomū muturat teste plinio; vnde Alciatus Emblema suum 208 desumsit, & ad praecocia detorsit ingenia: Cur properans folijs praemittis amygdale flores? Odi pupillos praecocis ingenij, Nucem Graecam vocat Cato, tam arborem, quàm fructum: Masius alij nuces appel∣lari volunt. Duplicis est differentie: alia n. dulces fert Amygdalas, alia amaras. Tempe∣ramentum eis est calidum; magis tamen amaris. Diocles eas tradit alere, & ventrem be∣ne habere; recentes tamen aridis minus esse noxias: vnde & ad bellaria exijs placent{que} quas panes Martios pharmacopoles vocant, conficiuntur. Vulpes autem Amydalarum esu mori tradit antiquitas: quod & in fele, Vergiluis Marcellus observatū esse, annotavit.
72 L. Amygdalum G. Amandes A. Almondes Ge. Amandelbaum. 73 L. Paralysis G. Prime vere, la oses de Ceca. A. Cawslips Ge. Schlusel ben. depiction of plants
LXXIII. PARALYSIS MINOR. HAec herba ab illâ, quae supra posita est, vix quicquam differe videtur in for∣mâ, nisi quod flores, minores exhibeat. Verbasculum per omni nutronem vocat lonicerus, & corum decoctum adversus rupta, luxata, & liventia va∣lere, tradit. LXXIIII. RANVNCVLVS. SEptem in vniversum Ranunculorum species numerat lonicerus. Haec verò vulgaris est, vbique obvià; folia habens coriandro similia, sed latiora, & ad Maluae similitudi∣nem accedentia; florem luteum butyri ferè colorem exprimentem, vnde & Belgae nostri Botterbloemen vocant. Folia & caules scabien tollunt at stigmata delent. Radix sicca & trista, sternutamenta, naribus admota, ciet; dentium quoque dolores lenit, cùm tamen calidi sint vehementer omnes Ranunculi ac sicci, cavendū est, ne intra corpus sumantur.
74 L. Raculus G. Bassinet A. Crafote Ge. Nfuse. 75 L. Acer maior G. Sycomorus A Sycome Ge. Hagdorn. depiction of plants
LXXV. ACER. ARbor est Acer Tiliae non absimilis formâ & magnitudine, verùm cortice scabriore quàm illa vestitur, subliuido{que} crasso, & flecti con∣tumate nascitura. potissimum in locis riguis floremq́ue fert in Ma∣io mense, Exiguus Aceris in medicinâ vsu sest. Radix contusa jeci∣noris doloribus vtilissimè imponitur. Serenus laterum malis mede∣ri testatur his virsibus. Si latus immeritum morbo tentatur acuto, Accensum tinges lapidem stridentibus vndis: Hinc bibis, aut Aceris radicem tundis, & vnà Cum vino capis hoc praesens medicamen habetur. LXXVI. NVX IVGLANS. IVglans quasi Iouis glans dicitur; Graecis  hoc est nux regia, etiam persica a regione vnde primùm est aduecta Gravis est foliorum ejus halitus, & cubantibus sub co arbore molestus. Fructū magnitudine differt & frigidis gaudet locis non tamē aquo∣sis. Lignum vtensilibus lautis & mensis dicatur. Habet & suam in medicinâ vim, nec tamen minus nocere solet; vnde Fiera sic cecinit: Mille nuces poteras dixisse, sed vnica iuglaus. Nux dicta est, linguae iam nocitura tuae. Siccior aressit, stomachum & caput improba vexat, Mirum, si nocua sit bene iuncta viae.
76 L. Nux juglans G. Noix A. Walnut Ge. Grosse nüss, oder banuss. 77 L. Volubilis minor G. Liseron A. Bindweede Ge. Kleine Wind. depiction of plants
LXXVII. VOLVBILIS MINOR. VOlubilis minor, Dioscoridis Helxine Cissampelos esse videtur, diversa ta∣men ab Helxine, quam parietariam vocant: folijs describitur ab eodem Hederae, sed minoribus; flores autem fert punicei ferè coloris candidis in∣terdum stellis distinctos. Oculis rubentibus & calculo medetur. LXXVIII. PINVS. DEpinu hoc modo fabulati sunt veteres: Pinus puella prius erat, & mutationem naturae duplicis assumpsit. Amabat n. puellam Pan, amabat eandem etiam Boreas. Quùm autem vterque puellam alliceret, ipsa Panis amore magis afficiebatur, & ob hanc rem Boreas aemulatione motus puellam in petras impulit, ac neci tradidit. Terra porrò miserta cladem, plantam puellae cognominem reddidit ac produxit. At permutatá vita erga eosdem priores affectus seruat, & Pana quidem germine suo coronat. Flet a. & la∣mentatur arbor, vbi Boream afflantem percipit. Hujus arboris nux lignosa, in turbina∣tam effigiem compacta cujus commoda hoc descripsit tetrastico. Fiera: Ebullit nimium{que} sitit, pulmonibus imis Debita, vex coquitur Pinea, sed bene alit: Intestina fovet, nervis regido{que} lapillo Subvenit, & Veneri grata, fugit Cybelen.
78 L. Pinus cum comis G. Pin A. Pine apples Ge. tb Jt. Pi. 79 L. Borrago G. Borraches A. Borage Ge. Oxenung. depiction of plants
LXXIX. BVGLOSSVM SEV BORAGO. BVglossum describente Dioscoride, herba est verbasco similis, folio in ter∣ram depresso, aspero, nigriore, & bubuli linguae simili: flore caeruleo, stel∣lae effigie. Locis nascitur planis & sabulosis & in hortis passim. Mense car∣pitur Iulio. Melancholicis ac languentibus in cibo cum Spinachiâ Bu∣glossum est saluberrimum, flore in potum etiam injecto. Hujus sic me∣minit Bapt: Fiera: Si tibi Buglossa est succi & Borrago tepentis, Loetus eris, siccum nec tibi pectus erit. LXXX. AQVILEGIA FLORE PLENO. HAec Aquilegia multiplici tantum foliorum in floribus conjunctione a simplici ac vulgari differt, nec multà descriptione indiget cùm vbique sit obvea & nemini ignota. Calida est mediocriter ac modicè digerit. Stillatitia florum aqua, est praecipuum contra syncopen confortatinum. Dodonaeus tamen tradit ejus vires incompertas, cos∣que temere agere qui Centaurij vires huic tribuunt.
80 L. Aquilegia duplex G. Achobes douple A. Double columbine Ge. Doppel Ackeley. 81 L. Pomicon G. Pome A. Apples Ge. Apffel. depiction of plants
LXXXI. MALVS PVMILA. MAlus Humilis & naná, poma fert vt caetera omnia minora Commoda atque incommoda malorum in genere sic exprimit in abundanti sua coena Fiera: Plurima sunt, minimique madentia mala caloris, Dulcia, sed stomacho commodiora meo. Corda iuvant flammis agitata, at noxia ventri Turgebunt, neruis & nocuisse volent. His caveas, mala sunt, diras{que} mouentia febres. Forma placet nitidi corticis, esca nocet. LXXXII. MALVS PVNICA. MAlus Punica  Graecis, arbor est haud ita procera, folio angusto intidique viro∣ris, flore puniceo, oblongo, calathe effigie; pomo, quod corio & membranâ tegi∣tur, numerosis intus acinorum granis fareto; vnde & Granatum est appellatum. Diffe∣rentia hujus ex sapore triplex Quaedam nhujus generis poma sunt dulcia, quaedam vi∣nosa, quaedam prorsus acida, de quibus sic Bapt: Fiera: Dulcia sunt madidi roris, sicci acria poma Punica, pulmoni haec sunt mala at illa bona. Cuncta nocent stomacho, feruentes acria flammas Extingunt, cunctis mensa secunda datur. Saepe remorbescit dulci si vescitur aeger. Vtra{que} cùm distent, meiere cur faciunt?
82 L. Nahun Granatum G. Pommes de granade A. Pece granates Ge. Granat apffel. 83 L. Gramen marimu G. Herbe de Mer A. Thrift Ge. Meergras. depiction of plants
LXXXIII. GRAMEN MARINVM. GRamen hoc Clusius Amerium tenui folium montanum vocat, flores ha∣bet in summo caulis plures, conjunctos in orbem, & purpurascentes vel caeruleos. Lonicerus videtur appellare gramen aquaticum quod Germanis Entengrass dicitur, ex eo quòd anates maximè silvestres Hyemali tempore hoc victitent. Nascitur in aquis stagnantibus graminis formâ. Decoctum radicis in potu tumoribus & vrinae difficultatibus meditur. LXXXIIII. GLADIOLVS PALVSTRIVS. GLadiolus palustris folia habet oblonga, tenua; caulem tres pedes Altum, aequalem, & sine internodijs, in cujus vertice plures flosculi apparent, colore subpurpureo, vel vt pictura indicat rubescente, quorum in centro, noduli, ex crocei vel miniata, in quibus semen latet perexiguum. Contra venenosos morsus valere medicamenta hinc confecta, tradit Dioscorides.
84 L. Gladiol{us} palustris G. Iouc de riere A. Water gladioll Ge. Wasier biesen. 85 L. Hori Syluestre G. Oruale Sonnage A. Wild Clarie Ge. Wilde Scharley. depiction of plants
LXXV. HORMINVM SILVESTRE. HOrminum  Graecis dictum placet Ruellio, quòd Venerem stimulet, Semen n. ejus bibitur ad Venerem stimulandam; Officinis Gallitricum est. Folia habet Saluiae formâ rugosa asperitate praedita; caulem sesqui∣pedalem leniter hirsutum, in quadrangulum striatum; flores è caerulaeo in purpureum vergentes, ad Aquilini rostri effigiem falcatos; In pratis sponte nascitur. Floret & semine in Iulio est praegnans. Aculeos corpori in fixos per se ex aquâ illitum, extrahit. Folia ex aceto imposita, panos per se vel cū melle discutiunt. Dodonaeus tamen avestre hoc nullius esse facultatis putat. LXXXVI. MALVS ASSYRIA. MAlum Assyrium Itali hodie pomum Adami vocant, quia vulgò creditur semili pomo deceptum in paridiso Adamum protoplastum, divina mandata supergres∣sum, dicuntq́ue insuper morsus in eo extare etianum reliquias, ita scilicet eius pomi strias interpretantes. Alij nihilominus pomum Arabis Musam dictum, vetitum illum esse arbitrati sunt; quod & Thevetus ex Iudaeorum relatione credidit. Est autem quar∣ta species citrij pomi vel medici Dodonaei.
86 L. Malum Asiyrium G. Pomme d'Assirie A. Asyrian apple Ge. Assyrischer apffel 87 L. Calendula G. Sousy A. Marigold Ge. Ringelblnen. depiction of plants
LXXXVII. CALENDVLA. CAltha officinis Calendula dicta, quòd singulis calendis mensium florere conspiciatur; Belgae Goutbloemen ab auri aemulo floris colore dicunt. Lo∣cis cultis, ac hodie nusquam non in hortis provenit, estq́ue perinde om∣nibus nota. Huius sic meminit Poëtarum princeps virg: in Georgicis. Mollia luteola pingit vacinia caltha. Pulvis florum cum Xylino dentium dolores sedat. Aridi flores & folia suffitu mensis mirò cient. Herba etiam condimētis & acetarijs miscetur. LXXXVIII. RVTA. RVta communis, cui, hîc expressa herba non malu convenit, omnibus notissima est. Verù Ruta muraria, cuius nomen notitia praefert Adianti species esse videtur. Hu∣jus natura & vis medicis quoque probata, eorumq́ue in libris tam celebrata quam ple∣nè descripta invenitur.
88 L. Ruta muraria G. Rue de Muraille A. Rue madenhare Ge. Maur rauten. 89 L. Saponaria G. Herbe à sauon A. Sope worte Ge. Seipkrant depiction of plants
LXXXIX. SAPONARIA. HAnc herbam Saponariam dictam tradit lonicerus, quod ad mollitiem candoremque la narum vsi eâ sint veteres vnde & lanaris nomen ei tri∣butum, quodque eluendis vestium maculis, ex purgandisque sordibus saponis vicem praebeat. Herba etiam fullonis ob dictos effectus est ap∣pellata. Idem lonicerus Struthion Dioscoridis putat. Dodonaeus autem credidit Alismatis sive Damasonij quandam esse speciem, quem plura de hâc scriben∣tem, vide in historiâ florum & Herbarum odoratarum. XC. ROSA MOSCHETTA. HAec Rosa, quinta Rosarum hortensis species Dodonaei, ramis & virgis caninam silvestrem Rosam quodammodo refert; florem habens simplicem, quinque folia non excedentem, exalbido purpurascentis, venis puniceis intercurrentibus & odore ad∣modum fraganti gratissimum. Huius laudes inter tot veteris ac recentes scriptores non omisit Strabus in eleganti suo hortulo, sed his inter alios versibus expressit: tantum qui protinus omnes Herbarum vicisse comas, virtute & odore Dicitur, vt merito florum flos esse veratur.
90 L. Rosa moschata G. Rose muscadem A. Muske rose Ge. Muscus oder Do∣sems Rosen. 91 L. Cucumis G. Concombre A. Cucomber Ge. Cucumcren. depiction of plants
XCI. CVCVMIS SATIVVS. CVcumis Varroni a curuitate sic dictis quasi curuinie Graecis verò . Sar∣mentis autem Cucumis serpit praelongis, inque ramos vitis modo se diffun∣dit, fulcimento cui innitatur, ob infirmitatem indiget: folium habet angu∣losum, florem luteum, fructum cartilagineū & maculosum, interdum, colo∣ris vel Herbacei, vel citrini, vel nigri, plures eius sunt species, solâ formâ & quantitate differentes. Hunc nostrum Anguriam Aetij ee putant, frigidae ac humidae temporaturae, quare & Simeoni Setho minus probata; plura nihilominus ejus commoda Dioscorides recenset. XCII. OTHONNA. ESt Othonna, Troglodytica quaedam herba, in eo Arabiae tractu nascens, qui ad Ae∣gyptum spectat: folia habet (ait Dioscorides Erucae similia; foraminosa velutis a tineis erosa, squallida, paucifolia: florem fert crocinum latifolium; quare quidam Ane∣mones esse speciem putaverunt. At quamvis iste flos aspectu non sit ingratus, odore ta∣men est adeò gravi, adeoq́ue inamaeno, vt ne gustare quidem ipse Galenus ausus fuerit, sed lethalem esse conijceret: veteres verò eadem herbâ (quam idem Galenus Lycoper∣sium esse arbitratur) vsi sunt ad vrgentes articulorum dolores. Convenire cum hac flo∣rem Aphricanum in perisq́ue omnibus Dodonaeus scriptum reliquit.
92 L. Othonia G. Othonne A. French Marigold 93 L. Cicer satinum G Peis cices A. Cicke pease Ge. Kichern. depiction of plants
XCIII. CICER SATIVVM. CIcer vnde nobile illud Ciceronis nomen. Graecis , amat solum crassum, pullumq́ue; ejusq́ue in medicamentis quam in cibis potior est vsus. Dioscorides, Cicer, inquit, sativum aluo idoneum est, vrinam ciet, inflationem parit, colorem commendat, mensas ac partus expellit, lac angel. De Cicere sic in suâ coenâ Baptista Fiera: Feruet & aiescit cicer omne, sed ignea vincunt Subnigra pulmoni prima alimenta tuo, Haec reduci formae, & vocum concentibus apta, Si data sint mensas inter vtras{que} tibi. Cortice non posito, renes, iecur, atque lienem, Vesicam{que} fovent, & Venerem faciunt. XCIIII. VIOLA TRICOLOR. FRequentissima in Hortis nostris haec Viola, ac perinde cognitissima, a floris maximè pulcritudine commendatur: Hic autem longiusculis pediculis insidet, purpureae Violae formâ similis, vt & magnitudine; triplici colore splendet purpureo videlicet Lu∣teo, candidoq́ue vel caeruleo; adeò vt semper noua colorum varietate gaudeat, odorem tamen nullum aut perexiguum habet. In summis duobus flosculi foliolis, & subinde in inferiores, & quandoque etiam in mediorum extimâ parte purpureus color violae ni∣grae relucet. Medijs vt plurimùm ac nonnunquam inferiori candidus aut caeruleus insi∣det. Luteus non rarò inferius foliolum vel magnam ejus partem, semper autem floscu∣li medium intercursantibus vnà nigris aliquot radiolis, occupat prodest, vt recentiores aiunt, febricitantibus maximè pueris, quorum connulsionibus ac comitialis morbi accessionibus subuenire creditur.
94 L. Viola tricolor Dod. G. Penrees A. Hartes ease Ge. Freisiam t. 95 L. Mam carbonarium G. Pe Charbier A. Poe water Ge. Apffel depiction of plants
XCV. MALVM CARBONARIVM. MAlorum nomina, à formâ, ab inventoribus à Colore, à sapore, a locis sunt ferè insinita; eaq́ue quotidie immutantur, ita vt nihil difficilius sit quàm nostra ad veterum nomina accommodare. Anglicum a. huius mali no∣men indicat aquosum esse prae caeteris, & ex ijs quae frigidum ac terreum habent succum; quibus, Setho teste, vti convenit, quoties ob distempe∣rantiam calidam vel humidam, male affectus est ventriculus. XCVI. TAMARIX. TAmarix seu Myrica, frutex est hominis plerumque aequans altitudinem, ramulis puniceis, folijs Ericae vel Sabinae arboris lignosis, ex viridi pallentibus. Florem sert verno tempore villosum, qui in pappos tandem evanescit. Fructùs est Galle similis. Lig∣num, folia, radix, & succus Tamaricis, in vino cocta & sumta, pulmonis, lienis, renum & vesicae obstractiones aperiunt; melancholiamq́ue validè purgant. Eiusdem cinis ma nantia hulcera siccat, adustionesq́ue igni factas sanat.
96 L. Tamarisone G. Tamaris A. Tamariske Ge. Tamarisken. 97 L. Linaria G. Li saage A. Tods fax Ge. Karubrant. depiction of plants
XCVII. LINARIA. LInaria silvestris a lini folijs sic dicta, Osyridis species esse vidétur, flavos fert flores, thalictro similes instar vmblici autcavini capitis acutos: in me∣dio luteos qui in capitula mutantur, in quibus semen Gentianae simule Proximam habet cum Esulâ minore similitudinem, differentiam nihilo minus vulgatus hic ostendit versiculus. Esula cum lacte, sine lacte Linaria crescit. Aridi flores vestes a blattis ac tineis conservare credunti. XCVIII. BELLIS HORTENSIS. HAec quibusdam etiam primula veris dicta est, quòd vere inchoante mox procedat: folia habet pinguia, interram jacentia, in rotundum oblonga & levissimè crenata florem verò pluribus barbulis densissimè circinatum, Colore rubicundo, odoris millius. Succus Bellidis vulneratis, polus prodest. Folia oleribus addita, facilem aluum faciunt eadem Trita tumorem sedant.
98 L. Bellis flori rubro G. Ngueries, en Psquette à floer rae A. red Double daisie Ge. rode Naslebon. 99 L. Quercus G. Chesie g. Acornes Ge. Eichlame. depiction of plants
XCIX. QVERCVS. QErcus notissima arbor, Iovi olim sacra, adeoq́ue, vt persuasum sibi olim habuerit caeca Gentilitas eum inde oracula petentibus reddere, Corona quoque, ex quernis frondibus facta servali civis praemium fuit: hinc Al∣ciati Emblema confictum hoc versu explicatur: Grata Iovi est quercus, qui nos servat{que}e fovet{que}e: Servanti civem querna corona datur. Eius quippe commoda infinita sunt, quae humano generi adfert, nec a medicinae vsu aliena. C. GELSEMINVM. GElseminum sive Iasminum hortorùm ornatui plurimùm servit: Cauliculos habet teneros, geniculatos, virides, quibus inest medulla spumea ceu spongiosa; ex sin∣gulis nodis vel geniculis oriuntur gemina folia, septem conjunctis foliolis aequalibus, saturè virentibus, & mucronatis, constantia: In vertice cauliculorum flores apparent oblongi, odoris gratissimi; Coloris verò subalbidi, nonnihil tamen calyces rubentis. Est & alia Iasmini species floribus caeruleis, quae ex clematidum genere esse videtur.
100 L. Gelsemi G. Gelsemin A. Jasmin 101 L. Pyra G. Poires A. Peartre Ge. Biren. depiction of plants
CI. PYRA. PYrorum vt malorum multa sunt genera, plurima inter se varietate di∣stincta. Cùm vero pyrum arborem supra descripserùm, eaq́ue sit insuper vulgatissima plura de eâ dicere hîc supersedeam, si addidero tantum Sco∣lae Salernitinae hos versus. Cum cognis antidotum pyra sunt, sed cruda venenum Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pyra cocta gravatum. Post pyra da pottum, &c. CII. LILIVM. LIly los bicet nemini hodie incognitus, omnibus nihilominus gratissimus exstit. De eo fabulantur poëtae in hunc modum. Quum Iupiter Herculem ex Alemenâ genu∣isset, essetque mortalis quippe qui matris conditionem sequeretur, immortalitatis par∣ticipem facere cupiebat, & propterem ipsum adhuc infantem Iunonis dormientis vbe∣ribus admovit infans itaque lacte satur ob à papilla amovit, lac tamen nihilominus v∣bertim fluebat, etiam puero amoto, & quicquid eius in caelo diffusum est, lacteum cir∣culum effecit, quod verò in terram dilapsum est eiusque glebas tinxit, id ipsum florem Lily produxit, quod similitudine lactis colorem exprimit: quem inde Rosam Iunoni∣am posteri appellavêre. Aqua stillatitia ad amissam vocem & syncopen plurimum com∣mendatur.
102 L. Lilium album G. Lis blanche A. White lillie Ge. Weisie Glgen. 103 L. Fragaria G. Fraises A. Strabo berries Ge. Erdbeer. depiction of plants
CIII. FRAGARIA. FRagaria exilis est herba passim obvia, neque caules neque ramulos habens, sed solùm folijs, floribus & fructu constans. Hujus tria faciunt genera: pri∣mum haec nostra est fragaria, multis a radice lanuginosis pediculis, q́uorum alij flore candido corenantur, alij trigemino comantur folio, per ambitum crenato & venoso, alij fructum gerunt exiguis moris haud dissimilem cum maturuit rubentem cum gustu tum odore suavissimum. Succus foliorum vulnera ar∣dentia sanare & glutinare traditur. CIIII. PSEVDO-MELANTHIVM. PSeudo-Melanthium herba est inter segetes nascens folijs, allij modo acuminatis, sed brevioribus pilosisq́ue; florem fert menso Iunio ex vasculo hispido purpureum, paruae & quinque foliae rosae similem, quo decidente capitulum ceu vasculum manet, longiusculum, angulosum, hirsutumq́ue in quo semen nigrum. Folia cum semine Chi∣rurgis sunt in vsu. Videtura esse Hippocratis Melanthium ex tritico, ac Octavij Horati ani Sith, quibus fere in omnibus convenit.
104 L. Pseudo melanthium G. Nielle de blede A. Cookle Ge. Rodra. 105 L. Cerasa G. Cherisses A. Cheryes Ge. Kierssen. depiction of plants
CV. CERASA. ESt hic fructus multiplici varietate Colorum, magnitudinis ac etiam for∣mae notissimus, & supra cum sua quoque arbore descriptus; De hoc sic Si∣meon Sethus in Sytagmate de libariorum facultatibus: Cerasia, quae & sic Graecis dicta frigida sunt & humida, maliq́ue succi, ventrem subducunt, stomacho parum idonea, humidum ventriculum laedunt, praesertim cum matura non sunt: sed calidis & siccis ventricalis & temperaturis prosunt. Gummia ar∣boris cum vino sumptum, calculosos sanat. CVI. MALVS PERSICA. PErsica malus sic dicta, quòd ex persica primum sit allata: gaudet locis aquosis, folia fert Amydalae, sed maiora: floret primo statum vere cum Amygdalis, flore subpuni∣ceo, pomum producit carno, succulentum, foris lanuginosum durâ intus & scabrâ nu∣ce, in quâ nucleus quilas in Amygdalis. Persica mla in ardētibus febribus sumi possunt; sed frequens eorum vsus multum phlegmatis gignit, horum sic meminit Fiera. Rosa sumus pluuio mox putrenscentut, ventri Fida calescenti, si modo prima damur. Mollia laxamus ventres, siccata tenemus; Nos timuit Persis, sed tibi grata sumus. postremum hunc versum quoque hec sequenti disticho expressit Martial. Vilia maternis pueramus praecoqua ramis: Nunc in adoptinis Persica cara sumus.
106 L. Mi e s G. Pesches A. Peches Ge. Pfirsing. 107 L. Lychins Chalerdonica G. A. flowr of Constantinople depiction of plants
CVII. FLOS CONSTANTINOPOLITANVS. BElgae nostri florem vocant Constantinòpolitanum; Germani verò Hie∣rosolymorum: Aldroandus Creticum. Herbae ventem e radice caules sunt plures geniculati, cavi; folia nonnihil aspera & hersuta: flores in latis vmbellis, multi simul congesti, aspectu pulcri, caeterùm inodori, co∣lore Lilij purpurei, sine maturi mali Aurantij corticis. In Iunio Iulio ac sequentibus mensibus, apparent. Quos habet in medicinâ vsus Dodonaeus sibi incog∣nitum esse tradit, quamvis non minimam in hortis ac coronis gratiam eius flores sint assecuti. CVIII. NARDVS GERMANICA. SPseudo-Nardi species est, quam Lauendulam appellant, quòd in balneis & Lana∣cris expetatur ob odoris paestantiam. Odorata haec & coronaria stirps est, sed humi∣lis, ramulos ceu virgas proferens tenues; folia oblonga, carnosa, vtraque parte albican∣tia, & in summo spicas oblongas tenues, floribus refertas caeruleis: Habetq́ue insuper radices lignosas in fibras divisas. Dodonaeus Casiam veterum, esse putat cuius Virgilius his verbis meminit in Georgicis: Haec circum Casiae virides, & olentia latè Serpilla, & graviter spirantis copia Thymbre Floreat. Caeterùm calefacit & siccat ordine secundo, tenuumq: est partiū. Discutie & ducit.
108 L. Spica lauendula G. Lauendule A. Lauender Ge. Lauendelen. 109 L. Armeiaca malus G. Abricos A. Aprecocke Ge. S. Johans Pfersic. depiction of plants
CIX. MALVS ARMENIACA. MAlus Armeniaca persicae species est. Ejus fructus teste Dioscoride mi∣nor est, atque stomacho vtilior quám persicae, totus quo{que} flammis & precox. Baptista Fiera poma Armeniaca hoc disticho describit. Poma eadem quae persica, si tamen amplum His corpus, nobis aurea forma datur. Latini, autem teste Lonicero, Trecacina haec mala vocare solent, ea{que} reliquis persitis prestare idem tradit. CX. CARIOPHYLLEVS MAXIMVS. INter coronarias herbas, familiam ducere creditur Caryophylleus flos; hic verò ex∣pressus inter alios ejus generis flores, insigni magnitudine, Colorum eleganti mixtu∣râ, & odoris gratissimi fragrantia praestat. In hortis hodie frequens est haec herba; sed spe∣ciosissimi flores ferè in fictilibus vasis habentur, vt à frigoris injuriâ hybernis mensibus tutari, & ad caliodiora loca transferri possint.
110 L. Garyophyll{us} maxim{us} G. Gyrofflées grand A. Cornations deuble Ge. Grosse doppele Negel der Gras blmen. 111 L. Genista G. Genest A. Broome Ge. Gisteren oder Pfrimen. depiction of plants
CXI. GENISTA. GEnistam dictam censent, vel quod genu instar ad nexus sit flexilis, vel quod genuum dolori medeatur, Germanis Ginst, videtur Dioscoridis Spartion vel eius species. Locis gaudet aridis & arenosis; ramos autem fert herbaceos, scabros, folia minuta, florem pisi, luteum tamen & api∣bus gratissimum. Differt a Genistâ minore hodie Genistellâ dictâ, quòd non sit aculeata, & minus exsiccet. Tenera Genistae germina, vel flores tusos, serpentum morisibus vtiliter imponi ferunt. CXII. SALVIA: SAlvia  ab  seu , quòd syderationem significat, quia, vt Ruellius inquit, herba retorrida & exucca videtur, quasi in tabem sit versa. Salvia dicta quod sit salutaris ejus vsus, vnde Schola salernitana. Cur moritur homo, cui salvia crescit in hortis? &c. Sativa haec Salvia in hortis frequens & omnibus nota, frequentissimi in quotodiana vitâ & etiam medicinâ vsus, quòd & Baptista. Fiera. in suâ coenâ non ignoravit, vbi sic cecinit: Vix sicca est calido, stomachum & cerebella iuuabit, Certa salus tremulis Salvia poplitibus. Dentibus, vrinae reclusae, menstrua ducens, Salvia & in fluidis ventribus apta satis.
112 L. Saluia G. Sauge A. Sage Ge. Saluey. 113 L. Castanea G. Chastaign A. Chesnue Ger. Kesten depiction of plants
CXIII. CASTANEA. CAstanea à Castano Magnesiae oppido, vnde primùm advecta; Glans Sardiana à loco similiter & Iovis glans Lonicero teste dicitur, quam vis Bekanus in ver∣tumno, vnde sic dicta à nemine Graecorum aut latinorum traditum esse scri∣bat. Arbor est nota, puram terram desiderans, fructumq́ue ferens nucem ca∣staneam dictum Ethynato tegmine tectum; quem sic describit Fiera: Quae tibi grata licet posito mollescat echinno Sicca est, & nimio Castanea igne calet. In caput & ventres inflata asperrima saevit, Ni spolia apportet mellis arundinci. CXIIII. POMVM. ALiquoties poma descripsimus mirâ varietate luxuriantia, & à nemine satis expressa; tu tibi lector cum sapore finge colorem, ac nomen ex ipsâ re tribue: ego hic tan∣tùm addam meliora per insitionem reddi Palladij versu. Insita proceris pergit concrescere ramis, Et sociam mutat malus amica pyrum. Se{que} feros silvis hortatur linquete mores, Et partu gaudet nobililiore frui, &c.
114 L. Pomum G. Pommes A. Apple Ge. Apfel. 115 L. Rosa canina odorata G. Esglantine A. Sweete Brier Ge. Wilde robriechende hegk rosen. depiction of plants
CXV. ROSA CANINA ODORATA. HAec vulgaris notitiae planta, spinosa admodum, tam fronde quàm flore odo∣rem spira gratissimum. Virgus fert aculeis humatis munitas, folia asper nigri∣cantias, incisuris tenuibus divisa. Flos ex calycibus erumpit dehiscentibus ex puniceo colore pallescens, quinque foliorum, imâ verò parte vnguis hu∣mani colorem referens, qui pandens sese, apices in medio sui fert flavos, ac stamina ca∣pillamentis, insidentia, quibus decidentibus fructus oblongus & subrubescens sequi∣tur, interius lanuginosus. CXVI. TRITICVM. FRumentum hoc quod in suo genere principatum obtinet Graecis , Latinis ve∣rò triticum dicitur, quòd e spicis tritum sit, nimis communi vocabulo, & Varroni vix digno. Tria hujus numerantur genera: primum culino nascitur quàm hordeum altiore, tribus geniculis constante, folio arundineo, spicâ folijs remotiore; Secundum in eo differt, quòd spicam multis aristis vallatam obtinet: Tertium priori per omnia si∣mile, nisi quod genicula habet quaterna. Multiplex ejus in Medicâ re, & quotidianâ vi∣tâ est vsus: Sed quando vtiliter seratur elegantissimis suis versibus indicat Maro Georg: lib. 1. Atsi triticeam in messem robusta{que} farra Exercebis humum, solisque instabis aristis. Antè tibi Eoae Atlantides abscondantur, Gnossia{que} ardentis dicedat stella Coronae, Debita quàm sulcis committas semina, quam{que} Invitae properes anni spem credere terrae,
116 L. Triticum G. Ele, fourment A. Wheate Ge. Weitz. 117 L. Caryophyll{us} dùplex siue multipl G. Gyrofflées doubles A. Double gilloflower Ge. Dbbel negeli eder graskkeuen. depiction of plants
CXVIII. FLOS CARYOPHYLLEVS MVLTIPLEX. FLos hic pulcherrimus, multiplici foliorum texturâ & colore puniceo in∣signis, hortorum delitium, & coronarum decus audit; puellarum assiduò manibus carpitur; & nunc sponsarum festinis crinibus adaptatur, nunc infantum tristia funera exornat, diverso vitae mortisq́ue Honestamento. CXVIII. CYDONIA MALVS. MAlus Cotonea Cydonia à Cydoné Cretae oppido dicta creditur. Cotoneam verò primus eam Cato vocavit, quòd nimirum mala ejus tenerâ lanugine tegantur; vnde Virgilius optimè cecinit. Ipse ego cana legam tenera lanugine malu. Haec Veneri olim gratissima fuisse leguntur: & Solon teste Plutarcho, jubebat spon∣so concubituram; prius edere malum Cydonium, quòd & eleganti emblemate expressit Alciatus: Poma novis tribui debere Cydonia nuptis Dicitur antiquus constituisse Solon, Grata ori & stomacho cùm sint, vt & halitus illis Sit suavis, blandis manet & ore lepos.
118 L. Malum Cotoncum G. Pome de Coing A. Quinces Ge. Kutten oder Quidden. 119 L. Leucoium G. Girefflees A. Wall flower Ge. Garten veiel. depiction of plants
CXIX. LEVCOIVM LVTEVM. LVteo Leucoio a floribus sic dicto, ramosi sunt caules folia oblonga in virore nigricantia, minora folijs Leucoij candidi: flores lutei perquam odorati; flo∣ret Aprili & Majo, etsi Hyems clemens fuerit etiam Martio. Totus frutex lig∣nosus est, & Hyemis rigorem facile sustinet; in ruderibus & saxosis locis liben∣tius nascitur, vnde nostri Muerbloemen vocant. Est autem Leucoij frutex vniversus, vt Galenus ait, extergentis facultatis, ac tenuium partium, plus tamen flores: Dioscorides etiam lutea Leucoia praecipui in medicinâ vsus esse scribit; Et Hippocrates ad secundas educendas ejus semen valere tradit. CXX. VITIS. VT vitis infinitâ vuarum differentiâ luxuriare solet, sic & vinorum inde expressorū, tot ferè sunt genera quot loca vbi nascuntur, ex quibus & nomina variare, & for∣mas, didicêre. Plinius, vino, inquit, modico nervi juvantur, copiosiore laeduntur; sic & oculi, stomachus recreatur, appetentia ciborum invitatur, tristitiae cura hebetatur, vri∣na & algor expellitur, somnus conciliatur: contra si nimius adhibeatur vini vsus, bel∣luina cornua capessimus &c. Atque ita ejus vel commoda, vel damna in modo consiste∣re docemur. At hujus demum laudes & simul librum eleganti finiam Bapt: Fierae car∣mine: Dulcis & apricis delecta in collibus vua, Terreus huic cortex, feruidus humor inest. Excipe de nigris quae sit tibi gratior albam, Neue inflet, soles sit remorata duos. Bacche quid hoc maius potuisti munere? nutrit Hac bene▪ visiae sed male sana nocet.
120 L. Botrys, Vua G. Grappe de raisin A. A Grabe Ge. Wein traube. depiction of plants
FINIS CORONAT OPVS.
Rembertus Dodonaeus portrait of Rembertus Dodonaeus Carolus Clusius portrait of Carolus Clusius HORTUS FLORIDUS In quo rariorum & minus vulgarium florum Icones ad vivam veram{que} formam accuratissime delineatae. Et secundum quatuor anni tempora divisae exhibentur Jncredibili labore ac diligentia Crisp: Passaei junioris Delineatae ac suum in ordinem redactae Ao. 1614. Extant Arnhemij. Apud Ioannem Ianssonium Bibliopolam ibid. engraved title page
