20596 99849238 14376
a large cock struts by smaller birds that are pecking at the ground
THE GLORIE OF MAN Consisting in The Excellencie and perfection of Woman, Gathered out of Holie SCRIP∣TVRES, and most Renowned Wryters; as well Ancient, as Moderne; Ecclesiasticall, as Morall. Wherevnto is annexed The duetie of Husbands. ABERDENE, Printed by the Author, June 6, 1638.
To the Right Hono∣rable, and Jllustrious LADIE, ANNA CAMBEL; LADIE MARQVES of HVNTLEY, COVN∣TESSE of AENZIE, BADINACH, LOCH∣ABRE, STRADOWN, AND STRABOGIE; LADIE GORDON &c.
MADAME, TO Vindi∣cate, and de∣liver my self, from the im∣putation of Sarcastick, bitter, too loose, & liberall speaches, agaynst the most Noble, Worthie, and Transcendant Sexe of WOMEN, (which some, kno∣wing their own imperfect weaknesse, may apprehend to be Calumnies, and detra∣ctiue to the whole Sexe) I here make humble Obla∣tion;
&, with all Reverence, present vnto your Ladiships Honorable Hands, this litle TREATISE; as a part of my Studie, in my wearisome Journie, this halfe yeare by∣past, in forraygne Coun∣treys. Which, indeed, MADAME, I aimed for Your La: the last New-years-day; if di∣stresse of weather, and con∣trarie winds, had not hin∣dered. But, through the mercie of GOD, your La: Servant being safelie arrived, I de∣sire no more, but that this Abortiue may shelter it self
vnder the shadow of Your La: Honourable Affection. Then may I think my selfe happie, and the payns well bestowed. Not doubting, but that it shall so plead for me, that by a just judgement of all Your La: most Glorious, Noble, and Gracious Sexe, I shall be pronounced guilt∣lesse, quyte, and free, from all Aspersion, and Imputa∣tion, vnjustlie here to fore layd to my charge. How-so-ever, Madame, if eyther this Subject maye anie wayes seeme pleasing vnto Your La: or my selfe
serviceable; all my cited Au∣thors never thought them∣selues halfe so GRACED; as I will continuallie confesse MY FORTVNES HONOVRED. And, thus, MOST NOBLE, AND GRACIOVS LADIE, With humble Heart, true mynd, and tempred Brayne, NED vowes, Your Sexe poore PRINTER to remayne.
The Prologue. SOme Men are so vncharitable, sayth Master Feltham, RESOL pag. 10 100. as to thinke All Wo∣men bad: and others so credulous, as they belieue, They are all good. But, sure∣lie, although everie man speaketh, as hee findeth; yet there is Reason, to direct our Opinion, without experience of the whole Sexe: Which, in a strict Examination, ma∣keth more for The Honour of Women, than most men, as yet, haue acknowledged. At the first, She was created his Equall. Onelie the difference was in the Sexe. O∣therwyse GEN. 5. they both were Man. If anie will argue from the Text, That Male and Female made Man; so the Man being put first, was therefore the wor∣thiest: I answere; So the Euening and the Morning were the first day, sayth the Scri∣pture: putting ever the Night before the GEN. 1
Day: otherwyse the Day was vnperfect. And, altho Peter Martyr, absurdlie, wold seeme to affirme, That, before the Fall, Man had Prioritie: Yet Saynct Chryso∣stome, stronglie, and truelie, confuteth his Grosse Opinion. Now, all must grant, Her Bodie to bee more Amiable, Admirable, and Beauti∣full, than Mans. She is fuller of Curio∣sities, and Noble Natures Wonders: both for Conception, and fostering the producted Birth. And, who, then, dare thinke, that GOD would put a worser Soule, into a better Bodie? It is certayne, that Women are of colder Constitution, than boyling Man: and, so, more temperate. Heate it selfe transporteth Man to Im∣moderation, and Furie: and hurrieth him to a Savage, and Libidinous Violence. But Women are, naturallie, more modest. And Modestie is, indeede, the verie Seat, and Dwelling-place, of Vertue: And Fond Fortunes blasts cannot prevayle, To over-throw Dame Vertues Sayle. Whence, I pray you, proceede the most
abhorride Villanies, but from a Masculine vnblushing Impudence? And what a deale of Sweetnesse doe wee finde in a mylde Dis∣position? For When Rage runnes swiftlie, step aside, and see, How hard th' Approaches of fearce Furie bee. If a Woman groweth bolde, and daring, wee dislyke her, and say, Shee is too lyke a Man. And yet, in our selues, wee magni∣fie, what in her wee condemne. Is not this great injustice? Everie Man is so much the better, by how much the nearer hee commeth vnto GOD. And in nothing can Man bee more lyke vnto GOD, than in beeing Mercifull. Yet Woman exceedeth Man verie farre, in Mercie, Pittie, Pietie, Chartie, and Rueth. And, whereas wee are still exhorted to loue, I am assured, that Women are everie where spoken of, for transcending in that Qualitie. Men, indeede, haue ever holden Parlia∣ment, & beene Judges in their owne causes: inacting their owne Wills, and not bearing the Women speake: whereby, verie easilie,
they may bee concluded guiltie. But let Men know, that Who judgement giues, and will but one side heare, (Though hee judge right) is no good Iusticiere. How-so-ever, for my part, I would gladlie honour Vertue in everie Sexe. And, I thinke, in the Generall, I shall finde it more in Women, than in Men; though weaker, and more infirmlie guarded. And, though Women bee the Better, yet may they bee wrought (by wicked Men) to bee the worser. Neyther shall the faults of manie, make mee vncharitable to all: nor the Goodnesse of some, make mee credulous of the rest. Yet, hitherto, I confesse, I haue found more sweete, and constant, Goodnesse, in Women, than in Men: for, of such men as are constant in true Goodnesse, I haue found no great Number. And thus I end my Prologue, which be∣ginneth not with Apologies; neyther doe I end it with any intreatie of a kinde censure, which might seeme to disparage this Work, and beg partialitie. But if in these weake
Extractions, the Judicious and Godlie Wo∣men, may bee anie wayes pleased in their increasing affections still towardes Godli∣nesse and Vertue, (all by-Respects put away) my Petitions shall ever bee to the GOD of all Goodnesse, to perpetuate their Happinesse; I ever remayning Their ImmutablE HonoureR. HAUD INFERIORA SEQUTUS. sun shining on a plant
The Authors, from whom this little Treatise hath its ori∣ginall; Beside the Holie Scrip∣tures, and Chronicles of all Nations, and in all Languages. 1 AMmianus Marcellius. 2 Aristotle. 3 Aulus Gellius. 4 Boccace. 5 Bohem. 6 Carter. 7 Cato. 8 Cicero, 9 Chrysostome. 10 Curtius Solinus. 11 Diodorus Siculus. 12 Epigenes. 13 Erasmus. 14 Eusebius. 15 Feltham. 16 Giero. 17 Gorgias Leo∣tanus. 18 Grantzio. 19 Gybson. 20 Herodote. 21 Hieronymus. 22 Hortantius. 23 Iohan Mar∣conville. 24 Iustinus. 25 Lactantius.
26 Marcus Varro 27 Mercurius Trismegistus. 28 Munsterus. 29 Origen. 30 Orosius. 31 Ovid. 32 Petrus Cirni∣tus. 33 Periander. 34 Pindar. 35 Plato. 36 Plinius. 37 Plutarch. 38 Pompeïus. 39 Pomponius Mela. 40 Pythagoras. 41 Siculus. 42 Scotus Subti∣lus. 43 Socrates. 44 Solinus. 45 Stesichoris. 46 Symphrorian Champer. 47 Taylor. 48 Theophrastus. 49 Thevet An∣gonozin. 50 Thomasius. 51 Trogus. 52 Virgil. 53 Xenocrates. And others.
To the Author. IN representing to the whole Worldes view, The lyuelie Pourtrait of the Worldes Ad∣mir'd: Yea, Natures Darling, with Her Pray∣ses due: With louelie Grace, and Merits Rayes attir'd: The Worth and Vertue of that Sacred Frame, Thy humble Service doeth thy Presse com∣pell, To vindicate, and blaze abroade Her Fame. Each one must say, Thou hast deserved well. M. I. G.
The glory of Man, Consisting in The Excellencie and Perfe∣ction of WOMAN. CHAPTER I. Of the Creation of WOMAN, and Her Perfection. HOwbeit THVCY∣DIDES, THVCY∣DIDES. the Philoso∣pher, (out of an heath∣nicke humour) was of opinion; That as the Women ought to bee good House-keepers, and seldome seene abroad; neyther should their good Name, Fame, nor Beautie, goe farder than the threshold of their doores: Yet worthie Plutarch, PLU∣TARCH. (a Man farre more excellent in Wit & Learning) treating of the Excellencie
of renowned Women, agreeth with the learned Gorgias Leontanus, and Gorgias eontanus sayeth▪ That not onlie Her Beautie, but also Her rare Vertues, good Behavior, comelie Manners, and other angelicall Perfections, should no wayes be smoo∣thered: But, in the Orations of learned men, made knowne; even to the en∣cowragement of Posteritie; according to the Lawes of the ancient Romanes; who held it for great impietie, only to make the grossest halfe of Mankynde renowned, and let the more excellent deeds, of the Nobler sort, bee buried in oblivion. And, therefore, according to my slender Skill, and abilitie, I vow to doe my best herein: though I presume nor to bee called absolutelie the Author hereof; but by way of gathering toge∣ther, and truelie translating, of learned mens just Tryalls, and sound Iudge∣mentes, in the prayse of so rare, glo∣rious, comelie, wyse, louelie, perfect, amiable, and precious a Creature, as is WOMAN, the Crowne, and Glorie, of MAN, even the Mother of all living Soules.
Neyther will I speake onlie of late tymes, since the dayes of Annacus, or Annac. Deucals Deucalion; but even frō the beginning, and first creation of WOMAN: where∣by Her splendant Brightnesse maye shyne the clearer, dazeling the dustie deeds of slalow-witted Man. NOw, it is sayd in the first and second Chapters of Genesis, That the LORD created the first man [Adam] even of the dust and slyme of the earth, breathing into his nostrils the breath of lyfe: and so he became a living soule; being innocent, and perfe∣ctlie holie, evē according to the Image of GOD. Then, marke, That Man was made of a dead lumpe, and of the worst of the earth. And, when GOD had put His owne Spirit therein, and made it a comelie, fayre, yea, holie, and divine Creature; then, out of the same purified substance, Hee made a more excellent Angelicall Creature; even EVAH, the Woman, and Mother of vs all. Here might justlie be showne innu∣merable
Testimonies, for the Honour and Prayse of Women, from the verie creation, vntill this day: 1. That everie worke of GOD exceedeth, excelleth, and out-reacheth each other, in great∣nesse, and goodnesse; and still the last, for to bee best. 2. That Man was the cause of the Womans fall; by neg∣lecting her companie. 3. That the Woman made denyall, to eate of the forbidden Fruit; and was overcome, by great and subtile temptations: and, that Man, verie impudentlie, and vnad∣vysedlie, without anie gayn-saying, at the first offer, tooke, and ate; and so verie rashlie brake the LORD'S Com∣mandement. 4. That whereas the Scri∣pture sayeth, that Wyues should bee subject to their Husbands; is not mea∣ned, That therfore, the Men are better than Women: but in respect of Her Fall. 5. That the fall of Evah, was greatlie to the manifestation of the Glorie and Power of GOD: yea, and a most happie Fall, to the Elected peo∣ple of the LORD. These, I say, with thousandes moe, might heere, truelie, and playnlie, bee
proven: but I omit the rest, vntill my second worke of this qualitie: which, (if this bee jangled agaynst) shall short∣lie compeare, even to the vtter shame of all the Fame-stayners of Women. And thus I proceede in Their due and just Prayse. Now, it is sayd, (Genes. 3.) that the seed of the Woman, should bruize the head GENE SIS 3. of the Serpent. And by this Seed, is meant our gracious Redeemer, IESUS, our Saviour: Blessed for ever: Amen. And, who so would rightlie vnder∣stand what Woman is vnto Man; Shee is, in verie deed, the first & chiefe essentiall Good, and Perfect Benefit of GOD, vnto Man. For, without that goodlie Creature, Man had never bene perfected: but in more miserable state, on earth, than anie beast: for each of them had his Maike, for his solace, re∣creation, and procreation. Thus, to conclude our first Chapter, let none denye, But that Woman is Man's Equall (and more) in every good poynt; and formost part-taker of every Heavenlie Gift and Grace frō Aboue: Being, as sayd is, composed both of the
more excellent Substance, and Qali∣ties. And, in Her, as in a rare, sump∣tuous, costlie, and precious Boothe, or Shop, (and from Her) doe shyne the beams of Beautie, Comelinehe, Con∣stancie, Vertue, Prudencie, Pietie, Cha∣ritie, and practise in good manners: Farre exceeding grosse Man: except, indeed, in strength, wherein he excee∣deth Woman mightilie, to commit all manner of Crueltie and Naughtinesse: and Shee the weaker Vessell, both in bodie and mynd, to commit anie evill. And, though Man seeme to brag of his strength, yet let him know, That what Man holdes, hanges but by slender Twyne. By sudden chance the strongest thinges declyne.
CHAPTER II. Of the fayre and goodlie Priviledges, gran∣ted and given vnto Women, even from the Beginning. ALtho WOMEN had no farder Advantage of Men, than sayde is al∣readie; to wit, That Shee is made in fayre Paradyse, and Man there-out: and, Of a good, purified, and liuelie substance; and hee of a grosse, heavie, and dead matter: This, I saye, might bee sufficient, to stop the inju∣rious wicked mouthes, of such calum∣niators, as are not worthie to be called The Sonnes (but The Shame) of Women. And yet there will remayne a worlde full moe of perfectious Excellencies, and vertuous Qualities, to be found in Women, farre excelling the grosse, and churlish conditions of Men. The smal∣lest part whereof, to collect together, and set downe in Print, would be a La∣byrinthiall, and Herculean Travell. Neyther could all the Paper in the worlde contayne Their Worthinesse;
nor the worlde contayne the Bookes, which, rightlie, might be written, In Their just Prayse. And, therefore, I request you, at this tyme, to accept onelie of this my little Knot, drawne out of other mens great Gardens: No more but to signifie vnto the worlde, the pretence of my good Will, if possiblie my Power could bee amounted to the Spheare of my soa∣ring Mynd. Then, for Brevities cause, hearken well vnto these few (yet notable) Re∣membrances, of Honourable Women, in tymes past; even to the encowrage∣ment of our gracious Matrons now-a-dayes, yea, and to Succession hereafter: together with a strong Confutation of all gracelesse Vilependers of this renowned Sexe of Women. Which sort of men, may fitlie be compared with the worst sort of Serpents, or Vi∣pers: which, after generation, having receaved lyfe, in their mothers bellies, gnaw, and eate thorow their mothers side, and so come foorth: whereby, of necessitie, shee loseth her lyfe. Firstlie, then: There was never such
a wicked, and vnjust Deed, wrought, by all the Women that ever were, as was showne on our Saviour; flat, and dire∣ctlie contrarie, to the will, counsell, and disposition of Women. Reade, consideratiuelie, & beholde, how the Women advertised, fore-war∣ned, yea, exhorted the Men, and ex∣presslie forbade them, To lay handes, or MATTH. 26. 19. haue adoe, with JESVS: proclayming and avowing Him, To be righteous; even as the trueth was indeed. Yet, vnhappie men would giue no credence to the Trueth: but, most madlie, wickedlie, and impudentlie, even agaynst all equi∣tie, justice, and reason, they furiouslie proceeded in their madnesse: and did not onlie Lay handes vpon the Just, as it were, to hold Him: but, for-sooth, they bound Him, buffeted Him, mocked Him, spitted vpon Him; and, with all the spyte the could, they crowned Him even with a Crowne of sharpe Thorns: Yea, and left not off, till, as shamefullie, and with the greatest ignominie they could invent, They crucified the LORD of Glorie; even betwixt two evill-doers, Hee Himselfe having done no evill at
all: but was vnjustlie accused, by such false men as themselues, whome they had suborned to be false witnesses. Hearken well, ye Monsters: because your sex rejected CHRIST, betake you to your brother Barabbas; who beeing guiltie, yee saved, and condemned the innocent IESUS; who is the Bro∣ther of WOMEN. For they cryed, Saue Him, saue Him: but yee cryed, Crucifie Him, crucifie Him. Yee prowde, faynt-hearted men! Matth. chap. 26. verse 69. 70 71. 72. 73. 74. Marke chap 14. verse 66. 67 68. 69. 70. 71. Luke chap. 22. verse 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. Iohn chap. 18. verse 17. 18 25. 26. 27. what thinke yee? Was it a fit tyme for His Disciples to forsake Him in the Garden? And did not His moste boa∣sting Disciple, Peter, denye Him thryse in short tyme? yea, with cursing, and swearing, that he knew Him not. 2. The Innocencie of Women, and Guiltinesse of Men, in this exceeding great Wickednesse, is yet verie pro∣bable, by these folowing Consequents. Because the men were found too light, and vnworthie, therefore the LORD made choyse of Women, to be the first Proclaymers, and sounding Trumpets, of His Glorious Resurrection. The meane tyme His Men-disciples beeing
too too forgetfull of what CHRIST had sayde vnto them manie tymes be∣fore, concerning His Resurrection: yet were they saythlesslie forgetfull, and believed not. But, on the contrarie, His Women-Disciples had great sayth, re∣membred well His words, wayted ear∣nestlie for His rysing agayne, and de∣parted not from the Graue: when as Matth. 18. Marke 16. Iohn 20. the light-brayned, and shalow-witted men, thought all was done, and never to haue heard anie more of their Lord: Dispersing themselues, some to their former Trade of Fishing; others tooke Iohn 21. verse 3. their journey into the Countrey, and that vpon the Sabbath Day. Yea, some Marke chap. 16. verse 12. 13 of them would not belieue that the LORD was risen from the dead▪ when it was tolde them of the rest: no, not when they saw the LORD Himselfe; except they put their handes into His precious wounds: and so, if it had bene Iohn 20. verse 24. 25. 26. 27. possible, to haue holden the LORD still in agonie. 3. Beholde still the fayre Priviled∣ges of Women, by the example of Ra∣chel, Leah, and manie others; who were preferred before their husbāds▪ &
had the preeminence to name their children even as pleased themselues: the great Patriarch Jaakob himselfe, father of the twelue Tribes, and many other Worthies, being thereto silent. 4. How can I worthilie anough ex∣presse the prayse of Jaill, the wyfe of IAEL. Heber the Kennite? who, with her own hands, and alone, slue Sisera, the Cap∣tayne of the Canaanitish hoste: who, in IUDGES 4. 18. deede, had made great spoyle of the LORD'S People. Beholde, I saye That which manie thousands of men could not atchieue vnto, it pleased th LORD to perfect by a Woman, as an¦other worthie Penthesilia. 5. Gracious Deborah judged Israe DEBO∣HAR. at that tyme: bearing prerogatiue, an commandement, over all Israell; as we IUDGES 5. Captaynes, and Priestes, as commo people. And the LORD blessed Israe mightilie in her dayes. 6. Look how farre more excellent¦lie IUDGES 13. 1. SAM. 25. the Mother of Sampson behaved he selfe, both towardes GOD and Man than did her churlish husband. And with her, let vs also joyne Gracious Abigaill. ABI∣GAILL.
7. See wyse Iudeth, howe cowra∣giouslie, IUDETH and valiantlie, she slue Olofer∣nus: and, by that meanes, discomfited hundreth thousandes of the Assyrians: whyle as the sillie faynt-hearted men were howling, and lamenting, within the besiedged Citie of Bethulia: not once daring to offer to come foorth: no, not so much as once to looke over he Wall. Sillie Cowards. 8. Hearken, yet, vnto the true Re∣cordes, of the Royall Priviledges of Women. Looke to the Countrey of Campaigne; where that excellent order is yet, from ancient tymes; That if it please a Gentle-woman to marry with anie meane man, by force of that mar∣riage he is inacted a Gentle-man. But if a Gentle-man marrie with a meane woman, it is nothing so. 9. Also, worthie Plutarch repor∣teth, PLU∣TARCH. That it is ordayned in Gallia Cel∣tica, (to the Honour of Women) in re∣spect of a League, betwixt Hanniball & the Celts; That, when as a Celt, or Gall, should complayne of anie injurie done vnto them by a Carthagenian, the lords of Carthage were obliedged, to heare
the cause, and make restitution for th wrong. But, on the contrarie, when Carthagenian had wronged a Gall, o Celt, the Celtish women were judge therein, even according to their wor¦thie Discretion. Thus were they ho¦den in high and deserved Honour, an moste worthilie preferred before th men of that Countrey. 10. More-over: The Troglodites of Aethiopia, though a barbarous people (as sayeth Bohem) yet, being governed BOHEM. with Women, as well at home, as abroad in the Warres, are victorious ritch, renowned, and feared of their neyghbouring enemies, who are go∣verned but with the vicious, faynt-hearted, effeminate, cowardlie, and luxurious men. 11. Here (to the prayse of women) I cannot omit to rehearse what one truelie speaketh of the moste Happie Reygne of our Sacred Soveraygne, ELIZABETH, Queene of England, France, and Ireland true Defender of the Fayth, &c. Blessed Queene ELIZA∣BETH (sayeth hee) a Princesse of Immor∣tall Fame, the Admiration of Her Sexe, the
Helper of all Nations, the Patterne of Princes, the Delight of Her People, and Terrour of Her Enemies: Borne to weare a temporall crowne on earth, and to bee crow∣ned with Eternall Glorie in Heaven: Resto∣red, Iohn Taylor, the Wa∣ter Poët. and mayntayned, the true Religion con∣stantlie: Reposed Her onlie Trust in GOD confidentlie: Held the Iesuits, all Papists, and other Hyrelinges, at the Staffs ende steadfastlie: Put Her Lawes in Execution resolutelie, (and yet without all crueltie:) Reygned manie years gloriouslie: Depar∣ted this lyfe peaceablie: And liveth in Hea∣ven triumphantlie. HER EPITAPH. The Griefes, the Feares, the Terroures, and the Toyles: The Sleightes, Trickes, Snares, that for Her lyfe were layd: Popes, Prisons, Poysons, Pistoles, bloo∣die Broyles: All these incompast Her, poore harm∣lesse Mayd. But Shee still trusting in Her Ma∣ker's Ayd, Was aye defended, by His Power Di∣vyne.
Her Glorie, and Her Greatnesse, were displayd, QUEENE ELIZA∣BETH. As farre as Sunne and Moone did ever shyne. GOD'S mingled Service, Shee did re-refyne, From Romish Rubbish, and from Hu∣mane Drosse. Shee yearlie made the Pryde of Spayne declyne: France and Belgia, Shee saved from Losse. Shee was Artes Patterne, t' Armes Shee was a Patron. Shee liv'd and died a Queene, a Mayd, a Matron.
CHAPTER III. Of the Excellencie of WOMEN, whom GOD hath made the first Mothers of VERTVE, and Instrumentall Finders∣out, of the most excellent, and needfull things, in the world. MARCVS VARRO MARCUS VARRO: testifieth, That Women were the first Instruments, and Finders-out, of the most excellent, and needfull things, belonging vnto Man∣kynde: to wit; 1. The Unitie, and Fellowship, to dwell together, in Townes, Villages, Freedomes, and Congregations. 2. That WOMEN were the first In∣venters of LETTERS, and Arte of Writing. 3. That WOMEN are the first In∣bringers and Ordayners, of Lawes, and Statutes; Politicke, Civill, and Morall. 4. That the comelie Arte of Barba∣rizing, Shearing, or Trimming of mens heads, and beards, first begunne
with Women, in Sicilia; and brought from thence, to Rome, by Tirinius; Rome having then beene inhabited 554 yeares, without the seemlinesse of this Arte. 5. That WOMEN are the first In∣venters of Horologies, Dialls, and Clockes; which most comfortablie measure vnto vs the Day and Night, into 24 parts, Winter and Summer. Then, next vnto GOD, to the glorie of Women bee it sayde, That no more excellent, and worthie things, than these, can bee in the world. What can bee more precious vnto vs, than LETTERS; For, without Let∣ters, the lyfe of man, yea, and his whole pilgrimage on earth, would bee but a continuall death, and an oblivious buriall. Because nothing can bee done without Letters. Letters are the pillars of everlasting Memorie. Letters keepe fresh to our remem∣berance to day, what hath beene done so manie thousand yeares agoe. Letters preserue all thinges done in our tymes, even vnto our posterities
posteritie, for ever. Had it not beene for Letters, Socra∣tes, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Theophrastes, Virgill, Ovid, Cicero, with the rest of the goodly fellowship of Philosophers; yea, most holie and wyse Fathers, had not so highly beene in estimation with the world, nor the world haue reaped such great beneficiall knowledge, as it hath pleased GOD, (next vnto His great Mercies) by their paynfull stu∣dies, (to our great ease) to bestow vpon vs. But what neede I to speake of mor∣tall men? and of late tymes? Are not the workes of GOD, even from the beginning, and His miraculous Won∣ders, yet extant amongst vs? yea, to∣gether with His revealed Word and Will; and all by the meanes of Immor∣tall Letters? whereof it pleased GOD to make illustrious WOMEN the first CAR∣MENTA. Author; even Renowned Carmenta, (or, by some Writers, named, Nico∣strata) the mother of Evander, king of Arcadia. For whose sake, all men are bound to loue and honour Her Sexe: giving GOD the praise, who hath lent vnto
Mankinde such an excellent exceeding great Benefite, as are immortall Let∣ters. If anie would heere alleadge, that PLI∣NIUS. Plinius, with the authoritie of Epigenes, would maintayn Letters to haue beene from the beginning of the Creation; yet aboundance of ancient Writers are of the contrarie opinion: amongst whom is the worthie, & learned Theo∣phrastus: who thinketh it no shame to THEO∣PHRA∣STUS- confesse, that the Ladie Leontia, with∣stood him, in the face, in disputation, before an Assemblie, and quyte over∣threw him: and that by reason, sayeth hee, shee had the knowledge, and pra∣cticall vse of Letters: which himselfe was ignorant of, at that tyme. And Saynct Hieronymus confesseth HIERO∣NYMUS. the lyke, of a woman, called Eustachius: to the glorie of GOD, in His great Mercies towards Womans Sexe, bee it sayde. And Aristotle sayeth, that as Man ARI∣STOTLE commeth of the Woman; even so doe all good things, and all excellencie in knowledge of Sciences, Learning, and Vertue, proceede also from the Wo∣man,
vnto Man; for his comfort. And therefore, Glorie bee to GOD for Her. To proceede, then, in the just praise of women. Women haue not onelie beene the first instrumentall finders of such things as are indeede the Royall Ornaments of Mankynds inward vn∣derstanding, (as were Letters afore∣sayde:) but also manie other necessa∣ries; without the which, man had yet lived, as in former tymes; that is, more lyke brute beasts, than reasonable crea∣tures, had it not beene for the wittie helpe, and painfull hand, of vertuous woman. For not onlie from the Crea∣tion, till Noah; but long after the De∣ludge, Man lived on Achornes, rootes, barkes of trees, and meale of such lyke thinges. Till, at the last, Dame Ceres CERES. found out the precious grain of Corne; and, consequentlie, invented the ma∣king, and baking of bread, in the coun∣treys of Greece, Italie, and Sicilie. And therefore was shee called a Goddesse; yea, and holden for the same of all our learned Poëts, even till this day. Moreover, it is soothlie sayde of the
same Dame Ceres, that shee was the first ordayner of good Statutes, and maker of Civill Lawes: without the which, no Kingdome, Cōmon-wealth, Congregation, or Housholde, could stand. And yet all this commeth im∣mediatelie from GOD, vnto Woman; and GOD maketh her the Destributer thereof, vnto man, her other halfe. And for my proofe concerning Dame DIO∣DERE. OVID. HERO∣DITE. VIR∣GIL. Ceres, I take to witnesse worthie Dio∣dore, in his sixt Booke; Ovid, in his fift Booke of Metamorphoses; and Herodo∣te, the father of all Historicians, in his sixt Booke. And therefore Virgil, in his Booke of Aeneids, calleth Her Le∣gifera; that is, Law-giver. And this al∣so doeth Plinius maintayne, & avouch, PLI∣NIUS. in his seaventh Booke of Naturall Hi∣storie. Now, as the Corne, and Meale ma∣king, & Bread baking, was first found by a Woman, Dame Ceres, as said is, so CERES. ISIS. is there another rare Dame, called Isis, who found out the way, how to ma∣nure, and plow the land. And, shortlie after, other vertuous Women, in Gal∣lia, haue invented the Siue; and some
others, in Spaygne, the Bolting-cloath: as sayeth Plinius, in his eyghteenth Booke. More-over, in the beginning Men lived most Barbarouslie, Grosslie, and Brutishlie, having not wherewith to cover their nakednesse, but the Shins of wilde Beasts, and barks of Trees: vntill the time that the Women found out the making of Cloath. In which Arte Dame Tannaquil, (or, as some TANNA∣QUIL. call her, Caja) was extraordinarie pain∣full, and expert: and, therefore, is cal∣led the Goddesse of good House-wyues. But the first that ever began to spinne Wooll, was a comelie, fayre, and ver∣tuous Virgine, in the Countrey of Ly∣dia, called Arachne: as testifieth Pli∣nius, ARA∣CHNE. and Ovid, in his Metamorph. But I know not what would haue become of sillie Man, had not Dame Pallas found our Flax and Hempe, and PALLAS. the invention of making of Linnen Cloath. For, I am sure, that, without Linnen, Men would bee much fouler, and vncleaner than Beasts: so that his Habitation would bee more odious, than the stall of Augia. And these
enormities are all prevented, even by Women. Thus Men may vnderstand, that all Heavenlie Gifts, and Graces, shew themselues farre more excellent∣lie in Women, than in Men. And, I neede not to make much adoe, to proue, that the Women are, in no degree, so greedie, and avari∣cious, as are vnhappie Men. And thus I durst appeale to everie honest Mans Conscience: yet, never-the-lesse, I can hardlie passe by heere, to tell you how Queene Semiramis approved this SEMI∣RAMIS. DARIUS. on King Darius: for she caused build a costlie, and Sumptuous Tombe, vpon the which she caused write this Poesie. Who so desireth gold, & silver much, (such. Breake down this Tombe, & he shall find all And, as King Darius happened to come that way, and beholding the Tombe, and reading the superscrip∣tion, hee caused open the same: and on the innerside of the same stone was written thus; Thou Gracelesse Man, and full of Greedinesse,
That Women doe surpasse thee, now confesse. Hadst thou beene other, but a catiue Wretch. Thy Hands on dead Mens Tombes thou wouldst not stretch. And so finding nothing within, but dust and clay, and seeing himselfe so farre deceaved, this greedie Glutto∣nous Man departed, looking as angrie∣lyke, as a March-Hare. Eusebius, in his Church Histories, EUSE∣BIUS. wryteth greatlie to the just Prayse of Women, by the example of the Mo∣ther of Origen: for, manie Martyrs on ORIGEN a day beeing condemned to bee burnt, by the Enemies of the Gospell of CHRIST, this Origen was in the mynde, voluntarilie, and vnaccused, to haue suffered death with them, on the morrow. But his Mother, (happie Woman) beeing aware thereof, came quyetlie into his Chamber, the night before, & tooke away all his Cloathes. So that when Origen rose in the mor∣ning, with full resolution, to sacrifice himselfe, with the other Martyrs, hee
had nothing to put on: and so was faine to tarrie in his Chamber, a day or two, till GOD changed his mynde: and lived manie yeares after, and pro∣ved an excellent instrument in propa∣gating the Gospell of GOD; as appea∣reth till this day, by his worthie, and holie Wrytings. Yet, before I conclude this Chap∣ter, I must rehearse vnto you two wor∣thie Women, who in excellencie of learning, and Governament, were not behinde anie Men that ever wee reade of. The first of these was a Woman borne in England, of Heroicke Parents, and her selfe of a loftie spirit, and sub∣till ingenious wit: and having passed the English Schooles, at home, shee de∣parted from England, in Mans Cloa∣thing and came to Athens; which Ci∣tie at that tyme, flowrished, aboue all others, in Learning, and Policie: in which she extraordinarilie studied, and profited exceedinglie, calling her selfe POPE IOHN. Iohn. And afterwardes, comming to Rome, shee taught, and disputed, open∣lie, in the Schooles, in the habite of a
most graue Doctor: and was so well lyked of, that they thought her the pa∣ragon of that Age. And after the death of Leo, the fourth of that name, Pope of Rome, about the yeare of our LORD 852. shee was chosen Pope of Rome; and governed that Place, with great wisdome, in good Civilitie, and hap∣pie Peace, the space of three yeares, two moneths, and foure dayes: and ended her lyfe with great Renowne. Another rare, wise, and excellent Woman, was Theodosia, Empresse of Constantinople: who through the base∣nesse of the Emperour, her Husband, who, seeing Disturbances lykelie to fall out, in his Empire, cowardlie, left all, betooke himselfe to a Closter, and became a Monke: and lykewyse her Brother Zoc beeing slaine, shee gover∣ned the Empyre her selfe; and that so valiantlie, and judiciouslie, that she was (out of measure) beloved of her Sub∣jects, and feared of her Enemies, all the dayes of her lyfe: and departed this lyfe in peace, about the yeare of CHRIST 1050. And, to conclude this Chapter, I
speake thus much, with pardon to the Women of these tymes, to follow the Vertue of these their aforesayde pre∣decessours. To Vertue, and to Honour, once in Rome, Two statelie Temples there erected was: Where none might vnto Honours Temple come, But first through Vertues Temple they must passe. Which was an Embleme, and a Do∣cument, That wee by Vertue must true Ho∣nour win; And that, that Honour shall be permanent, Which onlie did from Vertue first be∣gin. Then sith these Women haue tru Vertue wun, See yee with them the paths of Ver∣tue run.
CHAPTER IV. Of the Valiantnesse, Boldnesse, and Cowrage of Women; and of their Vi∣ctorious Battells; farre surpassing the engine, or Cowrage of Man. SUch Striplings as take pleasure, as farre as they may, to impeach the Honour and Credit of Wo∣men, and to denye their rare perfection in everie excel∣lent thing, even aboue Man; let such stand abacke, I say, and withdrawe themselues, vnto these learned Au∣thors, who preferre the Valour, Cow∣rage, and bold-heartinesse of Women, to all the Men that ever were: and, for this purpose, let them, with great re∣verence, reade Ammianus Marcellinus, Trogus Pompeius, Justinus, Orosius, Dio∣dorus Siculus, Plinius, Herodotus, Cur∣tius, Solinus Pomponius, Mela, and manie others, in the renowned Histo∣ries of the Amazones; where it is clear∣lie showne, that the just praise of Wo∣men,
in Martiall affaires also, farre aboue Men, hath sounded through the World. Now, these Amazones dwelt in Scy∣thia; this Scythia lying in North-Asia; the which, now-adayes, is called Tar∣taria; whereby it is knowne from that Scythia which lyeth in Europe. And the Amozones having no King, but a Queene, called Orithie, together with ORI∣THIE. a valiant Ladie, whom the Queene made her Vice-Gerent, called Antiope. These two Women governed the Amazones so wyselie, and valiantlie, that they were feared of all their neyghbours: So that Euristeus the A∣thenian King, was compelled to intreat Great Hercules himselfe, to put on his Armour, and to helpe him against two Women, forsooth, who then so wise∣lie governed the Amazones, that his bowles quaked for feare of them. Now, this Hercules, beeing pricked with Ambition, jealous of Honour, & greedie for preferment, (as, common∣lie, Men haue ever beene) hee assem∣all the forces that hee might: and ta∣king with him Theseus, and other
mightie Friends, and assistants, they imbarked themselues to sayle towards Scythia, agaynst the Queene of the Amazones: and after great Skaithe of their owne people, are returned with∣out victorie; not daring to bide bar∣gaine, when the Queene in proper person came to giue them Battell: but destroyed some of the Countrey with fire, and so fled away, lyke Men. But soone after that, the Queene, and her Forces, followed over, into Europe, to bee avenged on the Gricks, and on Eu∣risteus; where they made such havock, on the Borders, and Frontures, of the Athenians, that their King was faine to compone with the Queene, and to buy her out of his Countrey; Great Hercules being slayn: In token where∣of, the Athenians hold him for their Patron till this day. And a long time, thereafter, the Gre∣cians going into Asia, agaynst the Tro∣janes, and Penthesilia, then beeing suc∣cessiue PENTHE∣SILIA. Queene to Orithie, Queene of the Amazones, shee levied a gallant Armie, more Women, than Men, and came over, and assisted the Trojanes; in
such sort, that through her stratagems, and feats of Armes, shee so defeated the Grecians, that they were almost vt∣terlie vndone; had it not beene for Achilles, who subtillie deceaved that valiant Queene Penthesilia, and shee PENTHE¦SILIA. was slayne in Battell: wherethrough the rest returned home; to their owne Countrey of Amazone, choosing ano∣ther Queene, called Thalistris. And this Thalistris governed, and reygned, THALI∣STRIS. in great Wealth, and prosperitie, over the Amazones, even in the dayes of Alexander the Great, when as hee had Warres agaynst the Hircanites. And, whether for feare, or loue, I know not, yet Alexander never mole∣sted the Amazones; but helde their Queene in great estimation, and reve∣rence. But, after her decease, when Men, forsooth, came to governe the Ama∣zones, all thinges went backwards a∣gaynst them: so that their Enemies prevayled: and, within short tyme, that Kingdome was brought to nothing. Againe, the Emperour, Claudius the second, having Warres agaynst the
Gothes: and on a day, beeing victo∣rious over them in Battell, himselfe in proper person perceaved some valiant fighting Souldioures amongst the Gothes, exceeding manie others, in cowrage: which hee caused take aliue, as prisoners; but onlie ten in number. And when their Armour was laide off, these ten were perceaved to bee Wo∣men. Whereat the Emperour stood greatlie amazed, and gaue them great praise, and rich Gifts, judging them to haue beene descended of the valiant Amazones. And, lykewyse, the Countrey of Francia Antartica, is extraordinarilie well governed, and defended, even by Women, till this day: as wryteth The∣vet THEVET ANGO∣MOZIN. Angomozin, in his Diversitie of Hi∣stories. Hearken yet vnto Lactantius, who famouslie commendeth the women of Lacedemonia; who issued foorth of their Citie, when their Enemies had most stronglie besiedged them: and beha∣ved themselues so victoriouslie, that few of their Enemies escaped. In testi∣fication whereof, those worthie Lace∣dimonian
Women, even of the Golden Treasure of their Enemies, they made a large Image of Venus, in compleat Armour, in token of their Victorie; to an everlasting remembrance, and en∣cowragement, to all succeeding Ages. Neyther ought wee to passe by the Valiantnesse, and Cowrage, of the Wo∣men of Cimber; who, although their men were slayne, to the number of one hundreth fourtie thousands, by Catulus, and Marius of Rome; yet the Women proved more valiant, and a∣venged the death of their Husbands; choosing, rather, with them, to die, than to bee deflored of their Enemies. And this came to passe more than 90. yeares before the comming of Christ. Yet to proceede, in the just prayse of Women: Petrus Cirnitus, writing of PETRUS CIRNI∣TUS. ZENO∣BIA. Worthie Discipline, in his 26. Booke, and 14. Chapter, sayeth, that Zenobia, Queene of Palmyren, fought a cruell Battell, agaynst the Emperour Aure∣lian, and obtayned great victorie. Yet, because he thought her but a Woman, hee made no great matter of it; but wrote vnto her, and bade her yeelde.
But, shee, having receaved his letter, with a smiling Countenance, & Cow∣ragious mynde, answered him thus; It must not bee with Messiues, but with might of Armes, if thou shalt obtayne aniething at my hands: For, let thy grosse vnderstanding bee assured, that Cleopatra had rather want lyfe, than CLEO∣PATRA. AENEAS SYL∣VIUS. Honour. And Aeneas Sylvius, who after∣wardes was Pope, and great Bishop of the holie Citie of Rome, called Pius the second, declareth at length, that the land of Bealme was long time hap∣pilie governed by Women. But, because all Histories, both Spi∣rituall, and Temporall, as well olde, as new, make so much mention, of the Valiantnesse, & Cowrage of Women, I neede not to tarrie anie longer heere∣vpon; but to goe forewardes, in the due prayse of Women; declaring to the World, their other rare perfe∣ctions, also; even to the astonishment and bashfulnesse, of all their Gainsayers whatsoever: And so I conclude this Chapter, proceeding to another, with this great encowragement, to the Wo∣men
now of our tymes, and hereaf∣ter for ever. Let their Example bee a Spurre to you, That yee their worthie Vertues may persue. Women they were, and you are even as much: They were Victorious, you may even bee such. They had great Cowrage, guarded with good Skill: Which Skill and Cowrage, Fortune, Grace, and Will, I doe implore th' Almightie to be∣stow, On each of you, the High, and eke the low.
CHAPTER V. Of sundrie good Women, who wittilie, and valiantlie, haue cleansed whole Countreys, and Congregations, of cruell Tyrants, and Heretickes. ANd if men haue obtained anie prayse and glorie on earth, by mayntayning their Kingdomes, Coun∣treys, Townes, and other thinges of this world, by the losse of limbes and lyues; then, I am assured, that our wor∣thie women haue deserved farre more happie fame, prayse, and renowne, who haue not spared their vttermost endevours, painful travels, their goods, children, limbes, nor lyfe, in the de∣fence of things Aboue, as GODS true Religion, and the holie Gospell of IESUS CHRIST. It is sayde in the Booke of Judeth, that when the pryde of Nabuchodono∣zor was puffed vp even to the Heavēs, giving commandement vnto Olofernes
(chiefe captayne of his armie) to bring the whole world vnder his subjection. Where was ever heard tell of such lyke pryde in Women? But what followed? Forsooth, the LORD sent holie Judeth, into the campe of the Assyrians, (lying before Bethulia) and tooke off the head of the tyrant Olofernes, even with his owne sword: whereby shee dis∣comfited the hudge armie of the ene∣mies of GODS People, and preserved her citie. But, because I haue sayde somewhat heereof, and of Deborah, & Jael, before, in my second Chapter; therefore I goe forwards, to others moe; whose number is so infinite, that this little volume can not contayne the hundreth part: onlie I shall recite a few, and so proceede to another sub∣ject, even in the just prayse of Women bee it sayde. Abimelech, that Arch-tyrant, mur∣dered his threescore and ten Brethren, destroyed the Citie of Sechem, burnt IUDGES 8. 35. and 9. 1. 2. 3 4. &c. the Counsell-house, and sowed the Ci∣tie with salt. And, not content with this, hee presentlie besiedged the Citie of Thebes: and having chased the
people into a strong Tower, hee came to the doore thereof, of purpose to set it on fyre, with his owne cruell handes. IUDGES 9. 56. 7 53. 54. 2. SAM. 11. 21. But a certaine woman, sayth the Scrip∣ture, threw downe a piece of a Mill∣stone vpon Abimelech's head; so that his brayne pan was broken. Then cau∣sed he a young man to thrust his sword thorow him: and so hee died shame∣fullie. In this same manner died also King Pyrrhus: who lying in siedge before the Towne of Argoes, a woman threw a stone vpon his head. And being blin∣ded with blood, a womā caused a Soul∣diour, called Zopyrus, to run him tho∣row with a Speare. And Plutarch, in his booke of fa∣mous Women, speaketh verie laudably of Aretaphilia; who marvelouslie, and ARETA∣PHILIA verie periculouslie, delivered her owne Countrey, from the tyrannie of Nico∣crates, and Leander: both which she put to death, and caused Calniam to bee burnt, beeing the occasion of their ty∣rannie. Stand yet abacke, yee Despysers of WOMEN, and take example by Cyrus
the Emperour: who (as long as his Em∣peresse lived) being a good and merci∣full Prince, afterwards became a cruell & vnmercifull Tyrant. But what follo∣wed? The Historie sayeth, that Thomy∣ris, Queene of Scythia, waged Battell THOMY∣RIS. agaynst him: whom she tooke, and cau∣sed cut off his head. And, for a reward of his bloodie crueltie, she put his head into a vessell full of mens blood; say∣ing, Satisfie nowe thy selfe with blood; which, here-to-fore, thou couldst never get anough. More-over: Amongst the rest of worthie Women, let vs speake some∣what of Ieane of Orleans, or of Arke, IEANE of OR∣LEANS. (for whom the French-men haue great cause to praise GOD:) for by her god∣lie Skill, and willing forewardnesse, the kingdome of France was fred from conquering English-men: who had im∣periouslie possessed that kingdome a∣boue fourtie years together. But yet, as the English-men were al∣wayes valourous Conquerours: so also haue they ever beene knowne to bee verie mercifull Enemies, and friendlie Foes. For, though they had conque∣red
all; yet, of their courtesie, they suf∣fered the King of France to possesse Bourdeaux, with some other adjacent little Townes, for his mayntaynance: whereby hee might spende everie day a Sheepe, (at the least) and two Capons, besides Leekes, Salats, &c. as sayeth Iohn Marconville, in his book of the Prayse of Women, chap. 7. Now, I will not lose my tyme, for the prseut, to argue the matter, (with William Bellay of Lange, in his lear∣ned Booke Deremilitari) concerning the aforesayd Ieane, (named from Va∣colours, and called The Mayd of France, or The Mayd of Helpe) whether tho∣row the hand of GOD, or by Witch-Craft, she brought such great things to passe. How-so-ever, true it was, that France, by her meanes, was set free at that tyme, all, except Cales, which the English-men kept still, from the dayes of Philip of Valoys, till the Reygne of Heurie the second: which was two hundreth, and eleven yeares. But at last, the English Armie lying in siedge before the citie of Campaigne, and Jeane making her selfe thither-wardes,
to relieue the French-men, shee was betrayed by John of Luxemburgh, and delivered vnto the English; who burnt her to powder at Rowane, in the moneth of May, 1340. To testifie Shee had done good, Her deeds were sealed with her blood. And therefore, Let FORTVNE smyle, or frowne, bee still content: In all Essayes beare still an Heart true bent.
CHAPTER VI. Of the wonderfull goodnesse of GOD, to∣wardes Man, whicth He hath wrought by Religious Women: And how by a Woman, Britayne first receaved the Christian Fayth. IT is mani∣fest vnto all men, who are not bereaft of their wits, and altogether voyd of Understanding, That the greatest Benefite vnder the Sunne, is THE GIFT OF FAYTH, and TRVE BELIEFE; whereby wee come neare vnto GOD, frame our selues to loue and feare Him; and so attayne to the knowledge of His just Iudge∣ments, and tender Mercies. And this great and excellent Gift of GOD, is manifested vnto Mankynde, (next vn∣to His Sacred Word) even by chosen & holie Women; whom it pleased GOD to make the first Heraulds of Christ's Glorious Resurrection, as sayde is be∣fore, in our second Chapter. And also
manie worthie Ecclesiasticall Writers testifie, That Marie Magdalene, Martha, &c. did first publish the Gos∣pel, and preached CHRIST Crucified, and His Resurrection, and Ascension, in the Countrey of Illyrica, which is nowe called Slavonia, and also in the Land of Provence: where they conver∣ted the people, and brought them to the true Fayth. Wee reade of Apollos, a learned Jew of Alexandria, an eloquent Man, and mightie in the Scriptures: And altho hee was alreadie well instructed in the way of the LORD; yet Aquila, by the ACTS 18. 24. 25. 26. helpe of Priscilla,, his wyfe, expoun∣ded vnto him the way of GOD more perfectlie, than ever hee knew of be∣fore. And, the great King Agrippa was ACTS 26. 27. 28. 29. but almost perswaded by Paul, to bee a Christian. But, to the contrarie, GOD had mercie on good Lydia, opened her ACTS 16. 14. 15 heart: and not almost, but altogether made her His chosen Vessell. Reade the Chronicle of fayre Eng∣land, and you shall vnderstand, that in
the dayes of King Egilbert, the whole Realme was infected with the dam∣nable Heresie of Pelagius. And Saynct Augustine comming thither, to preach the Christian Religion; by mediation of the Queene, after great, and serious paynes, and loving intreatie, the King gaue eare, and was converted, toge∣ther with his People. See, thus did England, first receaue the true Fayth, by the meanes of a Woman; sayeth Gaguinus. Hermigidus, King of Gothes, beeing GAGUI∣NUS. infected with the Heresie of Arrius, is also converted, and brought to the true acknowledgement of CHRIST cruci∣fied, even by his Wyfe, Nigegond; as sayeth the same Gaguinus, in his second Booke. Also, thorow the earnest travell, of Clotildis Queene of Perthan, the King Clowis, her Husband, was baptized, and greatlie rejoyced, with thanksgiving vnto GOD, who had brought him from Darknesse, to Light, and that by the meanes of a Woman, sayeth John Marconville. Amongst aboundance of other wor∣thie
Authors, it is manifest by Plutarch, Boccace, and Symphorian Champer, That manie men, both mightie and wyse, haue gotten their best Education even by Women; and receaved from Them, next vnto GOD, their best and most wholsome Benefites: as well concer∣ning the good of the Soule, as the pro∣fit of the bodie. And this was more than manifest on Flavius Clemens, in the dayes of Domician the Emperour. But now I will not tarrie vpon such an ex∣traordinarie Subject, lest our pievish Disgracers of Women, should run mad, and altogether despare of their Par∣don, for their misbehaviour in chatting agaynst Women. MERCU∣RIUS TRIS∣MEGI∣STUS. Mercurius Trismegistus, duelie consi∣dering the wonderfull Goodnesse of GOD towards Man, in Women, sayth, That such a Man, as in all manner of wayes, showed not his full indevour in the Honour, yea, service of Women, let him bee accursed. And, that such a Man, as avoydeth the Companie of Woman, let him bee buried quicke. But, foolish, senselesse, and irregu∣lar Man, who will not bee perswaded
neyther by Reason, nor Trueth, to shun his objections, That they are but Men, and dead long agoe, whom I cite for my Warrandize, in the just prayse of Women; let him hearken then, what GOD sayeth vnto Righteous Abra∣ham, In all that Sarah sayeth vnto thee, GEN. 21. 12. hearken vnto her voyce, sayeth the Lord. Then, thou that wilt not hearken vnto the voyce of thy Gracious Wyfe, I de∣nye thee to bee a sonne of Abraham, but rather of Satan, the Enemie of all Loue, Concord, and good Connsell. Thus doe we find, that Womē, in all things, Health, happines, vnto the man still brings: And yet envious vnbelieving Man, His hardned heart, hee never settle can, For to implore the Heavens, to be so kinde, To keepe her state, according to her minde,
CHAPTER VII. Of the Wisedome, Learning, Discipline, and good Manners; wherein Women haue proven farre more excellent, and perfect, than Man. THE great Stu∣die, Care, & Pains, which sillie man hath bestowed, to attayne vnto Wisdōe, Know∣ledge, Learning, and Good Manners; whereby their Names and Honours, might bee immortali∣zed; is nowayes to bee compared with the wyse, curious, zealous, vpright, pious, and religious industrie of Wo∣men. For, indeed, Women haue excelled and exceeded, not onlie the Men of late tymes, and our recent Doctors; but al∣so the eldest, and wysest Fathers, and Philosophers; the which, to the just prayse of Women, I dare take in hand to proue, as thus: And, because the Sybills are of the most Renowned Rememberance, from ancient Tymes, therefore, I thinke it
not amisse, for the present, to giue thē heere, the first place, and that verie shortlie, since Lactantius, Eusebius, Hie∣ronymus, LACTAN∣TIUS. EUSEBI∣VS, &c. Orasius, and others haue more worthilie set downe their prayse, than it is possible for mee to imagine. Now, the word Sybilla, is not the name of anie particular Woman; but doeth signifie, Prophetesse, or Sooth∣sayer, or, as Thomasius sayeth, a Woman THOMA∣SIUS. which hath the spirit of prophesie. And of these Sybillaes were ten in number; the first was called Persica, 2. TEN SY∣BILLS. Lybia, 3. Delphica, 4. Cumaea, 5. Ery∣thraea, 6. Samia, 7. Cumana, 8. Hellespon∣tia. 9. Phrygia, and the 10. Tyburtina. And all these, even long before the comming of our blessed MESSIAS did prophesie no lesse, than was set downe by the holie Prophets, in the olde Te∣stament, concerning the Hebrew Childe, even CHRIST, our Redeemer. But, amongst these Sybills, there were two farre more renowned than the other, to wit, Cumana, and Ery∣threa. CUMENA ERY∣THREA. These two were in the dayes of our Ancient Fathers, and excelled all the Men of those dayes, in perfection,
Knowledge, Learning, and Divina∣tion, as can testifie their goodly books, decored with golden Sentences, extant till this day; telling, of the ende of the World, of the day of Iudgement, of Empyres, and Kingdomes, of Com∣mon-wealths, Congregations, and Po∣liticke Governament, and manie other worthie things, even in the Booke of Revolution; wherevnto the wyse and anciēt Romans, had ever their recourse, and tooke counsell thereat, as witnes∣seth Cicero, in his second Booke of Di∣vination; CICERO saying, that the Sentences of the Sybills, in those dayes, had as much authoritie, as now-a-dayes the holie Scripture. Aulus Gellius speaketh of an olde AULUS GELLIUS Woman, which came to the prowde King Tarquin, and brought with her TAR∣QUIN. nyne Bookes, asking him, if hee would buy them? Tarquin asking the pryce of the Bookes; shee said 300 Ducates. And whiles hee Skoffed at her, shee tooke three of the Bookes, and burnt them in the fire. Then shee asked, if he would giue 300 Ducates for the other sixe? But seeing hee regarded her not
yet, she burnt other three. Then hee be∣gan to repent, and sayd, Woman, thou hast burnt sixe Bookes; what wilt thou haue for the other three? No lesse, said shee, than the pryce of the whole nyne; taking the hinmost three vp, to throw them into the fire. But hee stayed her, and gaue her the money for them. And when hee perused, and considered the Bookes, hee was almost besides him∣selfe, for want of the other sixe. Yet, thorow those three Bookes, hee be∣came a better man than of before. Besides these Sybills, wee ought to keepe in rememberance the worthie Queene of Sheba, which some call Nicaula, and others Mangueda; who MAN∣GUEDA. bare such a loue to Wisdome, and Ver∣tue, that shee came from the vttermost parts of the world, to heare the wise∣dome of Salomon; as you may reade in SALO∣MON. 1. KINGS 10. the first booke of Kings: and is greatly commended in the Gospell, even by CHRIST Himselfe; who sharplie re∣proved those wicked Men, Scribes and Pharisees: and, (even in the just prayse of Women bee it sayde) Hee sayeth, That that one Woman, should MATTH.
ryse vp in judgement, and condemne that whole male generation. Now, this Queene of Sheba, (or of the South) put the wyse Salomon to his vttermost shifts in disputation: for shee reasoned with him, from the Hy∣sope branch, vnto the Cedar trees: that is, concerning the vertue and qualitie of the smallest Herbs, to the tallest trees in Lebanus. And yet I proceede in this subject, to the just prayse of Women, thus. The learned writings of Pythagoras PYTHA∣GORAS. DAMA. had never come to light, if his daugh∣ter Dama, had not beene of learned Skill, to interpret the same, after the decease of her father. ARETA. ARI∣STIP∣PUS. METRO∣DIDA∣CTUS. Queene Areta was so wonderfullie well learned, that her sonne Aristippus, had no other to teach him, but her selfe: and therefore was hee called Metrodidactus; that is to say, Taught of his Mother. Hortensia, the daughter of the renow∣ned Oratour Hortensius, made such a learned Oration publicklie in the Citie of Rome, and with such a comelie ge∣sture, and excellent modest behaviour,
that shee is registrated in the imperiall Annalls of statelic Rome; even to the example of all ensuing Ages, Thus may wee know, That Good Women, then, were never yet combynde; But evermore haue borne as braue a mynde, As did the men in Ages what∣soever. Their Cowrage, Skill, and Will, was conquer'd never. Therefore I'll forwardes, in our Mothers prayse, Of whom, next vnto GOD, wee holde our lyfe and dayes.
CHAPTER VIII. Of Women, who not onlie surpassed Men in Poësie: but also overthrew the learned Doctors, and Philosophers, in Dispu∣tation. CORIN∣NA. AMongst other worthie learned Poëticall Women, Corinna is said to haue surpassed the Poët Pindar, verie farre, in compiling of lyricke verse.PINDAR THEANO Also Heroicke Theano bare away the prayse from all the poëticall Men in her dayes; which were not a few, neyther vnexpert. SOCRA∣TES. The Renowned Socrates thought it no shame to confesse, that hee had gotten great Knowledge in Poësie, by the instruction of the famous Ladie Aspasia. ASPASIA LEAN∣TIA. THEO∣PHRA∣STUS. And Ladie Leantia overcame that great Philosopher Theophrastus, in Dis∣putation. Now, because Plato saw, that Wis∣dome, Learning, and Knowledge,
grew to such an height in Women, hee envyed their aspyring estate; and pro∣cured a Law, and Ordinance; That no Woman-kynde should frequent the Schooles, or bee brought vp in lear∣ning. But, sillie man, that hee was! the meanes that hee made to hinder women of learning, proved but a Mo∣tiue, to stirre them forwards therevn∣to. For then, more eagerlie than be∣fore, manie worthie Virgins, (such as Lascenia, Ariota, and others) neglected LASCE∣NIA. ARIOTA not carnestlie to haunt the Schoole of Plato himselfe, in mans cloathing; and profited greatlie. Cornelia, the wyfe of Scipio, was so CORNE∣LIA. excellent well learned, that shee hath left behinde her, even to the due praise of Women, manie excellent and lear∣ned verses, called Cornificia; which CORNI∣FICIA. beeing justlie interpreted, signifieth as much, as shee was a shyning, and glancing Light, or Lampe, yeelding Light, in Learning, to the darkened men of her age. Caria and Afrania, beeing but poore CARIA. AFRA∣NIA. Women, yet grew so expert in the Lawes, that the Magistrates compel∣led
them to lay away their Distafs, and spindles: and they so discussed the har∣dest matters, which came before the Counsell, that they were holden in great Reverence, and honoured of all: and gayned more loue, and benefite, than all the Men-lawyers in that land. Diodore of Sicilia had fiue Children, DIO∣DORE. and all were daughters: and each of them so exceeded other, in Learning, Behaviour, and good Manners, that certaine good Lawes of their making, are yet in full effect in that Countrey. But, to shun the objections of the Calumniatours of Women, who may seeme to say, that I produce too manie examples of Heathen Women: and the Heathen set their onlie Felicitie, and Summum Bonum, in the attayning to the perfection and knowledge of thinges of this lyfe: therefore, I turne againe, to the worthie testimonies of our Ecclesiasticall Wryters, and good examples of Christian Women. The worthie Eusebius witnesseth, in EUSE∣BIUS. IEMNA. his Church Histories, that Memna, mo∣ther of the Emperour Alexander Seve∣rus, had such an earnest zeale to God∣linesse,
Learning, and Vertue, that she sent to Antioch, desiring holie Origen ORIGEN to come vnto her, even to instruct her yet farder in the way of Salvation: of whose comming shee rejoyced great∣lie, heard his doctrine, and proved a worthie Matron in true Religion, and mightilie instructed others. Tecla, a Mayde-Disciple to Saynct TECLA. Paul, excelled manie of his Man-Dis∣ciples, in Wisdome, Learning, and Godlinesse, sayeth the same Eusebius. Saynct Katharine, a Virgin of Alex∣andria, SAINCT KATHA∣RINE. overthrew fiftie learned Philo∣sophers, in weyghtie matters of dispu∣tation. Amia, and the foure daughters of AMIA. Saynct Philip, were prophetesses of the new Testament, in the Churches of Philadelph. In the dayes of Saynct Jerome, were aboundance of learned, wyse, and re∣ligious GERON∣TIA. FABIO∣LA. &C. Women, such as Gerontia, Fa∣biola, Furia, Marcella, Demetridis, Sal∣via, and manie others: vnto whom Saynct Jerome wrote manie learned Epistles; and they to him againe. Heere may Dumea Angia, a Virgin, DUMEA ANGIA.
Ladie of Honour to the Queene of Portugall, of 22 yeares old, take place; who wrote vnto Pope Paulus, (the third of that name, Bishop of Rome) in fiue languages; to wit, in Latine, Greeke, Hebrew, Chaldaicke, and Ara∣bicke. So that that Pope seeing her to be such an excellent Scholler, indeede, was faine to vse the helpe of interpre∣ters: otherwyse, it had beene vnpossi∣ble for him to haue sent her any good∣lie Answeres. This happened about the yeare of GOD 1548. And in those dayes dwelt a Spanish woman in Rome, called Isobell Rosier; ISOBEL ROSIER. SCOTUS SUBTI∣LUS. who in publicke audience constructed, and interpreted the bookes of Scotus Subtilus: who in those dayes was hol∣den for the subtilest Fellowe in the world. Also we reade of manie Noble Wo∣men, yea, and of Queens, who haue so highlie excelled in Learning, and so skillfull in sundry Languages, that they themselues answered the Ambassa∣dours sent from anie Nation whatso∣ever. Which their block-headed Hus∣bandes could not doe: and therefore
must holde themselues as mute, as doe the Myce in presence of the Cat. And thus, in the just prayse of Wo∣men, I conclude this Subject, haste∣ning towardes another: for Their ex∣cellent Perfections are so manie, great and wonderfull, that I must needes confesse, The more I gaze agaynst the Sunnes cleare light, The more am I distracted of my sight. CHAPTER IX. Of the Chastitie, Modestie, and Tempe∣rancie in WOMEN, both Wyues and Mayds: to the example of luxurious, vitious, and libidinous Men. AS amongst the innume∣rable Imperfe∣ctions of men, there be some more gross and shamefull, than others: Even so amongst the beauti∣fying perfectious Graces in WOMEN,
there are some more laudable, and of greater estimation. And as Leacherie is a capitall Imper∣fection in Man, and ruleth in him as a Prince of all other Vices: Even so CHASTITIE in WOMAN, is the grea∣test poynt of Her Perfection, and ru∣leth in Her, as the Princesse of all other Vertues. Xenocrates sayeth, that although a XENO∣CRATES HELENA Woman had the fayrnesse of Queene Helen, the wisdome of the queene of the South, and the riches of Craesus; yet if shee want Chastitie, and puritie of bodie, shee is of no value, but lyke the blasted slowre, and withered grasse, which is troden vnder feete. Yea, Chastitie is a Womans owne element, without the which shee can∣not bee substantiall, no more than the fowles without ayre, and the fishes without water. For as long as a Wo∣man hath Chastitie, (sayeth an An∣cient Father) she hath all good things, and is all thinges: but wanting That, shee hath no good thing, nor is no∣thing. And, this is almost the saying of
chaste Lucretia, that in Woman all ver∣tues LUCRE∣TIA. were fled away, when shee was once defiled. And, it is true, that Lucretia spake not this in an vnadvysed manner, or lightlie, in a spleane, or that shee sayde the thing shee thought not: no, no; for shee sealed her words, even with her owne Blood, GOD wots, after that TAR∣QUIN. prowde Tarquine had violentlie defiled her. But, our Christian Women haue no fayrer example of cleanlie Chastitie, than in Susanna; who choosed rather SUSANNA to lose her lyfe, than to commit such vncleane wickednesse. THE chaste Coun∣tesse of SALIS∣BURIE. Also, it is steadfastlie affirmed in the Chronicles of England, that one of their Kings, at the sight of the fayre Countesse of Salisburie, desired her, to his lustfull appetite, her Husband being in France. But, that good Woman, beeing readier to ende her lyfe, with a Dagger, than to satisfie his filthie de∣sire, the King stayed her hand. Then shee besought the King, that she might first slay her Husband; and then shee would bee readie to pleasure him in
anie thing. Thy Husband, sayde the King, is in France. Nay, quod shee, hee is lodged here in myne Heart; there∣fore let mee kill him, that hee bewray vs not. Which wordes, and chaste be∣haviour of the Countesse, put the King in astonishment; so that hee feared GOD, left off his Devilish purpose, and helde that Ladie in Honour all his dayes. The Tyrant Maxentinus, (sayeth EUSE∣BIUS. Eusebius, in his eyght Booke, Chap. 17) sent his servants for a comelie Vir∣gin, in Rome, named Sophrania, to de∣flore SOPHRA∣NIA. her of her Virginitie. And when the Servantes had tolde her their mes∣sage, shee desired them to stay, till shee attyred her selfe in her best array, that their Lord might the better accept of her. And going to her Chamber, shee fell downe on her Face, and cryed to the GOD of Heaven, to delyver her from anie such filthie action. And whiles the wicked Sergeants would not stay, but beat vpon her Chamber doore, to take her speedilie foorth, by violence; she lifted vp her Eyes, Heart, and Mynde, towards Heaven; and with
pen-knyfe, bereaft her selfe of lyfe: choosing, farre rather, to offer her cleanlie Soule to GOD, and vndefiled Corpse to the Graue, by Death, than to liue, and abide the wicked Pollution of filthie leacherous Man. Yea, the same holie Eusebius, writeth EUSE∣BIUS. of an infinite number of other Womē, who wyselie, and valiantlie, haue pre∣served the cleannesse of Bodie: & haue not onlie ventred, (but also lost) their lyues therefore. And not onlie is this probable of Christian Women: but also amongst the verie Heathen, and Pagans, are re∣gistrated aboundance of Women, who did, farre rather, lose all the World, yea, lyfe, and all, before they would lose their Honour. Sainct Hieronymus, wryting against HIERO∣NYMUS. Joyinian, telleth of very many Women, who were of such cleanlie Condition, Disposition, and Qualitie, that neither Goods, Lyfe, nor Death, was in re∣garde with them, to their vndefiled Honestie. A THEBAN MAYD. And a Mayde of Theban, beeing ra∣vished, by a Macedonian, corbed her
heavie passions, for a day or two, till shee got occasion to slay him: which shee valourouslie performed with her owne hands. Then, rejoycing greatly, that GOD had given her strength to bee avenged on such a Villane, shee with-drew her selfe to the Wilder∣nesse, where she lived solitarilie all her dayes. Chiomara, the wyfe of Ortiagent, was CHIO∣MARA. taken in battell, by a Captayn who vio∣lentlie abused her. But shortly after her ransom was sent, and she was to depart homewards. Now shee requested this Captayne, to convoy her a little piece of her journey: which he did verie wil∣linglie. And, she having conspired his death with her servāts, she drew him a little from the way, (whereof this Lea∣cher grew verie amorous, thinking to take his lustfull leaue of that fayre La∣die) where foure of her servantes lay privilie, who helde him fast, while shee took off his head, which she carried to her husband, and threw it at his feete. Whereat he being amazed, sayd, Thou wicked woman, wherefore hast thou com∣mitted this treason? Trueth and fidelitie
ought to bee kept with our verie enemies. Yes, quoth she, you say true: but it is ney∣ther Trueth nor Honestie for me, to let anie man liue that hath lyen with mee, except myne owne Husband. Then her Lord vn∣derstanding the matter rightlie, he lo∣ved her the more entirelie; and he, to∣gether with the whole Countrey, hold her in great honour, all her dayes. A Lacedemonian Wyfe being strait∣lie persued by a leacherous Lubber, an∣swered him, that shee could not giue that which was never her owne: For, quod shee, whyle I was a Damosell, my Virginitie pertayned to my Parentes, and now it is myne owne Husbandes. So this leacherous Logger-head left off his sute, and tooke his Leaue without Fare∣well, looking as though his nose had beene bleeding. Reade, I pray you, Munsterus, in MUN∣STERUS. GRANT∣ZIO. his Description of the World, and also worthie Grantzio, in the Chronicles of Germanie: where men shall finde such plentie of the prayse of Women con∣cerning Chastitie; and such loathsom∣nesse in men concerning their detesta∣ble filthie viciousnesse; that if there be
anie spunke eyther of Grace or Shame left in them, let them bow to women, and cry Pecaavi; and let all such as vn∣happilie are fallen into that damnable fact of Blasphemie, or rayling, or scof∣fing agaynst Women, eyther in word or writ; let all such, I say, blush, and bee ashamed: and, without speedie and pu∣blick repentance, not onelie confuted, but confounded for ever. And thus, in the just prayse of Women, we pro∣ceede to another Subject. For, though I should aske vngratefull man, Wherein haue Women not surpassed Men, In Good? They'll answere mee I know not when.
CHAPTER X. Of the great and wonderfull Wisdome in WOMEN: to the high Glorie of GOD, and great Benefit of Man. ANd if our wicked, way∣ward, and witlesse Vilependers of Wo∣mans Sexe, could yet at last begin to consider, and looke to the Right hand; casting off that blind-board wherewith Satan, the fat her of Envy, hath so long over-syled & blind-folded the eies of their Understanding; then might they happilie, even to their owne credit and advantage, clearlie be∣holde and confesse the singular Grace of GOD, in every degree, and in grea∣ter measure, proceeding more from WOMEN, than from Men. And so beeing come to themselues, and ac∣knowledging their haynous transgres∣sion agaynst this Angelicall Sexe of Women, they would not fayle to imi∣tate the Poët Stesichoris, who vnadvy∣sedlie STESI∣CHORIS. in his verses had rayled agaynst
fayre Helene of Greece: but when hee IELEN. rightlie vnderstood himselfe, he recal∣led all what hee had eyther sayde or written before: and wrote excellentlie in her prayse and cōmendation. Then why may not mē of such qualitie (with Stesichoris) turne both Notes & Coates, since now-a-dayes so manie even of other qualities also willinglie adjoyne their Forces with them? Nowe, amongst all other gracious Ornaments, and ornamentall Heaven∣lie Graces, wherewith Women are ac∣companied, is WISDOME, and where∣with even from the Cradle they are still decored and cloathed, as is moste manifest as well by the sacred Scrip∣tures, as all other true Histories, both Ecclesiasticall and Civill. And the rayling of men agaynst women, showeth them to be the sonnes of cur∣sed cursing Shimei, who rayled on bles∣sed blessing David. And as David's Blessing returned to himselfe, even so did Shimei's Cursing returne vnto him∣selfe also. And so bee it vnto all those cursed men, who implore not the Hea∣vens,
that All Blessing bee vpon WO∣MAN, that MAN may get part. Looke to the wisdome of Rebecca, GENES 27. who procured her Husband Isaac his blessing vnto Iaakob her youngest son, whereas Isaac himselfe was purposed (that same verie day) to haue bestowed it on Esau his eldest sonne. For, sillie man, as he was blind of bodie, so also in mynde, and knewe not that it was the LORD'S doing, as Rebecca knew, that the elder must serue the younger. Nowe, the men may stay their boa∣sting agaynst Women, (even by this example of Iaakob and Esau) in plea∣ding MATTH 26 of Antiquitie; well remembering that the elder must serue the younger. For they solde their birth-right, for thirtie pieces of Silver, and so became portio∣ners with Barabbas, that laudable sedi∣tious Murderer. Agayne, if Antiquitie of men may beare anie sway agaynst women, I am assured the Devill is more ancient than men, being before them. And, as much as man can thinke himselfe better than woman, because he was first, I thinke the Devill may as well think such like,
because Hee was before man. I will say nothing heere of the Antiquitie of the Pope, and Popish Religion, till these mistie muggie vnwholsome vapours of Idolatrie which infect my brayne, bee somewhat disabled by the reflex of Titan from his highest Spheare. But let vs goe on to our Purpose, in showing this great Gift of Wisdome in Women. Wyse Abigaill is highlie to be com∣mended, and her churlish husband Na∣ball greatlie to bee condemned, for his vncharitable dealing with David in his great necessitie. Wherby he had almost brought Destruction to himselfe, and all his Familie, yea, and a horrible sinne 1. SAM. 25. vpon David, had not wyse Abigaill prevented the same in tyme. There was a wyse woman in the be∣siedged Citie of Abell of Bethmaachah, sayeth the Scripture, who delivered 2. SAM. 20. the distressed Citie, even by the confu∣sion of one wicked man, who had al∣most bene the destructiō of the whole Citie, named Sheba, the sonne of Bichri. The Emperour Theodosius, called the Youngest, was so foolish, that hee would
put his Seale and subscription vnadvy∣sedlie to anie Wrytinges that were brought vnto him, without eyther rea∣ding or hearing the same. Which his Sister Plucheria wyselie considering what great evill might ensue thereby, she bethought her, how she might hap∣pilie prevent all occasion of offence which might happen thorow her bro∣ther's simplicitie, and to ingraff in him more deepe and solid vnderstanding. So this Plucheria caused a fayre wry∣ter PLU∣CHERIA to frame a goodlie Commission to looke vnto, the contents whereof was, That EVBOCE, (which was his owne Emperesse, & whom he beloved most dealy) should be disherited of all her Dow∣rie, and stripped of all fayre Cloathing; and being wrapped in sacking, should lye in a darke Dungeon seaven years. And if shee lived that long, then was shee ordayned, to worke naked amongst the chayned slaues, all the rest of her dayes. This Decree the Emperour too rashly subscribed, which was presentlie delivered vnto his Si∣ster, who came speedilie therewith vn∣him, desiring him that her name might also be incert in that Decree, for com∣panie;
for shee vowed to take a part of all thinges with the Empresse, as well evill as good, woe as weale, yea, and to liue and die with her. The Emperour beeing amazed to heare his sister speake thus, sayd, My loving Sister, what meane you? I meane, quoth she, to liue and die with thy Wyfe, whom thou hast cruelly condemned, without knowing or asking the cause why. And, as one in a great furie, throwing the wry∣ting at him, sayd moreover, Haue there thyne own hand and Seale: it can not now be mended: but wryte downe my name also, and we will goe to prison together: for nothing but Death shall be able to part vs. And when hee saw, and vnderstood the matter consideratiuelie, hee cryed with a lowde voyce, desiring GOD & Man to forgiue him, sent for the Em∣presse, and on his knees, (shee falling a∣bout his neck halfe dead) hee besought her to forgiue him: which she willing∣lie granted. And giving them both great thanks, he never did so agayne. The Duke of Castilia being impri∣soned THE Dutches of CA∣STILIA. for treason agaynst his brother the king, his wyfe got leaue to visit
him in Prison: where shee chaunged Cloathes with him, putting his vpon her, and hers vpon him, and sent him out of the Prison, and tarried therein her selfe; willing to suffer anie Tor∣ments, yea, to die for him, if it had so fallen out. But when the jaylour per∣ceaved the matter, hee told the king, how that because his Majestie had gi∣ven accesse to the Dutches of Castilia to come to her husband in Prison, shee had beguiled them, and sent him away in her cloathes, and remayned in the Prison with his cloathes vpon her self, and was verie willing to suffer what∣soever could bee layd to her husband's charge. Which when the king vnder∣stood, hee sent privatelie for her, and caused his Queen giue her of her own rich Attire: and sending his great Seale for her husband, forgaue him freelie, vpon good conditions: and sent them home with great Honour. Plutarch maketh mention of Py∣thius PLU∣TARCH. in Lydia, who would haue nothing done but making of Golde, with all his people; neglecting all manner of Hus∣bandrie, Huswyuerie, and all other Oc∣cupations:
So that the whole land was overgone with Rubbish, Briers, and Thorns. Which his wyse Wyfe well remarking and considering, on a day her husband, with the whole people, being away to the making of Gold, and shee at home, with her maydes making readie their Dinner, shee prepared the similitude of all manner of meat, roast and sodden, everie thing in its owne forme and colour, and all of pure gold, and nothing else. Now her husband comming home hungrie from the Mynes, with his great companie, sate downe to Meat, with well-prepared stomacks. And drawing out their sharp Thittles, hee to a dish, and he to a dish: but could not cut, for all was Golde▪ Whereat they took great delight for a short space: but their bellies perswaded their eyes to somewhat else. Then Py∣thius THE wyfe of PY∣THIUS. desired his wyfe to take that mea away, and giue them others. So shee brought other kyndes of Bread and Meat, also of pure Golde, still so long that hee was almost mad for hunger and began to chafe moste horriblie Wherevpon she replyed, that she could
giue him no other than his Countrey afforded, and such as hee brought vnto her: For, sayde shee, you haue forsaken Husbandrie, our land lieth waste, corns haue we none, our beasts run wild vpō the mountayns, & traffique with other Nations haue wee none: wherewithall then would ye haue me to satisfie your hunger, or cloathe your nakednesse? Golde onlie is the fruit of your handes: eat it, and bee filled; put it on, and bee cloathed therewith; for I haue nought else to giue you. And whyle they gazed one vpon another, she ran, and brought some other meat, both grosse, and not much of it, wherewith they were fayne to be contented for that tyme. But afterwards Pythius took ever his wyues counsell about him, employed his people in Husbandrie, and all man∣ner of Vertue, made Golde also, were Traffiquers with other Nations, and so became a most flowrishing Countrey. And all by the wisdome and fore-sight of his worthie WYFE. Thus Golde, and All, good Women can subdue, And proue at all tymes to their Hus∣bands true.
CHAPTER XI. Of the constant steadfastnesse in Women, not onlie suffering cruell Tormentes, but also horrid Death, for the Testimonie of IESVS CHRIST. THe All∣mightie, our GOD, who is the be∣ginner of eve∣ry good work doeth often tymes make choyse of weake Instruments, and such as vnwyse men count fooles; ever to manifest His great Power, and make His Glorie knowne to all the worlde; By abasing the worldlie wyse, and tur∣ning their wisdome into follie; By put∣ting downe the mightie from their seate, and exalting the humble and meeke; By sending the rich empti away, & filling the hungrie with good things, &c. Which is more than mani∣fest by an innumerable number of wo∣men: who altho by nature they bee but
weak vessels; yet thorow influence frō Aboue, manie of them haue proven more strong and steadfast in the wor∣thiest and greatest Matters, than anie men that ever were: and especiallie in mayntayning & defending of the true and Christian Fayth: yea, and suffered for the same, not onlie tyrannicall tor∣ments, but also cruell Death it selfe, notwithstanding of the womanlie ten∣dernesse of their most comlie propor∣tionable featurall personages. A Christian Mayd in France, named Blandine, in the great Persecution of BLAN∣DINE. CHRIST'S Members there, vnder the Emperour Severus, about the yeare of our LORD 178, was taken, and bound to a Stake, with strong threatninges to burne her, or else to renounce the Christian Fayth. But she continued re∣joycinglie steadfast. Then brought they wilde beastes, to feede vpon her flesh, and began to let them byte her tender corpse. Yet neverthelesse shee shrunke not a jot: but the faster that the Serpents did byte her, the lowder she cryed, I am a Christian, I am a Chri∣stian: looking vp, and calling earnestlie
to the GOD of Heaven, to giue her strength and patience, that shee might bee worthie to finish her lyfe to the Glorie of His Name. Now, her tor∣ments lasted so long, and shee endured so steadfast, that the verie Executioner stood amazed, and cut off her head. The spectators bewayled her with ma∣nie tears: and manie at that same houre believed, and were casten inte deepe Dungeons. Another Virgine called Maxima, MAXIMA being so horriblie tormented by Sason prince of Vandals, and yet could not be vrged to forsake CHRIST, hee let her goe free. But manie others which were in Prison, hee banished into the Yle of Capsur, vnder the king of Mores: where they preached the Gospell: and after∣wards were eaten with wilde people. Maximine was a cruell Persecuter of the Christians: and tooke his chiefe pleasure in devysing new tormenting Instruments, to perplexe them with a languishing death. But he was not bu∣sier to invent their Sorrow, than they were earnestlie readie to suffer all that hee could imagine. But especiallie the
Women: Amongst whom were Doro∣thea SO PHRO∣NIA. DORO∣THEA. and Sophronia; who chose farre ra∣ther to drinke out the verie dreggs of the Cup of Death, than anie wayes to shrinke a whit from the Confession of the true Fayth. And the same GOD which streng∣thened these Women in all kynde of Martyrdome, (yea, and in the pangues of Death) for His Names sake, wroght also in the heart of this Tyrant, that he was overcome with the constant stead∣fastnesse in the Religion of these Wo∣men: In so much, that hee caused pub∣lish an Edict, and proclaymed through all his Empyre, That none should mo∣lest them in anie thing, vpon poene of Death. Thus wee clearlie beholde the ex∣traordinarie great loving Mercies of our GOD towards Woman Sexe: who hath stil so mightily assisted them even with His Divine Strength, to suffer all whatsoever could bee layd vpon them, without shrinking, vnto the last period of Breath: no, not in Death it selfe. And thus wee proceede. The Church Historie maketh men∣tion
of an ancient Virgine of Alexan∣dria, whom the persecutioner tooke, and drew out all her teeth, and then A VIR∣GINE MARTYR her tongue also; and brought her to the fire, to bee burnt quicke. And when they intreated her, yet to forsake CHRIST, shee resolutelie leaped into the fire, and was burnt to powder, about the yeare of our LORD 251. About which tyme also was a reli∣gious Woman, called Coïnth, vnnatu∣rallie, COÏNTH and filthilie drawne, at a horse tayle, thorow all the nookes of the Ci∣tie of Alexandria. And yet continuing steadfast, they rent her in pieces, with vglie disguysed persons, lyke Devils, and Death himselfe. Socrates telleth, that a Temple was SOCRA∣TES LIB. 6. CAP. 33. erected in the towne of Edesse, in Me∣sopotamia, to the honour of GOD, and the Apostle Sainct Thomas; in the which the Christians vsed to assemble, and of∣fer their sacrifices, of prayer, prayse, and thanksgiving, vnto the GOD of Heaven. Which when the Emperour Valens vnderstood, who was an Arch∣enemie to the servants of the true God, and an accursed persuer of all such as
professed the Name of IESUS, hee was wrathfull towards Modestus the chiefe Captayne; sent for him, and reproved him verie sharplie, for suffering the Christians, contrarie his will, and com∣mandement: And gaue him charge, on payne of Death, and his whole poste∣ritie, that the next tyme that the Chri∣stians coveaned in Saynct Thomas Church, hee should murder them all, both young, and olde. Now this Mo∣destus, MODE∣STUS. the chiefe Captayne, was a good Man, and sent private advertisement to the Christians, that vpon their next awonted day of assemblie in Sainct Thomas Church, none should bee found there, who loved his lyfe. Neverthe∣lesse, vpon their vsuall day, they came to the Church in great numbers, to say their Prayers: and Modestus, making a show to satisfie the Emperours evill purpose, was marching thitherwards, with a band of armed souldiours: and seeing a Christian Woman, with a chylde in her armes, running towards the Church, hee called her, saying; Vn∣happie Woman that thou art, whither art thou going? Shee answered, To
the Temple of Saynct Thomas. Hast thou not heard tell, quoth hee, that the Emperour hath commanded mee to slay all that are in the Temple to day? Yes, shee sayde, and therefore I haste mee thitherwardes, with my chylde, that wee may die with the rest of our Brethren, and Sisters. This chiefe Captayne seeing the Woman so resolutelie bent, with her little one, to suffer for the Name of CHRIST, returned with his souldiors, to the Emperour, tolde him what the Woman had sayde, and desired, rather to suffer Martyrdome himselfe with the Christians, than to worke anie thing agaynst them. Whereby the Emperour was put from his hellish purpose. The Arch-bishop of Saleucia had a Sister, called Tharbua; who because she THAR∣BUA. would not renounce the fayth of IE∣SUS, was bound to a post, and her Mayde to another, and were cut in twayne, in the middle, with a Saw, and never shrunke for the matter. And vnder the Reygne of Emperour Adrian, there was an holie, & wyse Ma∣tron,
called Sophia, who had three daugh∣ters, SOPHI which shee saw cruellie executed, for the Name of IESUS; shee standing by, and giving them cowrage, to the last gaspe. And beeing dead, shee bu∣ried them, with her owne handes, without the Citie of Rome; giving great prayse vnto GOD, glorie, and thanks, who had made her so happie a Woman, that the fruit of her Wombe was so respected of the LORD, as to account them worthie, to bee of the number of those that suffered for the Name, and Glorie of the LORD IE∣SUS. But, seeing it is not possible for me, nor none else to registrate all the stead∣fast & constant Women, in Godlinesse, Vertue, Wisdome, Learning, Know∣ledge, Cowrage, Chastitie, and manie other excellent perfections: (for, in∣deed, such a taske would fill the world full of Bookes, and yet never bee en∣ded) Therefore, at this tyme, I thinke to conclude this my little Essay, (to the Honour of GOD, and good Wo∣men,) with the ecclesiasticall Historie of the Maccabees.
Wee reade, that two Women were brought in, and accused, for not obser∣ving the manners of the Gentiles; be∣cause, according to the Law of GOD, they had circumcised their little ones; which, hanging on their Mothers breasts, they hurried them, shameful∣lie, round about the Citie; and then, both Women, and Infants, were throwne headlongs downe from the Wall. Agayne, a Mother, with her seaven Sonnes, were cruellie, and vnhumane∣lie, tortured, and also put to Death, because they would not forsake the Law of GOD, and their fathers. And this part of Scripture testifieth, That the Woman was marvelous aboue all, and worthie of honourable memorie, for when shee saw her seaven Sonnes slayne, within one dayes space, shee bare it with a good cowrage, because of the hope which shee had in the LORD. But, to vnderstand this Historie the better, I pray you reade the seaventh Chapter of the second Booke of Mac∣cabees, where it is alreadie most excel∣lentlie
set downe, even by the Spirit of GOD: vnto whom I consecrate my selfe for ever, & recommend all good Women; vnto whom, next vnto God, I dedicate my mynde, since my might is not able to performe what my Muse would fayne amount vnto: And to ex∣cuse my brevitie, I must conclude with Master Taylor, That The shortest Writ, the greatest Wit affordes: And greatest Wit, consists in fewest wordes. A false ECHO, truelie answered. The first Summonds, Come ECHO, I doe thee summon, Tell mee truelie, What is a Woman? ECHO. If worne, shee is a Feather: If wooed, shee's frostie weather. If wonne, the wind's not slighter: If vexed, the Moone's not lighter:
If lyen withall, shee's Apish: If lyen with none, shee's snappish. The ECHO thus replyed, But yet mee thought it lyed. The second Summonds. Come ECHO, I thee Summon, Tell me once more, What's a Woman? ECHO. If fayre, shee's coy in courting: If wittie, loose in sporting: If readie, shee is loathing: If naked, shee is nothing: If well belov'd, shee scornes thee: If not belov'd, shee hornes thee: The Answere. And, for all good Womens sake, This Replye now doe I make; If worne, shee's a jewell: If wooed, shee is not cruell: If wonne; the Rock's not surer: If weyghed, the Golde's not purer: If lyen withall, Delicious: If lyen with none, not vicious. False ECHO, goe, you lye, For this is a Woman truely.
And for your second Summon, I answere for a Woman. If fayre, shee's heavenlie Treasure: If wittie, shee's all Pleasure: If readie, farre from Vaynties: If naked, shee is Daynties: If well belov'd, shee feares not: If not belov'd, shee cares not: False ECHO, goe, you lye, For this is a Woman truely. The Conclusion. BLest bee the Heavenlie Powers, which brought to light This precious jemme call'd WOMAN, Man's Delight: This Free-borne Princesse, Casket full of Treasure: This solid Author of Man's wished Pleasure. This harmlesse spotlesse Saynct, not knowing evill, A Goddesse, though prowde man would proue a Devill.
Why? Shee's a Worke so purelie wrought, that Nature Knew not whether 'twas more adorn'd with Feature, Or with chaste Honestie. And this was Shee, Fruit of whose wombe fred Man from Miserie. For which Shee's blest, that Her Sexe Faults shall fall. From small, to lesse; from lesse, to none at all. And therefore thus wee may defyne a WOMAN; Shee's louelie, faythfull, harmlesse, false to no man. Altho that Man, as an incarnate Devill, Of Her whom GOD made good, would fayne make evill. And if sweete Womens loue doe not Men cherish, Those that contemne their Sexe, with shame shall perish.
Epilogue. THus to avoyde the imputation of In∣gratitude, which was holden for so haynous an Offence even amongst the Heathen, that Periander of Corinth made a Law, that whosoever was found vnthankefull, having receaved anie Gift, should bee put to death: Therefore, With lowlie Heart, and eke with thankfull Mynde, I sende my Labours to Good Wo∣man-kynde. Indeede, what the loftinesse of the Argu∣ment requyreth, I confesse, I haue not at∣tayned vnto: Yet haue I bestowed such willing paynes, as I was able to vndergoe: but nowayes heerein can I satisfie my selfe to doe them Good. Neverthelesse, I shall holde my selfe recompensed to the full, if by anie willingnesse I may reserue the Me∣morie of Honourable Women, in relating the Trueth in Honestie and Wisedome: Desiring no more, but to find a place, for
a tyme, amongst the pettie Writers of great matters: thinking my paynes ever well be∣stowed, if once well accepted: no wayes taking vpon mee to Instruct; but onelie to Remember. Surelie, if the poore Persians water in a potsheard, was acceptable to the Empe∣rour; and, an apple, from a poore Pessant, was receaved by Artaxerxes; a great ARTAX∣ERXES. ALEX∣ANDER. Prince: if Alexander tooke water cour∣teouslie from a common Souldiours Helmet; and our Saviour crowned the Widow, with everlasting prayse, for two mytes casten in∣to the Treasurie: Then am I assured, that your generous dispositions will sparinglie censure, and courteouslie receaue these my poore Endeavours. Which howsoever they be, they be yours, & so am I: Ever wishing, To buy the ABATEMENT of mine owne HONOUR, with the ritch pryce of WO∣MANS TRUE GLORIE: Concluding with Master GIBSON, That It is no BOUNTIE which doth flow from STORE. Who giues his Heart, what Gift can hee giuE moRe?
THE Duetie of Husbands: Drawne out of MASTER CARTER his Booke of Christian Common-Wealth. EPHES. 5. 33. Let everie one of you so loue his Wyfe, even as himselfe. PROV. 31. 11. 12. The Heart of Her Husband doeth safelie trust in Her: For Shee will doe him good, and not evill, all the dayes of his lyfe.
TO All Good Husbands. Good Husbands all, receaue in thank∣full part, This Sacrifice, (which may my Will approue:) Upon the Altar of a faythfull Heart, Consumed in the Flames of Zeale an Loue. Let Honourable Woman liue for ever, In all that Arte, that Tyme, that Fame can giue hER.
The Introduction. PAtient IOB saying, that the whole lyfe of Man was nothing else, but a tyme of Temptations, spake most fearfullie, and yet most truelie: for wee are tempted in our olde Age; and in our Cradle wee are not free. If anie evill bee set before vs, wee are easilie provoked vnto it. If wee a∣bound with Adam, in Paradise, there may bee Death in that: And, if wee want, with our Saviour, in the Wildernesse, there are Temptations in that also: So sub∣tile is Satan, and so envyous is our Enemie, to serue himselfe, even vpon all occasions. In the former age of the World, hee wrought, and prevayled with Men, by bringing in Errours of Mynde, and Do∣ctrines of Devils, to seduce the Church: But now the cleare light of the Gospell bee∣ing come in, and Knowledge abounding, hee
laboureth to bring in Errour of lyfe, and depravitie of Conversation; for that, not∣withstanding men know their Masters will, yet they performe it not, that all meanes possible ought to bee vsed, for the Reformation of these so notorious and knowne Evills: yea, everie man to put a hand to this worke: amongst the number of which, I haue brought foorth this my poore Talent, to the fartherance thereof: that wee married Men may stryue yet with our Arch-enemie; and, through the assistance of GOD'S Spirit, giue him the foyle; even by showing our vpright duetie towardes our Wyues, and our wyues to∣wards vs, in the true loue and feare of GOD. As for these contentious objectours, and barkers agaynst the Moone, I weygh not. Shepheardes, Cow-heardes, and Clownes, haue writen good thinges, yea, Divyne matters; Why, then, may not I show my good will? desiring no other Reward, nor Thankes for my paynes, but onlie good ac∣ceptance: And so I goe forwardes to thE WoRke.
The Duetie of Husbands. THE FIRST CHAPTER. THis Duetie of Husbands, is sayd to bee the first Degree which GOD gaue vnto Man after his crea∣tion: for, when GOD had made Man the Ruler of the whole Earth, and gaue him dominion over all the creatures therein; yet, vntill Hee gaue vnto him a Wyfe, hee had no true contentment in all the rest. For everie creature had solace, in their kynde except Man: but so was it not with Man, till he had a Wyfe. But then finding her a fit Cō∣panion to associate himselfe withall, with her hee setled his Content. And this did GOD for Man in the
tyme of his innocencie; giving vs thereby this instruction, That wee al∣so ought to liue so vprightlie, holilie, louelie, & purelie in the state of Wed∣locke, that we sinne not against GOD, nor agaynst one another. Now, heere is one speciall thing to bee noted; That GOD gaue vnto Man but one Wyfe; and not two, or three, or manie; altho Hee could haue given him moe, if hee had knowne it meete so to bee. But the Prophet Malachie MALAC. 2. telleth vs why GOD gaue him but one: Because, (sayeth hee) Hee sought a Godlie Seede. See, then, GOD rejecteth the seede of Bastardie, begotten in filthie lustfull fornication, and abominable Adulte∣rie. Hee chooseth none of these: it is the seed of lawfull Wedlocke, whereof Hee maketh His choyse, to inherite His Kingdome, and reygne in Glorie, with His beloved Sonne. And whence proceeded this breach, of GOD'S commandement at the first? Came it not from that wicked blood of Caine? Was not Lamech, that mur∣derer, lyke his father, the first author
thereof? Yea, hee was so, For wee see plainlie, that at the first GOD or∣dayned it not so to bee: and what Hee first ordayned, Hee still confirmeth. For when hee drowned the whole GEN. 4. World, yet Hee preserved vnto Noah but one Woman, and that his owne wyfe: thereby teaching vnto Man, That he ought to keepe himselfe vnto his owne wyfe onlie. And when the LORD gaue His Lawes, vnto His own chosen People, written even with His owne Hand, Hee then sayeth; Thou shalt not covet thy Neyghbours EXOD. 20. Wyfe, speaking in the singular num∣ber: so that by Him wee finde no no∣mination of a plurall. But if anie will object, and say, That the Saynctes and Servantes of GOD, as Abraham, Jaacob, David, Salomon, and others, haue not obser∣ved this rule; but haue had dyverse wyues; and beeing the beloved and chosen of GOD, therefore they could not erre in these thinges. To this I answere; It pleased GOD to permit his Servants to doe manie thinges, which Hee commanded not:
Hee suffered Abraham to say, that Sa∣rah, his wyfe, was his sister, Joseph to GEN. 11. GEN. 44. . SAM. 11 sweare by the lyfe of Pharaoh, David to commit Adulterie, and Murder, and manie other the lyke: and yet, wee know, that all these thinges were directlie contrarie to the will of God. And Salomon had manie wyues, indeed, 1. KINGS 11. but they drew him to Idolatrie. Wee reade, that Moses suffered the People of Israell, to giue their Wyues DEVT. 24. a bill of Divorcement, and so to put them away. But our blessed Saviour telleth the Jewes, That it was for the hardnesse of their hearts; And, to pre∣vent farder evills, that Moses permit∣ted it to bee so: and, That from the be∣ginning MATTH. 10. it was not so. But, to come to our matter agayne; let vs see from whence this wyfe came, which GOD hath given vnto Man; that so of him shee may accordinglie bee reguarded, as indeede shee should. Wee finde it to bee most true, That of Mans owne selfe, GOD made him this Companion and Wyfe: And that not from the hand of Man neyther, lest shee should clayme to rule, where
her power consisteth not; nor of the foot, lest shee should bee disdayned, & despysed, of her Husband: but from the verie bodie is shee taken. Nay, it is not anough for thee to spare of thyne owne flesh, for to make thee a wyfe of; but thou must spare a bone also, if thou wilt haue a fit Companion for thee. Then, O Man, bee thankfull for so ritch a Iewell; ritch, and deare, in∣deede, beeing so neare vnto thee, and that from the onlie Hand of the Great and Almightie GOD. Surelie it must needes be exceeding good which Hee maketh, and of a great value which hee vouchsafeth to giue. Wee haue an olde Proverbe, That it is a sweete Col∣lop, that is cut out of the owne flesh. Then, it must needes bee both sweete and deare, which is both of thyne owne flesh and bone. Therefore, let vs bee wyse in vsing this jewell as we ought; lest wee bee found vnworthie of her, by Him that gaue her vnto vs, and then too late wee lament our incom∣parable losse. Then, who so would keepe a good Wyfe, let him keepe her in the place
from whence she came; that is, from neare thyne heart, O Man: therefore lay her there agayne: let her not stray from thence: yea, locke her in there, with the Key of good Discretion: and so shalt thou be sure, to find a comfor∣table Treasure of Her in thy need. But if anie would say, Where is the Wyfe that deserveth such a place? For there are manie such lewde and fro∣ward ECCLUS. 26. wyues, that their husbandes are happiest when they are fardest from them. I answere such (to their owne shame) with these wordes of SALO∣MON, That a vertuous and good woman shall bee given vnto him that feareth the LORD: and a wicked woman is given as a reward vnto a wicked man. And therefore, he that would haue a good wyfe, let him earnestlie stryue to feare the LORD, that hee may bee a good husband; and so (of the free mer∣cie of GOD) obtayne such a Blessing as is a good wyse: whose commendations wyse Salomon himselfe could no wayes sufficientlie expresse: and farre lesse sil∣lie Raban: but let her owne workes giue her her due prayse.
THE SECOND CHAPTER. NOw, since Man hath receaved so precious a jewell, and deare Com∣panion, as is WOMAN, let vs justlie con∣sider the Dueties which hee is bound vnto, first to wardes GOD, for such an incomparable Blessing, and then to∣wardes Her. And if in this case wee search the whole Booke of GOD thorow, wee shall finde the effect and ende thereof, to be wholie and onlie Loue. Saynct Paul teacheth, That men ought to loue their wyues, as their owne bodies. And hee showeth the reason why: For, sayth he, no man ever yet hated his owne flesh, but EPHES. 5 nowrisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ doeth His Church. And thus did the Saynctes and Ser∣vantes of GOD loue their wyues in tymes past: Abraham loved Sara in∣tirelie, GEN. 23 and 26. and so did Isaac loue Rebecca. This hath that great Prophet and Servant of GOD, Moses, worthilie expressed, thereby to show vnto men, That it is not anough for them to liue peaceablie and quyetlie with their
Wyues; but they must liue lovinglie with them also. Thus did Jaakob loue his wyfe, ma∣king service vnto his vncle Laban, not onlie seaven years, but fourteen: to the GEN. 28. ende hee might enjoy her thereafter. And Helkana loved Hanna his wyfe . SAM. 1. UD. 14. TOB. 6. most dearlie: and so did Samson, and both olde and young Tobias, with ma∣nie others. And, as wee haue sayde before, this Loue must not bee ordinarie, but ex∣traordinarie, towardes our wyues: and must imitate that Great Loue which CHRIST showed vnto His Church, who gaue Himselfe for it. Yet this is a great mysterie. For we are not cōman∣ded to follow CHRIST punctuallie & perfectlie, but in imitation, as farre as it shall please Him to inable vs there∣vnto: That is, Wee must protect our Wyues, and defend them in all perils & dangers: wee must governe them in wisdome, according to the Rule of GOD'S Word, both by continuall In∣structions from thence, & by our owne louelie, wyse, and gentle behaviour to∣wards them: and we must be laborious
& carefull in our Callings, in the feare of GOD; so that wee may provyde all thinges necessarie for their mayntay∣nance. For so doeth CHRIST for His Church: He is still defending and pro∣vyding for her. For this cause (sayth He, blessed for ever) shall a man leaue father and mother, and cleane vnto his wyfe; and MATTH 19. 5. they twaine shall bee one flesh. Saynct Peter, beeing himselfe a mar∣ried Man, giveth manie notable instru∣ctions lyke these: who speaking by the Spirit of GOD, and in the know∣ledge hee had of Marriage, imposeth this duetie vnto Men; Yee Husbands, (sayeth hee) dwell with your Wyues, as men of Knowledge; giving honour vnto the woman, as vnto the weaker vessell; even as 1. PET. 3 they which are heyres together of the grace of lyfe; that your Prayers bee not interrup∣ted. And the wyse man giveth this counsell, Not to depart from a discreet and good Woman, which is fallen vnto thee for thy portion in the feare of the LORD. Ʋse thy selfe to liue joyfullie with thy wyfe, all the dayes of thy lyfe; for that is thy Portion in this lyfe of all thy la∣bour ECCLES 7. and travell that thou takest vnder the Sunne.
And, our blessed Saviour CHRIST Himselfe, confirming on earth, what His Father had done in Paradise, vouchsafed to grace a nuptiall feast, with His blessed presence. And to ma∣nifest His Loue the more which Hee bore to the holy Union then there knit betwixt the Man and his Wyfe, Hee expressed His Glorie and Power, in showing His first miracle at this mar∣riage, and that of joy; by turning wa∣ter into wyne, even to comfort and IOHN 2. glad their hearts withall. But now seeing wee haue proven, out of GOD'S word, that the princi∣pall duetie of Husbandes towards thier Wyues, is Loue, let vs looke into the glasse of our tymes, and see how the duetie of Loue is performed. But I feare, that amongst an hundreth wee shall scarcelie finde one that stryveth to performe this duetie of Loue as hee ought. For see wee not daylie rather the contrarie by many? Men consume the estates which they haue gotten by their wyues, thorow their owne vi∣cious lyues; some by sloathfull ydle∣nesse, some by gayming, some by
drunkennesse, some by whoring, and manie other sorts of damnable living. And thus are good Women brought to Beggerie, by lewde, shamelesse, and godlesse Husbands, who haue altoge∣ther forsaken the LORD, showing neyther Loue nor Duetie to their Wyues, who are their owne verie flesh, blood, and bones. Other Husbandes agayne, to show their authoritie, forsooth, will holde their wyues in such subjection, and ser∣vitude, that no servand nor slaue could abyde the lyke; beeing even a verie Naball vnto them, in churlishnesse of speach, and crabbednesse of Condi∣tions. Where is wisdome in such Hus∣bands, who are commanded to go∣verne their Wyues in loue, and accor∣ding to Knowledge? Other fellow-impudents with these, will not labour, nor care for nothing; but put the poore woman to shift for all. Or, if perhaps hee get something abroad, yet shee is sure not to bee the better thereof: it must bee spent be∣fore hee come home, or else hidden from her presence. What shall we say of such
veth GOD, and yet loveth not his wyfe, I say hee is a lyar in graine. But, when I haue all done, and sayd what I can, yet I must leaue men to the consideration of what is written, and wish, and intreate them, to bee wyse, and submit themselues vnto the gover∣nament of the Word of GOD: that so they may liue quyetlie, and loving∣lie with their Wyues: and not onlie so, but joyfullie also, (as the wyse man sayeth) for, surelie, hee hath obtayned a good portion, who hath a wyfe that hee can liue joyfullie with. For, what if a Man doe abound in wealth, so that hee can giue vnto himselfe as much plea∣sure as Salomon possessed, even what his heart can desire? yet, if hee liue not peaceablie at home, and in loue with his wyfe, all is but an heavie and sor∣rowfull burden vnto him. But the poore man, having little, and yet living friendlie, lovinglie, and joyfullie, with his wyfe, hath ten thousand tymes more than the rich cōtentious wretch; his heart beeing filled with content∣ment in the LORD, and the other his heart full of wretchednesse, and the
sting of an evill conscience. Wee haue an olde Proverbe, That in Loue is no lacke. For, where Loue is vnited with the feare of GOD, in the hearts of Man and Wyfe, they will, lyke yoak-fellowes, draw together the right way, lyke the two milke-kyne, which brought the Arke of GOD, in the new Cart, from the land of the Philistimes: Yea, they will plow toge∣ther, and sow together: and there is no doubt, but through the blessing of Him who governeth them, they shall receaue a plentifull harvest together. Thus, wee haue found, that the principall duetie of the Husband to∣wardes his Wyfe, is Loue: which due∣tie is now-a-dayes neglected, contem∣ned, and even despysed of manie, who haue turned aside, and forsaken the way of the LORD, as appeareth by the evills and mischiefes which daylie aryse betwixt Man and Wyfe. And, therefore, having descryed a mayne defect in Husbands, the which wee may not passe over, because it is the greatest breach of Loue that may bee,
wee shall speake something thereof the next Chapter, GOD permmit∣ting vs. THE FOURTH CHAPTER. THis duetie of the Husband vnto the Wyfe, beeing whollie inclu∣ded in the Bands of Loue, it streatcheth it selfe farder, into manie branches. For wee finde also by the Word of GOD, that the Husband must dwell with his Wyfe, according to Know∣ledge. So wee see heere, that it is not lawfull for the Husband to forsake his Wyfe: but, howsoever, whether it bee in weale or woe, in ritches or po∣vertie, yet hee must abide, and dwell with her still, except it bee onlie for the fact of Adulterie; and for no other cause may a Man forsake his Wyfe, nor a Wyfe her Husband. Indeede the wyse man sayeth, Giue mee anie plague, but the plague of the tongue. And, it may bee, some wyues haue this imperfection; but, consider rightlie, if thou thy selfe bee not the vrgent cause thereof. Howsoever, it
is not a cause sufficient to forsake her, as testifieth our Saviour, who vtterlie MATTH. 19. forbiddeth to separate those whom GOD hath joyned together, Adulterie onlie beeing accepted. But the verie fyre-brandes of Hell, even the wicked, and abominable A∣dulterers, of our tyme, neyther respe∣cting the Word of GOD, nor yeelding any obedience to His cōmandements, or fearing the justice of His vengeance, to come for their stiff-neckednesse, will, notwithstanding, lyke the Swyne possessed by the Devill, runne, violent∣lie, to their Destruction. But Saynct Paull telleth playnlie, that neyther For∣nicators, Adulterers, Wantons, or such 1. COR. 6 lyke, shall inherite the Kingdome of GOD. Whither they shall goe, then, let eve∣rie good Christian tremble to thinke of. For these men, not regarding any thing, will haue a Wyfe heere, and another there; one in this Countrey, and another else-where: or if they be no Travellers, will thinke no shame to keepe a whore vnder his wyues nose: and shee dare not finde fault with it, but may know, and dare not know.
Yea, manie not yet contented heere∣with, but proceed farder: for all these damnable abuses seeme sweet to a whore-monger, sayeth the wyse man: neyther will hee leaue off, till hee perish. But ECCLES. 23 hearken what hee sayeth farder; to wit, that such a man shall be put to shame, because hee would not vnderstand the wayes of the LORD. What neede wee cite pettie Authors for this Adulterous generation? Let the mouth of GOD take chiefe place, and condemne them, where Hee ex∣presslie sayth, Thou shalt not commit A∣dulterie, EXOD. 20. thou shalt not covet thy neygh∣bours wyfe, &c. And the LORD com∣manded stricklie, That there should bee no whore-keepers amongst His people DEUT. 23. Israell. But if all such should be swept out of Britane, the land would be thin∣lie inhabited. It is counted amongst young men, A tricke of youth; and amongst other of middle age, A veniall sinne: yea, the verie aged themselues▪ with their Hoarie and Snow-lyke head and beard, their furrowed and wrinck∣led browes, and their carion face; lyke a dead corpse, though their abilitie of
bodie be spent, and consumed, in abho∣minable and damnable filthinesse; yet they will speake now more filthilie, than before they lived lasciviouslie. Beholde, of all Monsters, Lust is the worst, and that especiallie in olde age, testifieth that worthie Clerke Erasmus of Rotterdam, in his Booke of Christian ERAS∣MUS. Warrefare, Capitulo 32. Where he ve∣rie pithilie exhorteth all such men, to turne backe from such great wicked∣nesse: saying, That if it be possible for them to get true repentance, it is also possible for them to bee saved. But who so heere repenteth never, A Reprobate shall die for ever. So great abhominations were not committed in Sodome and Gomorrah, loe! as now reygne amongst vs, (who were consumed with fire and brimston long agoe) and can wee then thinke to escape? Alace, no, except wee repent in tyme. And therefore let vs bee war∣ned by the holie PSALMIST, who sayeth thus: Oh, consider this, yee that forget GOD, lest that Hee teare you in PSAL. 50. 22. pieces, and there bee none to deliver.
Heare yet what Saynct Paul sayeth; Whore-mongers, and Adulterers, sayeth HEB. 13. hee, GOD will judge. And it is sayd in the Revelation, that they shall haue their part in the Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone: which is REVEL. 24. the second death. And thus sayeth the LORD by His Prophet IEREMIAH: They assemble IEREM. 5. themselues, by companies, in the harlots houses; and ryse vp in the morning, lyke fed horses, everie man neyghing after his neyghbours wyfe. And now mark what followeth: And shall I not visit for these thinges, sayeth the LORD? Shall not My Soule bee avenged on such a nation as this? And thus shortlie haue wee procee∣ded in opening the breach of Sacred Wedlocke; to the ende, that every one may clearlie see, into what dangers those men doe daylie runne, who liue not lovinglie and faythfullie, yea, and joyfullie with their owne Wyues, even as the Word of GOD enjoyneth them to doe. And such a man the wise SALO∣MON proveth to be the most foolish of all the fooles vnder the Sunne, saying;
That such a man destroyeth his owne soule: yea, hee shall finde a wound, sayeth PROV. 22. hee, and dishonour: and his reproach shall never bee put away. And into such a pit shall that man fall, with whom the LORD is angrie. THE FIFT CHAPTER. BY our for∣mer Chapters wee haue showne howe farre manie Husbands come too short of those Due∣ties, which by the Word of GOD they are enjoyned to performe vnto their onlie owne Wyues: and the whole cause, and chiefe ground whereof, wee see to bee, The want of Loue; or ra∣ther, of True Loue. For if in Hus∣bands were that True Loue, which the feare of GOD worketh in the heart of true Christians, it would surelie leade them to that Knowledge, wherewith
Saynct Peter exhorteth them to bee 1. PET. 3 furnished: and the which poynt wee must needes handle a little broader be∣fore wee ende this Treatise. Now, as wee haue showne before, it is not anough for Husbandes to abyde and dwell with their Wyues: but they must dwel with them as men of know∣ledge and vnderstanding, well expe∣rienced in the Word of GOD, yeel∣ding whollie to the Rule thereof, and obeying His holie Will and Comman∣dementes. Heereby commeth that Knowledge, which will bring Husbandes to per∣forme that Duetie which Saynct Paull teacheth them towardes their Wyues; to wit, To loue them, even as CHRIST EPHES. 5 loved His Congregation: that is, with an holie, heartie, vnfeygned, and constant loue: Which wee can no other wayes attayne vnto, but by the aforesayde Godlie Knowledge; which must bee ga∣thered from the Word of GOD, even as a Bee gathereth her honey from the sweetest flowers, and that by continual exercyse: or else bee yee sure, you shall never receaue true Comfort in your Marriages.
VVhen Samuell had anoynted Saull 1. SAM. 10. to bee King of Israell, the LORD gaue vnto Saull another heart than hee had before; even a heart according to his Calling. So no doubt but those men, whom the LORD calleth vnto that Honourable Estate of Marriage, Hee will (and doeth) furnish them with Giftes according to their places. For indeed it is no small matter, but verie weyghtie, of a Novice, to become the Father of a Familie, the governour of a Wyfe, Children, and Servantes, &c. Such a man hath need of another heart than hee had before: even an heart to pray vnto the LORD with Salomon, That He would vouchsafe to giue him wisdome, to goe in and out, and go∣verne that Charge with Godlie Know∣ledge, which the GOD of all Wis∣dome and Knowledge hath commit∣ted vnto him. Yet, before wee conclude, let vs also consider the Duetie of FORBEA∣RANCE, which Husbandes owe vnto their Wyues, as beeing the weaker
Vessels: and Saynct PAVL teacheth vs the reason playnlie why: Because, sayeth hee, they (meaning the Wyues) are Heyres with you of the Grace of Lyfe: Elected by the favour of GOD, in CHRIST JESVS, to that fellow∣ship of Saynctes, wherein your selues hope to bee numbered: And, as dearlie beloved of GOD, as your selues, are bought out of the power of Satan, by the precious Blood of His deare Sonne, as well as you: and Heyres also of that Eter∣nall Lyfe which you your selues hope to enjoye. And therefore, if you your selues thinke to liue as Sayncts in Hea∣ven heere-after, you must first liue to∣gether as Sayncts heere on Earth. Let these thnges, then, bee as a Load-stone, to draw Husbandes vnto the performance of all their Dueties towardes their Wyues. For this same Apostle yeeldeth yet a farther reason of the Dueties of LOVE, AMITIE, and FORBEARANCE of Husbandes: to wit, That your Prayers (sayeth hee) bee not hindered. That is: If you would
haue GOD to heare you, when you pray vnto Him, and to grant you the thinges you desire of Him together, vvhy then, in the Name of GOD, let vs agree together, liue toge∣ther, loue together, and pray together. That so our praying together, may receaue comfort together; And, That THE GOD OF LOVE may blesse our Loues togethER. AMEN.
