21639 23101913 26232
THE PRACTICE OF POLICIE IN A CHRISTIAN LIFE. Taught from the Scriptures. Written by I. Saltmarshe, M. of Arts of Magd. Col. in Cambridge. Yee erre not knowing the Scriptures,Matth. 22. 29. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Samuel Endarby and are to be sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Starre in Popes head alley, 1639.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE LORD HENRY RICH of Kensington, Earle of Holland, Groome of the Stoole, and Gentleman of the Bed∣chamber, Chancellor of the Vni∣versity of Cambridge, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Gar∣ter, one of his Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell. MY LORD, IT may seem a da∣ring and super∣fluous act to pre∣sent any draughts of Policy to so great a States∣man as your selfe, especial∣ly for me, so out of distance to yeares, experience, pra∣ctice, employment, profes∣sion, but my privilege is the subject I make choice on, a subject enriched with all
these, I know, as the Sama∣ritane said, The Well is deepe, and I have nothing to draw with, nothing if compared with the talents of deeper judgements, but my en∣gagement to your Lordship is the Universiy, our Studies wearing your Honours title and superscription, and our Savoiur hath there entitled a Tribute, where there is Image and Superscription, what I doe heere is but in the right recognition, what I doe in the next leafe is in right of Dedication and patronage, God make your Grace a Jewell to the Crowne below, and pre∣pare you a Crowne above, My Lord, Your humblest Servant, J. SAULTMARSHE.
TO MY HONOURED Patron, Sir ARTHUR INGRAM the younger. SIr, I have observed you active in your conversa∣tion abroad and at home, and I could not study any thing I thought more sutable, and congruous, than these pra∣cticall leases, which may at once recreate and instruct your retirement, instruct you not as mine but Gods, for his words are my ground and foundation both for place and sense, and in this course I fore∣saw
saw most security, for heere I have his Word for what I say, and I give you his Word for what you are to doe, and my lines are but onely drawne here to point you to the center of the Scriptures: there your de∣signes, your projects, may rest and relie. Sir, I know you have a breast-plate rich enough of your owne, yet to set an higher rate upon your counsels, bee pleased to let these holy jewels of Gods Word (which will bee a bright Urim and Thum∣mim to your bosom) have a place, and that I may be just to the brevity I professe in my Booke, I hasten to bee as I am ever bound, Sir, Your most devoted Servant J. SALTMARSHE.
The Motives which per∣swaded me to this. I Observed that the wit and industry bestowed on the Scriptures, that of the Fathers and the more moderne was most in perspective and meditation, set the Pulpit apart, I meaneVoluptatem quandam in us legend is ex illa reru varietate perciper sed de illaris   ne  qui∣dem, Machi. lib. disp. in Prooe. Preaching, so as they made the Scripture the Sabbath of their pennes recreating in the divine fancies and contemplations, but I know none that made the sixe dayes worke of it, and reduced it into practice for the conduct and administration of action; David stiles it A Lampe unto the feet, not so much to the head, the contemplative part, as to the feet the active. I observed too, that the fa∣ousMachavil. Politician brought his
vessell to this holy cisterne and drew some sacred Aphorismes, though too few for action, rather devoting his penne to the Ro∣mane Livie for copy and imita∣tion than hither. I observed againe that some had bestowed themselves on Ta∣citus, and on the Italian History as Guicciardine. And Lipsius who deserves much in this hath gone a succinct and speedy way in his Politicks, but all his draughts and copies were from heathen examples and pre∣cepts, Haud usquequaque conve∣nienter ad hoc aevum, as hee him∣selfe, not fashioned for us and our times. I observed also, that among the ancient, Plato and Aristotle had not beene a little painfull in their Politicks, but their con∣ducts were of a great latitude for common wealths and nations, not strait laced enough for parti∣cular affaires, and so Zenphn and the rest.
These kindled in mee an holy indignation, when I was still conversant with a more faithfull and sacred Oracle, therefore I set my selfe to the study of Scrip∣tures and drew from thence these short formes from the individu∣als and particulars there, which though small, yet like seeds, Se explicant, they are spreading and diffusive, and such things as are drawne from particulars, sayesBaon. lib. de Aug. Scien. our learned Authour, know the best way to particulars againe. For methode I thought it the best to observe none, for know∣ing how independent, contin∣gent, and emergent affaires are, I held it the best to keepe time with the variety, in these which I intend for their conduct and administration. For the brevity heere, I drew these copies rather in tablets than a larger space, Legem bre∣veesse oportet quae jubeat; dire∣ctive and imperative aphorismesSen. epist. 95. should bee quicke and spirited,
and practise should not bee put too farre about▪ If some of them heere seeme in feature and complexion of phrase or matter alike or the same, you shall finde but an exe∣gesin, I hope not unpleasant, a better illustration, and something for variety superadded, which in so much variety could not bee well escaped.
The sufficiency of Scri∣ptures for Policy. WHy goe yee to enquire of2 Kin. 1. 1▪ Bezebub? because there is not a God in Israel? Good Eliah was loth to have his Master loose credit or resort, to see them goe after other gods, when there was a God at home to supply, and that faithfull Apostle is alike soi∣citous, Master (sayes he) whither shall wee goe? thou hast the words, &c. Wee should bee as zealous as this Prophet and Apostle for the ad∣vancement of his credit and glory, and call home all the resorts that are made from him; though in o∣ther Histories civill and ecclesiasti∣call there are many exquisite copies for action, which may doe service to the negotiations of posterity, yet there are no such warrantable and
safe examples, and conducts, and transactions, as the Scriptures abound with, and hee that shall de∣vote his meditations to them, shall at once be wise and religious, a Ser∣pent and a Dove▪ all other formes, and draughts of affaires which are eerly humane, have too much of the wisedome of the World, and The wisedome of the World is foolishnesse with God, and a con∣sulting with such is a kinde of de∣parture with Saul to aske counsell of a dead Samuel; the Policies of flesh and blood should have vigour and influence from divine wisdome, like those jewels which have their matter from earth, their sparkle from heaven; they that have con∣sulted their owne darke bosomes, never looking after a beame of di∣vine light, have had successe as blacke as their counsels: how was Herod infatuated in his bloody de∣signe upon the male infants? How was Haman in his project upon the Jewes and Mordecai? How Juli∣an? in extinguishing all Christian
Schooles, in setting up the Iewes idolatry and superstition, these fol∣lowed their owne propositions. But he that consults the Word of God, shall see what affaires have beene stirring and how they have beene disposed and conducted, how they have succeeded, what circum∣stances have hindered, and what have advanced; hee shall likewise see the will of God which is a rule to regulate and submit his designes to, his Providence, which is a Law to him, that he be not too perempto∣ry for successe, seeing God hath the times and seasons in his owne Po∣wer, his Power which will make him pray for direction, like Jehosa∣phat, Wee know not what to doe, therefore our eyes are to∣wards thee, and besides this dire∣ction for an happy concurrence of such things as may conspire to the good effect of his enterprises. God could never endure any de∣partures and addresses from him therefore he gave his people a cloud and pillar of fire, a mercy-seate, an
Ephod, Urim and Thummim, Priests and Prophets, visions, dreames, and now though hee hath put a period to these revelations, Yet (sayes the Apostle) wee have2 Pet. 1. 19. a more sure word of Prophesie, whereunto yee doe well to take heed, a more sure word wee have, this is the Word, The Scripture which is given by inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for instruction, That the man of God may be perfect. These are able to make thee wise,2 Tim. 3. 15. and wise unto salvation.
That the Policies in Scripture are more safe and excellent than in humane writings. DIvinity is heere so well atten∣ded, that if you enquire for any of the sciences or vertues, you shall not misse, and they seeme more comely and gracefull by their office here and attendance upon her; you have Philosophy without vanity, Astronomy without curiosity, Ora∣tory without Rhetoricke, Policy without cunning, wisedome with∣out subtlety, for they were once like the Ephesians darknesse, but are now light in the Lord, and like Saul falling among the Prophets they are sacred too. A learned Authour of our times seemes to distaste Paracelsus Val∣lesius and all such parties who seeke for Sciences in Scripture, and stile it a seeking for the dead among the living, as on the contrary to seekeBacn.  Aug. Scien. lib. . for Divinity in them is to seeke for the living among the dead.
Sure I am that in Scripture they live a kinde of spirituall life, when Christ came among the dead many rose and walked about Jeru∣salem, it is impossible if bee bee in the company, there should not be a subtle participation of his presence, and a rising or exalting, you know Moses when hee had beene in pre∣sence of God, wore a brightnesse upon his face a while after, and these sciences and vertues being in the Scriptures where God is pre∣sent, receive a bright complexion and lustre; Elisha when he had the Prophets cloake upon him was more divine than before, and these ha∣ving such a Mantle as Divinity cast over them are more sacred; I have therefore enquired heere after Policy and Prudence, and finde her more beautifull than in any other civill conducts or trans∣actions, Exalt her then, as Salo∣mon sayes, and shee shall promote thee and bring thee to honour when thou dost embrace her.
THE PRACTICE OF POLICY IN A CHRISTIAN LIFE. The first Booke. POLICIE I. What the true Practice of Po∣licy is. POLICIE without practice is something like Faith without Workes, a kinde of idle speculative Vertue, and such politicians are like the prophets
which saw Visions and Revelati∣ons, yet had nothing to doe in the things they saw. And there is a Practicall Poli∣cy too, yet not the true, and such are either too politique for the designe, and then over-reach, or mistake the quality of it, and goe a wrong way, and yet they toile and are active, but like those Fishers who toiled all night with their nettes, but tooke no∣thing, and such are they of whom it is spoken, There is that laboureth and taketh paines and maketh haste, and is so much the more behinde, Eccles. 11. 11. The true practice is a sacred and serious deliberation and ele∣ction of the most fit meanes, an exact examination of time, place, and persons, and of all such cir∣cumstances as may bee in the cir∣cle of your affaires, and an ac∣commodation of what you doe to the copy in the Scriptures.
Thus, Wisedome is justified of her chil∣dren, Matth. 11. 19. POLICIE II. How to understand well a designe. IN any Designe, understand it first well and purely, and dis∣cusse such lets and difficulties as may appeare in the conduct, be∣fore you goe on too farre, so you shall not bee put to too much losse by casualties and accidents which happen most to the in∣considerate and ignorant; if you dispatch businesse in an implicite faith, it is as if you should un∣dertake to hit a way in the darke; as the Apostle said, I know whom I beleeve, so it is fit you should be able to say, I know what I am to doe.
Thus, God first made Light in the work of the Creation, And hee said, let there be Light, Gen. 1. 3. POLICIE III. In perplexed businesses divide and diperse. IF your businesse be perplexed and obscure, there is as it were a Chaos and confused matter, and like that, first in the Creation a Darkenesse upon the face of it▪ that it cannot be well discerned therefore the best course heere for clearing and serening, is to divide the parts that are mingled and more obscure. Thus, God in the confused masse of Creation, divided the Light from the Darkenesse, Gen. 1. 4.
POLICIE IV. Not to multiply subordinate acti∣ons too fast. DOE not multiply actions which are subordinate to the same end too fast, and goe not on too farre upon a businesse till you have seene some successe or proofe of your first engage∣ment, for in such indifferent pro∣ceeding you preserve your free∣dome, and may take off your pen fairely without harme to the pa∣per, without shedding a blot up∣on your credit. Thus, God would not goe on to A Let the Earth bring forth, till he sur∣veyed well the first part of the Cre∣ation, and saw that it was good, Gen. 1. 10.
POLICIE V. The triall of obedience is found in small matters, sooner than in great. HE that makes triall of the respect and obedience of a∣ny in small matters and slender obligations, shall finde the truth and faithfulnesse of a disposition sooner than in great and weigh∣ty; and this is to commit a weight to the trust of a slender thread. Thus, The Lord commanded the man saying, But of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evill thou shalt not eat, Gen. 2. 17. POLICIE VI. The weake ought not to parley with their too subtle enemies. HE that is guilty of weak∣nesse and rashnesse, ought not to hold parley with those
who waite for advantages, espe∣cially in occasions not materiall and pertinent, for that were a vo∣luntary resignation of your selfe into the snare, and you meete a conspiracy in the halfe way. Thus, The Woman was betrayed to sinne by parleying, for sayes the Text, The Serpent said unto the Woman, and the Woman said unto the Serpent, Gen. 3. 1, 2. POLICIE VII. Interrogatories made to an Offen∣dour will draw the worme out of the roote. SOmetimes it is best in case convenient to examine an of∣fendour with no notice of his fault, though you know all the particulars of the trespasse, to try the ingenuity of his disposi∣tion, and in a smoothe pretence of ignorance to seeke that you have found already.
Thus, God although hee knew Adam had offended, yet called him and en∣quires, Hast thou eaten of the fruit whereof I commanded thou shouldst not eate, Gen. POLICIE VIII. Trust not an Offendour who hath played false with you. TRust not an Offendour too much that hath played false with you, especially if any thing of yours lie open to advantage, for by that you put an occasion into his hands to betray you, and you halfe perswade him to that, you would not have him to doe. Thus, God after Adam had sinned drove him out, Least hee put forth his hand, sayes hee, and take also of the Tree of Life, Gen. 3. 22, 24.
POLICIE IX. Envy the mother of Mischiefe. AMong Rivals and Compe∣titours of desert, doe not publish your grace and accep∣tance which you fnde with o∣thers, it excites and stirres to e∣mulation, and it is a daring your adversary to doe you mischiefe, and even a spreading of Colours, and of flourishing in the face of your Enemy. Thus, Cain smote not Abel till he saw his Sacrifice blaze bright, And his countenance fell to see his Brother rise in favour, Gen. 4. 5. POLICIE X. True intelligence is necessary. IN negotiations abroad it is not safe to venture forth where there hath beene a danger appa∣rant,
till you have received true intelligence, with what safety you may goe, then you draw a lot for security, and you goe on trust with chance for successe. Thus, Noah kept close to his Arke till his winged intelligencer returned with an Olive in her mouth, Gen. 8. 11. POLICIE XI. Signes doe strengthen ones Faith. WHen you would oblige one to a condition or promise, it is not amisse to pro∣cure some token for remem∣brance: this seals them unto per∣formance, and at every appea∣ring renewes an importunity, and sheds a fresh sollicit upon them. Thus, God set his Bow, and I will looke upon it, sayes hee, that I may re∣member the Covenant, Gen. 9. 11.
POLICIE XII. Division is the mother of confusion. IN a Conspiracy which is dis∣covered to you and concernes you, and may prove of dange∣rous consequence, consult and observe whether many bee inter∣essed in it; if so, there is more danger; and your course is to plot a division among them, and to keepe them from being of one Language, and this is to disable and disperse a project, and to confound the Language of a con∣spiracy. Thus, God saw that the builders of Babel were one, And he said, let us goe downe, and confound their Lan∣guage, so the Lord seattered them, Gen. 11. 6, 7, 8.
POLICIE XIII. Gods promise and Abrahams obe∣dience. IF you desire a blessing upon your selfe or yours, withdraw from such evill society as you hold any deare correspondence with, GOD is ever jealous of such adherence, and is sparing till he have better demonstration of your integrity, and will not part with a favour till you part with your engagement. Thus, God said to Abraham, I will blesse thee, but first sayes hee, get thee out of this Country, G. 12. 1, 2 POLICIE XIV. Haste makes waste. FEigning in some cases is dangerous, and you may put your selfe upon a hazard by per∣sonating
that which you cannot bee easily quit of without preju∣dice, therefore consider well what may follow, and doe not say in haste what you would un∣say upon consideration, and so put your selfe into the curtesie of a recantation, it was Davids er∣rour, I said in my haste. Thus, Abraham unadvisedly bid Sa∣rah say she was his Sister▪ And shee was then commended before Pha∣raoh and taken into Pharaohs house, Gen. 12. 15. POLICIE XV. If your justice rise early, Gods mer∣cy will not be lute. IF you have any affliction or misery upon you, discusse and enquire in your selfe, if some sin of yours did not occasion it; if so renounce it with speed and re∣pent, and if your Justice rise ear∣ly, Gods Mercy will not be late.
Thus, Pharaoh when his House was plagued, called Abraham and said, What is this thou hast done unto me? and he sent him away and his wife, Gen. 12. 18, 20. POLICIE XVI. Separation is sometimes necessary. WHen you observe there will be any discord or jarring in your neighbourhood, the best remedy is to remove: if your nearnesse bee as it were in∣compatible with the other, yet first looke well with what con∣veniency it may bee done, and doe not take your leave at one place till you be secured by ano∣ther. Thus, Abraham's and Lot's Heard∣men agreed not, and they separated one from the other, yet Lot lift up
his eyes first, and saw the Plaines of Iordan well watered, Ge. 13. 10. 11. POLICIE XVII. A Friend is tried in adversity. IF you would get a blessing and respect, bee sollicitous in ai∣ding and revenging the cause and weaknesse of the just, for in this though you saile against the streame of the World and the times, yet you become more no∣table and meritorious. ``And this is to doe like God him∣selfe whose Power is most emi∣nent in the weakenesse of others. Thus, When Abraham heard Lot was taken, he pursued and brought back him and all his goods, and the King of Sodome went out to meete him, and Melchisedech King of Salem bles∣sed him, Gen. 14. 16, 17, 18.
POLICIE XVIII. A speedy flight is sometimes need∣full. IN avoidance of Dangers ei∣ther spirituall or civill, observe quicknesse and speed in dispatch, foresight of the way you are to take, election of your refuge, so you shall not be overtaken by the perill, nor unprovided of secu∣rity. Thus, Lot saw the conveniency of Zo∣ar and escaped thither, and the An∣gels hastened him, and while he lin∣gred, they laid hands upon him, Gen. 19. 22. POLICIE XIX. To attaine a new favour by illu∣strating favours received. WHen you petition a new favour, first illustrate and magnifie your favours received,
and then the pretences for this you desire, yet extenuate it smoothly too, onely report the advantages it may bring you, for the advantages which appeare, will move such as respect you to bestow it, and the lesse it appeares to bestow it the sooner and more easily. Thus, When Lot petitioned God, hee would give him Zoar for his re∣fuge: behold sayes he, thou hast mag∣nified thy mercy to me in saving my life, behold this city is neare to flie unto, and it is a little one, Gen. 19. 19. POLICIE XX. Ʋnlawfull kindenesse dangerous. THere is nothing lost in su∣specting unlawfull kinde∣nesse; for let the pretence bee ne∣ver so faire, the meanes is wicked
and no good issue can attend it, and hee that is taken and trans∣ported thus, is blinde in the co∣lours of Good and Evill. Thus, Lot did unwisely, not to bee jea∣lous over his Daughters respect and familiarity, when they made him drinke wine, Gen. 19. 35. POLICIE XXI. Wisedome to conceale ones hatred. WHere there is a Passion of Envy and emulation which cannot bee easily extin∣guished, it is wisedome for the party to conceale it, especially there, where there is any engage∣ment or dependancy to oblige you: he that shewes himselfe too openly an enemy to an other, is not his owne friend.
Thus, Hagars Sonne did foolishly, for Sarah sa the Sonne of this Bond∣woman mocking, wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this Bond∣woman and her Sonne, G. 21. 9. 10. POLICIE XXII. The triall of a Friend is necessary. WHere there is a desire in any to oblige or binde you to faire conditions, discusse with your selfe, his former beha∣viours, and if you finde any thing hath beene done prejudiciall, de∣mand the intent of that, and then you may contract or for∣beare, with more certainty and confidence, for hee takes up mea∣nings but rashly and ignorantly, that will not stay till the Authour expound and interpret himselfe. Thus, When Abimelech sollicited A∣braham
for an oath and promise of kindnesse, I will sweare (sayes he) yet hee remembred him of the Well of watér his servants toke vio∣lently away, but Abimelech said, I wt not, Gen. 21. 23. 4. 5. POLICIE XXIII. The triall of a friends faithfulnesse by presending the hazard of something he enteares. IF there bee any whom you have a desire to continue in your counsels and affaires, and have proved your selfe benefici∣all to him, you shall doe well to try him, with pretence of the hazard of something hee en∣deares and which you have con∣ferred; if hee part with it freely, it may confirme, he respects you more than your curtesie.
Thus, God would try Abrahams faith and obedience with commanding him to sacrifice his Sonne, Take now thy Sonne whom thou lovest, sayes God, and offer him, and Abra∣ham rose up early, &c. G. 22. 2, 3. POLICIE XXIV. The behaviour of a Stranger. IF you would be made partaker of any franchises and privile∣ges where you come as a Stran∣ger to inhabit, use all sweetnesse of demeanour, and that will speake for you well to their dis∣positions; and though you bee a Stranger in your arrivall, yet bee a familiar in your behaviour, the way to obtaine a freedome a∣mongst them is to bee free with them.
Thus, Abraham said, I am a sojourner and bowed himselfe to the People of the Land, and required a burying place, and they offered the choice of their Sepulchres, Gen. 23. 4, 7, 6. POLICIE XXV. Gods hand at his Pastport. WHen you have favours to request of any, that are inclined religiously, and with whom you have credit, you may advance and further your De∣signe, with relating how farre you have observed Gods hand, in moving to it, or any other such like circumstance worth observa∣tion: hee that wooes thus, makes GOD his Spokesman, and is sure to speed well with the reli∣giously affected, and hee shall ne∣ver bee turned backe on his way, that can shew Gods hand at his pasport.
Thus, Eleezer perswaded Rebecca and her friends, with the story and con∣currence of all the passages, how God had blessed him in his journey and Signe. So they answered, The thing is of the Lord. behold Re∣becca is before thee, Gen. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. POLICIE XXVI. Wisedome in taking advantage. WHen you observe inclina∣tions and desires in o∣thers to fulfill and grant your de∣sires, deferre not the sollicit, for imaginations will revolt, and the first heate you raise by your ave∣nues and addresses will coole, and like an impression upon wa∣ter or sand, soone vanish and bee blowne out. Thus, Eleezer did wisely in taking the
present advantages, Hinder mee not (sayes hee) since the Lord hath prspered my way, send mee away, Gen. 24. 56. POLICIE XXVII. The right demeanour of an enter∣view. In winning and obtaining re∣putation there must be punctu∣all care had of the first demea∣nours and behaviours upon your enterviewes, it is fit to let things bee well cemented and glewed, before you bee bold in experi∣ments of carriage. Thus, Rebecca when shee saw Isaak at distance, made ready her vaile and covered her selfe, Gen. 24. 65.
POLICIE XXVIII. How to dispose of children of di∣vers wives and beds. IN Families and houses where Children are not uterine and borne of the same Parents, the best course is to divide them and dispose them to distances, for it is rare if there bee not disagree∣ments and differences,—fratrum quo{que} gratia rara est▪ For heere is a pretty contradi∣ction made good, the neerest are often at most distance, and there is most difference amongst those that are most alike. Thus, Thus unto the Sonnes of the Concubine which Abraham had, he gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaak his Sonne, Gen. 25. 6.
POLICIE XXIX. Advantages may bee advanced by time or opportunity. SOme advantages are best ad∣vanced by times and oppor∣tunities of present necessity, op∣posing the supply, yet these you deale thus with would bee Esaus such whom their wicked and de∣sperate improvidence hastens to the bargaine, and then it is no neglecting, God may intend to make their Birthright yours. Thus, Jacob saw Esau hungry for his pottage, and he would not part with them without the Birthright. Sell mee this day (sayes hee) thy Birth∣right, Gen. 25. 31.
POLICIE XXX. Dissimulation hath much unsafety. DIssimulation is the worst po∣licy; and besides the unlaw∣fulnesse, it hath unsafety, it re∣quires too much punctuall cauti∣on, to preserve it undiscovered, and the paines you take to be∣tray by dissembling, even betraies Dissimulation; a secret behavi∣our in businesse does well, or an open confidence and a kinde of resolute profession, carry your light either in a darke or a cleare lanthorne. Thus, Thus when Isaak dissembled and said Rebecca was his Sister, the King looked out at the window, and behold Isaak was sporting with Rebecca his wife, Gen. 26. 7, 8.
POLICIE XXXI. The congediry of great ones. THey that would preserve their own honors, fortunes, and prescription of State, with∣outstain, depredation, and danger of competition, must labour the remove of those which grow up to them, trees which stand thicke and close hinder the flourishings and spreadings of each other, yet there must bee an uprightnesse in such proceeding, as there will be an irregular motion. Thus, Abimelech an heathen did wise∣ly in this act though the circum∣stances were wicked, when hee saw Isaak was strong and grew very great, Goe from me (sayes he) thou art mightier than we, G. 26. 13. 16.
POLICIE XXXII. To be jealous of his enemy comming to treat with him. WHen your enemy or ad∣versary would come in∣to favour and correspondence a∣gaine, bee jealous and suspitious over his pretences, till you have some solid occasion for faith and credulity: hee that takes his ene∣mies first word, is soone entrea∣ted to betray himselfe. Thus, Isaak (when Abimelech and his Captaines would beginne Covenant againe) enquired, Wherefore come yee to mee seeing you hate mee, and send me away from you, Ge. 26. 27. POLICIE XXXIII. Curtesie is a preamble to love. THey that would enfavour themselves for the advan∣tage of any businesse, must shew
themselves affable, smoothe, and curteous, all such demeanour pre∣pares an opinion for them in the parties they aime at, hee that sets his net betimes, may expect a fuller draught than he that fishes later. Thus, Jacob having a Designe for li∣ving with Laban, and seeing his Daughter come forth to water Sheepe, hee went and rolled backe the stone, and watered the flocke, and kissed Rachel, Gen. 29. 10, 11▪ POLICIE XXXIV. Credulity is often disparageable. BE not too credulous in the faith of any in an action or dispatch of consequence, but en∣quire into the truth of the per∣formance, especially if the party be such as you have had no long nor sufficient experiment on, for else you put your selfe in danger
of being deceived, and of repen∣ting Quando mutare non erit inte∣grum. Thus, Jacob trusting Laban to give him Rachel to bed, in the morning behold it was Leah, Gen. 29. 25. POLICIE XXXV. A divine Policy to forbeare emula∣tion. IT is a divine Policy if you would procure a blessing or divert an affliction, to forbeare emulation or envy of the good of others, for God sees no fitnesse in you for any good, while you cast an evill eye upon the good of another. Thus, Rachel erred while she hated Le∣ah, for God saw that Leah was hated, and hee opened her wombe, but Rachel was barren, G. 29. 31.
POLICIE XXXVI. How to effect actions or businesses. IF you cannot be a single party and effectour of the businesse or action you desire to succeed, then interesse your selfe as much and as close as you may, that you may be the better pretender, and that at least a share of it, may stand beholden to you. Thus, Thus when Rachel saw she had no children to Jacob, behold sayes she, my maide Bilhah, goe in to her, and shee shall beare upon my knees, that I also may have children, Gen. 30. 3. POLICIE XXXVII. To take advantage of time, things, and places. IN gifts which you doe not in∣tend to bestow freely and gra∣tis, looke out what honest cir∣cumstance
may benefit you, and have respect there, and then stand at tearmes with the desire you see fervent▪ this is to put off ware at the best hand, hee is a cunning Tradesman that knowes how t raise his rate in a quicke Market. Thus, Leah would not part with her Mandrakes to Rachel, but thus, Jacob shall lie with thee to night, Gen. 30. 13, 14. POLICIE XXXVIII. To make much of hopefull advan∣tage. WHen you observe any hopefull advantages make much of them, and doe not foregoe them lightly, such are not alwayes neare you, nor concomitant: he that lets his fish escape into the water, may call forth his net often, and not draw them againe.
Thus, Laban did well when hee said to Jacob, tarry, for I have learned by experience, that the Lord hath bles∣sed me for thy sake, Gen. 30. 27. POLICIE XXXIX. To quicken the memory of forepast service. WHen you deale with some you have beene gratious and kinde towards, make a smoothe and faire though slen∣der and sleight relation of what favours have passed, which being done upon just and fit occasion, and not with too plaine inculca∣tion, cannot savour of upbrai∣ding, but onely of a desire to bring the other in memory of his engagement, and to quicken his future faith in your cause. Thus, Jacob told Laban, This twenty
yeares have I beene with thee, thy Ewes and thy she-goates have not cast their young, &c. Gen. 31. 38. POLICIE XL. What to discover, what to conceale. IN matter of contract it is not requisite to discover all the be∣nefit you know may redound, but to reserve your knowledge, God who is all wisedome doth not reveale himselfe all; though he dwell in light, yet that Light is inaccessable: it is wisedome to have something still inaccessable to others. Thus, Jacob bargained with Laban for the spotte Lambs, not discove∣ring the issue of the designe, Gen. 30. 32.
POLICIE XLI. How to remove from those that feare you or you feare. WHen you see your selfe growne great and famous to the emulation of any you feare remove from their violence, if not by distance, by some other way, which may supply that and this is to cleare your enemies eye of the moe which offends him. Thus, Jacob by Gods appointment re∣moved, when he beheld the counte∣nance of Laban not towards him as before, Gen. 31. 2. POLICIE XLII. To communicate with those that are neare in relation to us. IN businesse of great or notable change which concernes your selfe, deliberate and communi∣cate
it to those that are nearest to you in respects and relation, their nearenesse obliges their faithfulnesse, and though their advices may bee but weake, yet your owne thoughts laid open, may thus bee better considered on, and besides they may let fall and interpose something, which may advance to an adjutory or engine of aide. Thus, Jacob when hee was meditating upon his departure from Laban, sent and called Rachel and Leah, and told them, your fathers counte∣nance is not towards mee, and they answered, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, doe, Gen. 31. 4. 16. POLICIE XLIII. He may erre in the manner, who erreth nor in the matter. BE not too secret and solitary in those actions which re∣ceive no great prejudice by their
publike execution, for their stolne and close effecting may bee occa∣sion of suspition and jealousie of that, of which perhaps in their owne nature, they are not guilty, for hee that is secret with too much adoe, betrayes even an o∣pennesse to▪ that endeavour to se∣crecy. Thus, Jacob because hee went in such secret preparation from Laban, gave him occasion of pursuite, and Laban overtooke him and said. What hast thou done that thou hast stolne away unawares? Ge. 31. 36. POLICIE XLIV. Suspicion keepes awake to prepare for Security. IN inevident and doubtfull oc∣casions, ever doubt and su∣spect, for suspition keepes you awake to prepare and project for most security and safety: he that
lets confidence and presumption shut his eyes, knowes not how to looke about him in a danger. Thus, Jacob when hee was to meete Esau, whise wrath hee suspected, divided his People and Flockes, and said, If Esau come to the one and smite it, the other shall escape, Gen. 32. 7, 8. POLICIE XLV. Humble words and presents may appease a mans anger. TOwards those of whose faith and friendship, you are not assured, use all faire en∣treaty and demeanure of curte∣lie, and so either charme them into sincerity of that they pro∣fesse, or cherish them with such like behaviours as their own, and thus you speake to them in their Language, and like a faire dealing Merchant trade with them by way of Exchange.
Thus, When Jacob was going towards Esau, he sent presents, and told his servants, they should say, They bee thy servant Jacobs, it is a present sent unto my Lord Esau▪ G. 32. 17. POLICIE XLVI. Not to suffer any thing we esteeme to be too publicke. SUffer not any thing of quali∣ty you esteeme too publike and ambulatory in the presence of great Persons, for if they cast an eye of delight upon it, you cannot so freely and resolutely deny their solicit and importu¦nity, and it is as if you should bring forth your picture of waxe before the Sunne, who whiles he lookes on it, melts it from your owne hand. Thus, When Dinah walked too openly
among the Daughters of the Land, Shechem the Prince of the Coun∣try tooke her, Gen. 33. 2. POLICIE XLVII. 'Tis folly to cry, Non putavi. WHen any one with whom you have had slender cor∣respondence and transaction would bee contracting and cove∣nanting, bee first inquisitive into the engagements they propose, how farre they may prove in∣congruous and inconvenient to you, it is a folly to say, non putavi. Thus, Thus Shechem and his Father were too unadvised, when they yeel∣ded to circumcise the Males of their city, and so betray them to the sword of Jacobs Sonnes, Gen. 34. 18. 25.
POLICIE XLVIII. Ʋse favour with secrecy for feare of envy. WHen you have grace and favour with any, use it with secrecy, and not too much ostentation, least you make worke for your adversary to undermine you: hee that shewes his wealth to his enemy, is the cause of his owne pillage. Thus, Thus because Joseph wore a parti-coloured coate, the apparant livery of his fathers love, therefore say his Brethren, Come let us slay him, Gen. 37. 3. 20. POLICIE XLIX. Innocency without prudence is hurtfull. WHen you are to present your selfe to a party or faction, where you are envied and
maligned, forecast and thinke, what may bee plotted and con∣trived against you, and how farre it may injure you, and what you have that lies naked and exposed to the danger, this is to consider and thinke your selfe into secu∣rity. Thus, Joseph might have prevented his present misery, had hee thought be∣fore of his brethrens envy, and the danger in his single approach, Gen. 37. 18. POLICIE L. Take earnest of an action you su∣spect. IF you suspect the performance of a promise, worke them ob∣liged by some speciall engage∣ment and pawne, this is to imi∣tate a performance, and take an earnest of an action.
Thus, Thamar to binde Judah to the remembrance of the covenant said, Give mee thy signet, and bracelets, and thy staffe, Gen. 38. 18. POLICIE LI. Not to advance a thing in expecta∣tion without triall. BE not too rash in entertai∣ning opinion by any pub∣like profession or open protesta∣tion, and by advancing any thing in your expectation without tri∣all, least you sacrifice your judge∣ment and election to errour and repentance, barely approve, till a full experiment command your assent. God himselfe is famous for his will of approbation. Vo∣luntas approbationis & efficientiae. Thus, The Midwife seeing one of Tha∣mars children to offer first into the
world, bindes rashly a scarlet thred to it for the first borne, but he drew backe, and his Brother came out, Gen. 38. 28, 29. POLICIE LII. How to avoide the importunity of Sutors. IF you would avoide all draw∣ing into bad engagements and obligations, avoide the importu∣nities of others, and doe not farme out your eares to the—Mollissima tempora fandi, the soft times and opportunities of impression: your stay and at∣tention encourages sollicit, and when you come so neare to the words of any, it is hard to keepe at distance with his request. Thus, Joseph when he was sollicited by by his mistris day by day, hearkned not unto her, Gen. 39. 10.
POLICIE LIII. An adversary may rend a skirt of advantage. WHen you thinke you lie open to occasion and ex∣ceptions, bee cautelous and fru∣gall of your selfe, least your ad∣versary rend a skirt of advantage from you. Thus, Joseph with being in opportunity of place with his Mistris scatters a piece of his Garment to her curte∣sie, and she shewes it for her owne purpose, He left his Garment with me and fled, Gen. 39. 18. POLICIE LIV. How to attaine honourable imploy∣ments. IF you finde your selfe successe∣full and prospering in attempts and dispatches, shew your selfe
abroad in other businesse, and be∣ing once observed to bee lucky and fortunate, the reports and fame will bring you home ho∣nourable emploiments. Thus, Joseph wrought himselfe into grace, The Keeper of the Prison looked not to any thing, because the Lord was with him; and that which he did the Lord made it prosper, Gen. 39. 23. POLICIE LV. How a man may recommend him∣selfe. VVHen you have done a thing which hath gai∣ned you favour or honour in the eyes of any, make use of it, as it may prove advantagious to you, else you neglect the opportunity and become guilty of Christs complaint, How often would I, but yee would not?
Thus, When Joseph had told Pharaohs Butler the interpretation of his dreame, and saw that hee pleased him, Thinke on mee, sayes he, when it shall be well with thee, G. 40. 14. POLICIE LVII. A Sheepe in Wolves cloathing. IF you would not have any to presume or grow insolent up∣on your favours, bestow them without taking much notice, in a kinde of neglect and inadver∣tency, or else in pretence of in∣dignation, which thing a witty dissembling will much helpe, and this is to bee a friend in the per∣son of an adversary, and to bee a Sheepe in Wolves cloathing. Thus, Joseph spoke roughly to his Bre∣thren and kept them in Prison, and they interpreted it harshnesse, which
was his love to detaine them. And he puts their money in their sackes, yet so as they wonder how it came, Gen. 42. 17, 19. 24, 25. POLICIE LVIII. A friend in the person of an enemy. IN discovery of a busines which containes in it any thing of e∣minent immutation or change, bee circumstantiall and prepare them whom the relation con∣cernes, with passages which in their nature, may exercise and fit them. I observe the Sunne is not without the bright pream∣ble of a Starre, and gives notice in that of a following day. Thus, Joseph would tell his Brethren who hee was, but first uses them as Spies, then put devised imputati∣ons upon them, then afflicts his Fa∣ther with taking away his Benja∣min,
and then sayes, I am Joseph, Gen. 45. 1, 3. POLICIE LIX. Gradations necessary to bee ob∣served. IN those relations which you feare may procure danger of Passion in those to whom it is imparted; first apologize for the qualification, and let your pre∣face be such, as may diminish the occasion of Passion: and this is to cast on water, before you kin∣dle the fire. Thus, Joseph fearing that his Bre∣thren might gro afraid upon the discovery beginnes, Be not grieved nor angry with your selves, that yee sold me hither, Gen. 45. 5.
POLICIE LX. Not to bee too credulous in matters unexpected. IN businesse of wonder and un∣expected event bee not too cre∣dulous, till there bee testimony sufficient to convince your faith: it is healthfull for any to rise up early and betimes, but to faith and credulity. Thus, Jacob was not confident of the newes his Sonnes told of Joseph till hee saw the waggons which Jo∣seph had sent to carry him, Gen 45, 26, 27. POLICIE LXI. Humble words doe humble the heart. VVHen there is a remove of any thing, which hath beene cause of the continu∣ance
of some favours to you, re∣new your obligation with the best and most seasonable circum∣stance you have, and this is Phe∣nix like, when one advantage is quickened out of the ashes of another. Thus, Josephs Brethren fearing when their Father was dead, Joseph might change towards them, fll downe at his feet, and said, Wee be thy Servants, Gen. 50. 18. POLICIE LXII. Pharaoh delt cruelly with Stran∣gers. IF any aliens or forraigners multiply and grow numerous and potent besides you, you may have a vigilant eye upon them, though you need not goe so farre as Pharaoh did, to afflict them; it is a pretty cunning to looke to
your selfe, with having your eyes upon others. Thus, Pharaoh did wisely in saying Behold the People of Israel, but too cruelly in saying, Let us deale wise∣ly with them least they multiply, Exod. 1. 9. 10. POLICIE LXIII. Opportunity is a necessary Servant. IF you desire to bee entertained in some occasion, waite not at too much distance, but study to be opportunely, (but let it seeme) accidentally present, this is to fall into the lap of imployment while it lies spread. Thus, When the Sister had a desire to interpose her selfe in any thing which might happen to the childe Moses, She stood a farre off, yet so as to wit what was done, Ex. 2. 4.
POLICIE LXIV. Curtesie requited with curtesie. IF you would obtaine courtese and favour, shew your selfe first eminent in the like respects, and they will invite a returne of their like, and as quoy favours bring home more of their kinde to you. Thus, Moses in curtesie aided Midi∣ans daughter against the Shep∣heards and drew them water for their flocke, and Midian said, Where is he? Call him that hee may eate bread, Ex. 2. 19: 20. POLICIE LXV. Refresh mens faintings for your profit. WHen you finde you have be∣nefit by the industry and labour of auy, have respect to supply and refresh their fain∣tings
and decaies, for what goes from you thus, issues but like a vapour from the earth, to fall backe upon you with advantage. Thus, The People got Victory as long as Moses hands were lift up when they were heavy, they tooke a stone and put it under him, and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, Ex. 17. 12. POLICIE LXVI. Wisedome to comfort as much as we can. IN great complaints and mur∣murings of People by rea∣son of grievances, it is wisdome if you cannot supply their de∣sires, yet to solace and comfort and addulce their afflictions, which act is a degree of redresse to the misery. Thus, When the people grieved for the
bitternesse of the waters of Marah, though Moses could not bring them to other Fountaines and streames, yet cast in a tree into the waters and made them sweet, Ex. 15. 25. POLICIE LXVII. Secresie the onely requisite in mana∣ging designes. IN the carriage of Designes, closenesse and secrecy are the onely requisites, for you should have the light of a project; like a tapour in a darke lanthorne, that it may not shed a beame, through any chincke of report to betray it selfe to suspition, and discovery, but onely shine to your selfe and your complotters. Thus, God set the Pillar which was in the Desart betwixt the Israelites and the Egyptians, And it was a Cloud and darknesse to them, but gave light to those, Ex. 14. 20.
POLICIE LXVIII. Remoras to hinder your Enemies Designes. IF you suspect or know your ad¦versary hath a plot upon you, let your first care be to retard and stay the speed of it, and inject a delay to it, till you have time to disperse and defeat it more com∣pleatly, these are commaes and halfe periods to his proceedings, and this bringing in of a paren∣thesis of your owne Designes, puts his project about till you gaine ground on him. Thus, God when he saw the chariots of Pharaoh in such haste to pursue the Israelites, tooke off their chariot wheeles that they drave them hea∣vily, Ex. 14. 24. 25.
POLICIE LXIX. Gods wisedome in leading his people WHen you have any instru∣ments or agents whom you imploy in businesse of some∣thing harsh consequence, and that you suspect their zeales and service in the cause, if they should finde it unsavory or vexing, lead them downe the most faire and even pathes you can project, and keepe the worst of it from sight, and thus like Japhet you draw a garment betwixt the eye and the nakednesse. Thus, When God brought the people from Egypt, he would not lead them through the Land of the Philistines, least, sayes he, per adventure the peo∣ple repent when they see warre, Ex. 13. 17.
POLICIE LXX. Princes are to have under-magi∣strates to helpe and ease them. FOr a Ruler or States-man or a Grandee of businesse, it is the best both in regard of their owne particular ease, and the more expedite dispatch of busi∣nesse, and more methodicall forme of proceeding to dispose of petty imploiments, to assi∣stants and surrogates, and this is as if others should put their shoulders to the weight of your businesse. Thus, Jethro Moses Father in Law advised, when he saw him sit Iudge alone, in such a throng of businesse, Thou wilt surely weare away, for this thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to performe it thy selfe alone, Ex. 18. 13. 21.
POLICIE LXXI. Superiours are not to be long absent from their People. BE not too long out of pre∣sence where your authority is awfull, necessary, and honou∣red, for there may soone follow a revolt upon your-with-draw∣ing; like the Aire, which if the Sunne with-draw the light and influence, fals from the allegiance it bore to brightnesse, into ob∣scurity and darkenesse. Thus, When Moses was absent-from the People, and was in the Mount, they said, Make us gods; for this Moses we know not what is become of him, Ex. 32. 1, 2.
POLICIE LXXII. How to behave ones selfe to his guest. AT times of great invitati∣ons and solemnities, when many are called to your table, it is in you to shew your selfe sweet and gracious, and to present your selfe with a cleare face, that your lookes may bee the Chrystall to your disposition; it is a sinne a∣gainst hospitality to open your doores and shut up your counte∣nance, Habere ostium apertum, vultum clausum, when thou hast done all thy office, take thy place that thou maist bee merry with them, Eccl. 32. 2. Thus, God appeared to the people, from a place, as it had beene the body of Heaven, in his clearenesse, and the people saw God, sayes the verse, and did eate and drinke, Ex. 24 10, 11.
POLICIE LXXIII. What is the best posture for great∣nesse to walke in. HUmility is the best posture for greatnesse and honour to walke in, and the more neare you are to your inferiour, the more deare and applauded: there∣fore to doe this, let not your height and greatnesse alwayes appeare, but sometimes show∣ded in obscurity; Starres twinkle most in their greatest height. Thus, The Mount was a good example, For the Glory of the Lord abode on it, and yet a Cloud covered it sixe dayes, Ex. 24. 16.
POLICIE LXXIV. Princes when they should appeare terrible. MAgistrates and Princes in place and occasion, should appeare awfull and terrible, of∣fences are often put out of coun∣tenance and confidence, when the eyes of Justice shoote lighte∣ning and revenge in the face of them. Thus, In the eyes of the Children of Israel, the sight of the Glory of the Lord was like devouring Fire, on the top of the Mount, Ex. 24. 17. POLICIE LXXV. Princes in their absence are to sub∣stitute fit persons in their places. IF you bee in authority and by chance importuned to remove, be wise in the disposing and pac∣king
up your affaires; I meane, leave not things disordered and confused, but doe as God did with Moses, take part of your spirit of authority and put it up∣on some that are resident. Thus, When Moses was called from the people into the Mount, hee said Aaron and Hur are with you, if any man have any matters to doe, Ex. 24. 14. POLICIE LXXVI. To send good intelligence abroad. IN the charge and advise for in∣telligence, be very acurate and punctuall, and the relations which are returned accordingly shall doe your Designe more ser∣vice; Blles come backe as they are racketted from you. Thus, When Moses sent out his Spies
for Canaan, See (sayes hee) the land and the people, whether they be strong or weake, few or many, what cities they dwell in, whether in tents or strong holds, Numb. 1. 18, 19. POLICIE LXXVII. How to becalme a mutiny. IN any commotion or mutiny labour to becalme it, with faire deprecations and plausible reasons which may superinduce a contrary opinion to that they are perswaded on; this is to stroke a fury, and fawne upon a frowne, and smile a discontent into fa∣vour. Thus, When the people mutined because of the false report, Moses and Aaron fell downe upon their faces before all the Assembly, saying, the Land is an exceeding good Land, Numb. 14. 5. 7.
POLICIE LXXVIII. Innovation dangerous. FAll not into any humour of Innovation or Change too suddenly, neither recant from a∣ny thing, you interest your selfe in, too inconsiderately; in these actions, let your motion bee like the shadow upon Ahaz Diall, and goe backe by degrees. Thus, When God pretended hee would mite the people that instant for nurmuring, and make a greater Nation, Moses perswaded him the action would bee scandalous to the Heathen, the Nations will speake, &c. Numb. 14, 15.
POLICIE LXXIX. Discontent a kind of plurisie which must be speedily remedied. IN universall murmurings and mutinies, labour the remedy, and supply without delay, com∣mon people are suddaine and im∣patient in their passions, and their discontent is a kinde of Plurisie, which must have speedy redresse, or the disease is mortall. Thus, When the people complained in the Desart for water, Moses and Aaron without stay went and fell downe on their faces to God, and he bid them, Strike the Rocke for wa∣ter, Numb. 20. 6. 11.
POLICIE LXXX. How to behave ones selfe in a strange Country. WHen you are to make use of any thing, where an∣other hath property, seeke to contract faire quarter, for your present advantage, and let your arguments for persuasion bee pertinent, and materiall, and in∣ducing; hee that rides other cir∣cuits for execution of his designe, is out of his way, or else goes a farther way about. Thus, Moses being to passe by the king of Edom, sent to him, saying, God hath heard our voice and brought us from Egypt, let us passe through thy country, wee will not drinke of thy water, nor turne to the right▪ hand nor left, Numb. 20. 16, 17.
POLICIE LXXXI. Places of Authority not to be long vacant. WHen Places of Autho∣rity are likely to bee va∣cant, bee ready in project with a successour, long inter-reynums or interstices in goverment is the Winter and ill Season of a State, where the nights are long, and the dayes short. Thus, Aaron being ready to die, Moses even then tooke Eleazar and strip∣ped Aaron of his garment and put them upon Eleazar his Sonne, Numb. 20. 28. POLICIE LXXXII. Praises and promises great in∣ducements. IF you would prevaile with any for some experiments of the fa∣culty
they excell in, you may induce themby promises, and advancing the report of their skill and ability, and this is a kind of tu∣ning an instrument for your hand, or with Moses a blowing into the Silver Trumpet to make it sound. Thus, Balak though a wicked Prince did well in his act upon Balaam, he sent him rewards, and Come now sayes hee, for I wote, he whom thou blessest is blessed, Numb. 22. 6▪ 7. POLICIE LXXXIII. Apply thy selfe to God on a designe for successe. I know no better Policy in the preface or entrance upon a de∣signe, then to apply your selfe to God, for successe and direction, or for declining your heart from it if it be not convenient; This is to goe to the first Mover for a motion.
Thus, Wicked Balaam was imitable in this action, Tarry ye, sayes he, that I may know what the Lord will say▪ Numb. 22. 19. POLICIE LXXXIV. A threefold cord is not easily broken HE that would draw any in∣to assistance or other com∣plot, shall obtaine soonest by of∣fers of interest in the cause, and by propounding such respects, as you thinke may sute the dispo∣sition of the parties or agents, and by solliciting, by persons of fame and quality; and such a threefold cord is not easily bro∣ken. Thus, The methode of Balaks policy, was good and sound, for hee sent to Balaam Princes more honourable, with this Language, I will promote thee, Numb. 22. 15, 17.
POLICIE LXXXV. Not to be too importunate. IF you observe any obstructi∣on, or aversenesse, or stopping in your businesse, presse not for∣ward with too much violence, but take time, to spruce the fea∣thers of your industry, that you may flie more roundly to the marke. Thus, Balaam did unwisely to spurre on his Asse, when his Asse made a stand, for the Angell said, I went out to withstand thee, and had shee not turned, I had slaine thee, Numb. 22. 32, 33. POLICIE LXXXVI. Severall wayes to be tried in a bu∣sinesse. IN the thing you would have to succeed, make triall of all the severall advantages you see open,
for there are more wayes than one into a City, and some Po∣sternes may be open, though the foregates be shut. Thus, Balak (had his action beene law∣full) tooke a wise course, for he said to the Prophet, Come I pray thee unto another place, Num. 23. 13, 27 POLICIE LXXXVII. Publique grace is to be shewne unto Successours. IF you would have your succes∣sour inherit your eminency and respect after you, derive to him betimes some publique grace which may bee a kinde of initia∣tion or pre-instalment, these whom wee would have members of a Visible Church, we baptize and dip. Thus, Moses before he aied tooke Jo∣shua,
and laid his hand upon him, and set him before Eleazar the Priest, and before all the Congre∣gation, and gave him a charge in their sight, Numb. 27. 18, 19. POLICIE LXXXVIII. Dangerous to follow the counsell of of an Enemy. IF you be upon the heights and battlement of honour or fame, and envied, suspect any that would draw you to partake of their iniquities, with pretence of society, or privilege of fami∣liarity, or other allurement, for there is no practice so devillish as that, for when envy sees you seated in security, and that you are even shot-free and enchanted in a blessed condition, she knowes there is no way to make you for∣feit that eminency sooner than by betraying you to sinne; hee that would have another con∣demned with himselfe, must
draw him first into the same guilt. Thus, The Children of Israel, through the counsell of Balaam committed trespasse against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a Plague among the Congregation of the Lord, Numb. 31. 16. POLICIE LXXXIX. Memorials to be made of good suc∣cesses. IF you would preserve the me∣mory of any attempt or suc∣cesse, raise such memorials as may traduce an impression to posterity, and bee a kinde of re∣gister to the action. Thus, Joshuah charged the people to beare twelve stones out of Jordan, and to set them up, saying, That this may bee a Signe among you, Josh. 4. 6, 8.
POLICIE XC. When to make conditions with ad∣vantage. WHen you have any at ad∣vantage, consider well, and make your owne faire termes and doe not omit and fall after∣wards into the complaint of Ib, Oh that I were as in moneths past. Thus, Rahab delt wisely with the spies, for while they were in her power, shee said, Sweare unto me that you will also show kindnesse to my fa∣thers house, Josh. 2. 12. POLICIE XCI. When and what Spies are to be sent abroad. WHen you are to make any onset in a businesse of of Controversie, send out some observation to espy, and bring
you intelligence, how your ad∣versary continues, and in what forme of resolution, for GOD often beginnes the successe at home in their owne hearts, either by feare or resolution. Thus, Joshua sent out Spies, who re∣turned with this, Truly the Lord hath delivered them into our hands, for all the Inhabitants doe faint be∣cause of us, Josh. 2. 1. 14. POLICIE XCII. Remember God and his Cove∣nant in affliction. IT is divine wisedome in any time when affliction is heavy and grievous, to remember God of his Covenant, hee hath made with his, and to enter a new Co∣venant of Sacrament with him; this is to strike a new bargaine for a blessing.
Thus, When Joshua had done circum∣cumcising the people, This day sayes God, I have rolled away the reproach from Israel, Josh. 5. 8, 9. POLICIE XCIII. A bright Sunne in a Winter mor∣ning. IN the most faire and comple∣mentall action of your adver∣sary, suspect the most: a bright Sunne in a Winter morning, is but a faire apology to a foule day. Thus, They of Jericho were vaine, when they thought Israel could doe the least harme, while they onely walked about their city, Josh. 6. 1.
POLICIE XCIV. Examination of ones selfe in time of affliction. WHen you observe in your proceedings any unhap∣py event or unusuall failing, bee inquisitive into your selfe, if some trespasse or failing with God, hath not occasioned it; hee that goes on without this care, is like a man wounded in the heate of fight, and because hee feeles not his bleeding, even faints, while he neglects to stanch it. Thus, When Joshua saw the children of Israel could not stand before their Enemies, said, there is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, up, san∣ctifie your selves, Josh. 7. 13.
POLICIE XCV. A diversion is a stratagem in war. IF you would prevaile upon your adversary in a businesse, and you thinke hee prepares too strongly to bee opposed by any force or endeavour of yours, cre∣ate something which may make him some worke elsewhere, and draw part of his care and strength to it, then apply your selfe to a way, which may bee least suspe∣cted to him, and where hee may be most weake for resistance; and this is to make him retaile those forces by parcels, he intended to bring in whole upon you. Thus, Joshua sent some to lie in waite behind the city, and I and the people will approach▪ sayes he, till we have drawne them from the city, then yee shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon it, Josh. 8. 4▪ 6, 7.
POLICIE XCVI. Looke asquint in dangers. BE not too fixt nor intent up∣on what is before you or in your eye, but looke asquint into your considerations and about you: dangers and assaults may come from other parts, and flow in like a Tide, where there is the greatest cracke in the wall. Thus, The men of Ai perisht, for they looked not backe till they saw, And behold the smoake of the city ascen∣ded, Josh. 8. 20. POLICIE XCVII. Not to be too credulous. WHen your condition is such, as admits easily of advantages and stratagems which may bee plotted, bee jealous over the most honest and vertuous pre∣tences;
Doe yee looke, sayes Paul, on things after the outward ap∣pearance? Thus, Joshua was unadvised to give credit to the old bottles and shoes of the Gibeonites, and they knew too with what Nation they made a league, for the Princes said, we have sworne, now therefore wee cannot touch them, Josh. 9. 6, 13, 19. POLICIE XCVIII. Diligence in a just proportion to Enemies flying and hidden. IN your pursute of affaires when you have such as are unequall in their natures, yet by circum∣stance may prove alike; let your diligence bee in just proportion to both, like a Wheele which carries about the Spokes, and les∣ser pinnes with like motion; else f you dispose your selfe une∣qually, that where you are most
remisse and negligent, may winne ground to your injury. Thus, When it was told Joshua the five Kings are found in a cave, he bid rewle stones upon the mouth, yet stay not but pursue after your Ene∣mies, Josh. 10. 17, 18, 19. POLICIE XCIX. Strike the iron while it is hot. IF you have a sute or request to make▪ when time and place sug∣gests fitnesse and season, apply your selfe, it is like setting on the seale while the waxe is warme. Thus, When the children of Israel were dividing the Land, Caleb comes to Joshua, Now give mee, sayes hee this Mountaine whereof the Lord spake, Josh. 14. 5, 12.
POLICIE C. When the time is to dismisse Con∣federates. THose you take into confede∣racy and aide with you in a∣ny attempt, and have but for tem∣porary servants, suffer them not to depart, till you have compleatly finished, or disposed other wayes what you intend, while the Sun with his heate keepes up a vapour in the aire, it wites there upon the day▪ but if hee withdraw and dismisse it, so that it fall upon earth, it is not easily gathered and exhaled againe. Thus, Joshua till the Israelites had won the Land, would not send away the Reubenites and their company, but then calles, And now returne yee and get yee unto your tents, Josh. 22. 1, 4.
POLICIE CI. Ecclesiasticall persons fit for em∣bassage in matters of Religion. IN businesse of embassage or other convenient affaire, which concernes Religion, employ some of holy Orders and place, the presence of such ever commands reverence and respect, and it is to them, as if GOD appeared by Proxey. Thus, Joshua when hee heard the Reu∣benites, built an Altar and suspe∣cted their Idolatry, Sent Phineas the Sonne of Eleazar the Priest, and ten Princes, Josh. 22. 12, 13. POLICY CII. Not to be rash in judgement. BE not rash to expostulate and suspect upon every rumour, least your conjecture sand surmi∣ses
befoole you, finding no cause for them any where extant and visible, but in your owne opinion; Multi aliis jus peccandi suspicando fecerunt. Thus, The princes of Israel hearing of the Reubenites Altar, hasten to re∣buke their Idolatry, but it was, say they, Nor for Burnt-offerings, nor sacrifice, but that it might be a wit∣nesse, Josh. 22. 14, 15, 26, 27. POLICY CIII. How to try those whom you suspect. IF you would try the syncerity and faithfulnesse of any, put them upon that you suspect their faith most fraile in, and soonest perswaded by from obedience and respect; this is to spread a bait and allurement in the face of an∣others vertue.
Thus, God seated the Israelites among the Canaanites, Take eed (sayes Joshua) therefore to your selves, Josh. 23. 11. POLICY CIV. How to contrive a memoriall. IF you feare your distance and discontinuance may cause any privilege or relation you desire should continue in fresh title to be forgotten, contrive such a me∣moriall as may serve in stead of a conservatory, and this is to make signes to posterity of your mea∣ning. Thus, Least there should in after times grow a strangensse betwixt the Reubenites and the Israelites▪ b∣a Jordan was betwixt them▪ T   A for a witnesse, Josh▪ 22▪ 10▪ 26.
POLICIE CV. The way to cut off deliberations for objection. IF you have a sute to any with whom you thinke it difficulty to speed, come upon them unex∣pectedly; asuddaīne surprisall quickens the party you are to deale with to attention, and cuts off deliberation for objections. Thus, When Ehud would have killed Eglon the King of Moab, and fea∣red hee should want opportunity, h turned againe hastily and said, I have a secret errand to thee O King, Judg. 3. 19. POLICIE CVI. The way to extinguish a faction or tumult. THe way to extinguish a fa∣ction or tumult, is to labour
at the head or Prince of it, and if you speed there, be quicke and suddaine with the rest, and you shall succeed with more ease and dispatch; such alacrity puts di∣straction and astonishment into your adversaries, and your haste retards them. Thus, When Ehud had slaine the King of Moab, he came suddainly downe with the Israelites and said, Follow me, the Lord hath delivered your Enemies into your hands, and slew at that time ten thousand, Judg. 3. 27, 28. POLICIE CVII. To watch soberly the convenient time for an Action. LEt not your zeale or ferven∣cy in affection to a cause, push you into any unseasonable ingagement, but soberly watch the most convenient time and
season, else you over-runne op∣portunity, and ride poste thither, where a flower pace would doe more service. Thus, Gideon would not pull downe the Altar of Baal by day, for hee feared his fathers houshold and the men of the city, but hee did it by night, Judg. 6. 27. POLICIE CVIII. Stratagems done by night and by scattered forces. IN military stratagems the onset by night hath most advantage, and by scattered forces more than single and intire brunts or skirmishes, for the darknesse and dispersion causes an apprehension in your enemy, that your forces are more by the report from so many parts, and if your plot bee opposite in quality to the present darknesse, it causes more terrour
and feare, and if suddaine in the first discovery, it amazes the more. Thus, Gideon plotted upon his Enemy, hee dispersed his companies gave each his Trumpet, his Pitcher with a Lampe in it, and they must fall by night upon them, with noise brea∣king their pitchers, and crying, The sword of God and Gideon,  Judg. 7. 16, 18, 20, 21. POLICIE CIX. A gentle soft answer pacifieth an∣ger. WHen the indignation of great persons is kindled against you, meete them with such language and behaviours, as may interpret and insinuate their power; for that is secret incanta∣tion or charme to the spirits of great persons, and it is a victory to have their power acknowled∣ged:
—Satis est potuisse videri. Thus, When the princes of Ephraim chide with Gideon for his victory, he answered, Is not the gleanings of Ephraim, better than the vintage of Abiezer, and what am I in com∣parison of you? then their anger abated, Judg. 8. 1, 2, 3. POLICIE CX. How to detract from ones selfe mo∣destly. WHen you have much at∣tributed to you, detract from your selfe modestly and de∣voutly, and referre it over to di∣vine Providence, which wise translation will bee a cause of a longer lived and more substanti∣all honour to you, hee that takes in God for a share shall have a su∣rer interest himselfe. Thus, When Israel said to Gideon,
Rule thou over us, for thou hast de∣livered us, hee said, I will not rule over you, Judg. 8, 22, 23. POLICIE CXI. How and when to value ones selfe. IF any have had a poore and undervaluing conceit of you, after some happy successe in any enterprise, labour by what emi∣nent proofe you can to convince their opinion, and exalt it, that they may in secret and with their owne bosomes recant their mistake, and entertaine more ho∣nourable thoughts of you, and this is to winne an Empire in that opinion which bore you no allegeance before. Thus, When the men of Succoth up∣braided Gideon with his weake∣nesse, he slew the two Kings of Mi∣dian, and shewed them, with be∣hold Zebah and Zalmannah,  Judg. 8. 15.
POLICIE CXII. What meanes a man may use aspi∣ring Principalities. IF you would commend your selfe to any place of eminency and popularity, which passes by vote and suffrage, make those your friends you thinke have most sway, and use such argu∣ments for your cause, as you con∣ceive fit and taking with their dispositions; the vulgar like ships in full saile are blowne on their way, by the breath of the great ones and more eminent amongst them. Thus, When Abimelech had a desire to raigne, hee spoke to his Mothers Brethren, That they should speake, and remember, sayes he, I am your bone and flesh, Judg. 9. 12.
POLICIE CXIII. Be not too confident upon good suc∣cesse. BE not too confiden d pre∣sumptuous and daring upon every sleight grace you receive, for it kindles and awakes jealou∣sies and feares, and cals dangers to you, and like the string of a musicall instrument, you tell a∣loud the fingers of them which touch you. Thus, When Gaal was a little graci∣ous with the men of Shechem, hee reviled the King Abimelech, then came Abimelech against him, and chased him that hee fled, Judg. 9. 28, 40.
POLICIE CXIV. How to behave your selfe towards your contemners. IF you have beene neglected by any, and thought superfluous, and after by the wheele of pro∣vidence become such, as you may stand them in place, bee dif∣ficult if they come after to solli∣cit you, and so your behaviour shall bee a corrective to their for∣mer insolence, and make you more gracious and acceptable, and in this the forme of expo∣stulation, will doe you service. Thus, When the Elders of Israel came to Jephtah, hee said, Did yee not hate me? and expell me? and why are yee come unto me now yee are in di∣stresse? Judg. 11. 7.
POLICIE CXV. How to behave your selfe to obtaine your desire. IF you be endeared to any, and have occasion to importune them to some thing you would have effected. First, observe when you are freshest in respect, for then the patient or friend is disposed to your hand and you need not pre∣pare him. Then observe to insinuate and let fall by the way, the want of affection which you shall have cause to suspect in the deniall. This is an argument impresses deepe, because your jealousie over a true friend respects that, of which hee desires to seeme least guilty, and therefore will labour to satisfie and release you from the opinion by friendly offices. Thus, When Sampsons Wife would
know the Riddle, shee said, Thou doest but hate mee, and lovest mee not, thou hast put forth a Riddle and hast not told me, Judg. 14. 16. POLICIE CXVI. How you may use circumlatory speeches. IF you see one importune you to discover some materiall se∣cret, especially if it bee such a one, as thinkes by the privilege of endearement to prevaile, dally with them by circulatory spee∣ches, runne them into a ring, and delude them merrily for their curiosity, let them observe you are not pleased they should en∣quire by deceiving them, nor much displeased, because you re∣ject them not directly and plainyl. Thus, When Dlilah was inquisitive of Sampson how hee might be bound, hee told her first with withes, then
with ropes, then with weaving his seven lockes, &c. Judg. 16. POLICIE CXVII. Neglect not faire advantages. IF you can make a faire depar∣ture for your advantage or fur∣ther benefit from the place or condition you are in, neglect not the opportunity, for as the Apo∣stle sayes divinely, It were better not to have knowne the way, than knowing it to turne, &c. Thus, When the Priest which was in Michaes house heard the Searchers say, Is it better for thee to bee a Priest to one mans house or to a Tribe? his heart was glad, and hee went in the middest of them, Judg. 18. 19, 20.
POLICIE CXVIII. Retiring is sometimes necessary. IF you have a greater and more mighty adverary, let not your passion sway you to any peremp∣tory resistance, but wisely for∣beare and keepe your sting to your selfe; hee that shewes him∣selfe fiery where his flame cannot touch, like lightening appeares onely in flash, but consumes no∣thing. Thus, When Micah saw they were too strong for him, hee wisely turned and went backe to his owne house, Judg. 18. 26. POLICIE CXIX. How to retaine one with hospitality IF you would retaine any in hospitality with you, deceive the time with harmelesse mirth
and entertainement, which may draw their attention, from being too much awake to observe their time and season of departure, else the stay is tedious and im∣portunes absence; hee that is spruce at this is like one that still beginnes new and fresh stories and sentences in his oration, whereby hee winnes time on his auditours. Thus, When the Levite and his Concu∣cubine came to their Fathers house, their Father stayed them, with Comfort your hearts, and tarry this night, and let your hearts be mer∣ry this night also, Judg. 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. POLICY CXX. Faire words moves more sometimes than rough threatnings. IF you have a friend offending and peccant, you may some∣times sooner winne him to a
good conversation and amend∣ment with faire entreaty, than severity and threatning, for this last course is as it were to com∣mit a rape in the act of refor∣mation, the first is like the Fable of Orpheus, to make him follow you with the musicke of your behaviour. Thus, When the Levites Concubine played the Whore, and went from him, her Husband went after her to speak friendly to her, Judg. 19. 2, 3. POLICY CXXI. Considerations in the time of mirth. IN your times of mirth it is wisedome before yee beginne the solemnity, to consider what occasions of errour you hazard by it, and to provide well for your safety, for when David was
playing on his Harpe, then Saul cast his Javelin at him. Thus, When the Daughters of Shiloh were dancing in dances, the Chil∣dren of Benjamin tooke every one his Wife, Judg. 21. 21. POLICY CXXII. When surprisals may be made. IF you have any surprisall to make, waite the time when those you deale with are most taken up and imployed, and especially in such actions, as put their imaginations and spirits into joy and alacrity, for then they are in a disposition most contrary to that which is re∣quisite for opposing you, and▪ for the present, their thoughts are as it were abroad in their plea∣sures, and when you fall upon them, they cannot come home
soone enough to themselves to make resistance. Thus, The Israelites advised the Chil∣dren of Benjamin, If the Daugh∣ters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ee and catch every man his Wife, Judg. 21. 20, 21. POLICY CXXIII. Ruths resolution toward, Naomi IF you would continue an ad∣herent to any, and not part society expresse your resolution in such Phrase as may speak your affection importunate and per∣emptory, such violence like faith in Scripture, workes miracles with a disposition that is encli∣ning. Thus, When Naomi heard Ruth, say∣ing, Where thou goest I will goe,
and where thou diest I will die, and saw her stedfastly minded, shee left speaking, Ruth. 1. 16, 18. POLICY CXXIV. To disclaime a grace with modesty. DIsclaime a grace, that is done you, with modesty, for such extenuation of your owne worth is the advancement of it in the eye of another, for humility hath this blessing at∣tending on it, the more it is lesse∣ned in its owne opinion, the more it is honoured in anothers, to bring forth your vertues in humility, is to powre out your Spikenard at Jesus feet. Thus, When Boaz  Ruth gleane in his field, she bowed and said, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take notice of me, Ruth 2. 8, 10.
POLICIE CXXV. A way to be knowne by some good occasion. IF you desire to bee made knowne to any by some sober occasion, observe where you see there is notice soonest taken, and where the presence of you is soonest discovered, and seeme to bee there rather by chance than on purpose; Philip must bee made knowne to the Eunuch, and therefore GOD set him in the way to Gaza. Thus, Ruth had a desire to be knowne to Boaz, and shee went to gleane eares of Corne after him, so I shall finde grace, sayes she, Ruth. 2. 2.
POLICY CXXVI. Bestow favours with a gracious neglect. IF you have to deale with mo∣dest parties, who perhaps would blush to be thought guilty of desert, wanting the boldnesse to manage their owne worth, bestow your favours with a gra∣cious neglect, yet let your neg∣lect be such as may make a signe it was done on purpose; looke like Christ, who though hee would stay at Emaus, yet set his countenance to goe further. Thus, When Boaz saw Ruth gleaning, hee said to his young men, Let her gleane, and let fall some of the handfuls on purpose for her, Ruth 2. 15, 16.
POLICIE CXXVII. How to dispatch a businesse. WHen you have a businesse you would dispatch with any with whom you feare put-offs and shifts, apprehend him suddainly and unexpected, when hee is least provided to ob∣ject, and draw some into the conference, for men are desicous in publike to discharge them∣selves fairely of that which in private they will shift, for they say in their hearts then, as the wicked man in the Psalme, God will never see it. Thus, When Boaz had businesse with Naomies kinsman, hee called him to sit downe, and he tooke ten men of the Elders, and said, sit ye downe, and then he said unto the kinsman, Ruth 4. 1, ▪ 3.
POLICIE CXXVIII. An attempt of comquest in a pro∣vident way. IN attempts of conquest spie out and informe your selfe first, whether they be such as are well lawed and disciplined, or care∣lesse and disordered, and whe∣ther secure or provident, if you observe these defects, you may promise better successe, the Ene∣my came with his ares in the Gospell, when all were asleepe. Thus, The Spies of Dan found them at Lsh, how they dwelt carelesse, quiet and secure, and there was no Magistrate, Judg. 18. 2. 7. POLICI CXXIX. Bribery in a Magistrate scanda∣lous. IF you would live honoured and obeyed in your Magistra∣cy,
forbeare corruption and bri∣bery, which betraies you to scandall and dislike with the people, and hee that is guilty of offence in his place, can never proceed with that cleare confi∣dence which is required in Au∣thority, therefore Salomon sayes of the righteous, they are bold as a Lion. Thus, When Samuels Sonnes turned after lucre and tooke bribes, the Elders of Israel said to Samuel, Thy Sonnes walke not in thy wayes, 1 Sam. 8 3, 4. POLICIE CXXX. Resist not a popular opinion with violence. WHere you see a popular opinion forward and vi∣olent, resist it not with violence, but decline it with faire and sweet perswasion, Bees are best
tinckled together when they rise, and a little musicke from David will soonest perswade the evill spirit in Saul. Thus, When the people were earnest with Samuel for a King, God bid him hearken to them, yet to tell them what a King he shall be, that will take their Sonnes for his cha∣riots, 1 Sam. 8. 7, 9, 11. POLICIE CXXXI. How to predispose a man to favour him. WHen you sollicit any of honorable parts or place for some curtesie or favour, pre∣sent something which may pre∣dispose him better towards you; A mans gift, saies Solomon, ma∣keth roome for him. Prov. 18. 16. Thus, When Saul and his Servant were
to intreat direction of the man of God, What (sayes hee) shall wee bring the man? what have wee? 1 Sam. 9. 7. POLICIE CXXXII. Disasters are to bee delivered with prudence. IN your relation of any busi∣nesse or disaster of sad and great equality, doe not deliver it in too suddaine and plaine nar∣ration, for so a misfortune is presented too like it selfe, and becomes more dangerous and desperate to the auditour, or him it concernes, and such a messen∣ger is like one of Iohs Servants, I also am escaped to tell thee. Thus, When the Messengers told Eli abruptly that his two Sonnes were dead and the Arke of God taken, he fell from his seat and died 1 Sam . 17▪ 18▪
POLICIE CXXXIII. Honour Gods mercy with a memo∣riall. IT is divine Policie to observe any notable favour or mercy GOD bestowes on you, and to honour it with a memoriall, which is the thankfulnesse or re∣cognition of the creature to the Creatour, God stickes most be∣nefits there where hee sees them fixt; you know he set most starres in the Firmament. Thus, When Samuel had got a victory over the Philistines, he tooke a stone and set it up saying, Hitherto hath the Lord helped us, 1 Sam. 7. 12. POLICIE CXXXIV. To prepare a man with a preface to receive good newes. IF you bee to discharge a relati∣on which conteines some un∣expected
and happy conditions to an inferiour and dejected per∣son, first let fall such language as may a little dispose his spirits for dilation, and diffusion, and so prepare him that hee receive it moderately and safely; That cloud does well that shootes a bright admonition of lighte∣ning before a thunder-clap. Thus, When Samuel was to annoint Saul King of Israel, first hee scat∣ters this, On whom is all the desire of Israel, is it not on thee? then he places him above all his Guests, 1 Sam. 9. 20, 21. POLICIE CXXXV. A preface in matter of disswasion. WHen you are bound to performe any thing you see inconvenient, use some pre∣face of dehortation and diswa∣sion at the very moment of per∣formance,
in making these often experiments you may by chance soften them thus into a recanta∣tion,—non vi sed saepe cadendo. Thus, When Samuel had bound him∣selfe to annoint them a King, yet at the very time of solemnity, hee sayes, yee have rejected God, and said, nay, but set a King over us, 1 Sam. 10. 19. POLICIE CXXXVI. Not to take notice of every neglect and injury. WHen you are entered into any popular grace and credit, take not any notice of every neglect and injury, for so you discover your selfe too ten∣der and apprehensive of your ho∣nour you enjoy, which thing will soone create you contempt in your lookers on; those thoughts are troublesome and
vexing to their owners, which like briers catch at every thing which touches them, and like the thicket on mount Moriah, which held that Ramme by the hornes which pushed it. Thus, When Saul was annointed King, the children of Belial despised him, but he wisely held his peace, 1 Sam. 10. 26. POLICY CXXXVII. How to make Subjects feare their King. IF you would worke upon the affections of the people, and superinduce a passion of feare; you may doe it by similitude and representation. GOD made his Prophet carry forth his stuffe and eate his meate with trem∣bling in the sight of the people, to signifie the misery hee would bring upon them.
Thus, When Saul would feare the men of Iabesh, he tooke a yoke of Oxen and hewed them in pieces, and sent them, thus shall it bee done to his Oxen who will not come, 1 Sam. 11. 7. POLICY CXXXVIII. If a King will not spare his Sonne, much lesse his Subjects. IF you bee to doe something of popular respect, and continue doubtfull how it will take, being there are many opinions to bee reconciled, first disperse it by sleight rumor, and as you observe them affected, you may proceed or forbeare, it is good playing a lesson of experiment before you shew your art upon a Lute in publike. Thus, When Saul saw there was a fire
amongst the people because God an∣swered not, hee told the people, if it were in Jonathan his Sonne hee should die, but there was not a man answered o that, 1 Sam. 14. 38, 39. POLICY CXXXIX. How to move commiseration in a fact of ignorance. IF you would move commise∣ration and pitie, when the pu∣nishment you are to suffer ex∣ceeds the fact, extenuate your fault in your best art, and make your clause in a smoothe aggra∣vation of what you are to suffer. Thus, Jonathan being condemned to die, said, I did but taste a little ho∣ney with the end of my rod, and loe I must die, so the people rescued Jo∣nathan, that he died not, 1 Sam. 14. 43, 45.
POLICY CXL. Ill report must not discourage from good actions. IN businesse of great enterprise and consequence, if you feele your spirit excited to it, doe not suffer your selfe amated or put backe by the ill reports or de∣tractions or envies of others; these are but the stormes which ill dispositions raise to blow you from sea, and your adventure, and if you resist the dispositions which warme your spirit, for the action, you may become guilty in a proportion of quen∣ching the spirit. Thus, When David was stirred up to fight against the Philistin, and heard his Brethren say, Wee know thy pride, and the haughtinesse of thy heart, he went on, and said, is there not a cause? 1 Sam. 17. 28. 29
POLICY CXLI. When a man may praise himselfe. WHen you are to be engaged in imploiment, and your abilities are doubted and questi∣oned, and therefore you are scru∣peld at, make a modest relation of your owne worth in some experiments you have made and succeeded in, least your silence make you suspected and negle∣cted; David said, when hee kept silence his bones waxed old, as though for want of speaking he had done himselfe injurie. Thus, When David was questioned by Saul, Thou art not able to goe a∣gainst this Philistin, thou art but a Youth, David said, There came a Lion to the Flocke, and I smote him, 1 Sam. 17: 33, 34, 35.
POLICIE CXLII. We may doe a man wrong in prai∣sing him over much. IF you desire to keepe the fame of some eminent friend entire, after any generall expressions of applause and acclamations of credit conferred upon him, for∣beare to publish them in too much formality, such language doth conjure up spirits of envie and detraction, ther fore when Christ did a miracle, hee would often say, See you speake it to no man, and when hee had appeared in the glory of his Transfigura∣tion, he charged them not to tell what they had seene. Thus, The cause which moved Saul to hate David, was, Saul hath slaine his thousands, but David his ten thousands, 1 Sam. 18. 8.
POLICIE CXLIII. When a man may deface himselfe in accepting of favours. BEe not too meeting, and seeme not too hasty in ac∣cepting graces and favours, for you ravish that which would come with consent at the season intended, and it is like the pluc∣king off a curtsey in the bud and blossome, before it be ripened in the purpose of him that bestowes it; and such early setting forth makes your desert become more guilty, than perhaps there is cause. Thus, When Saul told David he should bee his Sonne in Law, Who am I▪ saies hee, or my Fathers Family? and when hee was sollicited againe, hee said, I am a poore man and lightly esteemed, yet after, it pleased David to bee the Kings Sonne in Law, 1 Sam, 18. 18, 20, 25.
POLICIE CXLIV. An expostulation with an inno∣cent confidence. WHen there is any wrath or indignation entertai∣ned against you, which you may suspect, created and fed by the private whispers of any, take the advantage of presenting your selfe with an innocent confi∣dence▪ especially if you can make use of any occasion wherein it may appeare, you have forborne, where you might have offended, and beene gracious, where you might have beene grievous. Thus, David having got Sauls speare, and water-pot from his blster while he slept, shewed them for a witnesse of his mercy to him, and Saul said, I have sinned, 1 Sam. 26. 12, 21.
POLICIE CXLV. Obligations may bee intimated to move the affections. IF you would request favours of any who have been obliged to you, expresse smoothly what obligations they are bound in to you, for though there be no pro∣pension towards you, yet to dis∣charge the Conscience of grati∣tude something may be done. Thus, When David sent youg men to Nabal for supply, Say, Thy Shep∣heards which were with us we hurt them not, neither was ought missing unto them, wherefore give I pray thee, 1 Sam. 25. 5, 6, 7.
POLICIE CXLVI. Prudent Abigail saveth her Hus∣band and her whole Family. IF you observe a returne of re∣spects is expected and deman∣ded out of duty, and that you are over-awed by any churlish inhumane condition, doe by stealth and in private what you intend; like the Snne, when it it is barred out of doore, steales in a beame through a chinke or crannie. Thus, When Nabal would send David nothing, Abigail tooke bottles of wine and parched Corne, and mt David, but shee told not her Hus∣band, 1 Sam. 25. 17. 18, 19.
POLICIE CXLVII. Abigails apology for her selfe. IF you feare you shall receive a hard measure for the ill de∣meanures of another, and none of your owne demerit, appease it by early apology and intercession, and sprinkle your water before the fire kindle. Thus, Abigail hasted to meet David, and bowed, and said, I thy band∣maid saw not the young men whom thou didst send, 1 Sam. 25. 23, 25. POLICIE CXLVIII. Faithfulnesse is not to bee broke by false suggestions. IF you have given your faith or promise to any, and desires to keepe it cleare from violation, and knowes your nature and disposition such as is easily stir∣red
up to make a forfeit, keepe your selfe sht to all tales and suggestions, and let not your eare bee warmed by the breath of a tale-bearer: even the least sparke which fals upon such tin∣der will fire it. Thus, When Saul had given his faith to David to assure a truce, the Zi∣phites came and said, Doth hee not hide himselfe in the hill? then Saul arose and went downe, 1 Sa. 26. 1, 2 POLICIE CXLIX. Be not too secure in correspondency with areconciled Enemy. NEver bee too secure in the correspondence of a recon∣ciled Enemy, and being such an one who hath broken his faith before, for though hee hath dis∣covered passion and sorrow for the time, yet it is like the spiri∣tuall sorrow, the dint is not so
powerfull nor hath so much effi∣cacy to restraine from, after occa∣sions of sinning and offending. Thus, Saul having often broke with David, David said in his heart, I shall now prish one day by the hand of Saul,  1 Sam. 27. 1. POLICIE CL. Saul disquited wisely, though the businesse wicked. IF you thinke your owne naked presence will bee any impedi∣ment or retardation to the busi∣nesse you desire, doe it by dis∣guise, if you may goe on safel and accurately, and this is to act your part in the darke. Thus, Saul did wisely though his busi∣nesse was wicked, hee went not to Endor like himselfe, but put on o∣ther ramnt, 1 Sam. 28. 8.
POLICIE CLI. When to avoid and passe by occasi∣ons of distaste. WHen you have drawne a∣ny of quality and might into your assitance, and th your strength consists in such a contribution, avoid all occasions of exceptions and distasts, and wisely passe by them, else you give them occasion to retire into the consideration of the engage∣ment you stand in towards them▪ and to project some course of withdrawing and translating their power where they hope for more advantage, and like the birds in the fable, each will chal∣lenge their feather and leave you naked. Thus, Ishbosheth was ▪ill advised to rebuke Abner for the Concubine, Have I not shewed kindnesse, saies he, to the house of Saul and to his
Brethren, and therefore as God hath sworne to David, even so I doe to him, 2 Sam. 3. 8, 9. POLICIE CLII. Not to trust a reconciled Enemy. BE not too confident in the emploiment of such as may doe favour to themselves, and make advantages from the things you interesse them in; like ill qualitied Hawkes which eate the Fowle themselves they should take for their master. Thus, The Philistines were wise in not taking David to battle with them, least say they, in the battle he be a Adversary to us, 1 Sam. 29. 4.
POLICIE CLIII. A discreet retiring where envy is. IF you perceive, and have no∣tice by any that you are not favored by those persons of emi∣nency you adhere to, take the admonition, and discreetly re∣tire; such a motion is but to draw backe your arrow, that you may shoote with more advantage af∣terward. Thus, Achish told David, The Lords favour thee not, and David rose early to depart, 1 Sam. 29. 6. 11. POLCIE CLIV. How to make use of advantage. WHen you have one upon faire and honest advan∣tage, make then your owne law∣full termes, for the necessitated party will bee a little prodigall
in consent to obtaine any pre∣sent redresse, and like a patient in his fit of griefe would part with all to the Physitian for some in∣stant remedie. Thus, David, when Abner sent to make league with him, said, well, but one thing I require, thou shalt not see my fce except thou bring Michal,  2 Sam. 3, 12, 13. POLICIE CLV. How to draw parties to adhere to you. IF you would draw parties to you and encrease adherents, be sure to negotiate with the best of a faction, and as friendly as you can, and move them with the next reasons at hand, hee that goes to worke with the rest or meanest is like one that prayes to Saints when there is a Sonne of God for his Advocate.
Thus, When Abner intended to bring David into the Kingdome, hee had Communication with the Elders of Israel, 2 Sam. 3. 17. POLICIE CLVI. How to conferre in signes and sig∣nifications. IF you would give private in∣telligence, fearing to trust the businesse to relation, invent some thing which may signifie so to your selves by your secret con∣federacy, and not be conjectured by any other, and this is to conferre in signes and significa∣tions. Thus, Jonathan and David agreed to mak knowne by arrowes how Saul was affected, now the La which gathered them knew not any thing, ut Jonathan and David knew the matter, 1 Sam. 20. 39.
POLICY CLVII. Not to passe lightly the words of suspicious men. IN the discourses of any con∣cerning you, observe what things you heare let fall by chance, and passe it not with neglect, but lay it up for after occasion: in the rich Harvest of others discourse, the gleanes have their private commodity. Thus, When David came to Achish and overheard his Servants, say∣ing, is not this David of whom they sang? he laid up this in his heart, and was afaid, 1 Sam. 21. 11. 11. 12. POLICY CLVIII. Birds of a feather will flocke toge∣ther. IN generall▪ discontents, ob∣erve whether any man of qua∣lity
or famous condition shew himselfe a party; for those of in∣feriour sort will more easily com¦ply and bee perswaded, being ever more daring by the spirit of another than themselves, like va∣pours which fall downe if they have not a Sun-beame to rise by. Thus, When David a man of honour shewed himselfe grieved, Every one that was in distresse, every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves to him, 1 Sam. 22. 2. POLICY CLIX. Disgrace to an Ambassadour re∣dounds to his Prince. IF you be guilty of any defect, which is a dishonour to you or your place, behave your selfe so reservedly, that you put not your selfe upon the danger of making it more publike; weak∣nesses
would bee set forth like Masques by night. Thus, When Hanun had shaven the em∣bassadours of David, and cut off their garments in disgrace, David sent to them, Tarry yee at Jerich till your beards be growne, 2 Sam. 0. 4, 5. POLICY CLX. How to aide one another in warre. IN fight or battle, if your forces bee divided and your troopes scattered into severall battalios observe where the first decay or diminution beginnes, and there supply from the abler troopes; this is to call from the maine mast to stop a leake in your army. Thus, When Joab and Abishai fought against the Syrians, sayes Joab, if
the Syrians be too strong for mee, then thou shalt helpe mee, 2 Sam. 9. 10, 11. POLICIE CLXI. How to make a prudent relation of matters. IF you have any relations to make, put those things you thinke will move anger or not speed well, in the front and pre∣face of your speech, and what things you are most confident will enfavour you, place in the reere, it is not fit to goe away like indiscreet Waspes, leaving a sting behinde▪ and it is the wel∣comest storme that sets in a faire day. Thus, When Joab sent the relation of the warre to David, he said to the messenger, if so be the Kings wrath arise, when thou hast made an end of telling, then say thou, thy Servant
Uriah is dead also, 2 Sam. 11. 19, 20, 21. POLICIE CLXII. How a Generall must behave him∣selfe toward his Soveraigne. IF you would bee solitary and seeme to have no sharer in some famous successe, or atchievement, no Rivals to take part of the ho∣nour from you, as the Elders did from the spirit which was in Moses, behave your selfe in the most conspicuous fashion you can in occasions that are offered, because the Sunne comes nearer us with his light than other Pla∣nets, therefore hee hath the ho∣nour to bee called, That great Light which rules the Day. Thus, Joab advised David, I have fought against Rabbah, now there∣fore gather the rest of the people
and take it, least I take it, and it be called after my name, 2 Sam. 12. 28, 27. POLICY CLXIII. How to have Intelligencers and Spies abroad. WHere you feare practise and conspiracies, use the subtlety to mingle instruments of intelligence, or draw some of their counsellours by favours and promises to bee pentioners to to your countenance; by this you may be well informed in the others complots, and so know better how to dispose your selfe and your affaires; it is princely, to have a royalty in the liberties of another. Thus, David bid Hushai rturne to the City and say to Absalom, I will bee thy Servant, as I have beene thy Fathers; and what thing thou
shalt heare out of the Kings house tell it, 2 Sam. 15. 34, 35. POLICY CLXIV. An arch Policy to aime one way and shoot another. WHen you are in complot or entertained in conspi∣racy with any, and made private to a desgne which may prove injurious to whom you are se∣cretly affected, take it off by a subtle kinde of disliking and dis∣approving, yet put in your pro∣ject which may pretend as much evill or more in the face of it than the other, though not in present circumstance; this is an arch Policie, when you shall aime one way and shoot another. Thus, Hushi defeated the counsell of Achitophel, by saying, The coun∣ell that Achitophel hath given is not good at this time, therefore
counsell thus, And we will fall up∣on him, and of the men that are with him shall not be lft so much as one, 2 Sam. 17. 7. 11, 12. POLICIE CLXV. A Generall must not adventure his person too farre in a civill broile. IT is not wisedome for a Gene∣rall or Head to adventure him∣selfe in person too farre, or too nakedly in a civill or common broile, every wound hee receives is a wound to the cause in agita∣tion, and the danger is most which makes them ry out with the Shunamite Mine head, mine head. Thus, The People would not let David stirre out to battle, Thou shalt not goe forth, now thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Sam. 18. 3.
POLICIE CLXVI. How to behave ones selfe in a vi∣ctory. IN actions of gratulations, in publike or private returne of thankes, bee free and open, such sweet behaviour is a tribute of chearefulnesse to the spirits of those it concernes, the neglect or omission of the ceremony may decline those affections which were well disposed to you, and may worke a remorse in them for their good service so ungrateful∣ly accepted; God hath lighted up an example in the Sunne, who shines in the face of him that created him. Thus, Joab stirred up David when he kept private for the death of his Sonne; now therefore arise, goe forth, and speake comfortbly unto thy Servants, and the King arose and sate in the Gate, 2. Sa. 19. 7, 8.
POLICY CLXVII. Delaies in appeasing commotions dangerous. IN actions of civill commoti∣on, give not the Rebels occasi∣on for long deliberations, but la∣bour to dissolve them with seed, for delaies give them leave to take breath for advantages. Thus, When Amasa was employed to defeat Sheba, he tarried longer than the set time, and David said to A∣bishai, take thy lords Servants and pursue after, least hee get him fen∣ced Cities, 2 Sam. 20. 5, 6. POLICY CLXVIII. Imploy those for mediatours that are in favour with Princes. IN petitions and sollicits make your selfe a second with those you importune, and let him bee
some of grace and power, where the onsets are strong the resi∣stance is ever lesse, and more weake. Thus, When Adoniah entreated Sa∣lomon for Abishag the Shunamit to Wife, he cme to Bathsheba and said, speake I pray thee to Salo∣mon the King▪ 1 Kings 2. 16 17. POLICIE CLXIX. How to make a manry Peccavi. WHen you would rebuke any person of eminency, who are most commonly super∣cilious to all instructions, doe it by subtle personation or pro∣pounding another in the same guilt, and so insinuate his owne errour, and make him condemne himselfe by deputy, and in the person of another.
Thus, Nathan told not David plainly how hee had sinned, but tel him a story of a poore man an a rich man, and how the rich man had wronged the poore, and when Da∣vid was moved against the rich man, Nathan said, Thou art the man, 2 Sam. 12. 1, 2, 3. 5, 7. POLICIE CLXX. When to suspect the affection of a familiar. WHen you observe any change in the counte∣nance which hath beene famili∣ar and smoothe to you, and in a tongue which hath beene free in communications, and beginnes to be lesse chearfull in the confe∣rence, you may suspect some∣thing either ill taken or inten∣ded: from obstructions or stop∣pings in the body, the Physitian can guesse at a disease in the party
Thus, When Absalom intended to kill Amnon, because he had forced his Sister Tamar, Hee spake unto his Brother neither good nor bad, for he hated him, 2 Sam. 13. 22. POLICIE CLXXI. What circumspection is to bee had after reconcilement. AFter reconcilements be cir∣cumspect, for they are of∣ten made in policie to winne you from attention and suspition of practises, especially if they bee persons of state and honour who doe this, for they are lesse sensi∣ble of obligations than inferi∣ours, and therefore make lesse conscience, and such are like cunning Wrestlers, who close with you to give you a more compleat fall.
Thus, When David and Absalom were reconciled, Absalom tooke the oc∣casion of stealing away the Peoples hearts, and oh that I were Judge, 2 Sam. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. POLICIE CLXXII. Long deliberation in the discovery of treason is dangerous. WHen practises are disco∣vered to you, doe not de∣liberate too long before you have secured your selfe, least while you are in deliberation destructi∣on overtake you; this motion is even to thinke and consider your selfe into your Enemies hand. Thus, When David heard Absalom was risen, hee said to his Servants, Arise and let us slie, make speed to depart, least he overtake us, 2 Sam. 15. 14, 15.
POLICIE CLXXIII. Be not too forward in carrying bad newes. MAke no pretence and flou∣rish when you have no∣thing of weight, for you raise expectation in others, and you come off with disgrace, if you doe not satisfie, like the picture of a Courser in an hanging, that sits in a riding posture, but goes no farther. Thus, When Ahimaaz might carry no newes, Howsoever, sayes he, let me runne, and when hee came to the King, and had nothing to say, turne aside, sayes the King, and stand here.
POLICY CLXXIV. At reduction to honour bee merci∣full, not revengefull. AT your induction into place or honor be kind and gracious, and take not revenges then though you have power, be not like the Sunne, who when he reaches to the point of noone∣day or houre of glory then scor∣ches the World, and the brigh∣ter hee is, hee hath the more heate. Thus, David, when Abishai asked him, if his reviler Shimei should be put to death, answered, Shall there any man bee put to death this day in Israel? for I doe know that I am this day King, 2 Sam. 19. 21. 22.
POLICY CLXXV. Opportunity is to bee taken with lawfull advantages. IN time of leagues, let States take all lawfull advantages and pleasure each of other in speciall negociations and commerce, else they loose the opportunity and benefit of their sweet enterlude: the Apostle followed the oppor∣tunity when hee had a doore of utterance opened him. Thus, Salomon being at peace with Hiram, sent to him for Cedar trees out of Lebanon, for I purpose to build an house to the Name of the Lord, 1 Kings 5. 5, 6. POLICY CLXXVI. Absence is sometimes necessary. IF you be envied where you are resident by some of high place,
and thinke you cannot continue without danger of drawing emi∣nent suspitions and practices a∣gainst you, remove your scene and silently absent your selfe, till opportunity bee fairer, and the season better, if the face of hea∣ven be blacke and clowdy, hee is no wise man that will not looke for a storme. Thus, Jeroboam knew he was haed of Salomon, as one that should have the Kingdome from his seed, and that he sought to kill him, and there∣fore he rose and fled into Egypt un∣till the death of Salomon,  1 Kings 11▪ 40. POLICIE CLXXVII. Aske counsell of the ancient and experienced persons. IN points or resolutions expe∣cted from you, aske advice from those who have beene
knowne practicall, experienced, and immersed in affaires, for they are ablest to give firme counsell, and when your propositions have beene tasted or chewed and deliberated upon by such, it is as it were a politicke masticati∣on, and first concoction, and such advices prove often soundest and healthfullest. Thus, When Rehoboam heard the peoples propositions, Depart yee, sayes he, for three dayes, then come againe to me, And hee consulted with the old men, 1 Kings 12. 5. POLICY CLXXVIII. Flatterers are dangerous to Prin∣ces. IN consultations and delibera∣tions about great attempts, bee not too credulous, especially if you discerne their advices and suffrages encline to that part
you discover your selfe disposed, for men are naturally prone ra∣ther to bend in placency to∣wards their superiours humours, than to minister any sowre con∣tradictions. Thus, When the King of Israel enqui∣red of the Prophets if hee should warre against Ramoth-Gilead, they said, as he inclined, goe up, but for Michaiah who alwayes prophesied truly to the King, I hate him, sayes he, 1 Kings 22. 6, 7, 8. POLICIE CLXXIX. It is dangerous to resist good coun∣sell. IN taking advices and in con∣sultations, if you observe any Counsell our among the rest to swimme rather against your own streame than with it, suffer such n one, it is a signe his speech is more generous than others, and
not embased with that servility, which is a common disease in weake and fawning spirits. Yet this holds not so peremp∣torily, but sometimes it may bee onely his selfe humour, which a wise man may soone distinguish by surveying the reasons he pro∣duces to strengthen his counsell, men of contradiction are proud, and saile onely against the breath of another, like cunning Mari∣ners, when they have a crosse winde, who to fetch it into their owne sailes, take about. Thus, Ahab did ill when hee hearke∣ned onely to the Prophets▪ in whose mouth was a lying spirit which ad∣vised him to battle, promising suc∣cesse, Goe up, for the Lord shall deli∣ver it, and rejected Michaiah, who said, If thou returne in peace, the Lord bath not spoken by me, 1 Kin. 22. 22, 28.
POLICY CLXXX. Decline the excellency of your goods modestly. IF you have any thing of ex∣cellent quality, eyed by your superiours, decline the excellen∣cy of it modestly, least their de∣sires grow kindled and enflamed, like Ahabs towards Naboths vine∣yard, and such will soone finde an officious instrumnt or Jzabl to deliver your vineyard into their hand. Thus, Because Naboths vineyard was hard by the Kings Palace▪ Ahab spake, give me thy vineyard, 1 in. 21▪ 1, 2. POLICY CLXXXI. It is good to looke about when your neighbours prepare forces. IT is policy in States when they observe preparations abroad,
to provide and looke about them and gather up their powers, for though they seeme little at ri∣sing or birth, in appearance to them, yet it is safe to feare that a great and violent storme may breake forth. For States present their stra∣tagems by a false perspective, to deceive the opinion, and over∣take the judgement of lookers on Thus, When Eliah saw a little Cloud, Get home, sayes hee to Ahab, for there is a sound of abundance of raine, and hee girded up his loines and runne before him, 1 Kings 18. 41. 44. POLICIE CLXXXII. How to comply with hand in hand. IF you would have your advice take place, comply so farre as the action may seeme to have a dependancy upon you in part, yet
make no rude intrusion, therefore there is no way like the putting your hand upon the hand in action. Thus, Elisha, that King Joash might shoot with lesse errour laid his hand upon his, and the arrow fled more levell at the Prophesie, 2 Kings 13. POLICIE CLXXXIII. Jehu's policy with Baals Priests. IF you would discover or be ac∣quainted with the secret affe∣ctions and inclinations of any, you may pretend to affect what you thinke▪ you are disposed to,they and make their affections yours, and when they observe the same favoured and practised, it will en∣courage them to communicate the more freely. This is shadowed in that of the Apostle, when he became all to all.
Thus, Jehu that he might discover the Worshippers of Baal pretended to Ahabs superstition, as though A∣hab had done too little, but he would doe much more, and while all were assembled into the house of the I∣mage, and hee saw the dispositions▪ when they so freely adored, hee thn commanded those appointed to sla them, 2 Kings 10. from 18. to 26. POLICY CLXXXIV. In suddaine attempts bee close and quicke. WHen you intend a sud∣daine attempt, and would prevent all espials and intelli∣gencers in their returnes of no∣tice, be close and quicke, like the Angell which tooke away Philip out of the Eunuches sight, while he talked with him▪ These that are knowne before hand, suffer their project, out∣runne
by discovery, and like ill weather and Eclipses are in the Almanack of Date and expecta∣tion before they come. Thus, All the Messengers, the King sent with this voice. Is it peace Jehu? Jehu turned behinde him, and kept the King unresolved till hee slew him, 2 Kings 9. 17, 18, 19. POLICIE CLXXXV. Secrets discovered bee jealous and suspicious. WHen you have had inten∣tions of attempt upon any, and fee that they avoid and escape your preparations, you may suspect and grow jealous of some whom you have neare you or in counsell with you, and then bee more lockt and reserved: when the Philistines told Samp∣son his Riddle, hee knew they had ploughed with his heiser.
Thus, When the King of Syria had laid many plots for the King of Israel and was prevented, being discovered still by the Prophet, he wisely called his Servants and said, Will yee not shew mee which of us is for the King of Israel, 2 Kings 6. 11. POLICIE CLXXXVI. Rash inconsiderations make a man rush into actions with hazard. BEe not too hot and hasty in your suspitions and pursuits, such rash inconsideration puts out the eye of your deliberation and you rush into action with hazard. He that sailes and steeres by suspition, is like a Mariner that hath mistooke his Starre, for all his motion is out of the way; and such actions are like ram∣bling arrowes shot at rovers, which often hit to the sorrow and disadvantage of the archer.
Thus, The Moabites discovering the Rivers red with the mornings Sun, thought they had beene red by some civill slaughter among the Israe∣lites, and upon this pursued, and were overthrowne by the Israelites unexpected forces, 2 Kin. 3. 23, 24. POLICY CLXXXVII. How to retally favour for favour. IF you would returne and re∣tally favour for favours recei∣ved, fit and adaptate them to the present necessity of the party, for that puts a lustre upon the favour, and enriches it with the enamell of season and opportu∣nity; Paul could not requite Publius better than to cure him, when hee lay sicke of a Feaver.
Thus, Elisha would not doe the Shuna∣mite any recommendation to the King or Captaine, Because (sayes she) I dwell among mine owne Peo∣ple, but observing that shee had no Childe and her Husband old, hee promised her a Sonne, 2 Kings 4 13, 14, 15, 16. POLICIE CLXXXVIII. Not to bee too much discouraged in difficult businesses. WHen you have any new, or uncouth businesse fals to you, and no reason appearing for it, bee not too much deaded nor distracted by wonder and conjecture, but waite upon after occasions; little knew Peter what his Vision of the sheet meant, till he came to Cornelius house, then saies he, God hath shewed mee, I should call nothing uncleane.
Thus, When the King of Syria had writ to the King of Israel to reco∣ver Naaman of his Leprosie, hee expostulated thus, Am I God to kill and make alive? not considering that there was an Elisha in Israel, 2 Kings 5. 7, 8. POLICY CLXXXIX. To bee jealous of Officers who are covetous under good masters. IF you have to doe with Offi∣cers of Place in State or Court, and finde them greedy and taking in the name of their Office and Masters, you may bee jealous it is their owne sute and project upon you, and they are like Hawkes that flie from their owners and seize upon the prey with their vervels; or as casheerd Serving-men who robbe by the way in their masters livery.
Thus, Naaman did unadvisedly to give Gehazi two Talents more, for hee had said within himselfe, My Ma∣ster hath spared him in not recei∣ving at his hands, but I will runne and take somewhat, 2 Ki. 5. 20, 23. POLICIE CXC. Observe the inclination of those whom you desire to please. IF you would conferre eurteie upon any, or bee beneficiall, that they should accept of it with delight, observe what they che∣rish and indulge most in their affections, and accordingly dis∣pose and apply your intents, it is as though you should set a jewell in a ring which were fit for it. Thus, When Salomon knew God had a speciall inclination to the thre∣shing-floore of Ornan the Ibsite,
because hee had appeared there, hee builds the Temple and dedicates it to him in the same place, 2 Chr. 3. 1. POLICIE CXCI. Draw your modell before you build your house. IN all your actions and under∣takings propose to your selfe a forme, and patterne according to which you may worke, and like a good artificer draw your modell before you build your house; it is good writing after a copy, else you may scrible for want of rule, this comes nearest to divine artifice, which wee say did all by Idea. Thus, David will not set Salomon on worke to build God an House, till he gave him the patterne of all that he had by the Spirit, according to which hee advised him to worke, 1 Chron. 28. 11, 12.
POLICIE CXCII. Preparations are necessry both in spirituall and temporall affaires. DOE not goe on nor too farre in businesse without engine and preparation to effect it, that discovers an impatiency, as though you could not stay the ripening and maturing which is requisite; and it is as if an hasty archer should draw his bow when he wanted his arrow, as if the Prophet should prophe∣sie before the Spirit were upon him. Thus, David will first prepare Iron for the nailes of the Temple, and brasse and Cedar trees, Because (sayes he) the House must be magnificnt, I will therefore now make prepara∣tion, 1 Chron. 22. 3, 4.
POLICIE CXCIII. Lawes revived and repeated, when and in what manner they are to be divlged. WHen you are to establish new Rites and Lawes (though in their owne nature they bee but reductions to for∣mer, and a reviving and awaking of old and wholesome observa∣tions to practise, you will doe well to publish them by Senato∣ry consent, and by this they shall receive lesse scandall and censure, appearing to be the acts of many. Thus, When Ezekiah revived the true and ancient Ceremonies among the people of Judah, which had beene long neglected, Hee tooke counsell with his Princes, and all the Con∣gregation in Jerusalem, so they esta∣blished a decree to make proclama∣tion, 2 Chron. 30. from 1. to 6.
POLICY CXCIV. How and when to change gover∣nours. WHen Kings and Realmes feare dis-affection in States which belong to them, and are afraid of revolts and rebellions, let them take care that they ex∣change governours for such, of whose loyalty and allegiance they have had experiment, and not to suffer such places to con∣tinue those of their owne Nation in eminent imploiment. By this meanes the preparati∣ons for factions will be lesse, and lesse daring. Thus, Rehoboam is applauded by the Word of God, He dealt wisely and dispersed all his Children through∣out all the Countries of Iudah unto every fenced City, 2 Chro. 11. 23
POLICIE CXCV. In time of peace build Cities. IN any calme of opportunity of estate or fortunes, apply your self only to the confirmati∣on and assuring of what you en∣joy, and you shall make as hap∣py proficiency in the circle of such a purpose, as in proceeding to new degrees of getting, for∣tune like the Sea when she flowes in will fall backe, if you have no engine to stay her. Thus, Asah King of Iudah, when the Lord had given him rest, said unto Iudah, Let us build Cities, and make about them wals and towers, while the Land is yet before us, 2 Chron. 14. 7.
POLICIE CXCVI. Bribes corrupt men, and make them breake promise. IF you thinke the faction or party agaist you receive any ability or strength for resi∣stance by confederacie and cor∣respondence with others, endea∣vour the undoing of that, and drawing others away; wise Phy∣sitians, when they would draw a Flux of humours from one part where they gather too much, use some art to divert and turne them another way; and this is the rowelling of a correspondence, and giving it issue in another place. Thus, When Baasha King of Israel had strengthened himselfe by a league with Benhadad, and then beganne to offend Asa, Asa tooke treasure and sent to Benhadad to bribe him from his correspondence with Baa∣sha,
and Baasha let the worke cease, 2 Chron. 16. 2, 3. POLICIE CXCVII. How to prevent the designe of a Politician. IF you would prevent the de∣signes and machinations of a∣ny, study and finde out what the instruments are they make use of, what their materials, and la∣bour to take away those, or dis∣able them; and thus you dis∣arme a politician, and breake a tradesman, despoiling him of what he sets up trade with. Thus, King Asa knowing what Baasha was building and raising against him, waited his advantage, and car∣ried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber wherewith Baasha was building, 2 Chron. 16. 6.
POLICIE CXCVIII. A King newly installed ought to strengthen himselfe. WHen any Successour is new arrived, let him first study to enable and confirme himselfe; God first laid the foun∣dations of the Earth sure and firme, before hee said, Let the Earth bring forth: it is no being bold and confident while things are crazy and unsure. Thus, Jehoram hath this laudative in Scripture, that when hee was risen up to the Kingdome of his Father, he strengthened himselfe, 2 Chro. 21. 4. POLICIE CXCIX. Avoid Counsellours that have been cause of much ill successe. IF you observe some Counsel∣lours to have beene cause of
much ill successe, and that they would under some privilege offer their advices to your actions, avoid them; for hee that walkes in a path which hath beene nota∣ble for misfortune, cannot take it ill, if hee share in the fate with others. Thus, Ahaziah did ill to attend to the counsell of his wicked Mother and the house of Ahab,  2 Chr. 22. 3, 4. POLICY CC. To take away what may advance an Enemy. IF you would disable the stra∣tagems of any, spie out what they make most advantages on, and endeavour the abridgement of those; like him that when the light of the Sunne offends him at one window drawes a cur∣taine there.
Thus, When Sennacherib came against Jerusalem, Hezekiah considering what reliefe hee might receive by the fresh waters, stopt up the foun∣taines, 2 Chron. 32. 2, 3. POLICY CCI. Suspect a too much affected lan∣guage. SUspect a plausible and faire language then, when it comes with too much affectation, and from him whose person may render him suspitious; such are like Comets and blazing-starres, which portend ill when they ap∣peare brightest. Thus, Herod behaved himselfe to the wise men, and enquired of them di∣ligently, and said, Goe search, that I may come and worship him also, Matth. 2. 8.
POLICIE CCII. Inferiours are not alwayes to refuse the favour of their Superiours. DOE not alwaies stand upon the nice puntilioes and points of state and place, but re∣mit and submit as occasions re∣quire and vary; these that doe not observe this, are a little too strait laced for businesse either civill or religious. Thus, When John for ad Christ, I have need of thee, and commest thou to me? Jesus answered, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becommeth us, Matth. 3. 15. POLICIE CCIII. How and when to conforme our selves to the wes of the King∣dome. COnforme your selfe to the customes and lawes which
you see predominant in City or State, or Church, so you betray not the cause of Religion; else you give occasion to censure and opinion, and become suspected where you might have passed un∣questioned; men looke upon un∣usuall apparitions in the Heavens, when the constant lawes of night and day passe without notice. Thus, When at Capernaum they de∣manded Tribute, Jesus bids Peter goe to the fish for money, and was at expense of a miracle to pay it, Least sayes hee, wee should offend them, Matth. 17. 27. POLICIE CCIV. Require resolution of cases of those that are expert in them. IN all doubts and anxieties or perplexities, either divine or humane, require resolution of the most expert men in those ca∣ses,
for every one is likely to give best judgement in his owne faculty, Sua cui{que} arte credndm. Thus, Herod did wisely, hee gathered the Chiefe Priests and Scribes of the People and demanded of them, Matth. 2. 4. POLICIE CCV. Consider the party you are to deale with. IF you be to commence a busi∣nesse of distaste against any, consider first, of what quality the party is, and if hee bee one that is popular and of repute, then there is more danger, because the good opinions of many have interest where you oppose, and it is like the pulling at a beame in an house, where you endanger all that are near it, and have dependance to fall up∣on you.
Thus, Herod was discreet, for when he saw John was counted a Prophet, hee durst not put him to death for feare of the multitude, Matth. 14. 1, 5. POLICIE CCVI. Be suspicious of ones selfe and com∣pany in matter of affection. IN a businesse of passion and affection be suspitious of your selfe and company, for in such cases you are most open and soft to advantages, these are the Mol∣les adytus. Thus, Herod was unwise, for being much taken with the dancing of Herodias Daughter, hee promised with an oath to give her whatsoe∣ver she would aske, Matth. 14. 7.
POLICIE CCVII. How to procure forbearance of an answere to a question. WHen you are questioned strictly and severely, and have no desire to resolve the que∣stion, bethinke your selfe of some interrogatories and demands, by which you may rivall the other, and either procure forbearance thus, or draw them into an equall hazard with your selfe. Thus, When Christ was questioned, By what Authority doest thou these things? he answered, I also will aske ye, The Baptisme of John, &c▪ and they answered, We cannot tell, Neither, sayes he, doe I tell you, Matth. 21. 23, 24.
POLICIE CCVIII. How to observe the time and per∣sons in the action of a thing. IN actions which the vulgar and commons seeme to disaf∣fect, forbeare, for a multitude like the sea, swels into waves of trouble upon every blast of dis∣content. Thus, The Scribes and Elders consult to take Jesus, but not on the Feast day, Least▪ there bee an uproare a∣mong the People, Matth. 26. 4. 5. POLICY CCIX. Keepe at distance in matter of dan∣ger. IN occasions which you suspect full of danger and trouble, keepe at distance, if you have had the▪ happinesse to escape from observation at first, for so
you may have a safe walke, and live in prospect and view of all the passages. Thus, When our Saviour was betraied, and led away, Peter followed a farre off, unto the High Priests hall, and went in and sat downe to see the end, Matth. 26. 58. POLICIE CCX. Forecast makes a man not to be un∣provided in danger. IT is policy to forecast and presuppose such inconvenien∣ces as are obvious and in the way of your present condition, so you shall not bee found unarmed and unprovided when they befall and overtake you, but you shall be found like Roter who had his sword girt, when they came out to take his Master.
Thus, When great multitudes crouded after Christ to see his Miracles, hee spake to his Disciples, that a small Ship should wait on him, least they should throng him, Mark. 3. 9. POLICIE CCXI. In imparting secrets, when to use parables. IN communicating and impar∣ting secrets, observe your best and most opportune times; so you shall not wrong the businesse with any unseasonable relation. Thus, Christ spoke in parables to the multitude, but when he and his Dis∣ciples were alone, he expounded all things, Marke 4. 34.
POLICIE CCXII. The time fit to discover ones selfe. WHen suspitions are enter∣tained by others on you, and you thinke they may prove of dangerous consequence if they continue so, give as present and plaine resolution as you can, for this is an untying of the knot, and unlocking the chaine which kept their opinions bound. Thus, When Christs Disciples was on the Sea by night, and saw Christ passing by them, they feared it had beene a Spirit, but immediately hee talked with them, and said, It is I, e not afraid, Marke 6. 30. POLICIE CCXIII. When it is fitting to demand the re∣solution of a question. IF there bee any difficulties which vexe you, and keepe
you in suspence, demand the re∣solution of them in private, else you betray your owne weaknesse while you desire to be strengthe∣ned in opinion. Thus, When Christs Disciples sa they could not dispssesse one of an evill Spirit, when he was come into the house, they asked him privately, Why could not wee cast him out? Marke 9 28. POLICY CCXIV. In society bee discoursing of emi∣nent actions. IN the society you converse with be remembring some of them in a modest fashion of that thing in which they have been famous and eminent; thus you shall en∣deare their favours, and delight them in the memory; this is to hold a looking-glasse before a good face.
Thus, Peter comming by the Fig-tree Christ cursed, Master, sayes hee, Behold the Fig-tree, and Christ was pleased with the notice he tooke of th Miracle, and answered, What things ye desire when you pray belee∣ving, yee shall have them, Marke 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. POLICY CCXV. The Iewes envy Christs true Titles IF you would not countenance any thing you thinke is not true and reall, but in pretence and imposture, doe not allow the imposture by way of any ironicall indulgence, for the least shadow is made use of for gra∣cing it, and it is dangerous to be too acting and jesting with the vulgar.
Thus, When the Iewes did not believe Christ to be the true Messiah, they advised Pilate, Write not, say they, The King of the Iewes▪ but that hee said, I am King of the Iewes, John 19 21. POLICIE CCXVI. The spirit of contradiction in an ill counselled People. WHen you see peoples affe∣ctions carried in a tide and current one way, doe not at that time speake and expostulate, for it stirres and disquiets more, and it is like a little water cast upon a great flame, which makes it burne brighter; a wise forbea∣rance will compose and settle them better; and as a Physitian advises the Patient upon bloud∣letting▪ not to stirre much, so it is policy when a multitude hath had some issue for dis∣content,
not to move them much after it. Thus, When the people cried out for the suffering of Jesus, Pilate said, what will ye I shall doe to him? and they cried out againe, Crucifie him, and then he said, Why? and they cried out the more, Crucifie him, Luke 24. 20, 21, 22, 23. POLICY CCXVII. Shew not your selfe abroad before there be maturity and fitnesse. SHew not your selfe abroad, nor make open profession till you observe your maturity and fitnesse, for else you hazard the good successe of that by un∣timely publication, which a later season would cherish and ad∣vance, and it is certaine, that former failings cast backe and put too farre behinde for recove∣ry; for expectations come with
an appetite, and will bee then sa∣tisfied, or elfe they depart repi∣ning, neither doe they measure your action by your present abi∣lity, but their owne satisfactions. Thus, The Prophet John being desti∣ned to a great businesse, to goe be∣fore the Lord to prepare his wayes, it is said, that he grew and waxed strong, and was in the Desarts till the time of his shewing unto Israel, Luke 1. 80. POLICIE CCXVIII. Bee harmelesse as Doves, wise as Serpents. WHen you thinke you are much envied and spited, forbeare and bee not too prodi∣gall of your presence there, for when an hated object is present, it stirres up the passion in your adversary, absence may secure you, and bee a cause their cancour
and malice may waste and be ex∣haled: hee that comes thus be∣fore his enemy, is as sure of rai∣sing him against himselfe, as hee that lookes in a glasse is sure to create an opposite face. Thus, Jesus went and walked in Gali∣lee, for he would not walke in Iury; because, the Iewes sought to kill him, John 7. 1. POLICIE CCXIX. When to absent, and when to shew ones selfe. VVHen you would shew your self to the world for fame and popularity, let your approaches bee private and in se∣cret, elsewhere there is too much expectation and preamble of worth; people are halfe wearied and spent in their fore-conceits, and it is but a kinde of after∣gaine of credit which is so won.
Thus, When Christs Brethren bid him goe up to the Feast, saying, There is no man that deth any thing in secret and he himself desires to be knowne openly, Goe ye up, sayes he, I goe not up yet, but when his Brethren were gone up, then went hee, not openly, sayes the Text, but as it were in secret, John 7. from 3. 10▪ 11. POLICY CCXX. When not to discover ones intenti∣ons. IF you would have these you advise with to give faithfull and impartiall counsell, doe not discover your owne resolution or intention, but propose onely by way of consultation; else it is as if you should aske what way shall wee goe, and yet leade the company downe a path of your owne liking.
Thus, When Christ intended to feed the multitude with a miracle, he said to Philip, What shall we doe to buy Bread for these? this he said to prove him, for he himselfe knew what he would doe, Joh. 6. 6. POLICIE CCXXI. In matters of false accusation how to behave ones selfe. IN imputations and false accu∣sations doe not too much in∣sist upon contradiction, but al∣leage your most materiall cir∣cumstance, which is the most probable to vindicate you, by this; though perhaps you blow not suspitions quite away, yet you scatter, and in a manner disperse them. Thus, When the Apostles spoke in se∣verall tongues, some mocked and
said, They are full of new wine, Peter answered, These are not drunken as you suppose, seeing it is but the third houre of the day, Acts 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, POLICIE CCXXII. How to resolve a doubt. IF you observe a doubt to trou∣ble any, and that their close∣nesse may bee such, as they will not reveale it for resolution and satisfaction, then doe it by some queint device of discourse, and so you shall discharge a duty in your selfe, and release an anxiety in them to their great content▪ and it is a giving of Balsame in a boxe, or a cure in secret. Thus, When the Pharisee saw Mary the sinner annointing Christs seet, hee doubted in himselfe, whether hee were a Prophet, which Christ ob∣serving, resolved by the parable of
the Creditour, and two Debtours, Luke 7. 39▪ 41, 44. POLICIE CCXXIII. A commutative policy. IF you would have any action you doe, passe with approba∣tion of authority and the place you are in, shew your selfe a pun∣ctuall observer of their lawes and ceremonies, and thus by appro∣ving what is theirs, you winne them to approve of yours, and this is as it were, commutative policy, when you get your acti∣on returned with proportion. Thus, When our Saviour cured the Leper, Goe thy way (sayes he) shew thy selfe to the Priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded, Matth. 8. 4.
POLICIE CCXXIV. Be jealous of Enemies intergato∣ries. BE jealous over the questions and interrogations of those, whose bosomes and friendships you are not assured on, such p∣sing may be angling or fishing for your inclination and opinion; it is a notable feat, to catechize a secret from any. Thus, The Pharisees asked Christ, Is it lawfull to heale on the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him, Matth. 12. 10. POLICIE CCXXV. How to speake of ones selfe in the third person, being unknowne. IT is policy to retaine the dis∣covery of your selfe some∣times, and if you happen by
chance where you are not knowne, to comply with the mistake, for by that you shall heare rumours and reports more freely, which if you were knowne, you could not with such confidence enquire, neither would they discourse and satis∣fie, so that the next way to come nearest such, is to goe farthest from your selfe. Thus, Christ fell in the company of two Disciples in their way to E∣maus, and enquired of all, and they told him with this preface, Art thou onely a Stranger in Ierusalem? Luke 24. 18. POLICY CCXXVI. When to inject the remembrance of ones selfe with modesty on occa∣sion. WHen you are in company of those you deserve
from, and if they fall into any generall laudatives or commen∣dations, make use of the oppor∣tunity offered, and modestly in∣ject the remembrance of your selfe; such occasions puts your foot into the stirrop, and it re∣maines in you to get up and ride. Thus, When our Saviour was discour∣sing what great rewards they should have who had left house or kindred for his sake, Peter answered, Io: we have left all and followed thee, Marke 10. 28. POLICY CCXXVII. How to apologize with authority. IF you have a desire to move a discourse, or defence, and to renew some anciently received custome, which you thinke now convenient, let some others give the occasion, and so you may follow with more advantage in
seconding, [I prae, sequar] is a wise Motto upon your action. Thus, When our Saviour had a minde to rebuke the Pharisees superstition, he tooke occasion from the Disciples plucking Eares of Corne to say, The Sonne of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath, Matth. 12. 1, 8. POLICY CCXXVIII. Study the remove of the occasion of a faction. IF you see a faction much swai∣ed and transported with any one occasion, study the remove and extinction of the cause if evill.; if the painter would not have birds come to his grapes, hee might doe well to take away the picture. Thus, When the Pharisees saw the people goe after Christ, when he had raised Lazarus, they consulted not well. to put Lazarus to death, Joh. 12. 9, 10, 11.
POLICIE CCXXIX. Wicked men suborne false witnes∣ses when they are convicted. WHen you observe your selfe to have got the bet∣ter, and to have prevailed with those you were at difference, bee then most suspitious of their complots, for conquest upon your▪ adversary embitters him more, and sets him upon the project of mischiefe, and gives an appetite to his malice, and then hee will not scruple at any revenge, like the Sun, who though hee set under a cloud at night, yet may shine more stoutly the next morning. Thus, When the Synagogue of the Li∣bortines dispted with Stephen, and were not able to resist the wis∣dome and Spirit by which he spoke, they suborned men, who said, Wee have heard him speak blasphemies, Acts 6. 10, 11.
POLICIE CCXXX. How and when to use mildnesse in a factious time. WHen you see a faction succeed notably, so that you feare a danger in the issue, entreat the parties with milde∣nesse and pretence of favour, for fiery and passionate proceedings bring the people into suspition, that it is not justice which perse∣cutes, but their owne vindicative power of magistracy. Thus, When the Captaine saw the Apo∣stles succeed and doubted whereun∣to it would grow, then went he with the Officers and brought them without violence, Acts 5. 26. POLICIE CCXXXI. Gamels counsell was wise, but not alwayes and altogether. WHen Religion is preten∣ded in a commotion, and
is onely the countenance, suffer it, though yet in a wise care and caution that it spread not, and therefore you may bee plucking some feathers from the wing in the meane while, and thus let it rather seeme to die by its owne unsoundnesse, than your violence, and this argues the imposture of it more faithfully. Thus, Gamaliel gave wise counsell, Re∣fraine from these men, sayes he, and let them alone; for if this counsell or worke be of men it will come to naught, Acts 5. 38. POLICIE CCXXXII. The Euuchs piety and zeale. IF you would succeed in an action you are upon with any, observe when you see a prepara∣tion or disposition which may advantage such a cause as yours, and then goe on, for where there is a congruity before, there is
more aptnesse for operation, even in naturall subjects, the agent prevailes best where there is a predisposition. Thus, When the Eunuch was sitting and reading in his Chariot, the Spirit said to Philip, Goe neare, and joyne thy selfe, Acts 8. 27. POLICY CCXXXIII. When the principall authours are gained the adherents will be also. FOr the advancement of▪ any Religion, or opinion, or fa∣ction in Church and State, la∣bour the private conversion of the adversary who hath beene eminent in the opposition and contradiction of the cause, for by this you may winne all the adherents whose opinions were concentred in him, stant{que} ca∣dunt{que} standing and falling with him▪ and this advantage is like that in a battail, to get the winde
and Sunne of the enemy, and it is as though you should sound a victory in one of your enemies trumpets. Thus, When Saul was the only persecu∣tor, God converts him, and all that heard him were amazed, saying, Is not this he which destroied them Acts 9. 22. POLICIE CCXXXIV. Not to believe rashly the conversi∣on of an adversary. DOE not trust too rashly the report of a converted ad∣versary, till there bee some suffi¦cient testimony to move you, for as it is the most exquisite fallacy wch is put upon you under face of a truth, so it is the most accurate enmity which comes upon you in the attire of friendship, that Wolfe is the worst of all the heard, which was in Sheepes cloathing. Thus, When Saul came to Ierusalem,
the Disciples were afraid of him, and believed not that he was a Dis∣ciple, till Barnabas told how hee had preached boldly in the Name of Jesus at Damascus, Acts 9. 26, 27. POLICIE CCXXXV. When an escape is lawfull. WHen you are redacted to straights and necessities, and afraid of an ensuing mis∣chiefe, project your escape at the hole of any occasion, else you tempt God by staying till your deliverance prove more despe∣rate, and so you put him to some speciall and extraordinary worke; like those that let their Evill goe on, till none but the King can cure them. Thus, When they laid in wait to slay Paul at Damascus, the Disciples tooke him by night and let him downe by the wall in a basket, Acts 9. 25.
POLICY CCXXXVI. Memoriall of persons may move wonderfully. IF you would have any emi∣nent act forgotten, such as may cause sorrow in the remembrance or prove any other miserable oc∣casion, rase out all memorials and tokens which belonged to it, as that good King who made them cast their idolatrous stuffe and rubbish into the Brooke K∣dron, for so long as they are ex∣tant, and to be seene, they refresh and keepe wake the memory. Thus, When Peter came to raise the young maide to life, the Widowes stood by him weeping, and shewing the Coates and Garments which Dorcas had made while shee was alive, Acts 9. 39.
POLICY CCXXXVII. How and when to use mediatours. WHen you perceive your selfe to have incurred the displeasure of any upon whose favour you have dependance, worke them into respect againe by mediations and intercessions of those which are neare or fa∣miliar for making his friends your owne, you doe like a cun∣ning enemy, who takes the out∣workes of a city, that hee may be more enabled to make his par∣ty good. Thus, They of Tyre and Sidon came with one accord to Herod having made Blastus the Kings Chamber∣laine their friend, Acts 12. 20.
POLICIE CXXXVIII. How and when to punish Seducers. WHen you see any one a∣bused through the sub∣tlety of ill instruments, put such a disparagement or disgrace up∣on the instruments, as they may appeare worthy of, and so you may lessen them with those they are endeared: it is an arch policy to poyson the water or current which a country esteemes or makes use of. Thus, Paul seeing Elymas the Sorce∣rer turne Sergius Paulus from the Faith, strikes him blind with the language of, O thou Childe of the Devill! and when the Deputy saw what was done, he believed, Acts 13. 12.
POLICIE CCXXXIX. Blasphemy not to be indured. WHen you observe any one bent towards you, in a strong passion of indignation, or too much admiration, use passi∣onate importunity to decline them, and extreme derogation of your abilities, Contraria contrari∣is curantur, contrary passions are cured by their contraries. Thus, When they of Lystra would have done sacrifice to the Apostles, the Apostles rent their cloathes, and anne crying out, Sirs why doe you these things? wee are men of like passions with yee, Acts 14. 15. POLICIE CCXL. Synods are necessary and profitable. WHen factions or seditions grow ripe either in Church
or State, convoke assemblies and Synods, for consultations in such perplexities may relieve with ad∣vice, what the heads of a few are not able to doe by reason of pre∣sent distractions and apprehensi∣ons at the face of things; that light hath the most power which is gathered and straitened in the circle of a glasse, where there is a conventicle of Sun-beames. Thus, When the Sect of the Pharises troubled the Church with urging Circumcision and Moses Ceremo∣nies, the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter, Acts 15. 5, 6. POLICIE CCXLI. In recommending their persons, re∣late their acts. WHen you desire to recom∣mend any into respects and favours, relate those things
they are most notable and fa∣mous in, for opinions expect pleas, and allegations, and argu∣ments, and are not prevailed with by naked obtrusions. Thus, When the Apostles writ to the Brethren at Antioch by the hands of Paul and Barnabas, they stiled them men that hazarded their lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus,  Acts 15. 25, 26. POLICIE CCXLII. Entitle with the best authority what you desire to be made au∣thenticke. IF you feare something may be sleighted which you would have authenticke and well repu∣ted, entitle it to the best authori∣ty you are able, it is a kinde of signature to an action, as a seale to a writing, and if the image and superscription bee Caesars, Give to Caesar, sayes Christ.
Thus, When the Apostles writ their de∣finitive Letters to the doubting Brethren, they began thus, For it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, Acts 15. 28. POLICIE CCXLIII. Injuries  offered, content not thy selfe with private satis∣faction. WHen you perceive your selfe to have suffered in∣juriously, and yet have the ad∣vantage on your side by reason of the wrong, doe not acquit or release them, though they would let you escape, till you let them know how they stand disabled by the act, and this sheds a kinde of obligation upon them for your curtesie. Thus, When the Magīstrates had bea∣ten
Paul and Silas, and heard they were Romans, they sent to release them, but Paul answered, Doe they thrust us out privily now they have beaten us openly? Nay verily, let them come themselves and fetch us out, Acts 16. 36, 37. POLICY CCXLIV. In tumultuary actions shew the un∣lawfulnesse and danger thereof. IN seditious tumults and ri∣sings, still urge them that their cause shall have publike justice, and disswade them from such vi∣olent actions by the danger and unlawfulnesse of such procee∣ding, for so you remember them of the integrity they violate. Thus, The Towne Clearke smoothed the People whom Demetrius had raised against Paul, The Law is open, and there are Deputies, Let them implead one another, there be∣ing
no cause, why wee can give an account of this dayes uproare, Acts 19. POLICIE CCXLV. How and when to make a protesta∣tion of ones innocency. IF you would leave any place, function or employment with credit and good name, and secure your selfe from any after aspersi∣on, make publike protestation of your syncere behaviours therein, and thus you remove like a light which is not put out and choa∣ked in snuffe, but taken from the socket of one candlesticke to blaze in another, and such tran∣slations are like those which the Elect shall suffer at the last day, they shall not all sleepe, but shall all be changed.1 Cor. 15. 51. Thus, When Paul tooke his leave of the Elders of Ephesus, he called them
together and said, you know from the first day that I came, after what manner I have been with you. Acts 20. 17, 18. POLICIE CCXLVI. Forces to be raised with all expedi∣tion in tumults. IN tumults and factious stirres, if it be requisite, muster forces with all expedition for appalling them, and thus you weigh downe▪ the burthen of one scale with the weight of another. Thus, When Jerusalem was in an up∣roare, and saw the Captaine and souldiers comming to them, they left beating Paul,  Acts 21.
POLICIE CCXLVII. How to create a party for your selfe by making division among your adversaries. IF you observe an advantage by which you may create a party or faction for your securi∣ty, from the dissentions and di∣visions of others, make use of it, for by that you draw more to side with you, and make the danger which before was onely yours more generall, and then authority will grow more puz∣led what to doe, and this is a po∣licy to get a kingdome divided against it selfe, and our Saviour tels us, such a one cannot stand. Thus, When Paul perceived that on halfe was Pharisees and the other Saduces, he cried out in the Coun∣cell, Men and Brethren, I am a Pharisee, and when he had said so, the multitude was divided, Act. 23. 6, 7.
POLICIE CCXLVIII. What is sometimes materiall in the defence of your justification. IN false accusations and citati∣ons to judgement, if you see the first stirrers recoile, and con∣ceale themselves, and onely some new incensed prosecute the bu∣sinesse, alleage in defence of your justification being a very materi∣all thing: this giving backe of your adversary is a setting for∣ward of your Cause, and you may well sound at such a retreat. Thus, When Paul was brought before Felix, Certaine Jewes (said hee) found me in the Temple, who ought to have been here, and object if they had ought against me, Acts 24. 18, 19.
POLICIE CCXLIX. How to decline your adversary that he be not your judge. IN trials and judgements of controversie provide so, that you fall not into the audience of them, where you thinke there is malice and prejudice to prepare authority against you, for so even your adversary may be∣come your judge. Thus, When Paul was demanded if he would goe up to Ierusalem and he judged, I stand (sayes he) at Cae∣sars judgement seat, Act. 25. 9, 10. POLICIE CCL. Relate the successe of things which are famous. IF you would strengthen and confirme any cause with those which are interessed and incli∣ned
to it, yet you feare may bee alienated and drawne away by disswasions and whispers of the adversary, relate the successe and commodities which have beene knowne, and are famous in it, and this is as Mariners doe with their ships, when they arrive from great voyages, put on all their flagges and streamers to grace their returne. Thus, When the Apostles met and had gathered the Church together, they rehearsed all that God had done for them, Acts 14. 27. POLICY CCLI. An expedite way to preent sinister constructions. WHen you thinke your be∣haviours or actions may have given occasion of ill con∣structions, which were neither in your intention nor desert, use
some expedite way of giving early satisfaction, and thus you shall outrunne conjectures and suspitions by your faithfull reso∣lutions, this is to give physicke before the Disease. Thus, When Paul was brought to Rome, hee called the chiefe of the Iewes together, to let them know, hee appealed not unto Caesar for ought hee had to accuse his owne Nation of. Finis libri primi.
A SUPPEDITATION TO THE FORMER POLICIES. The second Booke. POLICIE I. How to put your selfe out of the danger of being seduced. THough you doe not keepe your discourse at home, yet keepe your opinion, and though that walke abroad, yet let this stay within: goe not out of your selfe, to see another: it is dangerous for a tender and sicke opinion, to bee
too adventurous in airing it selfe; it is Christs advice, If they say, Behold he is in the Desart, Nolite exire, Goe not out, Matth. 24. 26. POLICY II. How to try the ingenuity or gene∣rous condition of any. MAke open protestation of their kindenesse and fa∣vours to themselves, and you shall observe it will worke a dis∣claiming and disavowing in the ingenuous, when Christ said to the righteous, I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, they replied, Lord when saw we thee an hungry, and fed thee? but the wicked re∣ply, Lord when did we see thee an hungry, and did not minister unto thee? Matth. 25. from 35 to the end
POLICIE III. How to draw men to your humour. BEe oft neare and familiar in discourse and society, and be often infusing your affections and more light passions: this is to cast your owne garment upon another. Eliah to make Elisha prophesie like himselfe, cast his cloake upon him, 2 Kin. 2. 13, 14. POLICIE IV. When your adversary hath favour in audience. HEre would be some art used to draw the attention away that your adversary obtaines, and by this, like Peter, you cut off Mlchus care, Luk. 22. 50.
POLICIE V. To appcase passions you raise. IF recantations may stand with the credit of your per∣son, they are surest and most pre∣vailing; the prodigall had this refuge, I will goe to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned, Luke 15. 18. POLICIE VI. If you be in presence when favours are conferred upon any. DOE not seeme to grudge or repine, for by that you insi∣nuate some disability and want of desert in him who is honou∣red: Christ tooke it ill when Iu∣das said of Maries Spikenard, To what end is this waste? Matth. 26. 8.
POLICIE VII. If you would have your entertain∣ment please in generall. BEe not too peremptory in lawes or ceremonies in your feast, obliging others to the obser∣vance, Ahasuerus feast was there∣fore commendable, For they gave royall wine in abundance, yet none did compell, Esth. 1. 7, 8. POLICIE VIII. To prepare one to whom you have a suit. MEn are freest and most chearfull in times of joy and mirth or pleasure, therefore put them into these, or observe to take them at these times; When Ahasuerus was at banquet with Queene Esther, What is thy re∣quest, saies he? and it shall be per∣formed, even to the halfe of the Kingdome, Esth. 7. 2.
POLICY IX. When an opposition is of dangerous consequence. IT is the safest not to let such goe on, and enjoy the power they assume; when Vasthi the Queene would not obey the King, Shee hath not wronged the King onely, sayes Mamucan, but all the Princes, whose Wifes, if they heare of this deed, shall despise them, Esth. 16. 17. POLICIE X. When generall applause or honours are performed. IT is policy to comply, and thus farre to bow with Naa∣man in the house of Rimmon: when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reve∣rence, Then was Hman full of wrath, Esth. 3. 5.
POLICY XI. In businesse with Strangers. SUspition is a vertue where you have had no occasion to trust, credulity hath betraied more than her opposite, Believe not every Spirit, 1 Joh. 4. 1. POLICY XII. In occasions of feares. TO bee fearefull, is to doe misfortune a curtesie, and to make us lesse able to encounter what wee feare: successe or dis∣comfiture often beginne at the heart, The feare of a man brin∣geth a snare, Prov. 29. 25. POLICIE XIII. In suddaine assaults. MAke them not more sud∣daine by your apprehensi∣on,
let not your project for e∣scape, bee violent, but smoothly quicke, for else it distracts, and in your haste you may take out at a wrong doore, Goe not forth ha∣stily to strive, Prov. 25. 8. POLICY XIV. When misfortunes befall any of your owne quality or condition. IT is wisdome to looke to your owne house when your neigh∣bours is on fire, and to startle and awake at the passing-bell of your friend, And great feare came on all those and as many as heard those things, Acts 11. 5. POLICIE XV. To draw others into your assi∣stance. RElate your owne alacrity, and chearefull resolution, the aide you have already in pre∣sent,
or in promise, the counte∣nance and quality of your assi∣stants; when Nehemiah would repaire Jerusalem, hee told the Priests and Rulers the Kings words, and how God was with him, And let us rise up and build, Nehem. 2. 18. POLICY XVI. How to please the variety of com∣pany you discourse with. GIve occasion for each to dis∣course in his owne professi∣on and art, so you please the par∣ty, who delights to communi∣cate his knowledge, and you en∣rich your owne, A wise man will heare and encrease, Prov. 1. 5. POLICIE XVII. For publike dispatch. ANimate and cherish your agents and instruments
with such arguments as fit the nature of the businesse, either by gift, promise or extolling their merit, And all the Wall was joyned together, for the People had a mind to worke, Nehem. 4. 6. POLICY XVIII. In time of unexpected assaults. LOoke about where your weaknesses and disadvanta∣ges lie, and there apply forces, And they said unto us, from whence yee shall returne they will bee upon you, therefore I set in lower places behinde the Wall, and in the higher places, I even set the People with their swords, their speares, and bowes, Nehem. 4. 12, 13. POLICY XIX. In times of publike danger. WArme the bosomes of the people with exhortati∣ons,
excite them with the right of their cause, the dependancies, and supposed advantages, which are on their side, Be not afraid, re∣member the Lord who is great, fight for your brethren, your sonnes; and your daughters, your wives, and your houses, Neh. 4. 14. POLICIE XX. In some kinde of solliciting. IT is better to move by speech than letter; your face, your person, your countenance, may get regard; Saint John deferres further writing to Gaius, I trust I shall see thee shortly, and we shall speake face to face, 2 Joh. 14. POLICY XXI. In imploiment of Instruments. VSe the plainest, for they will worke faithfully, and report truly; cunning men will
for your satisfaction sake and their owne credit, adventure without command, and from your businesse derive credit to themselves: Christ chose the plainest for his spirituall busi∣nesse: God hath chosen the weake things of the world, 1 Cor. 1. 27. POLICIE XXII. What qualified instruments to im∣ploy. IN generall, fit your matter with a condition. In businesse of expostulation. VSe a bold man, such an one will not easily bee put off or daunted, God imploies Paul to the obstinate Jewes, Bee not afraid but speake, Acts 18. 9.
POLICIE XXIII. In businesse of persuasion. WHere entreaties are of moment, use well Ian∣guaged men; thus were the men of Lystra perswaded, and They called Paul Mercurius, because hee was the chiefe speaker, Acts 14. 12. POLICIE XXIV. In businesse of enquiry and obser∣vation. VSe subtle and crafty men, they will search, and skrew, & worme into busines of difficul∣ty, Counsell in the heart of a man is like deepe water, but a man of understanding will draw it out, Prov. 20. 5.
POLICIE XXV. Observation for imploiment. VSe such as have beene lucky and fortunate, such will bee industrious in your businesse to keepe up their reputation, The keeper of the prison imploied Joseph in all, for he saw what hee did the Lord made it to prosper, Gen. 39. 23. POLICIE XXVI. In the first onset to any for a request or suit. ONe way, 1. You may sound them a farre off rather than touch upon it abruptly: though our Saviour intended to stay with his Disciples, yet Hee made as though he would have gone far∣ther, Luke 24. 2.
POLICY XXVII. A Second way is by unexpe∣cted comming upon them, and some quicke question which prevents long deliberations; when God prevailed with Paul in his conversion, Suddainly there shined round about him a light from Heaven, Acts 9. 3. POLICY XXVIII. How to discover the dispositions of others. ONe way of discovery is by passion. Passion is one casement through which men are seene, therefore the Wise-man advised, The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, meaning, least hee dis∣cover himselfe, Prov. 19. 11.
POLICY XXIX. ANother way is by trust. He that committeth any thing to the faith of another may observe his condition: the Servant in the parable by the ta∣lent committed to him, discove∣red himselfe to his Lord, and heard from him, Thou hast beene faithfull over a few things, Matth. 25. 21. POLICY XXX. A Third way is by your ne∣cessity. When there is no pretext or colour to bee used, men are dis∣covered, how they stand affe∣cted; thus the Hypocrites for a while beleeved, but in time of temptation fell away, Luke 8. 13.
POLICIE XXXI. To worke one to your bent. One way, IT may bee done by knowing his nature and customes, and so you may winne him; thus▪ God disposes and orders men to his will, For he knoweth the hearts of the children of men, Prov. 15. 11. POLICY XXXII. ANother way, you may doe it, by observing their ends, and so draw them; Christ saw Simon, and the rest also for fish, and hee gave them their nets full at draught, and perswades them to follow him thus, Ye shall hence∣forth catch men, Luke 5. 10. POLICY XXXIII. A Third way, by knowing their faults and weaknesses, and so you may with awe make them yours, when the woman of
Samaria saw Christ knew her se∣cret faults, Whom thou hast now (saies he) is not thy Husband; I per∣ceive thou art a Prophet (saies she) and then honoured him, John 4. 18. POLICY XXXIV. In dealing with subtle men. THeir speeches must bee in∣terpreted by their ends and aimes you perceive by them, and doe no expound them too much to the present sense they seeme to beare; the Pharisees end with Christ was to trap him, therefore hee wisely declined every faire question, and that of Tribute thus, Give Cesar the things which are Cesars, Matth. 22. 21.
POLICIE XXXV. In occasions of expence. IF you bee fluent in one kinde▪ bee sparing in another, if in your diet, save it elsewhere, keepe one hand shut when the other is open, when Christ had beene prodigall in his Miracle of loaves and fishes, hee concluded fiugally, Gather up the fragments▪ that nothing be lost, Joh. 6. 12. POLICY XXXVI. In occasions of praise and commen∣dations. TOo much magnifying and applauding moves envy and contradiction, when the Officers said of Christ, Never man spake like this man, the Pharisees re∣plied, Are ye also deceived? John 7. 46, 47.
POLICIE XXXVII. In outward behaviours and de∣meanour. TOuse a kinde of ceremony is to teach others to be cur∣teous too, and demeanours most commonly are paid backe in their owne coine, Whatsoever a man soweth that shall hee reape, Gal. 6. 7. POLICIE XXXVIII. In society. BEe not too much in any thing, by that you create satiety and become cheape, With∣draw thy foot from thy neighbours house, least he be weary of thee and so hate thee, Prov. 25. 17.
POLICIE XXXIX. In application or addresse to any. APply your selfe so to any person of quality, as though it were more out of regard than your owne softnesse, least your good intention bee expounded flattery, therefore in discourse to acquit your selfe of this, inter∣pose your distinctions and rea∣sons to his, and when you allow, doe it with enlarging those rea∣sons which are his grounds: Christ commended the woman of Canaan when shee thus inter∣posed, Truth Lord, yet the Dogges eat of the crummes which fall from their masters table: shee yeelds to him, yet with an exception, Matth. 15 27.
POLICIE XL. When you would propose a thing to any. IT is not so convenient to offer it your selfe as to lay some traine for the party to take at; when Nehemiah had a desire to tell the King a businesse, hee be∣came sad, so as the King enqui∣red, Now (saies hee) before that time I had not beene sad in his pre∣sence, Neh. 2. 1. POLICIE XLI. In conference with any. IT is policy to watch him with your eye to whom you relate any thing of consequence, for the secrets of many appeare in by-motions of their counte∣nance and behaviours, therefore the eyes of God, whom no se∣crets escape, are said, To runne to and fro throughout the whole earth, 2 Chron. 16. 9.
POLICY XLII. In innovations or novelties. AFfect not innovation too much, for there is an incon∣gruity in all new things with the old, and they peece not so well, and such experiments are dangerous, unlesse the necessity be urgent, No man (saies Christ) putteth a piece of new lth to an old garment, for the rent is mad worse, Matth. 9 16. POLICY XLI II. In reformations. LOoke well that it be the ne∣cessity which calles for the reformation▪ and not rather a desire of your owne to change, and then Aske for the old pathes. where is the good way, and walke therein, Jer 6. 16.
POLICY XLIV. In dispatches. TOo much haste maketh false conclusions and clauses in bu∣sinesse, stay a while to make an end the sooner, The race is not to the swift, Eccl. 9. 11. POLICIE XLV. In discourse. OBserve the quicke and tart speeches of any, they are often sprung out of covert and secret intentions, therefore Salo∣mon condemnes such, Seest thou a man hasty in his words? there is more hope of a foole, Prov. 29. 20. POLICIE XLVI. In place or authority. THinke on those predecessors that have behaved themselves
ill in the place before, for a dire∣ction to thy selfe what to avoid, Now these things are our examples to the intent wee should not lust, as they also did, 1 Cor. 10. 6. POLICIE XLVII. When you are in place or authority. A second way, INvite and embrace helpes and advices touching the practice of bunesse, If two lie together, then they have heate, but how can one be warme alone? Eccl. 4. 11. POLICIE XLVIII. When you are in place. A third way, GIve accesse freely, and bee li∣berall of your presence, for concealement stirres up passion in sutours; it is even one of the spirituall griefes, Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psal. 30. 7.
POLICIE XLIX. When you are in place or authority. A fourth way, BE not swayed and led by ea∣sinesse, importunity, or light respects, To respect persons is not good, for such a man will trans∣gresse for a piece of bread, Prov. 28. 21. POLICY L. When you are in place or authority. A fifth way, IN conversation and private dispatches, be not too sensible of what you are, of your place and honour, by humility you shall finde grace and favour, God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble, and our Advocate Christ Iesus bids us, Step boldly  the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16.
POLICIE LI. In businesse of complaints. BEe not hasty to punish, but debate and examine, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, saies God, I will goe downe now, and see whether they have done al∣together according to the ery of it, Gen. 18. 30. 21. POLICY LII. To avoid envy. AVoid all unnecessary and ambitious ingrossing of businesse, and all insolent and proud affectations, He that exal∣teth his gate seeketh destruction, Prov. 17. 19.
POLICIE LIII. To avoid envy. A second way, A Wise man will some∣times in businesses that doe not much concerne, suffer himselfe to bee crost on purpose, and to bee over-borne, that hee may lessen envy, It is good for me that I was afflicted, Psal. 119. 71. POLICY LIV. In time of action: DOE not publish too much what you are to doe, it is like a Trumpet to call up and awake opposers or competi∣tours, The prudent shall keepe si∣lence in that time, Amos 5. 13.
POLICIE LV. In affronts and disgraces. One way, STudy not revenge too much, neither meditate on the af∣front, for by this you keepe your wound greene which would heale, It is honour for a man to cease from strife, but every foole will be medling, Prov. 20. 3. POLICY LVI. In affronts and disgraces. A second way, BEe not too witty in finding out circumstances of con∣tempt, for they kindle and aggra∣vate, He that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow, Eccl. 1. 18. POLICY LVII. A Third way, consider that revenge maketh thee but e∣ven with thy adversary, but par∣doning makes thee his better, it is the glory of a man to passe over a transgression, Prov. 19. 11.
POLICY LVIII. In affronts and disgraces. A fourth way, IF hee be a friend that provokes thee, thinke as Iob did, when God afflicted him, Shall I re∣ceive good at his hands? and shall I not receive evill?  Iob 2. 10. POLICY LIX. In your dealings. VSe a kinde of opennesse and freenesse, such be haviour will make others free to you▪ To communicate forget not: what∣soever you doe, doe it heartily: and as in water▪ Face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man, Prov. 27. 19.
POLICY LX. In your dealings. A second way, GEt the opinion of secrecy, for then like a sound and close vessell men will powre themselves into you; Let every man bee swift to heare, slow to speake, Jam. 1. 19. POLICIE LXI. In your dealings. A third way, GEt the report of upright dealing, and men will ne∣gotiate more freely with you; doe not affect the crooked cour∣ses of the Serpent, Renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, not wal∣king in craftinesse, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
POLICIE LXII. When favourites grow insolent and haughty. IT is wisedome to raise another into favour, who may give checke to the others insolency and presuming; Ahasuerus cau∣sed Haman his favourite to take the royall apparrell and put it upon Mordecai, Esth. 6. 10. POLICIE LXIII. When things succeed fairly with you, as friendships or fortunes. DOE not relie too much on the faire weather below, nor suffer your selfe much pos∣sessed with what you possesse; the faster you are glued and bound, you are then torne and rent from thence with more sor∣row; when Haman was com∣manded to honour Mordecai
whom hee hated, after hee had done, He hasted to his house mour∣ning, Esth. 6. 12. POLICIE LXIV. When there is difficulty in obtai∣ning a suit. IF you cannot prevaile for your entire sollicit, goe lesse for the present, and importune a grant in part by way of experi∣ment; when Daniel saw it was difficult to enjoy his diet of pulse and water, he said to their president, Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, and as thou sest▪ deale with thy servants, Dan. 1. 11, 12. POLICIE LXV. When pretences and rumours are told you, which concerne the action you are upon. EMlatours and secret Ene∣mies will be dispersing these,
to disparage your attempt, or to feare you from proceeding, for such prevaile much with a timo∣rous actour, but a wise and reso∣lute agent will neglect them; Thus (said Nehemiah) they all made us affraid, saying, Their hands shall bee weakened from the worke that it be not done, Neh. 6. 9. POLICIE LXVI. When you are sollicited from any great or famous action by pre∣tences. YOu may safely suspect their plot, for it is either to enter∣taine you with parley and delay, and so to hinder the progresse of your worke, or else to engage you in some other businesse, to make you remit in your industry and action upon this; And San∣ballet sent, saying, Come let us▪ meet together, and I sent saying, I am doing a great worke, Why should
the worke cease? and they sent unto me foure times, Neh. 6. 2, 3. POLICIE LXVII. In occasions of scandall. LOoke what your scandall is you afford and occasion, whether it bee dishonourable to your profession, religion, or obligation, and then differ not the reformation, least you con∣tinue it with too much disad∣vantage to the cause, Also I said, It is not good that ye doe: ought ye not walke in the feare of our God, because of the reproach of the Hea∣then our Enemies? Nehem. 5. 9. POLICIE LXVIII. In actions of great designe. SEt not both your eyes upon your businesse, but looke a∣broad with one, bee not too se∣cure in what you doe; if your
mattocke be in one hand, have a sword in the other, bee prepared for worke and defence; And the builders every one had his sword girded by his side, and so they buil∣ded, Neh. 4. 18. POLICIE LXIX. In times of Peoples or Commons complaint. IF the cry and exclamations bee high and grievous, delay not, but redresse exactions, by reforming the Officers and Ru∣lers, and causing them to ab∣staine; There were that said, wee have borrowed money for the Kings tribute: then I consulted with my selfe, and rebuked the Nobles and Rulers, and I said, I pray you, let us leave off this usury, Nehem. 5. 7. 10. 4.
POLICIE LXX. How to use the favours of any. BEe not insolent and presu∣ming, neither assume too much; it is Salomons, Put not forth thy selfe in presence of the King, Prov. 25. and when Saint John would have bowed himself, the Angell suffered him not, See thou doe it not, for I am thy fellow servant, Rev. 19. 10. POLICIE LXXI. In imparting a businesse which is not generally allowed. IT is not safe to bee too pre∣sumptuous no bold in com∣municating, especially to com∣mon people, and those of meane ranke, who are the very servants and vassals of rumour and fame; make choice rather of persons of quality; when Paul went to Jerusalem, I communicated (sayes
hee) the Gospell, but privately, to them which were of reputation, Gal. 2. 2. POLICIE LXXII. In difficult affaires. MUch counsell bringeth much safety, And God sate upon a throne, consulting how to destroy Ahab, and all the Hoast of Heaven standing by him, 1 Kings 22. 19. POLICIE LXXIII. In the multitude of sollicitours and sutours. REmission and reference is fit in such throng, and crowdes; when Paul in his asto∣nishment, asked GOD, What wilt thou I shall doe? he referred him over to Ananias: so Corne∣lius was set over in a vision to Peter,  Acts 9. 6. 10. 5.
POLICIE LXXIV. In giving favours. FAvours given with modera∣tion and temper, keepe them still in appetite and atten∣ding for more, None returned to give thankes (sayes Christ) but this stranger: so they that are strangers to your favours, that taste them seldome are thank∣fullest. When the Crow that Noah sent forth, found sure footing, he never returned. POLICIE LXXV. In carriage of a businesse. SEcrecy and silence is the chiefe engine: these that hold not counsell, are but Jays in acti∣on, and like bad gamesters, by not keeping close their Cardes, let their adversary winne the game.
The heart of a foole is in his mouth. POLICY LXXVI. In case of enquiry. BEe not too inquisitive after that you would bee loath to finde, it is like one that pursues that which hee desires to avoid, Take heed,—least thou heare thy servant curse thee, Eccl. 7. 21. POLICIE LXXVII. In dealing with a weake man. SAlomon forbids to exchange any aire with such per∣sons, there is neither credit in the contention, nor conquest; Answer not a foole according to his folly,  Prov. 264. yet hee allowes after, what he here disapproves; therefore a light medling is not amisse, but no familiarity; An∣swer a foole (and so leave him) ac∣cording
to his folly, least hee be wise in his owne conceit, Prov. 26. 5. POLICIE LXXVIII. In times of displeasure of friends. DOE not retire and leave a displeasure to it selfe, it is as if you should see your neigh∣bours house on fire, and goe a∣way, no seeking to quench it; keepe still your prescription, there is an art to looke ones selfe into the favour of a displeased friend; like one that sheds his image into a looking-glasse with standing before it; if the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place, for yielding pacifieth, Eccl. 10. 4.
POLICIE LXXIX. In reconcilements and comming backe of friends from wrath, IT is more policy to passe o∣ver words and causes, which have occasioned the difference, than to peece the rent with ex∣cuses and apologies. It is a strange act to make the cause of your enmity your way to friendship, and to send your old wrath on embassage for a new reconcilement, Hee that co∣vereth a transgression seeketh love, but he that repeateth a matter se∣parateth very friends, Prov. 17. 9. POLICIE LXXX. In discourse with the choterick and passionate. BEe smoothe and soft in your nswers and replies, and so you put off wrath, and this is to
blow upon the heate of another to coole him. Sweet entreaties and calme phrase perswades such passions into friendship; Surely the Ser∣pent will bite without enchantment, Eccles. 10. 11. POLICY LXXXI. In waiting for opportunities. BEe not too formall and pun∣ctuall for occasions; as it is but a vaine delicacy in Religion, so it is in civill matters; Thomas his faith was the worse for being so point-device, Except I shall see in his side the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the print of of the nailes, I will not believe. Doe not regulate your devoti∣on by the Calendar, nor waite for conveniency by the Alma∣nacke; Hee that observeth the winde shall not sow, and he that re∣gardeth the cloud shall not reape, Eccl. 11. 4.
POLICIE LXXXII. To know when fashions are pre∣tended and dissembled. THey are ever carried with timorousnesse and formali∣ty, and they come hardly and unnaturally from the actours; Peter sate downe among them, but a certaine Maide beheld him, as hee sate, and looked earnestly upon him, and said, This man was also with him, Luke 23. 55, 56. POLICY LXXXIII. In use of friendships. IF your friends bee men humo∣rous and uncertaine, though not with you for the present, yet date an alteration to your selfe; Ama tanquam inimius futurus, love your friend as one that may be your enemy; Job describes the wisedome of God in this clause, Behold hee put no trust in his ser∣vants,
even he charged his Angels with folly; and sayes Zachary, I was wounded in the house of my friend, Zach. 13 6. POLICIE LXXXIV. If you faile in your designe upon any. DOE not therefore extin∣guish all your purposes up∣on them, saying, as Paul at his farewell, From henceforth you shall see my face no more; if you faile in the thing you desired, doe not therefore casheere and turne their respect out of service: that were asif you should breake a bow, that would not hit the mark you shot at. Keepe what you had still in tune for application, and re∣member, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, Acts 1. 7.
POLICIE LXXXV. How affections and passions are in∣cited. PAssions are of light and sub∣tle nature, like aire and spi∣rit, soone moved; the motions which prevaile with them must bee according to their owne na∣ture, suddaine and subtle; Or ever I was aware, my Soule made mee like the Chariots of Amina∣dab, Cant. 6. 12. POLICY LXXXVI. How they are be calmed. THey are pacified by oppo∣sing passion to passion; I will turne their mourning into joy▪ Jer. 31. 13. By not opposing their first brunt, but suffering them to worke out their first forme of vi∣olence; By long for bearing even a Prince is perswaded, Prov. 25. 15.
POLICIE LXXXVII. To worke any by hope. STudy to create this passion in those you imploy, by promi∣ses and faire inducements, such will endure the distempers and agues of businesse, for hope is like a pulse and spirit in the ar∣tery of negotiation; therefore the Apostle sayes of Charity, that it hopeth all things, and end∣reth all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. POLICY LXXXVIII. To worke any by advantage of their dependances. OBserve what influence de∣pendances have upon mens natures. Where dependance is, there is a servility and tendernesse of be∣haviour, Therefore the chiefe Ru∣lers, though they beleeved in Christ,
durst not confesse him, because of the Pharisees, Joh. 12. 42. Where dependance is, there is an Obligation from departures; men that depend cannot bee free and absolute in their actions and motions, The eyes of such servants must still looke unto the hand of their masters. Where dependance is, there is a feare to make forfeit of pre∣scriptions and favours, to which they are entituled; therefore David in his spirituall adhe∣rence sayes, In thy feare will I worship, Psal. 5. 7. By these advantages men are awed and swayed, and speake in the Language of our Saviours o∣bedience, Not as I will, but as thou wilt, Matth. 26. 39.
POLICIE LXXXIX. How to enquire and informe your selfe. HE that would see the closets or private walkes of any, must procure the keyes. There is no informing your selfe in the secrets of another, without the helpe of these that can open them. A servant is one key, He revea∣leth his secret to his servants, A∣mos 3. 7. An espiall is another, A tale∣bearer revealeth secrets, Prov. 11. 13. His owne actions a third, thus God is discovered, Speake to the Earth, and it shall teach thee, Job 1. 7. Common report a fourth, Aske now—the Fowles of the aire, and they shall tell thee, Job. 12. 7. Familiars and Counsellours a fifth, Come (said Dalilah) for he
hath shewed me all his heart, Judg. 16. 18. POLICY XC. How to know how men are affected. IT is a pretty art of discovery, to put out some questions or cases which import your pro∣ject, and to observe how they assent or dissent; this is to dive and wade for a secrecy, and to informe your selfe for accom∣modation; this policy the Pha∣risees used often upon Christ, Is it lawfull (say they) to heale on the Sabbath-day? this they said tempting and trying him, Matth. 12. 10. POLICY XCI. How to make men tell some secret or private grievance. IT is a prevailing practice, to pretend the like, and seeme
sicke of the same diseaemen of a trade or profession will commu∣nicate most freely each to other: We powre out our selves freeliest to Christ, for hee was like us in all things, sinne onely excepted, Heb. 4. 15. 2. Another way is to appose▪ and question them in times and seasons of alacrity and joy, for the spirits then come forth more from retirednesse and privacy, and have a subtle loosenesse and laxation, and are not so retentive and difficult; therefore it is stiled in Scripture, The Oyle of joy, Isai 61. 3. because it makes the parts soft and supple to be wrought. POLICY XCII. A Third way, to picke a se∣cret out, is to observe them in any fit of sorrow or dis∣content; for though griefe bee a corrugation and contraction of the parts within, yet it holds
with the nature of strainings and squeesings; there is something still exprest, and got out at such times; when David was in hea∣vinesse, then sayes hee, I acknow∣ledged my sinne unto thee, P sal. 32. 5. POLICY XCIII. How to preserve a State from se∣dition and tumult. LEt there bee a free course for complaints, let the law bee open and expedite; this keepes favourites and great ones from daring, and doing wrong, and restraines the people from sediti∣ous meanes of redresse, when they observe any wrong committed; Seeke judgement, relieve the op∣pressed, Isai. 1. 17.
POLICIE XCIV. In secret calumniations and libel∣lings. APprehend alwayes the first rumours, and catch at the breath of reproaches; their spreading is like a malignant aire, that infects where it blowes: the onely course here is to force the libeller and calumniatour to turne accuser and impleader, and to bring publicke proofe for the private calumniation, and so ex∣cuse, or condemne: Execute judgement in the morning, Jam. 4. 11. Jer. 21. 12. POLICIE XCV. In innovations and change of lawes INnovations are made two wayes, either suddainly and at once, when the present lawes are then observed inconvenient; and this is scarce effected without
dislike and opposition and dan∣ger. Or by degrees and slowly, by these which foresee inconveni∣ences at a distance, and even here is a hazard of dislike from these which are not equally sighted. In generall, the danger is great, and departures from customes unsafe and full of hazard; Ab antiqua vivendi consuetudine non libenter discedamus; therefore sayes the Wise-man, Meddle not with them that are given to change, Prov. 24. 21. POLICIE XCVI. In time of peace. EVen in a time of peace, it is a policy to have a noise of warre: the exercise of armes makes your peace brighter than them, and preparations for an enemy, keepes your enemy at more distance, never none lost by antedating losses; Pais tem∣pore
belli studia tractarentur, Watch therefore, for yee know not the day, Matth. 25. 13. POLICIE XCVII. How to make innovations tak∣with the people. WHatsoever the change be, whither of forme of go∣verment, or lawes, or doctrine and discipline, still things take better if they appeare in the fea∣ture of antiquity, and that your change seemes still but to bee a recovery of antiquity which was lost, and a kinde of reduce∣ment to the primitive integrity; therefore give the same names and titles, vt eadem cum illis esse putentur, that they may bee thought the same still among the vulgar; for absolute innovations will take from none but him, who said, Behold I make all things new, Revel. 21. 5.
POLICY XCVIII. What would bee done at succeeding into a new state or fortune. IF too much injury may not follow, or unlawfulnesse bee committed by it, it is policy to alter the state and fortunes of the greater sort, to transmite and exchange the possessions and their lords, to put a new face up∣on all things, that you may bee the onely man read there, and all dependances acknowledge you: this action comes in a proporti∣on to that of God, Who filleth the hungry with good things, but the rich he hath sent empty away. Luke 1. 53. POLICY XCIX. In great deserts and expectations of reward. IT is the best not to seeme assu∣ming and arrogating, for then
the obligation ends in ingrati∣tude, and where men have beene most deserving, even those which should requite, grow sicke of two diseases which makes them un∣gratefull, Avaritia & suspitione, avarice and envy, and Where envy is there is confusion, and every evill worke, Jam. 3. 16. POLICY C. When any faction or power growes great and dangerous. IT is policy to suffer it with caution, for if you once shew your dislike in opposing, you stir it into combustion and strife, for many are often well prepared to rebell, which fit still and con∣tent themselves in the contem∣plation of the power they en∣joy, like some birds which never stirre nor offer upon wing, while you seeme to neglect, or not eye and stirre them too much, but if once you move, they move too;
therefore in this case as the Pro∣phet sayes, Your strength is to sit still, Isai. 30 7. POLICIE CI. If you suppresse your disposition for a time, it is policy to change and shew it selfe by degrees. HEe that hath occasion to suspend the discovery of himselfe, and thinkes it no time to make himselfe knowne, let him take heed when hee hath ob∣tained what he desired, that hee change not too suddainly, but that his alteration seeme rather a worke of the occasions which happen to him, and that hee seemes to change because things require it, else hee discovers his disguise and pretence to his dis∣honour, but in the other way like Job, He even waites till his change come, Job 14. 14.
POLICY CII. When you observe any Officer or favourite to expresse himselfe free and noble generally. TAke notice that two things may set such on worke, therefore they are to be eyed and observed. The one may bee an ambition to greatnesse and popularity. The other, a fortifying them∣selves in the favours and opini∣ons of others, that they may bee more able to struggle with the authority they feare. Therefore observe, Ne benefi∣centiae aliqua specie mali quippiam mliantur, least what they pre∣tend as a vertue, they use but to colour their vice, for Gifts are said even to blinde the wise, Exod. 23. 8.
POLICIE CIII. How to diminish or lessen a faction. ENquire into their walkes and advantages, and those they adhere to, winne those then by favours and promises from them in private, and this is to disable them without noise or appea∣rance of tumult: this the Apostle observes and drawes some from siding with the world by propo∣sing Heaven and heavenly com∣forts, From such withdraw thy selfe, but godlinesse is great gaine, 1 Tim. 6. 5, 6. POLICIE CIV. When you are to receive favours or rewards from any. DOE not betray by your joy and alacrity any project which lies dormant in your bo∣some, watching for this occasi∣on; discover not your secret
ends and purposes, you intend upon the enjoying this favour, and give no occasion for suspiti∣on; hee is unwise that makes suit for his enemies sword, and tels him hee intends to slay him therewith, Discover not a secret to another, Prov. 25. 9. POLICY CV. In occasions of rebuke and incre∣pation. WHen you have occasion to reprove the errours and misbehaviours of any, ob∣serve your season and phrase for it, if they bee many who are in∣teressed in the guilt, reprove them smoothly and calmely; Saint Pauls methode is observeable, when hee rebuked the Corinthi∣ans, What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I praise you not, 1 Cor. 11. 22.
POLICY CVI. In employing formerly discontented spirits. THey that worke by such, are like those that shoote in a broken bow, which will not hold the bending, it is not safe to employ any who have suffered ill intreaty or disfavour from you, such keepe a wound in me∣mory, and they will either fall upon some action which shall recover their honour, or expresse their revenge, Ʋsing their liberty for a cloak: of maliciousnesse 1 Pet. 2. 16. POLICIE CVII. In counselling and advising. THose counsels which are un∣fortunate, though they bee prudent and faithfull, yet prove ever dangerous to the counsel∣lours themselves; therefore it is
policy to advise with moderati∣on, and not with vehemency and importunity; and yet however to propound your soundest rea∣sons and arguments, that these which embrace it may rather seeme to come over to it, than bee drawne, and when their as∣sent meets, they stand equally engaged themselves to share in the successe; it is not safe for any to counsell peremptorily, but for him Who worketh all things after the counsell of his owne will, Ephes. 1. 11. POLICIE CVIII. How to behave your selfe when you are envied. IT is your safest to seeke the re∣move of those which envy your attempts, yet by honest and lawfull wayes, for so long as they are neare you they will bee a cloud still to hinder the bright∣nes and clearenesse of your acti∣ons;
God tooke away Korab and his complices, that Moses might doe his service more accu∣rately and famously, Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33. POLICY CIX. DOE not seeme in your acti∣ons to referre all to your selfe, and to bee too much a cen∣ter to what you doe, attribute all your successe to the Power a∣bove; It is no more I, sayes Paul, but Christ that dwelleth in mee; and make still protestation, that your undertaking have respect to the benefit of others; Whether we bee comforted (say es the same Apostle) it is for your consolation,—or whether wee bee sober, it is for your cause, 2 Cor. 1. 65. 13.
POLICY CX. What you are to observe when you are to negotiate with any. AS hee is no wise physitian, that will not study to know the full vertue of every ingredi∣ent he uses, and all circumstances which concerne the nature of it, so hee is no wise man for busi∣nesse, that will not study the knowledge of him hee deales with, for there are many things which have influence and make impression upon the nature of man; the discovery of which may doe much service. It is necessary to consider the sexe; the Feminine is more soft and easie, and lighter things will move and prevaile with it, there∣fore the Apostle cals Women the weaker Vessell, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Then consider the age: old age is more perverse and harsh to
treate with; Seest thou (sayes Sa∣lomon) an old—King? there is more hope of a foole than of him, Prov. 26. 12. Consider the state or present condition, prosperity makes men more daring and confident, I said, sayes David, in my prosperity, I shall never be moved, Psal. 30. 6. Consider their country or cli∣mate, for their inclination is a little over-ruled by that; Paul bids Titus rebuke the Cretians sharpely, because They are lyars, evill beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12, 13. Consider the present disposi∣tion and humour they are in, the Apostles observing that Christ was not disposed to be discove∣red; None of them, sayes the Text, durst aske him, who art thou? Joh. 21. 12. Consider where their advan∣tages
and disadvantages or weaknesses lie most, like the light whose brightnesse examines the least chinke in a roome, and there shootes in; I gave my heart (sayes Salomon) to seeke and search out by wisedome concerning all things, Eccl. 1. 13. POLICIE CXI. How to enfavour your selfe with those you discourse with. BEe observant of the humour and disposition you see raigning and predominant where you come, bee not singular nor contradicting, discord advances all musicke, but the musicke of society and correspondence: they that cannot comply (and yet not betray too much easi∣nesse) are ignorant of the true symmetry and proportion in so∣ciety, and are like those in the parable, We have  to yee, but
ye have not danced, we have mour∣ned to ye, but ye have not lamented, Matth. 11. 17. POLICY CXII. How to make one love your com∣pany. BEe not too lockt up nor re∣served, when there are occa∣sions of freenesse offered, but let your behaviour like a key open the double locke of your owne and your friends reservation; it is no right method to draw one neare you, by keeping your selfe at distance; and the way to have the vessell of another opened, is to powre forth your selfe in a sweet effusion, Because of the sa∣vour of thy good ointments, there∣fore doe the Virgins love thee, Cant. 1. 3.
POLICY CXIII. If you would be popular. LEt your face bee open and entertaining: there is an art to looke ones selfe into respect and honour: a plausible and libe∣rall countenance is a pleasant re∣pose to these that perhaps shall never be admitted nearer you, as a hall or dining chamber in a great mans house welcomes ma∣ny which never come to bee ac∣quainted with the lodging or in∣ner roomes; The King hath brought me into his chamber (sayes the Spouse) wee will bee glad and rejoyce, Cant. 1. 4. POLICIE CXIV. How to observe your times of free∣nesse with great ones. BE not unseasonable in broa∣ching any pleasant humour, like intruding Musicians, that
strike up in a roome where many are retired and busie: wee know Christ turned the musicke out of Jairus house for venting their lighter aires at the serious time of a funerall, the best opportunities are meale times, and some other by-houres of relaxation, others must bee as well tuned for recei∣ving as you for giving, While the King sitteth at the table, my Spik∣nard sendeth forth the smell, Cant. 1. 12. POLICY CXV. How to behave your selfe towards your friend, that you become not guilty to his exceptions. BEe punctuall in finding out his times of sowrenesse and disaffection▪ for all men have cri∣ticall seasons and dayes, and are not alwayes the same in humour and disposition; let their beha∣viour be the alarme to yours, and be observant of their more secret
motions and gestures, and awake with them at their first sum∣mons, for you shall see, if you be an exact observer, the dawnings and day breake of their better dispositions: it was a wise com∣mand the Spouse gave, I charge ye, O ye Daughters of Ierusalem, that yee stirre not up nor awake my beloved till hee please, Cant. 2. 7. POLICIE CXVI. How to preserve your selfe fresh and acceptable to society. DOE not let your selfe loose so as to create any satiety or surfet in those you converse with, but leave them as neare as you can in appetite and desire, and it will not be amisse to make some suddaine and unexpected departures, so they seeme not too affected and abrupt▪ thefe that af∣fect you will continue after this inquisitive and restlesse to enjoy you: it is policy to shed a plea∣sant
sowrenesse in some of your actions, and to become an inge∣nious and friendly tormentour▪ these are in Salomons language the true wounds of a friend, and an ingredient of such bitternesse will addulce and sweeten you afterwards; I opened to my belo∣ved, but my beloved had with∣drawne himselfe and was gone, I called on him, but hee   no answer, Cant. 5 6. POLICIE CXVII. If you would have one thnke you endeare them in speciall after a reconcilement: LAbour to bee guilty of an act  ay shew some notable friendly respect; in new reconcilements, it is not the ex∣changes of ordinary behaviours and common entreaties which will doe it, such are taken but for complements and aires of the times, and like an eccho finde
a returne in the same accent, the Spouse takes a▪ wise course with her beloved, I found him whom my Soule loved, I held him, and would not let him goe, untill I had brought him into my mothers house, and into the chambers of her that conceived me, Cant. 3. 4. POLICIE CXVIII. How to make any take notice you honour them. IF you know any eminent oc∣casion or solemnity wherein such may stand ingaged, shew▪ your selfe an observer there as one that had brought a share of congratulations to sacrifice at such a time: persons that are pub∣licke and famous, love to have things passe with notice and re∣gard, Goe forth, O yee daughters of Sion, and behold King Salomon with the crowne wherewith his mo∣ther
crowned him in the day of his spusals, and in the day of the gladnesse of his heart, Cant. 3. 11. POLICIE CXIX. If you desire to see or heare experi∣ments of the faculty wherein one excels. A Modest insinuation of your knowledge in their abilities, a smooth taking notice how eminent they are, will in∣vite them to communicate: there is a secret to discourse men into a relation of themselves, Awake O North-winde, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4. 16.
POLICIE CXX. How to informe your selfe of the parts of any. IF the party you discourse with bee difficult in his relati∣ons, use a kinde of interrogato∣ry enquiry, question him in an handsome way of diminution and lessening that which you de∣sire to see enlarged: the Daugh∣ters of Jerusalem desirous to know what a Lover the Spouse had, What is thy Beloved (say they) more than another Beloved? then shee answers, My Beloved is white and ruddy, the fairest among tenne thousand, Cant. 5. 10.
POLICIE CXXI. What to doe in civill factions and commotions. 1. Consider their originall. CIvill contentions are occasi∣oned by a double feare, the Rebels hasten to Armes fearing a future revenge for their present provocation, and the King or Princes of State hasten, fearing their surprisall, and had rather overtake their violence with an early setting forth, than stay at home for it, and Stay you not (sayes Joshua) but pursue, Josh. 10. 19. 2. Present need and necessity is another occasion, and then they envy the fortunes and goods of the reft, and like Naboth, are sicke of their neighbours vinyards. 3. The luxury and licentious∣nesse of times is a third occasion, and then a faction rather, lascivit
quam saevit, is more a wanton than a rebell, and like a proud fed Horse corvets till hee cast his Rider; the Apostle gives this same reason for the spirituall re∣volt, They have begunne to waxe wanton against Christ, 1 Tim. 5. 11. POLICIE CXXII. Consider now the parties in the commotion, and their quality. AMbitious men are most stir∣rers, for troubled waters are fitter for their nettes than calmer streames, and they hope to shuffle into a place or station, like men in crowdes, sooner in a tumult or disorder, than upon quieter tearmes: David com∣plaines, The proud are risen a∣gainst me, Psal. 86. 14. 2. Men of desperate and bro∣ken fortunes, for such having runne riot upon themselves are
readier to doe the same upon o∣thers, and to set their neighbours house on fire, that they may from their losses save something to themselves, these that stirred once in a time of combustion, sayes the Scripture, was every one that was in distresse, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, 1 Sam. 22. 2. 3. Men inconstant and wave∣ring are parties too, for to such it is tedious to have things al∣wayes the same, and like Coper∣nicus, they never thinke things are in right in motion, but when they runne round, and then they are in most appetite and expe∣ctation, and are ready to play the midwifes, when times are bigge with new and doubtfull actions, and to deliver them into strange events, and thus the Apo∣stle▪ observes it in the spirituall change too, The time will come when they will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their owne lusts, shall heape to themselves Teachers, having itching eares, 2 Tim. 4. 3. 4. Men confident and daring are great advancers of this cause, the more men in these attempts put forward, the more the com∣mon rout put to them, and the worse men are now, the better for such a cause, —n turbis pravus sortitur ho∣norem. The first men in the impiety, are the first in esteeme and credit, The Leaders of the People cause them to erre, Isai. 9. 16. 5. Men disaffected and dis∣contented with present affaires are not behinde heere, these are eloquent in complaints of the times, and ingenious in scatte∣ring suspitions and jealousies up∣on the King and Governours, be∣ing the very turbamenta vulgi, incentives of the people; They dispose Government, presumptuous
are they, and are not afraid to speake evill of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10. POLICIE CXXIII. Consider the things that further the Faction. KNow that meetings and private conventicles ae the very Parliaments of factious deliberations and resolutions, and are to bee observed and dis∣persed, The Rulers of the Earth were gathered together against the Lord and against▪ his Church, Acts 4. 26. 2. Know also that the preten∣ces which Factions make use on are the recovery of their liber∣ties, which they complaine to bee taken in, and mode straiter, the defence of their charters, with other reformations, these are the colours a rebellion paints with, and sets them abroad to
entertaine the eyes of the com∣mon people; the Elders and Scribes thinke to prevaile against Stephen thus, We have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and charge the customes which Moses delive∣red us, Acts 6. 14. POLICY CXXIV. What to doe to becalme civill Fa∣ctions and combustions. KIll Factions betimes, as Herod did the infants in their cradles, if you let them grow they may prove too strong for you, when a sedition is at age it is more able, Fortior adulta se∣ditio; a little Physicke will dis∣perse a gathering Disease, which if it knot, hath more danger and difficulty: it was enough to make the Servant in the Parable bad, when he thought with him∣selfe, My Lord delayeth his com∣ming, Matth. 24. 48.
2. Send some of authority, gra∣vity, and of a gracefull speech among them, who may disswade and exhort; And they were asto∣nished, for his Word was with po∣wer, Luke 4. 32.
3. Let the Prince or chiefe Governour reserve his owne pre∣sence for the last remedy; Last of all (sayes the Parable) hee sent his Sonne, saying, they will reverence my Sonne: the appearance of the greatest prove often happy ex∣tinguishers to a civill flame, yet let it bee done in all state and royall circumstance, the perso∣nall presence of many Com∣manders have put a commotion sometimes out of countenance, till they have turned as the Soul∣dier from Caesar, with a Non pos∣sum ferre fulmenculorum, wee cannot endure the thunderbolt of your eye: know too, that common people are more ready to beginne opposition than con∣tinue it, more ready Ad rebellan∣dum,quam bellandum: And when they saw the chiefe Captaine and Souldiers, they left beating of Paul, Acts 21. 32. 4. Though the Faction gather and grow violent, yet let the weapons bee the last in your hands, give dayes of respit, and time for a calme; naturall things after a trouble will returne to smoothnesse, and afterward re∣duce themselves to a setled con∣sistence; And remember that to sinners, God is gracious and merci∣full, long-suffering, and of great kindnesse, Joel 2. 13. 5. Try experiments upon them with severall passions, raise them with hopes by faire entreaties, and promises, and cast them downe with feares and menaces; offendours are wonne with al∣lurements, and awed with threat∣nings; God uses this method,
If my People shall humble them∣selves, and seeke my face, I willheare, and forgive, and heale their Land; but if yee turne away, then will I plucke them out by the roots, 2 Chron. 7. 14, 19. 6. Try to draw away some of them with gifts and office of place or honour, and thus you pull feathers out of the wing of a conspiracy, and imps your owne. 7. Dispatch some of eminency to comply in the faction with them, and to bee parties among them, and their advices may find occasions and pretences to pull them behinde or about in their practices, that you may gaine ground and advantage; David had his pensioner in Absaloms counsell-chamber, 2 Sam. 17. 5, 6. 8. Doe not shew your selfe too inquisitive into those you suspect guilty of any adherence, neither make too much noise of revenge and punishment; pardons are
your best language to offendours, though many bee in the guilt, there should bee but few in the suffering, Multorum culpa sit poe∣na paucorum. If that Nation (sayes God) against whom I have pronounced turne from their evill, I will repent of the evill that I thought to doe unto them, Jer. 18. 8. POLICIE CXXV. What to bee observed before you embarque in businesse. CAlme such passionate moti∣ons as trouble your spirit, so long as smooth water is trou∣bled, there can be no cleare refle∣xion; passions shed an ill dispo∣sition over the whole Soule, and distracts both your counsell and judgement, so as you may then erre, both in making choice of your end, and of your meanes to it, or in your act of applying, and accommodating, or in the
time you should take, or the place where you should doe it; thus the ambitious and envious men of humours and passions often succeed ill; A man of coun∣sell will be considerate, Eccl. 32. 18. 2. They are not likely to suc∣ceed ill who make God of their counsell, goe not forth among affaires below till you have beene above: David resolves wisely, I will heare what God the Lord will speake, Psal 85. 8. POLICIE CXXVI. What to doe in calumniations. EXpresse neither your passi∣on, nor revenge; if the re∣ports bee just, your guilt is a pri∣vilege; if false, it is wisedome to take no notice, stirre not there, where you shall provoke sooner than appease; A wise man will pacifie it, Prov. 16. 14.
POLICIE CXXVII. What you are to doe in affaires in generall. FIrst consultation is requisite and election of what is to be done, then looke about for cir∣cumstances, as of place, time, persons, humours, dependancies, occurrences which may happen, propose all reasons, suspitions, conjectures, and improve them by a due examination, forecast impediments or what may hin∣der your effecting, and conse∣quences, what may follow and arise from thence, then looke to the conduct of your businesse, how to dispose all, and allow some uncertainty to those events which are independant, for there is an instance of succeeding in which providence reserves and reveales when and to whom shee pleases, There is a time when in their hands there is good successe, Eccl. and sayes Christ, cast the
net on the right side of the ship, and yee shall finde, Joh. 21. 6. there is a right side for fishing, else your net may returne empty. First see what is to bee done in each particular case. 2. Then enquire prudently the meanes how to compasse it, then observe the just measure and pro∣portion you are to allow the action, that is, weigh the fittings of the circumstance of time, place, and subject, then apply your selfe to the felicity or dex∣terity of arriving where you in∣tend: Let reason goe before every enterprise and counsell before every action Ecclef. 37. 16. POLICIE CXXVIII. How to quicken your judgement for dispatch of affaires. IF you would have your judge∣ment cleare for the conduct of
businesse; retire home into your selfe, and keepe sometimes a di∣stance with businesse; your eye sees not so distinctly things that are nearest and closest; Moses will be in the Mount a farre off, as well as below among the people; and your judgement or word of your Soule should like the eter∣nall Word of God, Never goe out so, as to depart from you. POLICY CXXIX. How to obtaine respect. THe state of outward cir∣cumstances and retinue, will command a stooping and bowing in opinions towards you, if you want these your owne vertues, and good qualities will doe you that service, yet have them va∣lued by others upon your selfe, and keepe them at home, and they will bee more admired a∣broad, for retirements and with∣drawings in conversation is like
a distance, to some scene of a heaven which is presented with more admiration, and in your necessary nearnesse with any that are your familiars, let not your face and language and ge∣sture too freely loose to your owne or anothers mirth, you shall never binde up strangers in a solid respect of you by too much unloosing your selfe, Numb. 11. The plentifull showers of Manna caused a satiety, and made the people say, Now our Soules are dried away that there is nothing besides this Manna, Num. 11. 6. POLICY CXXX. What to doe if you would have your counsels words or deeds respected. THere is a secret authority and power which hath great influence over mens spirits, and it is some individuall thing
within the party, some naturall graces besides the affluence of outward things which begets re∣putation and sets a price upon him in the opinions and causes what hee sayes or does to bee re∣ceived; observe what you have of this in you, and then preserve and improve it, for it is of great advantage; commanders, law∣givers, and magistrates, profes∣sours in arts and sciences are fa∣mous for it; where men are of reputation, others encline before hand to their opinion, belike for feare they come too late, they attended to our Saviour, for He spake as one that had autho∣rity, and not as the Scribes, Matth. 7. 29. POLICIE CXXXI. How to gaine respect and estimate. NObility, wealth, dignities, favours, friends, are such outward things as conduce to
put you into respect; to these beauty, comelinesse, and grace∣fulnesse, to these the gifts of the Soule, as of knowledge, wise∣dome, or what other vertue or grace may exalt you above the ordinary pitch of others, these give men the empire and sove∣raignty over others, and above all these, that speciall character which God imprints upon any whom hee intends for place or office, which ever commands ve∣neration, and entitles to prehe∣minence; David was commended to Saul thus, I have seene a sonne of Jesse that is cunning in playing, and a valiant man and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the Lord is with him, 1 Sa. 16. 18. POLICIE CXXXII. How to preserve the credit and good name you get. AS in the spirituall estate perseverance preserves and
advances that grace which re∣lapses weaken and loose, so in the temporall, the streame that will be still pure must keepe run∣ning; Philosophers say, Ex qui∣bus nascimur nutrimur, wee are nourisht with such things as wee are made on, thus in fortunes, the same actions must bee repea¦ted for the preservation which were active in the acquisition, Fortuna moribus immutatur, a change in your course will bring a change on your estate, Meddle not with them that are given to change, Prov. 24. 21. And a double minded man is unstable in all his wayes, Jam. 1. 8. POLICY CXXXIII. How to gaine credit and esteeme by your meanes. BEe liberall and magnificent, yet doe it with speciall choice of persons, causes, times, and places, the service of God
and your country are the actions which exalt you most in the eyes of all; God is magnified by Da∣vid thus, He hath dealt bountifully, sayes hee, and those to whom God himselfe sayes, Yee are Gods, must keepe in some faire propor∣tion to make good their Divinity they receive, Hee that sowth bountifully shall reape bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. POLICIE CXXXIV. How to know whether you be luckie and fortunate, and how to con∣tinue so. IF you finde an happy con∣currence of your affaires with time, place, and persons which give successe, bee prudent and in∣dustrious to manage and dispose this good fortune, your coopera∣tion is necessary, and though God provide you this harmony in your circumstances, yet your owne paines and counsels must
manage them, and then you shall not bee so much fortunate by contingency and chance, as by in∣dustry and prudence, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, Tim. 4. 14. POLICIE CXXXV. How to keepe you at your point of prosperity. BEe moderate, and bee graci∣ous to your friends and ad∣herents, avoid insolency and presumption, for those kindle you into scorne, and pride, and enflame into emulations, and emulations into checkes and contradictions, and those bring on improsperous events, there∣fore the highest have had the most fatall mischances, Goe on with thy businesse in meeknesse, so shalt thou be approved, Eccl. 3. 17.
Let us not be derous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another, Gal. 5. 26. FINIS. Imprimatur, T. Wykes. Febr. 5. 1638.
