22399 99852615 17944
A SVRVEY OF THE MIRACLES OF THE CHVRCH of Rome, prouing them to be ANTICHRISTIAN. WHEREIN ARE examinedand refuted the six funda∣mentall Reasons of IOHN FLOOD Ignatian, published by him in defence of Popish Miracles. By RICHARD SHELDON Ca∣tholike Priest, and sometimes in the Church of Rome Mr. FLOODS COLLEAGƲE. IEREMY 50. 14. Put your selues in aray against Babilon round about: all yee that bend the bowe, shoote at her, spare no arrowes, for she hath sinned against the Lord. LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop at S. Austens Gate, at the signe of the Pyde Bull. 1616.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE VVILLIAM Earle of Pembrooke, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe, Marmion, and S. Quintin; Lord Chamberlaine to his Maiestie, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Gar∣ter, one of his Maiesties most Ho∣norable Priuie Councell. RIGHT HONOVRABLE SVCH is the condition of bookes (though the lynes of them may haply be as ap∣ples of beaten gold,) that like houses without couers, they are not reputed per∣fect, vnles they beare in their Fronts the Name of some Potent Patrone, whereby they may be shadowed from the blasts of ignorant and ma∣licious Censurers. Our most Christian and vi∣ctorious
Soueraigne, hauing as another Dauid with the flint of Gods word, and the slnge of his admirable Spirit, smitten the Golias of Rome in his forehead, wherewith he lyeth prostrate on the ground, groueling in the ignominie of his meretricious enormities; hath by his Princely example, drawne diuers of his Worthies to ga∣ther vp the spoyles of his victories; amongst whom, and behinde whom, my selfe as a soul∣dier postliminio in praelium reuertens, haue (being moued thereunto by the zeale of Gods truth) vndertaken this taske, to reueale the Antichri∣stianisme of his Exuuies, I meane his rotten and ragged miracles. Hauing finisht the Treatise, and bethinking my selfe of a Patrone, I concei∣ted tht the Patronage of such an argument, was meete for the Emperour himselfe; and also that his shield would be more then needfull, for the defence of a poore Souldier against a world of Aduersaries. Yet weighing with my selfe, how his most learned eyes, and victorious hands, are filled with presents of Bookes from euery hand, and of euery argument, I resol∣ued not to presume in this kinde; and yet for my securitie and safetie, I determined not to depart a latere Principis, whose Princely fauour
I haue already layd vp as a crowne vpon my heart. To your most Honourable Selfe there∣fore, who for your rare Vertues are honoured with the grace of being Comes Pallatinus à latere; I haue presumed to present this my worke, and to lay it into the hands of your most Honoura∣ble and Christian Patronage. I nothing doubt of your Noble admittance of the same, such a Humanitie is seated in your Noble brest, as in a naturall Center; and such is the nature of the argument handled, that it beareth this affiance with it selfe, that it will not bee vnwelcome to so Religious and Christian a Peere of the Church. If I be demanded the Reasons of this my Dedication to your Honour; I summe them vp thus; Loue, Opinion, Religion; Loue, for I confesse ingenuously, the very first moment I saw your Honour attending vpon our Soue∣raigne, your most Noble aspect did present to my apprehensfull view, true Nobilitie, ador∣ned with a Christian , and a Panoplie of all vertues, which then like a Load-stone drew my minde to loue and admiration of your most Noble Person, the which some courteous respects of your Honour to my selfe
haue since confirmed. Opinion, and Fama verax, which reporteth your Honour to be a worthy Fauourer of learning; an Honourable Mecaenas, to all such as desire your Patronage: a noble testimonie of true Nobilitie, brought forth in your birth, nourished by your education, perfe∣cted by your affectation and prosecution of all noble studies. Religion, wherein your Honour by the hand of heauen (for this Donum optimum is from aboue, à Patre luminum) appeareth by imitation, to be another Iob; sincere, vpright, and fearing God; siding to no side, but walking via regia, & via media, before the Christ of our Lord, and Christ our Lord: by which Christian Collar of vertues, (though your place be most Honourable) I may say in Agesilaus his words, Conciliasti loco dignitatem. When I weigh with my selfe, how his most Excellent Maiestie, clothed with the zeale of the glorie of Gods house, after a most learned Pre∣monition with pen, hath in his excellent Decla∣ration pro iure Regio, consecrated himselfe Pugi∣lem, a Champion to the warres of the Lord: I can∣not but be comforted to thinke, what com∣manders he would finde, who like Isadas, holding lance in one hand, and sword in the other, will be rea∣dy
ruere in hostes. And would God, the day were come, that the old Romanes wisdom were followed, who resolued to fight against Philip in Grecia, lest they should be put to defend themselues against him in Italie: So our Chri∣stian Monarch, would be pleased to command the Capitoline Ioue of Rome to be assaulted, who now by himselfe in his Breefes, and by his Igna∣tians furiall bookes, sendeth Sentences most furi∣ous into this Kingdom, not to be written with inke but with blood, as his Maiestie writeth: which his presumptions, what are they else but incitements to some hellish and furious Rauillacs? At whose head and Crowne doth Suarius ayme and point in his most furious booke? My pen dreadeth to write, what his Maiestie hath declared in his most learned Declaration, touching the same point. And may not Clemencie it selfe be awa∣ked with such roares, to doe such things as appertaine to the seueritie of iustice? Opus alie∣num, opus eius. What shall we say? Let vs pray, Memento Domine Iacobi tui & omnis mansuetudinis eius. Let his enemies o Lord be confounded, who proiect euill to his soule: And grant Lord that the presage which one Worthington, hearing of the happie▪ Inauguration of our most gracious
Soueraigne, vttered at Valladolid in these words, We are vndone, we are vndone, Iames of Scotland is proclaimed King of England. Let it O Lord proue a true prophecie, against them and their Ioue; let them be vndone at home, and abroad; night and day; sleeping and waking; in them∣selues, and in their posterities; who thirst thus after the blood of thy Annointed Ones, and haue made thy house a den of theeues▪ If peaceable Salomon become Lion, by their traiterous pro∣uokings, let them impute it to themselues; San∣guis eorū, supra capita eorum. And so most hum∣bly leauing my Booke vnder your Honors gra∣cious protection, I pray most heartily the Lord Iesus to blesse your Honour, with an assured pledge of true happinesse in this life, and with fullnes thereof in the life to come. Amen. Your Honours most humbly deuoted, RICHARD SHELDON.
The Contents of the Treatise Following. CHAP. I. A Prelude, shewing the Popes Psendochristianisme, in re∣spect of his lying signes and wonders; the same is decla∣red by diuers particulars. Page. 1. CHAP. II. A second prelude, prouing briefly and cleerely that mira∣cles in these latter times, are no certaine tokens of the true Church of God. Page. 32. CHAP. III. A briefe Examination of Master Floods Preface, shew∣ing the same to be full fraught with vaine bragging and osten∣tation. Page 43. CHAP. IIII. Sheweth how ill Master Floods argument in defence of their miracles, is grounded vpon the opinions of his Aduersa∣ries; returneth the dint of his argument against his owne Church, and further declareth, how many impertinencies, vn∣truths, & slanders▪ Master Flood hath shuffled vp in the same for his best aduantage. Pag. 50. CHAP. V. Declareth how idly Master Flood bringeth some mira∣cles
(related by the Ancients) to proue their adoration of their Masse-Christ, relikes, Images to be lawfull. Here Ma∣ster Flood is put in minde of many of their Churches, vani∣ties and ridiculous fables. Page 65. CHAP. VI. Declareth, how weakely and calumniously M. Floode hath ioyned in his third reason, the reformed Churches for denying their miracles, with the Pagans, for their denying the miracles of Christ, his Apostles, and those of the primitiue Church: Page 105. CHAP. VII. Examineth Master Floods fourth reason, grounded (as he speaketh) vpon the impietie of vs, denying their miracles, but the imputation is retourned vpon him and his Church; di∣uers of his impious inferences and proofes are discouered, Ga∣leacius his honour is defended; and imputations of incontinen∣cie iustly retorted vpon the Aduersaries. The history of Pope Ioane is breifly handled: And Master Flood who ob∣iecteth lies to other, is found himselfe to be a Lyar, and therein a Disciple of his Grand Master Bellarmine. Pag. 119. CHAP. VIII. Discusseth Master Floods fifth reason, (which he groun∣deth vpon the good & profitable conditions of their miracles) sheweth the same to be a vaine conceit; examineth further how vainely Master Flood attributeth some certaine mira∣cles to Antichrist; examineth also their manner of conuersion of Countries, and the sanctity of their Preachers. And be∣cause Master Flood twitteth the reformed Churches for the allowance of marriage in Priests, the Authour sheweth large∣ly and clearely euen out of Popish principles, that the marriage of such is lawfull, and commendable both before God and man. Pag. 156.
CHAP. IX. Weigheth Master Floods sixth reason, grounded (as hee pretendeth) vpon the prouidence of God: in this many of his blasphemous conceits are discouered; Master Whitaker is defended: Some Popish laughing toyes are breifly inserted. Page 214. CHAP. X. In this the Authour examineth those speciall miracles which the holy Scriptures attribute to Antichrist, and doth fasten them vpon the Pope and his Church, shewing how he fetcheth fire from heauen, and maketh the Image of the Beast to speake. Page 225. CHAP. XI. Examineth all, or most of the Properties and conditions of Antichristian miracles, recounted in holy Scriptures by Christ and his Prophets; and doth most clearely fasten them all, vp∣on the Pope and his. Page 244. CHAP. XII. Discusseth a notable prophecie of Christ concerning Anti∣christ, in the 24. of S. Mathewes Gospell, and largely shew∣eth the same, euidently to bee fulfilled in the Pope and his. Page 251. CHAP. XIII. Examineth a prophecie of Saint Paul, in the 2. to the Thessallonians, 2. concerning Antichrist and his Church, and doth euidently shew the same, to bee fulfilled in the Pope and his. Page 266. CHAP. XIIII. Examineth another Prophesie of Christ in the 7. Chap∣ter of Saint Mathewes Gospell, and proueth the same to bee accomplished in the Pope and his Prophets. Page 278.
CHAP. XV. Discusseth another Prophecie of Saint Paul, in his first to Timothy the 4. and declareth the same to be fully complea∣ted in the Pope and his Ministers. Pag. 282. CHAP. XVI. Conteineth two additions, the first of which discouereth the Papists, as in their Miracles so in their Ʋisions (which are vsually brought by them for defence of their Religion) to be Supporters of Antichristianisme: Here it is shewed, how diuors of their Visions containe absurdities against their owne principles. And also some few Visions are added, for the Pa∣pists to meditate on, and they are such as are related by their owne Authours. Pag. 282. The Second addition sheweth breifly the idle vanitie of a late Pamphlet written by one I. G. Priest touching the prodi∣gious birth and miraculous death of his Brother Edmund Gennings executed for Treason together with one Swithune Wells in Grayse-Inne fieldes. Pag. 323.
THE PREFACE to the Reader. COurteous Reader, my salutation shall be with a few aduertisements and requests vnto thee. First, whereas I often vse these phrases, The miracles of Antichrist, Antichristian miracles, or such like, my meaning is not, to giue vnto Anti∣christ or his Ministers, power to doe wonders, which are in se and substance supernaturall: for those bee the Mirabilia, which Dominus solu facit; the Lord onely doth, Psal. 72. 28. by his immediate power, vnto which all his creatures, and the nothing, out of which his creatures are made, are subiect by an obedientiall power or subjection: but I call the prodigies of Antichrist Miracles, because in the opi∣nion of the seduced, they are such; and because sacred Scriptures, as Antiquity hath expounded and interpre∣ted, doe so terme them. Secondly, I request thee, perusing my twelfth chap∣ter, that thou passe not thy iudgement hastily thereon, vntill thou haue read the whole contents of the same, and then as thou shalt finde, s iudge; whether I haue not, at lest very probably disputed, according to the sense of
our Sauiours prophesie, and Context of the Text; giue me leaue in this, Fungi vice Cotis, to whet the wits and pens of the more learned, to examine the secrets of that admirable prophesie of our Lord Iesus, which I there handle: Quicarpet mea edat sua. Thirdly, if in the prosecution of this argument, I do interlace some particulars, and vse some phrases which may seeme tart to the Aduersaries pallate, the Reader may not be iustly offended thereat: for they doe inces∣santly, so a buse all Reformed Clergies, & Christian Maie∣sties, with their calumnious imputations, that there is no end nor measure of their malice: and as for phrases, their pens & mouths can hardly find any bad enough for vs. Againe, such is the nature of the argument, which I han∣dle in this Treatise, that it cannot bee well prosecuted without Tart termes to the Aduersaries taste. If any o∣ther of the Cleargy which are Siders to the Popes facti∣on, doe distaste my matter or my stile, I shall no more regard their dislikes, then I will the barking of a currish whelpe. Such hypocrite-Clerkes what are they else, then the very Scumme of this Church, and the excre∣ments, which being, neiher hot nor cold, God doth cast out Apoc. 3. 15. of his mouth, and would God this Church had, or could spew them out. And heere I defire the Christian Reader to be aduer∣tised, that such Conuerts as come from Rome (if sincere and conuerted in their soules) are sure to bee beset with diuerse sorts of Aduersaries: as the Papists and their Si∣ders, the Semi-Brownists or fiery Precifianists, and their Fauourers, and to the hard censures of all such; sin∣cere and sound Conuerts are certaine to be subiect: The first taxing them as not sound, because thēselues playing the hypocrites, and measuring others by their own lasts, doe hold them for like dissemblers: loth they are that a∣ny reputed learned or honest, should be thought to bee
sincerely, and in truth, conuerted to the Church of Eng∣land, or to bee well esteemed of, or prouided for by the same. The other kinde, more vnkinde; taxe and reprooue such, because in their preachings and practises, they are firme and zealous for the maintenance of those articles (Christian and Apostolicall) Canons (Goodly and God∣ly) to which they haue subscribed. Ioyntly both sorts of them haue their eyes set so narrowly and incessantly vp∣on them and their doings, that the least errour they may commit either in priuate conuersation, or by lapse of tongue (which as the Apostle deliuereth, no mortall Iam. 3. 8. man can perfectly rule or tame) shall be made a moun∣taine: but why write I this? to curry fauour, or to begge indulgence at any mans hands? Absit: no man without Arrogancie, can assume that of Christ to himselfe; Quis ex vobis &c. Who of you can reprooue me of sinne? yet by the mercies of Christ, such sincere Conuerts, as England Ioh. 8 4. hath of late had from Rome, dare in humility say; Quis Ioh. 8 7. ex Aduersarijs &c. Which of their Auersaries can reprooue them of crime? If they can, wee say not to them in those words of Christ; apologizing for the adulterous woman in S. Iohn; He of you which is without sinne, let him cast the first stone: But we say confidently, haue our Aduersaries crime or not crime; let him, her, or them, cast peales of stones against vs, if they can iustly prooue that wee haue in any point whatsoeuer in doctrine or action, criminal∣ly or semi-criminally transgressed against the Lawes of God, or against the lawes of this Church and Kingdom; let them not spare vs; wee onely desire that they would deale honourably; not come behinde and stabbe, for that is neither Knightly nor Gentle-man like, but let them accuse plena in Curia. Thus writing in the defence of sincere and honest Conuerts, my penne telleth mee, in the words of the Apostle, Factus sum insipiens &c. I am
become foolish; I confesse it: but my Apologie shall bee the same, the which the Apostle vsed, Ipsime coegerunt, They (our Aduersarie,) haue compelled me: But why passe I not by the calumny? Because it toucheth the sincerity of our religion, which these by secret whisperings and surmises, seeke to staine and wound: and I verily thinke if in any kinde of calumnie, in this, that of Austin is most true, Qui negligit famam crudelis est: He who neglecteth his fame is cruell against himselfe. I hope then that wee shall not be reputed contentious, if wee call any to answer for their calumnies against vs, if they cease not to blemish the integrities of our Faith, wherein (I doubt not, but that I may speake the like of my brethren) I neuer knew what hypocrisie meant: no, no: wee leaue that for our Church Papists and Communion-Recusants, we com∣mend that dish as due to such as ioyntly subscribe and dnie &c. subscribe to obtaine a Cure, denie to peruert their Cure. As for our selues, who in the feare of God haue sha∣ken of Iugum Exactoris, the yoake of the Exactour; wee Isa. 9. haue by Gods blessings a double staffe of comfort, the one firme as the euerlasting mountaines: Our faith and hope is that we are, Filij liberae Children of her that is free, Gal. 4. 22. and Liberti Domini, Free-men of the Lord, which liberty the Lord Iesus hath graciously bestowed vpon vs: from 1. Cor. 7. 22. whom we pray, and hope for uch a good measure of his grace, that we shall not vse this liberty as an occasion of sinne; but liue more warily, by how much wee are hem∣med in with Aduersaries on euery side, Sed ex his omnibus liberabit nos Deus. Another staffe or cause of comfort vnder God to such Conuerts as alreadie are come, or hereafter may happily come, may be, to thinke, that we haue a Prince and Soueraigne, who doubtlesse doth from his very hart, embrace and loue those Conuerts which are in heart con∣uerted.
There are also of his Subiects both of highest and lowest ranke of all sorts (I meane such as are sincere Christian Protestants, and leane to neither side directly nor indirectly) who doubtlesse doe in their hearts loue vs, and are very glad when they haue occasion to doe, or heare of any good that is done vnto vs. What neede such then care if either Precisians on the one side, or Popish and Papists on the other, doe maligne them, Si Deus nobiscum; (& Dij eius nobiscum) quis contra nos. But seeing it pleaseth the Popishly affected, (I meane Church Papists, whether Laikes or Clerkes) to be so vn∣charitable and so prone to censure vs late Conuerts; as vnsound, and yet in hearts Popish; I desire the Reader to giue me leaue to Character them out in a word or two in their right collours. What are they else then very Vi∣pers who desire to bring forth a forreine Monarchie (they care not what it be, so it be Papall) with the rent and dis∣solution of their mothers bowels. Like as the Dogges which haue arrowes sticking in their thighes, are neuer at quiet, till they, may haue shaken out the arrowes from their thighes; so they vntil they may shak off the present Church and State-gouernment, which like arrowes pene∣trate their remorsed consciences; they will neuer bee at rest; for this purpose though they frequent sometimes the Church, they will often withall haue secret confe∣rence with Ignatians &c. I haue often heard Creswell and Pasons (and if I mistake not, Parsons saith in effect as much in his Treatise for mitigation) affirme, that it would not haue beene good for our late Soueraigne by any se∣uere statutes (as by enforcement to communion) to haue exasperated Church Papists; because (said they) the remorse and sting of their consciences against which they are compelled both to Church and communion; would when occasion might be offered, lead them praeci∣pites into the ruine of the whole. Thus they. But what
toleration will worke, who seeth not? whenas gracious Conniuencie hath made them so insolent? yea then, there, and by those meanes it is to be thought they will proue most perfidious where, when, and by what meanes, they are most fauoured. Further I request the Reader, not to account this voluntary oblation of my Mite, into the box of Gods Sanctuary, as the effect of an arrogant desire to see my selfe oft in print. No, no; I consider the diligence of the Aduersaries, who are in∣cessantly clamorous with their pennes, against the Tents of the Lord; I consider the diligence of our Soueraigne who as the Imperator Augustus hath inuited both his Captaines and common Souldiers in praelium Domini; And although he hath performed his part so excellently that as Hircius affirmed of Caesar, for his Commenta∣ries, his Maiesty seemeth rather to haue taken away then to haue giuen others occasion of writing; yet such seem∣eth to be his Princely zeale that he prizeth as a Sacrifice any seruice done in this kinde; what if by his most lear∣ned penne Golias seeme prostratus? his Exuuiae to some seeme not taken from him, I meane the ragges of his mi∣racles and rotten superstitions. Thirdly I considered seriously tanquam Classicum Belli that Clangor of God, by the mouth of his holy Prophet: Put your selues in aray against Babilon, round a∣bout; Ierem. 50. 14. all ye that bend the bow, shote at her, spare no arrowes: for shee hath sinned against the Lord. If I amongst the rest of Gods Souldiers obey this his voice; and shoote a∣gainst Babilon the best arrowes my simple arme can draw out of the Quiuer of Gods booke; with the bowe of his holy Spirit, this my diligence I hope shall not turne to my reproach; let them rather be reproached and reprooued, who tumbling as fat as brawnes within their sties, will not shoote out one arrow in Print, for feare of reproach; and lest they should bee put to de∣fend
what they shall commend to presse. And what? will they dare to deliuer any thing in Pulpit which they are afraid to commend to the Theater of the world? As the Presse is the worlds Stage, so is the Pulpit Gods Theater and a Stage for Angells. I see they feare with Arcesilas, and are worthy to bee rewarded with him; but they haue the golden Arte of supplanting. For my part should I foreknow that this Treatise of mine which is sweete in my mouth might proue bitter in my stomacke and belly; yet out it should, my shoulders are of steele armed for all censures. But to all idle drones if neuer so elegant (who are ready with Bonamicus, Lazarus the Patauine to carpe at other mens labours) as Erasmus said to him, Lazare veni for as; so I to these Bon-amici Lazari venite for as, My good friends, and Lazars come yee out, shew your selues, or else, as your handes be tyed from writing, so let your tongues be tyed also from censuring: or else, be not discontent, if you bee reputed by some seuere Censurers like Esops Asse with head euer in manger and yet striking with his heeles. It is not inough to bestow a bimestrian Sermon and the same twice or thrice to bee said ouer, and then account your selues as worthy to be Censours ouer other mens labours: vaevobis, if liuing of the Gospell and hauing diuidents sufficient for two or three worthier then your selues, your tongues or pennes Euangelize no more nor better; no more of this, lest I bee twitted as I was once speaking for the free inlarging and increase of a free beneuolence &c. What? this man comes lately from Rome, and shall hee teach vs, what wee are to giue &c. But for my part I haue done, crauing pardon if I am ouerbold in this my free Epi∣stle▪ whereof the period shall be this: He that followeth Auarice cannot be innocent. Further in all sinceritie & humility, I pray for the Church in generall, that such as halt betwixt God and Baal may bee remooued è castris
Domini: And for my selfe in particular I humbly beseech our Lord Iesus that he would bee pleased so to assist me (who am the least of all his Familie) with the Graces of his blessed Spirit to the end, that I may neuer fall from that Grace in which now I stand. In fide viuo Iesu fily Dei. Amen. Yours in Christ Jesus Richard Sheldon. Epigramma de Miraculis Antichristi. Parturiêre diù septem tibi, Rómule, montes: ridiculos mures iam peperêre suos. Cuitua non odium, vel cui portenta cachinnum non moueant posthâc, is mihi prodigium est. VIA-PORTA nou: coll: Ox: olim Soe.
A BRIEFE PRELVDE, SHEWING THE PSEVDO-CHRISTIANISME OF PAPISTS, in respect of their lying SIGNES, and WONDERS. CHAP. I. ONE Faith, one Baptisme, one Ephes. 4. Christ, saith Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians: by which we are euidently instructed, that one and the same Faith, doth now saue the faithfull of these later ages of the Church, which did saue those of the primitiue times; likewise as the same Christ, and in the same manner was then, and is now to be beleiued; the same baptisme, and in the same sort, was then, and is now to be practised, and frequented. This Christian axiome, soundeth well in the eares of all reformed Churches, because their totall scope and pro∣iect is, (separating the pure siluer of Christian faith, from the drosse of popish superstition) to reduce all points of religion, and necessarie rites of Christian disci∣pline, to the primitiue Antiquitie, and prime institution of Christ and his Apostles; But it is too too harsh in the eares of Papists, who by their additions of many nouel∣ties,
and vaine traditions to Christian religion, haue a∣boue measure, contaminated and corrupted the simpli∣city of the same: and therefore, being vrged with these their nouelties, they are constrained to teach, and despe∣rately to affirme, that the primitiue Church, the Apo∣stles, and funders of the same, did at least, implicitely, tanquam in principijs bleiue all that, which they them∣selues do now explicitely, and expressely beleiue, vpon the opening and vnfolding of their holy Father the Pope: (to whom with their Angelicall Aquinas they Aquinas 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10. commonly attribute power to order, ordaine, stablish and declare the symbole of faith.) And therefore, to vphold this their paradoxe, diuers of them haue not beene ashamed, to apply to the primitiue Church, and her times, that of the Apostle, sapiebat vt paruulus, loque∣batur 1. Cor. 13. 11. vt paruulus, she was wise as a litle one, she spake as a litle one, as not hauing all points necessary of faith, expresse∣ly, and explicitely suggested vnto her; but they forsooth, by vertue of the infallible determinations, and decisions of their Inerrable Iudge the Pope, can speake wisely and beleiue perfectly in euery particular conclusion the which it shall please their holy Father to determine; prouided it be ex Cathedra, that is with intention and purpose to teach and instruct the vniuersall Church whereof they make him sole Head and Vmpire. And although the ancientest Bishops of Rome, and the Pri∣mitiue Fathers of the Church did hold some points as doubtfull, obscure, and apocriphall, yet their Romish Father, hath such a potency, that sitting in Cathedra (tanquam ex tripode) he can cleare all, and make that to be an expresse article of faith, which the auncientest Church, either held for doubtfull or else had no ex∣presse knowledge nor practise therof. That in this vani∣tie, (wherein they doe most egregiously please them∣selues, and vpon which, all Ignatian-papists, build their faith) I doe not vniustly impose against them, it is mani∣fest
in a few (amongst innumerable other) cleare in∣stances. As first, their presumptuous Canonizing into the ranke of sacred Scriptures, apocriphall bookes of errable men, so reputed, and esteemed by venerable an∣tiquitie. Againe, their vaine presumption in defining their metaphysicall and paradoxicall transubstantiation, by which, (out of those most venerable and sacramen∣tall words of Christ, this is my body, by an admirable Math. 26. Luk. 22. kinde of logicke, neuer heard of nor dreamed of in the auncient Fathers) they doe by transubstantiation place and set their Christ, in such a manner of being, site, and disposition of body, within the round wafers, which they consecrate; that I could neuer as yet heare any one of them dare to affirme, in what sort Christ is there, whether sitting, standing, or lying; whether prone, or supine, with his face vpward, or downeward; whether like Ianus bifrons double-fore-headed, or with as many faces, as there be imaginary parts in the wafer: This on∣ly, by the way, I giue the Reader to vnderstand, that when their famous Ʋasquez publike Reader of diuini∣tie Vasquez his chi∣mericall conceit touching trans∣substantiation. in the Ignatian schooles at Rome was treating of the manner of Christs being in their sacrament, he did then, and there (not without admiration and astonishment to my selfe) deliuer, that looke howsoeuer, and in what sort, and manner soeuer, the deuout Receiuer, will ima∣gine Christ to be there, whether as standing vpright, or as sitting or like as hanging vpon a crosse, hee shall so haue him truely and realy: his reason was, because Christ, is in the sacrament in like sort as mans soule is in his body, totus in toto & totus in qualibet parte, whole Christ in euery part of the wafer and whole Christ in the whole wa∣fer; so that although the whole face of Christ be in the whole wafer, and in euery part of the wafer, and the feet of Christ be in the whole wafer, and in euery part of the wafer, yet it is (said hee) in the power of the Receiuer, to imagine the face, to be in one part, the hands in an
other, the brest in the third, and the rest in other parts, in such sort, as might best serue for his deuotion. And that this doctrine was there publikely deliuered, I call the heauens to witnesse; but what neede I, so to do? when this their superstitious diuinity, is so frequently taught, and deliuered in their meditations and pulpits: and it is so agreeing to that their principle, that Christ is wholie in euery part, and wholy in the whole wafer; that by neces∣sary consequence it followeth thereout, as the intelligent Reader will easily obserue. Further a third instance I adioyne of their doting and fatuouse indulgences, which are so farre from be∣ing founded and grounded in any expresse practise of the primitiue Church; that the acutest of themselues confesse, and acknowledge; that they were only impli∣citely deliuered, in those words to Peter, whatsoeuer thou Math. 16. shalt binde, shall be bound; and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose, shall be loosed: which wordes, being by their inerrable Iudge expounded, for their indulgences; thereupon they haue coyned according to their diuinity, a new ar∣ticle of faith. By all which, with infinite more instances, it is as cleere as the very heauens, that they doe beleiue many things as necessary points of religion, which the ancient Church neuer dreamed of. And when vpon this point they are vrged and tould (as Christ taxing the Iewes errours spoke to them) that ab initio non erat sic, from the beginning it was not so. Abraham non fecit sic; Math. 19. 8. Christ, his Apostles, the primitiue Church, did not so; then they recurre to their rotten sanctuary: that al∣though the primitiue Church did not so expressely, yet they did so implicitely, although they did not so beleiue in expresse tearmes, yet they did so beleiue (in principijs) in those principles, and premisses, out of which their Holy father by his vnerring Spirit, hath deducted these new conclusions, and vpon whose declaration, wee re∣ceiue and beleiue them, as the very Oracles of God.
But how is this diuinitie confronted by the Apostle, Galat: 1. 8. 9. who hath denounced an Anatheme to him, whosoeuer shall deliuer as matter of faith (for so the Apostle must be vnderstood) beside what was then deliuered? how can the Pontficians shew me, any commandement of God, by which I am bound to beleeue new articles of faith, which were not expresly beleeued, and receiued in the Apostles times, and primitiue Church? by what This is catho∣like faith and profession, which the Apo∣stles haue deli∣uered, Martyrs haue confir∣med, & which the faithfull hi∣therto do keep. Vigil: against Eutich. principles, can they euince, that the faith which was suf∣ficient for the Apostles, and their immediate schollers, is not sufficient for the faithfull of this time? by what scripture, or authoritie of any ancient Father can they shew, that the Pope can deliuer new Articles of faith touching manners, which were not beleeued in the pri∣mitiue Church? surely by none: and yet they trauaile egerly therein; but their issue being fruitlesse, and they not being able to be deliuered of a masculine childe, to defend this their paradoxe, they recurre and runne to that vaine and fond bulwarke of all Heretikes, and false Prophets; miracles forsooth, prodigyes, visions and wonders must be deuised, there they rest, there they tri∣umph and sing: but before the victorie; as easily I (by Gods assistance) will make it manifest in this my dis∣course, rest they, triumph they, insult they neuer so much. The manner of the Papists vrging of their miracles, prodigyes and visions, is so peculiar, and essentiall to Antichristianisme, and to the great Patriarke of the same, the man of sinne and sonne of perdition; that I suppose there are no passages of sacred Scripture, which do more clearely euince poperie to be Antichristianisme, and the Pope to be the man of sinne, then that they so egregi∣ously insult for their false prodigyes, and tryumph for their lying visions; that if it were possible, they would Matth: 24. Marc. 13. draw the very elect into errours and heresies, were they not vpheld by the hand of him, qui nouit qui sunt cius, 2. Timoth: 2.
who knoweth his, and were they not taught by his voice Ioh: 10. and fortified by his holy inspirations to flee from the hearing of any Alien in matters concerning faith, reli∣gion, and worship of God: but being by his holy word and spirit sufficiently instructed; whensoeuer they heare the sound of any errours broched from Rome, (though for continuance, they might haue a thousand yeeres of age; vsed in times of errour, ignorance and su∣perstitious darknes,) yet if that of Christ, Ab initio non erat sic, from the beginning it was not so, in the Apostles time it was not, in certaine ages after it was not so; may Matth: 19 8. iustly be opposed against them, they dare constantly auouch such customes to be not christian but hereticall; not antiquities, but long inserted nouelties; not able to prescribe against Christ his truth, though they come adorned and furnished with as many portents, wonders, and signes, as the man of sinne and his ministers, descri∣bed by the Apostle, shall by the great power and vertue 2. Thess: 2. of Satan, be able to worke. Admirers of visions, Prodigye-deuisers, and wonder∣workers, euen such as should falsely professe Christ, were foretold both by Christ and by his Apostles. First, if we aske the time, they were most to abound, yea as it were to swarme towards, and in the latter times: which Matth: 24. 2. Thess: 2. Apocal: 13. manner of dealing, with daily aduantage, and new in∣crement in that kinde, is so liuely to be found amongst the Popish, that I dare boldly ashrme it, and will stand to iustifie it, (notwithstanding the infinitie of fables re∣iected by themselues in their old legends and portesses) that in respect of their glorying in visions and miracles, there is no comparison to be made betwixt the former times and these: so that in them, and in their congrega∣tion, it is most euident, that the neerer they approach, to the later or latest times, the more they abound with their lying visions, prodigyes, wonders: And if they them∣selues, be not the men that should falsely ptofesse Christ
and gloriously vaunt in miracles, and prodigyes; let them shew vnto vs, point out vnto vs, some others that teach here and there is Christ, (by tying Christs faith and religion to some one See; or by pretending and preaching, some reall presence of Christ vpon earth) let them (I say) shew some manner of men, who glory in the name of Christ, (though most falsely) and yet doe prodigyes, wonders, miracles, for confirmation of their errours, and heresies: as cleare as the heauens it is, that there is no sect which doth, so absolutely rest and con∣fide in their miracles & wonders, as themselues: and to them it doth agree so properly, euen 4to modo, that there was neuer yet any popish Doctour, who hath written in defence of their heresies and errours, who challengeth not miracles and visions, as peculiar to themselues, and as frequent in their Church alone; making the same as a sure note of true Christianisme, amongst themselues. Wherefore else, doth Bristow in his motiues and de∣mands? mountanouse Hill in his quartron of reasons; without all reason, truth or honestie, wholly quartered out of Bristowes motiues, and Gasper Ʋlenbergius his cau∣ses? wherefore else, doth Bellarmine in his notes of the Church? Stapleton, Coster, Baronius, Coccius, Sanders, and all other whatsoeuer writers for that sect, so triumph vpon their miracles, and visions? they haue them there∣fore, and we willingly yeeld them vnto them; for other∣wise, we should not esteeme them as ministers of him, who without compere or equall, sitting, (that is, ruling 2. Thes. 2. and gouerning) in the Temple (the visible externe house) of God was to come in all power, signes, and lying wonders, (marke the words, obserue the mysterie) I say it, and re∣peat it againe; who was to come, and to sit in the temple of God, not shewing a few miracles, not weake wonders, not with small power, but in all power, signes, and lying wonders, was to beare himselfe, as in the steed and place of God; was also, to contend with the elect, yea to ouer∣come
the Saints; was to persecute and afflict those who embracing the charitie of truth, that is, the loue of Christ, who is the way, life, and truth, should refuse to accept, or Ioh: 14 6. admit of any other meanes for saluation, but the name of Christ, which onely is giuen for our saluation, as the holy Scripture deliuereth. If it be demanded, whether Act: 4. these sincere professours of Christ, which were to be af∣flicted by the man of sinne, and his manciples, were to oppose miracles, against their miracles; and wonders, Exod: 7. 19. & 8. 6. 7. against their wonders; as Moses did against the Egyp∣tians. To this answering I suppose, agreeing to sacred Scriptures, that either they were to worke none at all, or else so few, that in comparison of those which should be wrought by the Antichristian synagogue, they would seeme none at all: and this is clearely gathered out of Matth. 24. 24. Marc. 13. 12. holy Scriptures (agreeing to the sense of auncient Fa∣thers) where it is said, that the prodigyes and wonders of these Pseudochrists, should be so many, and so great, that if it were possible, the very elect should be peruerted: which feare of peruerting the elect, how should it take place, if they should haue miracle, for miracle; vision for vision; wonder for wonder, to oppose against these pseudochrists and false prophets? Cleare therefore it is, that multitudes of wonders, and great wonders were to be towards, and in the later times peculiar to him, who should sit in the temple of God bearing himselfe for a Vice-God; euen as Paul the 5. with blasphemous impu∣dencie now doth: suffering himselfe to be termed in certaine Theses of diuinitie (defended by a Dominican Fryer called Caraffa at Naples) by the name Vice-Deus, Vice-God: whose blasphemie herein is intollerable: as alike is that of his Burghesian Familie; for the eterni∣zing of which, those arrogant Nephew-Cardinalls of him, are not afraid to haue ingraued in their cupps and plate this poesie, AETERNITATI BVRGHESIANAE DICATVM, Consecrated to the Burghesian Eternitie.
Is not this more blasphemous then Constantius his Nu∣men, diuinitie, for which religious antiquitie so much condemned him? But we may not forsooth deny eter∣nitie to the Familie of a Vice-God; to whose predeces∣sor (Gregorie the 13.) Stapleton was not ashamed to giue, Numen, a Diuinitie, Godhead. And truly, seeing they will needs haue Eternitie, Numen, Diuinitie, Godhead, Omnipotencie; seeing they alone will needs sit in the temple of God, ouer-ruling all, commanding all; seeing they will needs haue wonders and prodigies, and in great store and frequencie: for my part I will neuer de∣nie them vnto them, and I doubt not, but withall easily to proue that they haue lost charitatem veritatis, the cha∣ritie 2. Thess: 2. of truth, for which God hath giuen them ouer to strong illusions to beleeue these errours and lyes. Saint Gregorie worthily discourseth to this purpose, In exposit. Iob, lib. 34 cap 3. & apud Pateriū in 2. ad Thessal. whose speech, although it be large, yet I will not omit to set downe a great part thereof. Terribili ordine dispositio∣nis occultae &c. By the terrible order of secret prouidence (saith he) before the old enemie appeare in that damned man Antichrist, whom he shall assume, the signes of vertues shall be taken from the holy Church; for prophecie shall be hid, the grace of curing shall be taken away; the vertue of longer abstinence shall be diminished, words of doctrine shall cease, and the prodigies of miracles shall be remooued: the which notwithstanding, the diuine disposition shall not vtterly take away, but shall not so openly, and so frequently shew them as in former times. And a little after; therefor for the greatest part, signes of miracles and vertues, shall be withdrawen from the faithfull in the holy Church: And then the old ene∣mie shall in that damned man Antichrist, appeare, conspicuous against them, by many prodigies; that by how much he is puf∣fed vp with his signes, by so much with greater praise, he may be ouercome by the faithfull (for although signes shall not al∣together be wanting to the faithfull in that conflict; notwith∣standing, his shall be so great, (note these words) that ours
will seeme few, or none at all) whose vertue shall be stronger then all his signes, spurning with the heele of inward constancie against all that which is so terribly shewed by him; but the malignant enemie shall by so much vse greater immanitie a∣gainst them, (behold the Romane practise) by how much he shall greeue to see himselfe despised in the midst of his shi∣ning miracles; therefore he will wholy recollect himselfe for their destruction, and will kindle vp all the reprobates with one minde, and like crueltie, to the destruction of the faithfull: And so the proud loftinesse of Antichrist, ouer reprobate mindes, shall be raised vp with the fast (how cleare is this in the sonne of perdition sitting at Rome?) and pompe of secular glory, so that, a sinfull man, and yet despising to be esteemed as a man, (that is a pure man only) will lyingly affirme himselfe to bee a God ouer men; (obserue these words, a God ouer men) (wherevpon the Apostle Paul saith,) so that he will sit in the temple of God shewing him∣selfe, as if he were a God. thus farre Saint Gregorie with much more to like purpose. And although this Father in this place, doe seeme to teach that Antichrist shall di∣rectly and expresly extoll himselfe aboue God, (which none of the Popes haue yet done, as some Papists may obiect, and that therefore this Antichrist here described by Gregorie cannot be the Pope), For my part I thus resolue the doubt, that all the Fathers discourse may most fitly be applyed to the Popes vnmeasurable extol∣ling himselfe aboue the lawes of God, challenging power to dispense in all vowes and oathes; challenging power, to annexe to base creatures more spirituall efficacie against sinnes and wicked Spirits, then he himselfe, and his doe giue to the Sacraments of Christ: challenging the very name of Vice-god, challenging all that honour and adoration, For the Popes in∣solent pride, read the dictates of Gregor. 7. in Baron. anno 1175. which is vpon earth giuen vnto him; for that he is a Vice-God, a God▪substitute vpon earth, sitting in the temple of God. But setting this circumstance at this pre∣sent aside, by this Fathers whole discourse, agreeing to
sacred Scriptures and his iudgement, it is manifest, that to abound with miracles and wonders against that Church, which hath few, or no miracles (in comparison) shall professe Christ, and only Christ, is an euident signe of Antichristianisme; the which, how fitly it squareth to the Romanists, no man cannot but see, whose eyes the 2. Cor: 4. God of this world hath not blinded. To proceed; Concerning the time, when the mira∣cles of false prophets were to be most flush, and like shoales to flee abroad: the reuelation of Saint Iohn hath Apoc: 13. v. 2. 11. 13. 14. it so cleare, that nothing can be more clearely or liuely expressed: For there, the Prophet deliuereth the great power, authoritie, miracles, and wonders of the Beast, and of the false Prophet, hauing two hornes like the lambe Miracles ceased for most part, in the time of Aust: See August. de vera relig. Chrysost. in 1. ad Cor. cap. 2. hom. 6. Greg. hom. 29. in Euang. (which must be towards the later times of the Church, after the substraction of miracles from the true Church, which hath passed long agoe) to worke great prodigies and wonders; pretending the very power and place of the lambe, as Popes doe; yet speaking like the dragon, de∣nouncing, proclayming blood, ruine, fire, sword, proditions, perditions, against all such, as shall denie his monarchicall Papacie; against all such, as shall refuse that power, by which he challengeth authoritie to dispose of kingdoms, and depose Kings, for the saluation of soules: and this he doth (as if it were with the hornes of the lambe) pre∣tend; thereby cloaking and couering his ambitious, lof∣tie, and fastuous spirit. And if your holy Father the Pope, do not (pretending the two hornes of the lambe) worke prodigies, and wonders sitting in the temple of God, then bring me, ô yee Pontificians, some one man, that euer did it, or that is likely to doe it in any other sort and manner then the Pope now doth it. Deny it if you can, that he hath spoken like the Dragon, when as, by his bloody sentences, he hath in all Christian king∣domes Apoc. 6. & 13. that euer were, at one time or other, taken peace from the earth, the proper worke of the Dragon: and to
presse you further, was there euer yet any man, who hath deceiued the dwellers vpon earth, by those mira∣cles which he had power to doe in the sight of the Beast, but the Bishop of Rome; who in his prophane legends (though termed by their Genitours and forefathers, Aureae Legendae, Golden Legends) of doting Metaphrastes, fabulous Lippoman, lying and voraginous Iacobus, su∣perstitious Antonine, confuse Vincentius, hath so cloyed the dwellers vpon earth, with delusions, lyes, and impo∣stures, that for very shame, they haue pared out of their Portesses and Breuiaries many and sundry of their fa∣bulous histories: and for the derisions and out-cryes of Christians against them, haue exploded no small mem∣bers of their Golden Legends. May I not fitly vse against them those words of the Apostle, what fruit was there in those things whereof you are now ashamed? with which you Rom: 6. 21. are now confounded? and worthily confounded, to consider, that your Progenitours, your Pillars of the in∣errable Church, should set forth Legends, yea golden Legends, written by Bishops, Archbishops; authorised by publike authoritie, read in your publike seruices, con∣cerning miracles that neuer were, and of men that neuer were liuing vpon the face of the earth. Your Didimus Verdicus Claudius Espencaeus telleth vs, that your Legends spencae. in 2 a Timoth. and like digress lib 2. cap. 11. and Portesses were full of fables, as any stable could be ful of dung; and I dare constantly say, more full of va∣nities and lyes then the stable of Augias was of dung, for that, by thousands of oxen might in time be purged, but the whole congregation of Roman Repurgers haue not as yet been able to cleanse your Legends, which haue filled and deceiued the whole world: yea so fresh is the reviuing of their delusions, that I dare boldly say, that all their old Legends, haue not any more vaine, more pernicious, then some that haue been of late, and a fresh published by themselues. In this place, I mention onely that of Catharine of Sienna. Shee forsooth and Life of Cathar: of Sienna.
Christ Iesus, by an admirable kinde of permutation, did enter change their hearts; so that Christ, had the heart of Catharine, and Catharine that of Christ. Oh you ignorant and desperately superstitious Pontifi∣cians! obserue you not? vnderstand you not? that this miraculous chaffering of hearts, subuerteth a very Principle of Christian religion, (receiued also by your selues) which is, that (quod Christus semel assumpsit nun∣quam dimisit) what Christ did once assume (to wit by hy∣postaticall vnion) he neuer left the same: tell vs then, I beseech you, did he not assume his carnall and corporall heart, as a principall member of his body? was it not conioyned, and vnited mediately or immediately by hypostaticall vnion to his diuinitie? I know you cannot nor will not deny it. Well then, for Catharines sake did he demisse, and leaue his owne heart, to enterchange for hers? if so, then you must needes admit, that Christ for Catharines sake, did suffer a partiall kinde of death, Christ changeth his heart for Ca∣tharines. by separating his soule from his owne heart, which was the principallest part of his body, and the chiefest and immediatest seate of life; vnlesse, you will be so despe∣rately madde, as withall to affirme, that Christ also did enterchange soules with Catharine, either partly or who∣ly, and so giue her a liuing heart, and take in liew thereof her liuing heart: and surely, if the hearts enterchanged, betwixt Christ and Catharine, were but dead hearts, and had not so much, as a vegetatiue or a sensitiue soule in them: for what purpose then, can your senselesse soules, and witlesse hearts dreame, that Christ should be so ena∣moured, with a dead heart of Catharine, as to giue her his own liuing for it? what? was he ouertaken with some corrupt passion of loue, to long after a dead heart? hath he so forgotten his loue and respect to his mother, as to esteeme more of a peece of dead flesh from Catharine, then of that heart which hee tooke from her sacred wombe? the which also, because heauy in the garden
euen to death deserued not to bee cast off. Christ him∣selfe confesseth, that his corporall presence, was a kinde of let and hinderance to his Apostles, that the Paraclet and Comforter could not come vnto them vntill he was depar∣ted. Ioh 16. 7. And yet now forsooth, he cannot sufficiently loue Catharine spiritually, embrace Catharine fully, vnlesse hee make a carnall and corporall permutation of heart with her; and take hers for his: When I read in Baronius, Quer Baron. anno to 28  5. that phantasticall relation of his, how the vergin Mary visited Fulbert in his sicknesse, and gaue him her brests to sucke (perhaps then there escaped some drops of milke from Fubbertus his lips, hee being not accustomed to sucke, and are those, which are kept in a siluer-image of the virgin Mary, in her Church at Rhemes, and are there worshipped) much comforting him thereby; I thought Baronius should haue gained the whetstone, but now the case is otherwise, for surely of all prodigies this commu∣tation of hearts, betwixt a young Damosell and God, is most exceeding all credit. Surely, we might iustly esteem our selues as bewitched, if we should not thinke, that the Pontificians are deluded by strong illusions, foretold by the Apostle to beleeue such lyes. Doe they not giue the world, iust cause to make like account of this their Ca∣tharines markes, and signes, in her hands, head, feet, and side? like those of the holy maide of Lisbo, by whom, how the holy Father, Lewes Granatensis her Ghostly Fa∣ther; and Sixtus Quintus, the Ghostly Father of their Catholike Church, together with the Spanish King, his Prelates, his Priests, and his inuincible Armado, were mocked and deluded, the yeare 88 is not ignorant; and yet let them deny it if they can, but that they held her in admirable veneration, setting vp, and worship∣ping her pictures, in publike places, yea in Churches esteeming of her, as of another Catharine of Sienna, like another Asissian Saint Frances; (for he also had the signes and markes of a crucified Saint; walking, not hanging,
liuing, not dying, in deception, not in verity.) But af∣ter 88. when her blessings and prophecies proued to be vanities, then the Spanish Sages, and Romes Ghostly Father well obserued how they were ouertaken in their follies, (but had they preuailed, as they might according to the chance of warres if God had not withstood them, she had been a Canonized Saint, ere this) and then were they ashamed to see themselues so deluded by an Hipo∣crite-woman: and doubtlesse, had some like occasions happened, they had not beene so long deceiued by their Asissian Frances, and Catharine of Sienna: but the time was then not come for the more open reuealing of the man of sinne; and for the stronger deception of those, who had forsaken the charitie of truth, who therfore de∣serued so to be deceiued, God permitting the same. And notwithstanding, I dare tell them by the way for their comfort that there are diuers of their religious blacke Fryers who beleeue not their Francis (who was a white-Fryer) his signes, and markes: as on the other side, diuers of the white Fryers, disciples of Francis, beleeue not, re∣gard not the signes and markes of Catharine, who was a blacke Nunne. This I deliuer both out of my owne ex∣perience, and verie credible relation of those who are ve∣ry well acquainted with the dispositions of Monkes and Fryers: And if it be answered, that these Fryers doe so, out of emulation, and bitternesse against each other, not because they hold the histories to be doubtfull; bee it so for this time; but by this their answere, euery man may Ioh. 13. 35. euidently know, that such enuious Fryers are not the disciples of Christ; but of him, who is the Parent of dis∣cord, and by whose enuie death entered into the world, and so consequently of the Archministers of him; a∣mongst whom not a few, (Tyranizing like Lions as it is Langius. Platina, alij. written of Boniface 8.) haue indeauoured to cast their terrour and feare vpon the whole world. Secondly, I obserue, these men (that shall worke such
wonders and prodigies) to be described both by our Sa∣uiour, and by his Apostles, that they shall be false-Pro∣phets & false-Christs, preaching the doctrines of deuils; the which how to the very haire, it is fulfilled by the Pontificians, I do hereafter declare. Christ speaking of the dangers which his Elect should suffer towardes the consummation of the world, saith thus. Then if any man Mat. 24. 23 &c. Mark. 13. shall say, loe here is Christ, or there; beleeue it not; for there shall arise false-Christs, and false-Prophets, and shall shew great signes, and wonders, insomuch (that if it were possible) they shall deceiue the very elect: behold I haue told you before, wherefore, if they shall say vnto you, be hold he is (that is Christ is) in the desert, go not forth; behold he is in the secret pene∣tralls, beleeue it not; for as the lightning commeth out of the East, and shineth euen vnto the west, so shall also the comming of the sonne of man be: For, wheresoeuer the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. This prophesie and premonition of Christ, I handle largely in my twelfth chapter whitherto I referre the Reader where hee shall finde the same largely and clearely examined. To proceede on; I said before, that these pseudopro∣phets (which is an other marke of them) were to teach the doctrines of Deuils, according to that of the Apo∣stle, Now the Spirit speaketh expressely, that in the later . Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. times, some shall depart from the faith, giuing heede to sedu∣cing Spirits, and doctrines of Deuills, speaking lies in hipocri∣sie, hauing their consciences scared with a hot iron. By which propertie of false-prophets, concurring with the former mentioned aboue, it is more then manifest, who are spe∣cified, especially, if wee ponder those wordes of the Apostle, that such should forbid marriage, and commaund men to abstaine from meates, which God hath created to bee receiued with thankesgiuing, of those, who did know, and be∣leeue the truth: The Papists, would faine cast off this im∣putation of speudo-prophetisme from themselues, and lay it vpon the Eucratites, and Manicheyes. but howsoe∣uer
these old Heretikes might so affirme, cleare it is, that herein they are their children, vpon whom also, the prediction of the Apostle more iustly lighteth, in respect of the circumstance of time; for they, not the Mani∣cheyes and Eucratites, come in the later times: and al∣though the Manicheyes, who did allow marriage in their ordinary Professours, but disauow it in their elect and choise Professours; yet notwithstanding they vrged not single life with that vehemencie, and tyrannie as these holy Fathers do. And truly there is one circumstance in this their doctrine of Deuills, and answerable practise, which seriously weighed will make any man detest them herein. It is this: notwithstanding, when they traine vp their yong men in their Colledges and seminaries, they do well vnderstand (I speake both what I know, and al∣so vpon most assured relation, and testimonies not to be refused, and God is my witnesse, that I lie not) and ob∣serue by the continuall conflict, in which they are often foyled, at least, with impure and morosous cogitations, delectations and desires, that their young schollers haue not the gift of continency; yet they will not only suffer, but further also, euen perswade them to vowe chastity, and continency, and afterward hold themselues in that state in which by reason of their continuall lapses they are doubtfully to incurre eternall damnation. And this they doe in a certaine shew of hypocrisie, thereby to pur∣chase countenance and credit of their misteries: a very tricke of Antichrist, as it hath beene long agoe obserued by the ancient Fathers, so Hipolitus, so Hierome vpon Da∣niell, Hipol. orat. de consummat. mundi. Hierom. in com∣ment. super dan. Damasc. lib. 4. fidei orthodox. Liran in Dan. Hierom. in 1. ad Timeth. 4. so Iohn Damascene, so Liranus expressely, Simulans primo castitatem Antichristus postea in omnem libidinem ruet: Antichrist dissembling at the first chastity, he shall after rush headlong into all luxurie. And this is so cleare that our later Pontificians cannot deny, but that Antichrist shall dissemble and pretend chastity, thereby to purchase cre∣dit. And as cleare I suppose, that there was neuer yet a∣ny
man, who euer hath dreamed, that Antichrist should haue a wife: either therefore he will pretend chastitie, or glory in impudencie: but surely chastitie hee will pre∣tend, and so greatly glory therein, that by that meanes (to speake with Ribera) he will thinke all his other vices Libertis Apoc. cap. 13. sct. 5. may be couered; and be himselfe by onely opinion of chaslitie, be mounted up to the Monarchie of the world. Courteous Reader, dost thou not thinke, that this Ignatian forgot himselfe, when he wrote thus that by onely opinion of chastity, Antichrist should purchase empire of the world, which, how it squareth with the Popes it is most facile to declare, if a man would but stand to moue that sinke. By the way in a word or two, too too fresh is the memory of the impurities of Clement the 8. and yet sel∣dome was he seene to say Masse but hee would weepe: The impurities of Sixius Quintus I would leaue wil∣lingly to the relation of some Ignatians, if they would vouchsafe to catalogue them: as for two Gregories, the 13. and 14. supernacaneous it were; to commend to the world their virginities, their Nephewes shall do it for them: Paulius 5. who now raigneth is thought through disposition of nature not to be ouerpropense that way; but if he be not, his purpured brethren for him are drow∣ned vp, euen in crimine pessimo: witnesse that accident which happened not long agoe in Rome, when diuers young youths, (young succubyes) were burned, but the See hereafter. purpured (Incubyes) escaped. Beleeue it courteous Reader the abominations which are committed by those purpured Fathers, and the Supreame Fathers of that Synagogue are so detestable, that they passe all nar∣ration either of modest or immodest penne: and if our ignorant Pontificians in England, bee not acquainted with this, or thinke that I doe of purpose aggrauate; God is my witnesse I doe not so. But the true cause, that they are so vnacquainted with Romes impurities and impudicities is, that all their Seminary-Priests, Monkes,
Iesuits whatsoeuer, haue euer most strict charge giuen vnto them before they returne into England not to speake of anything, which in any respect, may turne to the dishonor of the Pope, or his purpured brethren. A∣gaine, for most part they are so cloystered vp, that they haue litle conuersation with those that know the liues & conuersations of Cardinalls, both intus and in cute; and yet the Colledge is not so euen builded but that some stones stand further out, then the rest and so consequent∣ly are of better intelligence. And the detestably impure, proude, and luxurious liues of Popes, and Cardinalls; is indeede the cheefest cause, why Italy so swarmeth with Atheists, and why few ingenuous Christians entring into it, are euer peruerted or drawne to their heresyes and Idolatries. I except such youthes, as are corrupted in the Fry, or neuer looke without their Seminary-mewes, or else such scioppyes, as for Ceres and Bacchus, are con∣tent to serue Pluto. And thus much by the way of their Of this matter the Reader may find more in the eight Chapter. doctrine of Deuills, and of their diuelish practise of for∣bidding marriage, vnder pretence of greater chastity, and Antichristian puritie, (I call it Antichristian puritie because it is, the immediate root and cause of all impu∣ritie, flatly repugnant to the ordinance of God, nature, & the lawes of Grace) tying men by lawes and vowes, to that which their own consciences tell them they cannot keepe, and obserue. And for this respect I here conclude that both this doctrine and their practise thereof must needes be from the Deuill. But to discourse more in Generall, that this marke of teaching doctrines of Deuills, can by no meanes, bee ap∣plyed to the reformed Churches, it is thus to be mani∣fested. Because all that they teach, as necessarie to bee beleeued; is positiuely, truely, and really conteined, in the sacred Scriptures, and symbole of the Apostles, as they haue beene expounded by the most Auncient, and Catholike Church, and therefore by no waies, can their
doctrines be called of Deuills; vnlesse the Auncient, & Catholike Church, may be apeached of such a crime. But the Papists, through the presumptions of their Popes haue made many additaments to faith, of which some for speciall respects are called doctrines of Deuills; and all in generall, for that, either they are deuised by sug∣gestions of Deuills, or approued by them. The which is clearely declared thus; because they wanting testimonies of sacred Scriptures for most of these their hereticall patches and additaments; they doe often returne vnto the dead, scraping thence, what horrible testimonies they can get; contrarie to the instruction of Christ, who to damned Diues, desirous to goe to his liuing brethren, and to instruct them that they might auoide that dan∣ger, into which he was fallen, answered thus; they haue Luk. 16. Moses and the Prophets whom if they would not beleeue, nei∣ther would they beleeue, though any should arise from the dead: yea Papists themselues are so eager, to take testi∣monies for their heresies, that they can bee contented, yea glad, if the Deuills (whom they know to be such) doe speake in their behalfe. Witnesse Robert Chambers, who produceth for a great miracle, and a worthy testi∣monie of their religious worship of the vergin Mary at▪ Sichem; how certaine Deuills going out of one Birus cried out thus, liue our Lady of Sichem, liue our Lady of Si∣chem; not thus; liue the mother of Christ; but thus, liue our Lady of Sichem; which Lady of Sichem, we willingly leaue to the Deuills, and such Papists as Chambers, who glory in such consorts of their superstitious worshippe. We for our parts only, will euer call blessed and happie, Like testimony Coster beggeth from the De∣uill touching the worship∣ping of Images Coster dom 3. in Quadrag. that blessed Ʋirgin who reigneth and euer shall reigne with her Sonne in euerlasting glory, not their Loretto or Sichem Ladies. Againe, wiesse Tilman Bredenbachius who seeking testimony from the Deuills for his religi∣on, relateth how the Deuills at a certaine place called dimpna, testified that vpon the commaund of their
great Lord Belzebub, they all went to honour the fune∣ralls of Martin Luther. Ah yee besotted Pontificians! how are yee delighted with such delusions, Adlegem & ad testimonium, to the law and the testimonie, thence tell vs, Isa. 8. what manner of man Luther was; there contending, neither Caietane your Popes Legate, nor Cocleus your great Theologue, were able to stand out, with that wor∣thy man and of most happy memorie: but to the deuils you will recurre, and from them you will needs haue te∣stimonie against that learned man. Againe, witnesse that detestable and vsuall practise of Popish Priests, when they take vpon them to exorcise the deuills with their sacrament, (God knoweth I belye them not) with their Christ in a pixe. For then, they do euer seeme to constraine the deuills whom they exor∣cise, first of all to confesse, that Christ himselfe, is in that very host truly and really; and this they do forsooth, lest the standers by should be scandalized to obserue after∣wards in the course of their exorcismes, how little esteem The storie of Magdalen de la Crux exorcised at Corduba is worth notg, she sometimes spake like the diuell, somtime like Christ, yea in the person of Christ. She consecrated an host, which many adored for Christ, to such madnesse were the Cordu∣bans come. Delrius mag. disq. cites Ribad. lib. 5. vita Ignat. cap. 10. and regard, the exorcised diuells make of that their Christ, and how contemptuously and scornefully the diuells doe carrie themselues, notwithstanding the presence of that their Christ. Herein I appeale to the consciences of diuers Priests, who know this that I write to be most true. In steed of many particulars, which might be re∣lated in this kinde, heare one of holy Dibdale for them all. This Dibdale exorcising of Sara Williams, one of the Minian Energumenisses (which were often coniured by holy Weston, alias Edmunds, and diuers others, at Denham∣house, and elsewhere) did to this effect speake to the de∣uill in the foresaid Sara. What doest thou say to the bles∣sed sacrament of the Altar? Oh, saith the deuill, it is the very bodie of Christ, cut it, and thou shall see it bleed. thus the deuill to Dibdale; but herein he lyed, for all that cut it, see it not bleed; witnesse that Inquisitour and Fryer, who being at Saragossa in Spaine to put a certaine conse∣crated
hoste into a pixe, to be caried vp and downe in The great de∣uill exorcised in France, deman∣ded whether Christs body were in the host, answered it was because hee was there. procession, and finding it too great for the pixe, with a payre of sissers he pared the hoste, and fitted it for the same; but the hoste did not then bleed, onely the auda∣cious Fryer, for such paring and rounding of their Christ, was sharpely rebuked by other Inquisitors, and for a cer∣taine time remoued from his Inquisitorship. Againe, the same Dibdale did thus demand of the same Sara Williams her deuill. What thinkest thou of the blessed Ʋirgin Mary? to which the deuill answered, with an Oh, Oh, shee had no originall sinne. I had not a bit of her, neither within, nor without: but, what would the whole rable of the blacke Fryers with their Saint Antonine Archbishop of Florence, with Aquinas their Angelicall Doctour, haue said to this deuill, if they had heard him Anton. part. 1. tital. 8. Aquin. 3. parte. so constantly affirme the Virgins conception without originall sinne? surely they would haue made lesse esteeme of the deuills Oracle, then they did of Brigetts reuelations for that purpose; they would (as they doe) haue produced visions, against visions, illustrations a∣gainst illustrations, and haue set Catharine against Briget. yea Bernard also should haue entred into the listes, to haue confronted against Brigetts dreames, and Sara Wil∣liams deuills oracle. Another demand, made to Sara Williams deuill I may not here pretermit; hee was demanded forsooth, what was the cause that Campians girdle, which was by nature so contemptible, should so torment and afflict him; to this the deuill with admiration and veneration cryeth out thus; Tyburne and Hierusalem know the cause thereof, they can tell you. Sundry like fopperies of Westons (alias Edmundes) and other popish Priests questions to op∣pressed persons I could produce, more worthy of laugh∣ter and contempt then obseruation: but by no deuill, was that holy father, with his consorts more deluded, then with Mainyes, of whose visions and illustrations
whilest I was among the Pontificians, I heard diuers vani∣ties related vnto me by a graue Priest, and an eye-wit∣nesse thereof, who is yet liuing, and whose name I doe purposely conceale; who hath often told me, that hee hath been euen ashamed of himselfe, to consider how both Weston, Dibdale, and himselfe, and diuers others, were deluded by this Mainye; and amongst many of their delusions, none is worthyer of laughter; then that Mainye would sometimes pretend, that the Virgin Mary with a great companie of Saints and Angells, did ap∣peare vnto him in the chamber: at which his words, presently graue Father Edmunds, with his Priests, would not onely ducke, but euen prostrate themselues to the ground, and there adore Mainyes imaginations. At an other time, would Mainye pretend, that all the deadly sinnes did present themselues vnto him in most vgly shapes, and then forsooth, with no small horrour, would some of the standers-by tremble; then would they knocke their brests; then holy Edmundes begins to in∣ueigh against sinne, especially against pride (appearing like a Peacocke) with which (if euer any man liuing vpon earth) he was most egregiously, in all hypocrisie and dis∣simulation, infected, tainted, corrupted. But the whole proceedings of Edmundes and his Priests, with their Mi∣nions and Energumenisses, is largely, and learnedly set downe, and confuted by Doctour Harsenet the worthy Bishop of Chichester, and therefore I cease to relate any more of these Ignatian fables, referring the Reader to the same Booke. As the popish Exorcists, doe euer seeke testimonies from their indiueled persons, for confirmation of their Such a kinde of conflict and coniuing, is vsed by the con¦iurers them∣selues. See Austen de ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. cap 9 and none of the Pontificians can deny, but that Magicians can command the deuills in like sort. read Victoria in lus prelection of Magick. q. 6. heresies; euen so, that counterfeit and seeming conflict and warfare, which passeth betwixt the Deuills and their Exorcistes; the Exorcist coniuring, the deuills trembling; the Exorcist commanding, the deuill obeying, (not to depart, not to go out of the possessed) but to wander vp
and downe, (like a come aloft Iacanapes) within the lists of the possessed bodie, sometimes in the face, then in the tongue, after in the throat, anon in the great toe, by and by, in those parts, which a modest pen may not mention, (and yet there, and then, will the holy Exorcists fingers signe with their crosses, to driue the deuill thence) all these their dealings I say, do euer tend to this proiect, that the standers-by, may be perswaded of some point of poperie, or of the Priests power ouer the deuills; which their power is so great and powerfull, that as yet neither Edmunds, Campian, Sherwin, powerfull Cornelius, of ould: and of late Wodward, Kempe, Warmington, Colington, Hill, Walpole, Father Thomas, with diuers o∣thers, could euer cleare any one, either possessed person, or seeming so to be. Witnesse their sundry and late at∣tempts in Hampshire, in London, in the Clinke, in Bread streete; yea the holy Dame Lucia at Barbican, at Hygate, in her Spittell-nunrye, hath been with her Ignatians and Ignatianed Priests, and her Nunnes, very forward in this kinde; but her assaults haue proued no∣thing else but towe and powder. for neither shee nor hir champions haue been able to deliuer any, or to cleare any. This is only the comfort, which such poore soules, and hypocrites receiue from them, whether it be here in England, or at Sichem, or at Loretto, or Sancta Croce in Hierusalem at Rome, that they are, or seeme most cruelly to be tormented, and afflicted; and this especi∣ally in their holiest places and sanctuaries; as at Lo∣retto, at Sichem; where it seemeth the deuills, if any be there, haue greatest power, because there they doe most afflict the possessed, there they doe most scorne the Ex∣orcists, there they doe most blaspheme against their reli∣gion; and yet there will they not out, despising, scor∣ning, deriding, their nayles, their crosses, their reliques, their lyes, their trumperies. That I speake truth herein, there was of late an Eye▪example, a man of worshipfull Mr. Bluett.
estate, and faire reuenues, who either was, or seemed to be indiueled. Alas poore man, how often hath he been exorcised in this Kingdom, by Francis Kempe, by Philip Wodwarde, by sundry others, but especially by Mr War∣mington? who hath often promised, that he would make the deuill speake in Mr luett: and as this wretched man, hath had many sweating combats here in England, so it were lamentable to relate, the tormentings, true or seeming, which he hath had at Loretto, Sichem, Lile, and elsewhere, beyond the seas; and all the consolation which he hath found, is to returne worse, (as though the Popish Sanctuaries added strength to his deuils) and farther from hope of deliuerance, then when he went. And yet our Popish Thrasonicall Priests will bragg and boast, that they can like a tennis-ball, or like a dogg in a sheete, tosse and canuase a deuill in a possessed woman, and driue him from tongue to toe, from toe to finger, to her great affliction, and their owne small ease. Being in Spaine, in the companie of Robert Parsons, I haue more then once heard the man impudently af∣firme, and desperately promise, that he would vnder∣take, The like brag others haue made most vainely, where∣in they shew themselues mi∣nisters of that King which is termed by Da∣niel Impudens facie, and hath os blasphemum, Reuelat. to make the deuill speake in any Bishop, Archbi∣shop, or Arch heretike in England, and yet the man was so full of spirituall magnanimitie, that after hee had Caualier-like ranged vp and downe this kingdom for a short while, for feare of Tyburne he voyded the king∣dome: A great ouersight surely in the man, that being here, he attempted no such matter; for surely if he had been so powerfull, he might at the very barre haue had store of Arch heretikes (so esteemed by him) vpon whom he might haue shewed his coniuring power. But that the courteous Reader may well conceiue what cre∣dit is to be giuen to these Exorcists, & their cobats with their deuils, I will here relate a true historie. A certain Fryer-Priest there was in Italie, who vndertooke to ex∣orcise a young maide, either seeming, or indeed posses∣sed:
but such was this Fryers manner of exorcising her, that not once, not twice, but very often, euen day by day, he would so well accord with the maide, that he would haue carnall knowledge of her bodie, and yet by no meane, could shee agree with the Fryer, or endure him, when he would take flagellum Daemonū, the deuills scourge (a booke of their exorcismes) into his hands: for then would shee so roare, and make such vgly faces against him, as if Michael the Archangell had been combatting with her: and if any here aske, how it came to passe, that the deuill in this young maide, did not reueale the sinnes of this Fryer? mary thus the case stood. The Fryer would euer haue to doe with the maide after his exorcising, and coniuring of her; and before he would vndertake to coniure her againe, he would be assured to go to confession, & cry peccaui: the which he did excee∣ding often, as I haue been most credibly informed from A notable cou∣sening tricke of a Fryer with an Energumenisse. the mouth of his ghostly Father, who is reputed a wise & graue man, who though he often did absolue his Frier, yet deserueth to be excused, because it is a position of diuers Pontifician Casuistes, that a Penitent must be still absolued, as often as he shall come, though still with the same sinnes: and this especially, if there may arise the least suspition of the sinne, by the Priests denying abso∣lution to the Penitent: Now the case passing thus, be∣twixt the Fryer and the maide, to the deception of ma∣ny: The attentiue Reader may well perceiue what man∣ner of confession that is, which will please the deuill, and what manner of collusions, passe oftentimes betwixt these men and their Energumenisses; as is iustly to bee thought did passe betwixt Dibdale and his Sara, whom he would often carrie a horse backe behinde him, from place to place, as also some others then did deale with their minions: which thing the Pontificians (though to their great shame) cannot denie. And why might not Dibdale carrie Sara Williams behinde him, as well as
the younger Garnet, executed some yeeres since, was accustomed to carrie a woman as his wife, vp and downe Suffex? It is a world to obserue how certaine Pontifician soules, especially feminine, dare not present themselues, where any person is exorcised, before they haue been at confession; but to such persons, I would commend this generall rule to ponder vpon, that commonly (especi∣ally in Italie) the greatest Coniurers, and to whom such a Prouince is committed, are notorious sinners, and of the worst spirits, and most rebellious dispositions. Another circumstance, whereby we may euidently gather, that the deuills haue a great hand in popish do∣ctrines, rites, and ceremonies, is this; that the diuells themselues (a thing which cannot be denied) are plea∣sed, and delighted with the very same and selfe-things, which are most sacred amongst the Pontificians: as for example, their Agnus-deies, their holy water, their blest in∣cense, their palmes, their waxe candles, their crosses, and often crossings, (their crossings and often crosses I say, for otherwise the signe of the crosse vsed in Baptisme, and as a ceremonie, I cannot see how it should be super∣stitious, or magicall) their stoles, maniples, vestments, yea their consecrated hostes, and sacred Eucharists; with which, that the deuills themselues are pleased, and honou∣red, no man can denie, who hath euer heard of the pra∣ctises of coniurers; who hath euer read, the sundry in∣chantments of witches, sorcerers; who hath euer seene the instruments of them, which they vse in their myste∣ries: for they vse euen popish stoles, maniples, vesti∣ments, candles, holy water, consecrated oyles, &c. I know what the learned Pontificians will pretend to an∣swer to these things, they will say forsooth, that the de∣uill doth emulate Gods honour; true, in such worships The deuill is delighted with the sacredst things that are in Poperie. as he himselfe deuiseth; but how is it imagineable hee should emulate Gods honour, in vsing and respecting those things, which the Popish Church, with bell, booke
and candle, with all her sacred breath, breathing, & in∣vocating the H: Ghost vpon them, doth especially or∣deyne, appoint, and prescribe, to be vsed against the ver∣tue, power, illusions, & inchantments of the deuils. This is that mysterie of iniquitie, which I desire the learnedest Dowists to vnfould; and to shew, how the deuills can desire to be honoured, reuerenced and worshipped, by such things; and themselues to reuerence and regard such things▪ as by their Church, with all her power, are blessed & prescribed against them. I challenge all the Aduersaries to shew if they can, that the deuills were de∣lighted and pleased, with the very sacrifices of God in the ould Testament; or by any such things, as were blessed by Moses or Aaron; or that now they are pleased with any thing of religion, which the reformed churches deliuer, and as they deliuer, teach, and prescribe them. Furthermore, the deuills concurring to the mainte∣nance of popish doctrine and practises, in nothing doth appeare more clearely, then in their damnable doctrine of equiuocation, which is nothing else, but flatlying, whereof the deuill is principall Parent and Authour, for he was a murtherer and a lyer from the beginning, saith the Ioh: 8. Gospell. Here I desire the Reader, to giue me leaue to relate two equiuocating trickes of two Ignatian Priests, one worthy of detestation, the other of laughter. There was in the Countie of Northumberland, a fiery and furious litle Priest, well knowne to my selfe, and di∣uers others in Rome. This Person attempting with vio∣lence to haue oppressed a young maide, which came to him to confession, was reiected by her, and vpon her out-cry, his Clerke (which was in the next roome, and A notorious periurie of an Ignatian Prest. attending to helpe him to masse) comes in with haste, findes him strugling with the maide; vpon which sight and accident both the maide and his clerke fell into such a detestation of him, that by one of them he was disco∣uered to the Magistrate, and was therevpon presently
taken: being taken, with solemne oath he denieth him∣selfe to be a Priest (like as one Komes an Ignatian Priest in the Clinke did the like with solemne oath to the last Lord of Canterbury) but afterward being conuicted to be a Priest, by one that dwelt neere, and had knowne him in Rome, he to excuse himselfe, said that hee did e∣quiuocate, and that when hee denied himselfe to bee a Priest, he ment he was not Priest of Baall, and so this holy Ignatian, (who neuer ascended into the Sicomore tree to behold Christ, with sincere Zacheus to repent;) thought his credit sufficiently salued. This wicked wretch, not long after was banished, by vertue of that gratious proclamation, which was published presently after the discouery of the powder-treason. Being ba∣nished his first entertainment was to be a Ghostly Father for strangers at Nostredame du Hall neere Brussells; from thence, he was preferred to bee Ghostly Father in the Campe amongst the Spaniards, where hee profited so well, that thence he hath recollected himselfe to Louayne to Saint-Iohns mount, where he lately plaide the young∣ster vnder Father Talbot, hoping after his nouice▪ship to be Ignatianed. Where willingly I leaue him, wishing that he may still there continue. The other true tale is of one Thomas Cornford, con∣cerning whom, the courteous Reader may obserue, that at his examination, before my Lords Grace of Canterbu∣rie, taken the 25. of Iune 1612▪ he did first giue vnto him selfe the name of Iohn Ʋnderwood, and so subscribed it; affirming, that he was a married man; and that hee had married the daughter of one Robinson, in Irkingburge, where his wife also, then, at the time of his examination remained: he added also, that he had beene married vn∣to her twelue yeares, and that, he had by her, sixe chil∣dren: and being examined, about his going to mistresse Ʋaux; his answere was, that being, himselfe was by con∣dition a Farmer, he went to Mistresse Vaux, to intreate
her, to moue the Lord Vaux; that he himselfe, might be Tenant to his Lordship, for a certaine house and land, lying in Irkingburge, where his wife Robinsons daughter remained. This being in effect, the substance of his an∣swere, at the first of his examinations, he acknowledged and subscribed vnto the same, by the name of Iohn Vn∣derwood. But my Lords Grace, vpon some occasion of busi∣nesse, putting this man off for a time, hee, either vpon some remorse of conscience, or fearing, lest his conditi∣on and estate, might, by some other meanes be discouer∣ed, doth of himselfe offer, to manifest vnto his Grace, his condition and profession; vnto which, as it were vp∣on a second examination he is admitted: where, he first, acknowledgeth himselfe for the space of sixe yeare, to haue beene brought vp in the Colledge of Rome; and that there, he tooke the orders of Priesthood, according to the manner of that Church; and that from thence, some 12. yeares since, he was sent by mission into Eng∣land: where by Father Garnet, he was admitted into the society of Iesus: he acknowledgeth also, that his name was Thomas Cornford, and so subscribed the same the se∣cond time; after, that before, hee had subsigned by the name of Iohn Vnderwood. The Reader will here expect, to vnderstand how this ingenious and Saint-like Ignatian, did conciliate and ac∣cord, such contrarie sayings of his; surely thus hee per∣formed his part, and demonstrated himselfe a worthy Rabby in the Ignatian Academie of equiuocating, cog∣ging, lying: whereas he affirmed himselfe, to be a mar∣ried man; his meaning was, that his wise was his breui∣arie; and that hee had beene married vnto it, twelue yeares; as for his children, which hee had by Robinsons daughter, those were his ghostly and spirituall children. But yet, the wily man (being demaunded thereof) could not well shew, how his wife the Breuiarie, became Ro∣binsons
daughter: and here being at a stand, hee was hol∣pen out by his Grace that in probability, his Breuiarie was Robinsons daughter, because it might be, that the Printers name, who printed it was Robinson. The reason, why he called himselfe a Farmer, was because he was so to God, according to that text, Redde rationem villicatio∣nis tuae: Giue an account of thy Farmership. And the rea∣son, why he said, that he went to Mistresse Vaux, to take a farme of the Lord Vaux; was, because he was ready, to doe them any seruice, for their saluation, and for the spi∣rituall tilling of their soules. Whereas hee had denied himselfe, to haue beene beyond the seas; his answere was, that he spoke that, with intention, that he had bin there, but not, that hee was bound, to tell his Grace so much. Thus in effect with much like stuffe passed the Holy Ignatians examination; out of which, the intelli∣gent Reader may clearely inferre, how egregiously these men, shew themselues, to be impes of him, who was (mendax ab initio, a lyer from the beginning) and yet for∣sooth, these men, and none but these, (if, it may so please the Gods) are only sincere, holy, Christian, Apostoli∣call. For my part I cannot but thinke, that Father Tho∣mas, since his engrafting into Ignatianisme, and Garne∣tisme, became an Equiuocater; for in Rome, hee was possessed, with such a doultish kinde of simplicity, that it is a kinde of miracle, that he should so easily haue been transformed into another man: well it may be obserued herehence, how efficacious the Garnetian Academie hath beene for training youth in lying, cogging, equi∣uocating.
A SECOND PRELVDE SHEWING BRIEFELY THAT miracles are not certaine tokens of a true RELIGION. CHAP. II. NOtwithstanding, for further con∣firmation of this truth, I will (by Gods assistance) shew that miracles are not certaine and infallible tokens of a true reli∣gion, especially after the esta∣blishment of Christian religion in the world, and that there is no other sure and certaine An∣chor for truth but the infallible word of God, by which, and according to which all miracles which may happen are to be examined, with which if they agree they may be approued, if otherwise they are to be reiected and de∣tested as the Deuills owne inuentions; for as a worthy man saith, all truth is to be suspected, which the authority of sacred Scriptures doth not confirme; without which (to speake with Saint Hierome) whatsoeuer is brought, it is as easily contemned, as it is brought. Agreeingly to which, Saint Austen disputing against the Donatists, contendeth August. de vnit. Eccles. cap. 16. most earnestly, that therefore this thing or that thing is not to be held for true, because Pontius or Donatus haue miracles, haue visions; or because Catholikes haue mi∣racles,
haue visions, in the Catholike Church: in which discourse enlarging himselfe, and shewing out of scrip∣tures, that false-phophets were to doe miracles he addeth thus. Nonne legimus &c. Doe we not read, that euen of the Lord God himselfe, many were heard in the high places of Iu∣ry; which high places notwithstanding, did so greatly displease God, that such Kings as did not subuert them, were blamed, and such Kings as did ouerthrow them, were greatly praised? and a little after; Exaudinntur ergo &c. Therefore many are heard and by diuerse meanes, not onely Christian Catho∣likes, but euen Panymes, Heretikes, and Iewes, giuen to di∣ners superstitions, but they are heard either of seducing Spirits, (who notwithstanding can do nothing, but what they are per∣mitted by God, secretly disposing what is to bee giuen to euery one) or of God himselfe, either for a punishment of their ma∣lice; or for asolace of their miserie, or for awarning to seeke e∣uerlasting saluation. And a litle after: Quaecunque mira∣cula Note. &c. What miracles soeuer are done in the Catholike Church, they are therefore to be approued because done in it, but not therefore is the Catholike Church manifested, because they are done in it. Thus he. Now come our Papists Aliquando &c. Sometimes great decepti∣on is made by Priests in feig∣ned miracles for game which ought to be rooted out as these were by Da∣niel Lira. in Dan. (which will only be Catholikes) and say that therefore their miracles are true because they are done in their Ca∣tholike Church, which reason if it may hold, then all those fond lyes and imaginations, must bee beleeued which their golden Legends relate, & if they grant any to be false, and delusory which are done by men in their Catholike Church, then it will needes follow, that the credit of all the rest will be cracked, according to the ge∣nerall and true saying; A lying man deserueth not to be be∣leeued, although he tell the truth; and that of their Cannon lawe, he who is found once euill, is alwaies presumed to be e∣uill in the same kinde of ill. But how deuysing, and couse∣ning in miracles concerneth Popish Catholikes, let Ca∣nus speake, Nostriautem plerique &c. Very many of ours, Canus de locis lib. 11. cap. 6. either follow their affections, or of set purpose doe so feigne
many things, that I am not only ashamed of them, but they al∣so greatly vexe me. Thus he; with much to like purpose, where he addeth somewhat which is litle for the credit of those dialogues which are commonly attributed to Gregorie the Great. Againe Leonard Aretine, doth iustly taxe this abuse of his brethren the Pontificians, he char∣geth them with deuysing of dreames, visions, phanta∣sies, and miracles, (which were neuer done) to deceiue and make gaine of their simple Auditory. Doth not Antony a Saint of their Church, and Archbishop of Flo∣rence peremptorily taxe the visions and dreames of some deuised to proue the Virgin Maryes immaculate conception? And if this had not beene the practise of Pontificians euen to the deprauation of their seruice∣bookes, Breuiaries, &c. would Pius the 5. haue acknow∣ledged Pius in prfat. Breuiar. Rom: reformat. corruption in the Breuiaries, to the eternall igno∣miny of his Church? Aske venerable Bede what a lye was deuised and fathered vpon Melito, to proue the Vir∣gin Beda: in retract. in Act. Apost. Maryes corporall assumption? the Rhemists them∣selues, haue taken vp the lye, and though they obserue the credit of Melito to be casheered, yet they haue deui∣sed Annot. in 1. act. Apost. a new tricke to corrupt Dionyse who notwithstan∣ding is counterfeit. Is it not cleare as the heauens, that for very shame they haue exploded diuers of their old Monkes fictions out of their Legends? surceasing there∣fore, to adde any thing more for confirming of this iust imputation against them that their Church hath beene a Forger in her miracles, visions, and prodigies; I make this inference, that seeing she hath beene found false so often, shee deserueth not credit, although shee should tell truth. Saint Austen in his booke of the city of God, so litle August. 10. lib. deciuit. cap. 16. esteemeth of miracles, though wrought by Angells, a∣gainst Christian truth, that against them hee boldly pro∣nounceth See Origen. con∣tra Celsum. lib. 1. thus: If (saith Saint Austen) those Angells, which desire sacrifice to be done to themselues, should by won∣derfull
facts, moue the mindes of men, and those who doe for∣bid the same, and doe command sacrifices onely to bee done to God, should not vouchsafe to doe those visible miracles, tru∣ly then, not by sense of body, but by reason of the minde, their authoritie were to be preferred. This doctrine of Austen is confirmed by the like of Saint Chrysostome, who ex∣pounding those words of Christ, if you shall haue faith as Chrysist. supra illa Math. si . tis fidom vt granum. a mustard seede &c. saith thus: where as these things are not now done in the Church, may wee thinke therefore that Christians are voide of faith, God auert it that wee should speake such bad things of the people of God: Iustifying faith is present, and not wanting, but the faith of miracles hath cea∣sed. Thus there. But if Chrysostome, bee the Author of the imperfect worke vpon Mathew as it is commonly cited by the Pontificians, and is of great authority, then he goeth further; for he writeth thus, speaking of the la∣ter times. Wherefore, if a man should long to know where the Chrysist. homil. 49. in Math. operis imperf. true Church is in the middest of so great confusion, whither shall he returne but to the Scriptures? heretofore also by signes, the true and false-Christians were knowne; how this? False Christians indeede, either could not doe the signes as true Christians did, or else could not doe such as true Christians did; but the miracles they did, were vaine, causing wonder, but hauing no profit, as wee haue often expounded, but true Christians did perfect signes, hauing alwaies some profit, and by these things were knowne true and false Christians, but now the working of signes is altogether taken away, but it is rather found, that fained things are done, with those who are false Christians; but euen as Peter expoundeth it in Clement, the power of doing full and perfect signes, is to bee giuen to Anti∣christ: Thus farre there, with much more to like pur∣pose; shewing that the only Anchor in time of confu∣sion, and Antichristianisme, are the Scriptures, not mi∣racles, not wonders as our Antichristians would now haue; resting for those things, which the reformed Churches condemne, vpon traditions forged, and mi∣racles
feigned. But yet in this later part of Chrysostomes discourse, (being thereunto vrged by the force of truth) the Rhemists themselues do concurre; who vpon the E∣pistle Annotat. in 2. ad Thess. 2. vers. 9. & in Apoc. cap. 13. vers. 3. in marg. to the Thessalonians write thus. Sathan whose power to hurt is abridged by Christ; shall then be let loose; and shall then assist Antichrist in all manner of signes, wonders, and false miracles, whereby many shall bee seduced, not onely Iewes: Thus there. And againe vpon the Apocalypse, they af∣firme the like: by all which it is most manifest, that the working of miracles, and wonders can bee no certaine argument, for truth, seeing that both Heretikes and Schismatikes, yea Antichrist, and his Ministers shall haue full power to doe the same: the which yet I further strengthen with the authoritie of Ignatius and Iustine. Ig∣natius Ignat epist. ad Hieronem. hath thus: Quisquis dixerit &c. Whosoeuer shall speake beside those things which are appointed, although hee may seeme worthy of credit, although he may fast, although he may keepe virginitie, although he may doe signes, although he may prophesie, let him be esteemed of thee, as a Wolfe vnder a sheepes skinne, endeauouring the corruption of the sheepe. Thus Ignatius: agreeing to whom Iustine affirmeth, that Justin. ad Or∣thodox. q. 5. if any miracles be done in the conuenticles of Heretikes, that their errours may not thereby be more confimed, then if any man would teach the impity of Gentiles to be gratefull to God, because he causeth his sunne to rise on them, and doth sprinkle them, with dewe from heauen. According to all which Au∣sten in his treatise vpon Saint Iohn calleth the miracles August. tract. 13 & 14. in Ioh and visions of the Donatistes, meere Fables, and the Do∣natistes who gloried & triumphed in them, mirabiliarios, mirabiliarians, as the Pontificians now doe in their pro∣digies deseruing like name. Doctour Stapleton a late Achilles of the Popish Sina∣gogue, will not deny, but that Heretikes shall and will S plet prompe moral. in 24. minic. diuis 4. doe miracles, especially in the later times of the Church; and this vertue he ascribeth confidently and peculiarly to Antichrist, and his Ministers; which Ministers hee
would gladly make the reformed Churches of these times to be; but the good man speaketh it faintly, as it were against his owne conscience, as it may be obserued in part of his words, which are these: The deception made by Antichrist, and heretikes, which are his fore-runners, shall be so great in signes & wonders, that the very strongest in faith shall be in hazard▪ vnlesse they shall beware of this, which is foretold: especially because such, before the com∣ming of Antichrist, shall be much more bitter then the for∣mer, euen as at this day we see, for so great, and such, are the heresies of these times, that deseruedly they ought to seem the very next to Antichrist, the which also we haue in a cer∣taine Oration of this argument, endeuoured (what? hast thou onely endeuoured?) to shew. What sayest thou Stapleton, art thou so constant, that the precursors of Antichrist, and the next hereticks before him, shall work miracles and wonders? why then doest thou, euen in this place, deny them (whom thou callest Antichrists precursors) to worke any miracles, as thy brethren the Dowists doe also in their Annotations vpon the second Epistle to the Thessalonians? why dost thou speake so Annotat. 2. chap. v. 9. faintly, that thou hast endeuoured to shew, that the heretikes of these times are the immediate precursours of Anti∣christ? was not thy Oration of set purpose laboured, with all thy wit and eloquence, to proue the same? why then, dost thou not speake more confidently, according to thy presumptuous spirit there? but I tell thy Dowistes for thee confidently, that thou hast endeuoured it so well in that Oration, that my selfe (as small a scholler as I am) dare vndertake to retort all thy demonstrations, against the popish synagogue and the Antichrist of the same; who although he be already the man of sinne, and sonne of perdition, working prodigies, and wonders in his ministers; yet he hath not as yet put on Panopliam Antichristi, the whole compleat armour of the most damnable Antichrist, which he will then do, when in his
synagogue, his vniuersall, absolute▪ monarchicall, and direct tyrannte, ouer all and in all; spiritualls and temporalls; subiects and Soueraignes; Faith and discipline shall be decreed; I say direct, because indirect he already most arrogantly assumeth; but when the malice of those men of sinne, and children of perdition, shall be compleat and consummate; then also, not onely by desire, by li∣king, by sentence, but euen by breefe, by decree, by de∣finition, he shall assume and challenge direct Monarchy of the world; which miserie how fast it higheth on, I leaue to some other place and time to be debated and discussed; that it is not already compleated, I am sure there wanteth no good will in Popes, no desire in their Canonists, no good affection in their State-Ignatians. The authorities, which I haue produced out of Fa∣thers, agreeing to the holy Scriptures doe euince, that miracles and wonders, are not infallible tokens of truth; but for further illustration of this point, I will make the same cleare by reason. My reason is an expresse conclu∣sion of their famous Victoria, and it is this: Eadem opera &c. The same workes, or the like, are done by Arte Ma∣gicke, Victoria relect. 12 de Magia. q 4. propos. 1. and by Graces freely giuen; and thus it is proued; for to Graces (gratis datis) freely giuen, it belongeth to cast out deuills, to take vp serpents, to restore health, to speake with tongues, as is manifest in the last of Marke, and first to the Corinthians 12. but these things are done by the Magicians, therefore the same workes are common to both. thus far he: how truly in euery respect, ipse viderit, let him looke to it: it is sufficient for me, that their so famous a Praelectour, doth teach that by Artes Magicke, the same workes are done, which are done by the gift of working miracles. And yet the Louanian Professour Stapleton aduentureth Prompt. mral in Dominic. 24. post pent. diuisi 4 further, and herein I desire his Duacene-successours to de∣send him from errour, thus he teacheth: Although the miracles, which the false prophets shall doe, be true prodigies (quoad actus supernaturales) in respect of the supernaturall
actions themselues; notwitstanding they shall be but lying, because they shall serue for a lye; certainely, for the greater proofe of the faithfull, not onely Antichrist himselfe, and his immediate precursours, but all heretikes, like as the Magici∣ans (God permitting them) may be able to doe miracles. thus he. This Doctour speaketh most truly of mira∣cles to be done by Gods permission, both by Heretikes and Magicians; but I cannot but maruell at his Diui∣nitie, where he teacheth, that the actions and acts them∣selues of such prodigies, should be supernaturall; surely his head was supernaturall, when he dreamed such diui∣nitie; for I neuer yet read any learned Christian, who durst teach that the prodigious acts of Magicians, or Heretikes, except they be extraordinarily endewed with a miraculous faith, and doe them by the immediate power of God, should be in themselues (that is in their substance and nature) surpassing the boundes, limits, and force of naturall causes: for I neuer learned otherwise, no not in Rome, but that all miraculous workes done by Magicians and Heretikes, were euer done, by the secret, hidden, quicke and speedy application of naturall cau∣ses; the vertues of which are well knowne to Satan, who is the cheefe and principall Agent in such myste∣ries. And the truth of this is grounded vpon this prin∣ciple, that no creature whatsoeuer, can create; now if ei∣ther good or bad Angells, could produce any things, which were in substance, essence, or nature, supernaturall, then they might create; and although they would pre∣tend to vse naturall causes for such effects, they should doe nothing; for betwixt a supernaturall effect, action, and operation, and a naturall cause, there is no propor∣tion, but infinite disproportion; and it is onely God, who by his omnipotent power can vse any creatures, by their subiected and obedientiall power to him, to the effecting of whatsoeuer he shall please: therefore, good and bad Angells, Heretikes and Magicians, all they doe
in these their prodigies, is by secret application, and meanes of naturall causes, God in his good pleasure, permitting them so to doe, for the deception of those, who deserue to be deceiued. But leauing Stapletons su∣pernaturall acts, to be defended either by his Duacenes, or some Ignatians, which are by his will to succeed him in See my mo∣tiues vnder the title of dange∣rous Spirits. his Librarie at their first Colledge in Oxford. I do out of the Aduersaries mouth euince, that heretikes, deuills, magicians, may doe workes supernaturall, therefore ac∣cording to their owne position, to doe such things, can be no certaine proofe of true Religion, and true Prea∣chers: we must rather recurre ad legē & ad testimonium, to the law and testament, as God himselfe hath instructed Isaiae 8. Ioh. 5. 39. and commanded vs. And if I would here stand to inlarge my discourse, I could easily shew, that ancient Magicians and Panymes haue wrought as prodigious workes for confirmation of their erroneous rites, as Pontificians haue done for proofe of their superstitions; and this in as cleare, open, and publike a manner, yea more certaine. For popish miracles haue certaine pro∣perties, making them of lesse credit then those of the Panymes: as for example, they are seldome or neuer seene to be done, by any indifferent witnesses, but are commonly first done, then spoken of; few there are, which see the euills from which their persons pretend to be deliuered; but fewer see their deliuerance. At Si∣chem, Loretto, Nostre dame du hall, and elsewhere at their miracle-stages, a man may liue many a yeere, before he shall see any one miracle done in publike view, and sight of the Church: but many forsooth, come from farre places, pretending deliuerance, and these commonly are poore, are commonly women, and some such creatures; and their deliuerances be commonly from some infir∣mities, which the deuills may performe, and this lightly alwaies vpon their vowes: in which kinde, if one by chance or physicke recouer, for a hundred who perish,
by and by as it were with sound of trumpet, there must be a miracle, a prodigie: truly, their follies and vanities herein, with an indifferent and an vnpartiall eye being considered, will either procure laughter, or compassion, they are so many, so manifold. But in all breuitie, I will paralell a few of their prodi∣gies, with the Panymes wonders: They forsooth pre∣tend, that a certaine wooden Crucifixe spoke thus to their Angelicall Doctor Aquinas, bene scripsisti de me Thoma, thou hast written well of me Thomas, (well per∣haps because he taught, and constantly taught, that it must be adored with adoration of latria, the very same wherewith Christ is to be adored) what reward dost thou Aquinas part. 3. q. 5 art. 3. 4. desire? to which he replyed, none other but thy selfe. But Valerius telleth vs of a more certaine speech of the image Valerius lib. 1. cap. 8. of Fortune, made not to one but to many of the Dames of Rome, when they did dedicate it: rite me consecrastis, rite me vidistis: Yee Matrons, you haue rightly consecrated See Austen 10. de ciuit. relating mira∣cles of hea∣thens like these of Papists. me, you haue rightly seene me. They much glory, how the house of Loretto was first caried by the hands of An∣gells into Dalmatia, thence ouer the Adriatike Sea into Italie; where it was first placed in a most dangerous wood, (where innumerable Pilgrims visiting the same lost their liues, as likewise going to Sichem not long ago, many were both spoyled and lost their liues, so potent Patronesses be their woodden Images) but afterwards the second time, it remooued to a peece of land, which belonged to two brothers, who seeing the great gaine by offerings and donations which came to that place, be∣gan to contend about the same, each of them desirous to make it proper to himselfe: vpon which contention, as Turseline reporteth, the holy house remoued it selfe from that ground, and placed it selfe in the middest of a common high way, where now it standeth, and is with diuine worship honoured and adored. Thus they fable of their house of Loretto. All which notwithstanding
if it were true, there is no more done, then what may be acted by deuills and magicians: For their owne Can∣non law, as it is expounded by Turrecremate Driedo, Turrecremat. Driedo apul Victoriam relct. de mag. and Ʋictoria, hath in the chapter, Episcopus, causa 26. q. 1. that the deuills are able, to carrie bodies vp and downe in the ayre, (visibly or invisibly as the Cannon must be interpreted): and therefore, by their ministerie, this might be done, if God would so permit. But the ob∣scure natale, and birth, as I may so speake, of that house, maketh me absolutely to iudge, that it is wholy spurious. for were it true and sound, how is it possible, that the Historians of those times should not specially, and with all circumstances deliuer the first and happy happening of such a blessing? to me such a doubtfull and obscure beginning is an euident argument of bastardie. To proceed, they vainely deliuer, how Christ tooke Catharine of Siennaes heart from her, and gaue her his owne. So Clement in his Itinerarie, reporteth how Si∣mon Clement. in Itinerri. Magus tooke the proper figure and face from one Fraustianus, and gaue him his owne. They teach I cannot tell how often, and how frequent changes they haue of their Eucharist by stabbs, by blowes, into true flesh, into bloud, and sometimes into the forme of a young childe (which is mendacious and doth not in truth shew Christ as he is, for Christ now is no childe:) But who is ignorant how many transformations the old Panymes had made by their Godds and Goddesses, and related with as good credit as these of the Pontisicians? And yet perhaps our Pontisicians haue more Gods then the Painims, because the number of their Patrons, which they make as Petty gods, doe surpasse the number of Gods worshipped by the Pagans, which may easily be beleeued, if we doe but call to minde how Trithemius a blacke Monke doth reckon vnto vs diuers thousands of his order for Saints, and consequently for diuine Pa∣trons, and Demy▪ Gods. But to conclude this my
Prelude, and to leaue of further adding of any autho∣ritie from man, for confirmation of what I haue said, I adioyne that which Moyses deliuereth in Gods name in his booke of Deuteronomie, the thirteenth Chapter, vers. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a drea∣mer Verses 1. 2. 3. of dreames (and giue thee a signe or a wonder, and the signe and the wonder which he hath told come to passe) saying let vs goe after other gods, which thou hast not knowen, and let vs serue them: Thou shalt not hearken vnto the words of the Prophet, or vnto that dreamer of dreames; For the Lord your God proueth you, to know whether you loue the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soule. Thus God by the pen of Moyses. And so I come to ioyne and enter into the lists with Mr. Flodd. CHAP. III. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS petty Preface. Mr. Iohn Flodd in his Purgatories tryumph to Sir Ed∣ward Hobby chap. 5. pag. 143. numb. 25. SOme of your writers seeing our relations to be autenticall, as none can be more, haue not brazen faces to denie the stories, yet their heart and tongue is no lesse impious, not fea∣ring to affirme that these miracles are miracles of the deuill, and Antichrists lying wonders: which fancie though I finde it not in your booke, yet I will seeke to confute it, knowing it to be one of the false notes your Ministers often sing vnto you. Sixe arguments occurre vnto me, which shew the vanitie of the conceit, and how inexcusable Protestants are, who reiect our miracles vpon this silly fancie.
ANSWER. Mr. Flodd, you hauing answered, as your selfe thought, sufficiently, (though God wot very slenderly & in iugu∣lum proprium) such reasons, as Sir Edward Hobby had alleaged against your Lipsian vanities and prodigies, out of an ouerplus of your learning, you marshall as in battell∣aray, six arguments, against such ministers (as you say) who admitting your narrations to be true, sing notwith∣standing, that your miracles are no other then the Miracles of the Deuill, and Antichrists lying wonders. When I had read this your vaunting proposall of sixe arguments, and obserued how like a fludde you made precipitate hast to enter into a dispute of this kinde, and found with all that Sir Edward had passed by your argu∣ments with a scornefull nodd, not deigning them so much as a looke; I, who am not vnacquainted with the boasting ostentation of Popish spirits, when any of their bookes or pamphlets passe vnanswered, thought it my part being moued with zeale of Gods truth, to cast my small mite into Gods boxe, and to enter into the lists with you, and so to renew our old acquaintance which both at Rome, S. Omers, and elsewhere, hath beene seasoned with diuers disputes, concerning sundrie obiects: and now again if it please you, let vs make triall of our forces, what each of vs can say for his assertion: I ingenuouslie confesse that I am one of those Priests or Ministers who doe sing this note, that your miracles are no other then the Deuills miracles and the lying prodigies of Antichrist, which by Gods assistance in this my discourse and answere to your sixe arguments; I will make most manifest. I pur∣pose to examine your reasons, as they lye sentence after sentence: In the vewing of which I am sorry to obserue so many false imputations, sleight impertinences, hai∣nous blasphemies, shufled vp together; that there are
hardly any lines (if examined by the leuell of sacred Scripture and morall truth) will passe for currant. And to digge vp, not your fountaine but your puddle à capite; where like a flud, you calumniously ouerflowe, in the pettie preface to your sixe reasons, speaking thus; some of your writers seeing our relations to be Autenticall &c. which of our writers I beseech you doe hold your rela∣tions to be autenticall? Why name you not them? if you had said some of our Preachers, I would haue let it passe, obseruing it to be too true, that in the Church of England there are some secret Iamnes & Mambres, who couertly resist the truth, and equiuocate for your purpose. But you pointing at Writers I cannot deuine whom you should meane, especially that you speak thus indefinite∣ly without any rescription or limitation, that they see your relations to be autenticall, which is equiualent with this all your relations to be autenticall; had you said some of your relations or narrations to haue beene true, at lest in some part, you might haue found those, who would haue so auerred with you, for otherwise, your Sinagogue should not be that Apostating Church, which is to doe signes and wonders, if it were possible euen to the decep∣tion of the Elect. This then your first outlashing what shall call it a lying ostentation of an Ignatian? I will not. Let the reader only obserue what your forehead is, to be∣ginne thus. But when you adde of your owne (as none can be more) may I not here iustly thwart you thus? Im∣peret tibi Dominus, The Lord rebuke thee. What? no re∣lations more autenticall? Apage sis: I would haue thought, that all humane relations should haue attended as handmaides, and not haue stalked cheek by iole with the euerlasting records of sacred Scriptures: I pray you Sir be contented, that they may rest in the lowest degree of humane authoritie; your Sichem, Lile, Arras, Laure∣tane and Hallensian relations, haue hardly humane credit euen with diuerse of your own Priests, Fryers, & Monkes,
yet Inhabitants of Babilon: I call your selues to witnesse herein that I lie not; diuers of your Priests are doubtfull what credit to giue vnto them; yet they admit and e∣steeme of them, tanquàm pias fraudes ad faciendum popu∣lum, as pious fraudes to perswade the people. Some fiue yeares since, at my second visiting of Sichems Sanctuarie, I did in great earnest with a kinde of coniuring, in Gods Of like, Viues speaketh apd Espen. lib. . 1. cap. 11. name importune a person of no small note there, what he truly found touching the miracles, which were said to be done in that place: his answere was (charging me to conceale his secret, which I will do by Gods assistance by concealing of his name) that for his part, hee had seene nothing for the time he was there, neither did hee giue credit to any of the former relations: And knew I (said he) how to liue elsewhere, I would not abide here: thus he, though doubtlesse in profession a ranke Papist, but magna est veritas & preualet: Truth is great and preuailes. As for Hall, this I can boldly affirme, that none of those quarters are lesse credulous of the incredible narrations there, then the Inhabitants themselues. Ludunt alios, nummos vt lucrentur. And Lipsius who professeth to write such thinges, which at the commaund of the Archbishops of Meclines, had been examined by the Bishop of Anwerpe Miraeus, and such other relations as hee receiued from his Coun∣treyman Numan &c. is hee able, to bring but one eye witnesse, as Miraeus, Homas, Numan or any like? who beheld the doing of any such miracles? no, they are lu∣cifugae, nightbirds; for my part, I confesse ingenuouslie, though in my often trauailes in those Countries, I was very inquiitiue, yet could I neuer meete with one man or woman, who could affirme himselfe to haue been an Eye-witnesse, of any one miracle, done either at Sichem, or at Hall; and yet now, such are the times, that the great incredulity of the powerful working of that Image should according to S. Paules rule (non fidelibus sed infi∣delibus 1. Cor. 14.
&c tongues are signes not for the faithfull but for the incredulous) seeme to require, some miracle to be done in their open sight, & not all to be related only, (as they are) vpon heare say, and from dead witnesses. For my part, when I read in Lipsius (which also so happened) how the miraculous Image was found out, I ipius Diua S. cap. 3. & 4. dare not giue any credit to the same, as to a miracle. Thus it was; the picture, first was found by a poore shepheard, who for the taking vp of the same was prodi∣giouslie affrighted; but being set vp into the old tree a∣gaine, (from which Dagon-like it was cast downe) it was againe taken away, the second time and is not yet knowne how or by whom, and is as yet still missing. The people thereabouts, notwithstanding repayred for the space of sixe yeares to the place, where the Picture stood, crauing helpe, (O prodigious throne of great Iuno!) and Sichems numen sell &c. and is stolne away not yet resto∣red. obtained the same; at last one of the Senatours of Sichem (A Senatour like as if one of our Countrey Labourers, or Rustickes should be so tearmed) set vp an other new pic∣ture of wood in roome of the former, vpon the same olde rotten tree, where it also now standeth, and is there ado∣red and worshipped. When I thinke seriously, of this manner of substituting, of one picture for another, and by so graue a person as a Senatour of Sichem, I cannot but suspect some legerdemaine. What Mr. Flodd? the poore shepheard, tooke vp, out of a religious deuotion, the poore picture which lay basely vpon the ground, with purpose to carry it home (for saith Lipsius, paruaerat & prinato cultui opportuna, it was a pretty little one and fit for Ibidem cap 3. priuate worship) and to make thereof a domesticall Pe∣nate; and yet he is prodigiouslie affrighted, from his so godly an attempt? And yet notwithstanding about the yeare 1580 the same Image perished, vncertaine by what way, or meanes, saue only that there is suspicion that theeues tooke the same and committed the crime. Obserue a prodi∣gie! A religious and deuout Oratour is affrighted, be∣cause
he would haue taken home, the Goddesse to haue worshipped her and yet the same Goddesse, is in despight stolne away by (they cannot tell whom) Theeues, Rob∣bers, Malefactours, and no reuengfull numen punisheth Predones them for such a sacriledge? O fatuas Gentes, quibus talia rapiuntur ab arboribus numina, O fatuous people, whose gods are thus stolne from trees! When I thinke, of these lipsian vanities, I doe not maruell, that in the very front of this Chapter, he prefixeth this sentence: Miracula diuina con∣sideranda sunt, non discutienda, diuine miracles are to be con∣sidered Lipsus seemeth to mistrust the credit of his miracles. and admired, not to be discussed▪ as if he should say, Yee Protestants! you must not examine these miracles I write, you must only admire and consider them, for otherwise, in vaine you shall read them. What is this lipsian caueat, but trepidatio cordis ex causae imbecillitate, a trem∣bling of his heart, out of an imbecillitie of the cause? This con∣sidered, and much more, which might be added in this, and like causes; what reason hath Mr. Flodd, to giue so great autentikenesse to their narrations, as none can bee more? yea and to adde further; that they haue not bra∣zen Mr. Flud ibidē. faces to deny the stories, yet their heart, and tongue, is no lesse impious, not fearing to affirme; that these miracles, are miracles of the Deuill, and Antichrists lying wonders. Heus tu, bona verba! good words Sir! how free their hearts and tongues are, from impiety, for calling your miracles An∣tichrists lying wonders, the dissoluing of your sixe phi∣losophicall arguments, which (you said truely) occurred not as second or after-considerations, but as dreaming im∣pressions, to your conceitfull apprehension; & the oppo∣sing of sundry arguments taken out of sacred Scripture against them, shall by Gods assistance make manifestly to appeare: and further how inexcusably giltie you are, and wedded to the papall fleece which giue credit, to so deuelish and Antichristian narrations, and how your sixe occurrent arguments wherewith you seeke to confute (as you speake) our silly fancies, shall prooue im∣pious
Beast which had two hornes like to a Lambe, and spake like a Dragon: Edetque Signa magna adeo vt faciat ignem e Coelo discendere in conspectu hominum, & seducet Incolas Apoc. 13. Terrae propter signa quae datum est ei vt faciat in conspectu Bestiae: In which places as we see this Traffique of Mira∣cles is plainely called, Operatio Satanae, and a seduction of those who must perish. By these I doe appeale vnto the diuine light of your Lordships conscience, whither you doe not thinke that we ought to content our selues with Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, following Christs owne precept Scrutamini Scripturas, to search the Scriptures, for the doctrine of Saluation, and to con∣temne this ridiculous and impious profession of preten∣ded Miracles: I appeale to your Lordship, as you will be answerable to him who hath said of that light which he hath giuen you: Est lux vera quae illuminat omnem ho∣minem venientem in mundum, Whether you do not thinke that those who in this Sunne-shine of Gods word; would ground their beliefe vpon Miracles, doe not iustly me∣rite that answere of Christ to the Scribes and Pharises, demanding miracles, Generatio mala & adultera signum quaerit, and whither you Lordship doe not hold all those who beleeue such poore and childish conceits bee not iustly giuen ouer to themselues as the Apostle saith; vt credant mendacio qui non crediderunt veritati. So I will conclude this point of Miracles and Idola∣trous worship with two short obseruations, first for that exteriour splendor and shew of Religion by so many pil∣grimages, holy dayes and festiuall euenings and others deuoute like exercises which doe blind simple people, I say it is the common marke and maske both of Idola∣trous seruice, the very pretended zeale and holy pretext of Balaam when he came to sacrifice vpon the mount of Balaac, did bewray his Treacherie, he cryed to build him seuen altars, while as Abraham who was so faithful & sin∣cere a sacrificer, that the Spirit of God doth honor him with this Testimonie, Abraham beleeued the Lord, and it
was imputed to him for Righteousnesse: the first father of all the faithfull when hee went vnto the mount to offer his sonne Isaac, hee did content himselfe with one Altar, knowing how it is one Altar only that doth please God, and what is that? & what is the sacrifice? the Altar of our heart prouiding it bee in vprightesnesse and faith, the immolation of contrite and faithfull prayers, as the Pro∣phet Dauid saith (contrary to Balaam, who would haue no lesse then seuen Altars) Quoniam si voluisses sacrifici∣um dedissem, vti{que} holocaustis non delectaberis, Sacrificium Deo est spiritus contribulatus: So that it is ordinary to false worship to cloake and couer their deuotion with more specious shewes then are commanded by the word, or v∣sed by simple or true Professors, because as the Italian saith, Per coprir vn gran mal bisognia vn gran mantello, there is need of a side cloake to hide a great euill. Secondly I say, of such opinion maintained of miracles and popular credulitie, as it was in Gentilisme said by Numa Pompil∣lius, Patres consilio valere decet, populo superuacanea est cal∣liditas: The fathers of states should be wise, and subtile, but the people simple: so it is now said in Christian su∣perstitions, that ignorance is the mother of Deuotion, & that Apocrypha speech of Esdra, Hac narrabis Populo, & has abscondes, holden for good Scripture, it is the speciall Stratagem whereby the diuell doth leade men into the snares of idolatry to crie for miracles, and to depend vp∣on them: They haue bene only ordained by God to beat and breake downe the hardnesse of infidelitie in the first plantation of the faith, Moses and Aaron were strong in miracles, but the Israelites did no sooner come to the borders of Canaan, then they lost the light of their fierie pillar which conueyed them to it; they had no sooner passed Iordan, then the Manna ceased to raine downe foode vpon them. These extraordinarie things were to comfort and confirme them in the wildernesse, the vn∣speakeable wisedome of God knowes that a custome of miracles working, were to make vs vilipend his most glo∣rious
miracles: So as we must say that as he had beene a sencelesse Iewe, who would haue refused to goe forward into Canaan, because hee wanted the pillar to conuey him, and the Manna to feede him, euen so must wee esteeme him a foolish Christian, who being entered into the cleere light of Christs Gospel, because he sees not the power of miracles which in the beginning of that Chri∣stian Progresse was granted to Saint Peter and Paul, for conducting of the first beleeuers through the wildernes of Gentilisme, or of Pharisaicall pride, and for comfor∣ting them to reiect stoutly the yoake of their spirituall Pharaoh, because of this he will refuse to be guided by the Arke of Gods word, wherein are comprehended the whole mysteries of his law; and without the which there is no way to the heauenly Canaan, certaine he must bee counted more then mad. CHAP. IIII. The impeietie of Papall Indulgences, the open Polluti∣on of the caelibate, and other pregnant vices of Rome, against the credit of all Christian profes∣sion. I Come next to speake of that which I did obserue tou∣ching Indulgence, and dispensation, wherein I neede not to be tedious and longsome, the case being so no∣torious, onely summarily and truely relate to your Lordship, of things which I did see, three or foure, that did most specially offend me. There can be no more said concerning this abuse now adayes, then our fore beeres haue said many yeares agoe, Omnia venalia Rome: and certainly no lesse; if we should speake vprightly: That is to say Rome is a common staple of Pardons for all the sinnes and crymes that can be committed, and those sold at so high a rate, which is the reason why one should
thinke the Camera de Componendis, within Saint Peter Palace one of the richest houses in Christendome. This mooued a fine iest in a certaine German, who hauing some dispensation to purchase at Rome, which he look't to haue granted to him gratis, but finding an ordinance on the backe of it for paiment of one hundred Ducats, tooke a penne and blotted out the date wherein was said Datum Romae, putting in the place of it Emptū Romae swea∣ring, that because they had liberty of Conscience in Ger∣manie, that he would rather take it vpon his libertie, then buy it so dearely. I did see their diuers Monasteries or Conuentuall houses of religious persons, wherein liue great numbers, which houses bee no way endued with rents nor prouided, but only referred to voluntary cha∣ritie: for helpe whereof, the Pope doth grant them some priuiledged Altars, with extraordinary Indulgences, and a peculiar Festiuall day, vpon the which, thither the whole people resorteth, but chiefely profligat and de∣baushed persons: as, Whoores, Bawdes, idle Rascalls, Charlatanes Coosoners, who for the offer of some grosse almes, bring back with them so many Pardons of sinnes, so many soule Masses by redemption from Purgatory: induring which time of the Visitation of this Altar, the people entring at one dore, and issuing out at an other, all the day long, without intermission, there is no other voyce to be heard at the first port, but calling out aloud, Fate vnabellissima diuotione: Make, Sirs, a braue deuotion; by the which is meant▪ to giue a sat Offering Conferring this voyce with that which is to bee heard in their Came∣ra de componendis, it resembleth in my eares that cry of the two Daughters of the Horse-leech, mentioned in the Prouerbs of Solomon, Duae sunt sanquisugae filiae quae semper clamant affer, affer: all which deuotion consisteth in the multitude of those who bought the Pardons, being so vnder the name of Religious exercise, a Trade of abomi∣nable impietie: for while I was curious to aske the Priests of those Altars, vpon the importance of their priuiled∣ges;
I did receiue no other answere, but what was once graunted by the Pope was absolutely good and effectu∣all for all. Againe, I saw this, which fell foorth during my being there: The Duke of Neuers came there in great and glorious state, extraordinar Ambassador from the French King to the Pope, who, according to the cu∣stome of that Seat, with such personages, did graunt him Indulgences very large and bountifull, that one would haue thought the ports of hell was not able to preuaile against them: and when the Dukes Medalls and Beads came to be blessed vpon the Popes Altar, ac∣cording to the forme, there was no famous Whore in Rome who had not also numbers put in for her, saying, (which I haue heard with mine eares) The French In∣dulgences should procure them both English and Spanish money. This kinde of Marchandise and publike sale of sinnes is vsed in so lewd and vile a manner, that the most simple man in the world would count it to bee a scuruie ridiculous inuention of insatiable auarice. During my being at Rome, there hapned to dye there a rich Venetian Merchant, who left in Legacy a good summe of money to that Church, standing vpon the Monte di Trinita, for celebration of his Funeralls, and seruices for his soule, the same day which was appointed for those Fu∣nerall Offices, I did finde my selfe soone in the morning vpon that Mount, because it is a fresh and delectable walke, when a number of Fryers, with great Torches, comming to enter into the Church, was demanded of a Gentleman of Rome, who was beside me, whither they did goe? to whom one of them did answere, Andiamo cauare del purgatorio Lánima di quel mercadante Venetiano chimorse láltro iorno: which is to say, translated sincerely we go to hale out of Purgatory the soule of that Venecian Merchant, who died the last day. The Gentlemā replied in bitter speech against the Pope, calling him Cuillione, & Morbidotto, which be ignominious & contēptible words, because (saith hee) hee doth not keepe in Purgatory to
the worlds end all those wretched soules of Venice, who doe so disturbe the Apostolike Seat: for it was in the meane time of those late broyles betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. Can any iest in the world be more worthy of derision? then this or any thing more like the pittifull Idolatry of the Gentiles, where the Priests made the sens∣les people to thinke there was no way to make their gods propitious, but by their rich Offerings. This sort of do∣ing is so frequent there, that we see no other businesse: and if it be true which they hold, Quel che fa sua santita è fatto, that which the Popes Holinesse doth, is done, certaine all those of those Countries must bee in heauen before their feete be cold, as wee say, because the most wicked and godlesse among them neuer departe this life, but laden with Pardons. And this farre I thinke is enough to prooue, that the abuse is not onely authori∣sed, but as it were married with Religion, seeing vpon the meanes thereof they doe found Cloystrall societies. And this onely speaking de facto, for to reason Quo iure, these are practised, it is Theologicall, alwaies the most learned among them haue said to me touching the Popes pow∣er, Il nostro signore è dio soptala terra, Our Lord the Pope he is God vpon earth, hee may dispence what hee will: Yea (say they) if the question were to marry the King of Spaine to an hereticall Princesse, the Pope will first dispense him to marry his owne Sister. Is not this to go aboue the power of God, who hath said of his holy Law, that a jot thereof shall not perish nor be changed? Well, to vrge Theologicall Arguments I will not, but I remit your Lordship to search the Scriptures, to see who it is there that doth sit in the Church of God, and exalt Dan. 11. 2. Thes. 2. himselfe aboue all that is called God. And now I ap∣peale to the diuine light of your Lordships conscience, whether you doe not thinke that the contemplation of so grosse things; first, such Ethnicke Idolatry, that while Paul and Barnabas being aliue, did teare their cloathes, and runne vpon the people, because they would haue a∣dored
them, saying, they were but men like vnto them∣selues. Now so much adoration must bee done to the Statues of their dead bodies, that one shall not enter within Saint Peters Church at Rome, but we must kneele to salute him where hee sits in brasse, we must lay our head vnder his feete, and kisse euery one of his oes se∣uerally. Then such impious and base auarice in this trade of Purgatory and Indulgences, that in their Came∣ra de Componendis there sitteth Simon Magus, vnder the name of Simon Peter, making sale of the Spirit of God for money, of the mercies of God, of remission of sinnes, and the Kingdome of heauen, and that with such insati∣able hands, that if euer I, who came from a remote Countrey to honour the Apostolicall Seat, would giue him largely for dispensation, hee would willingly em∣brace it, as who knowes what I did pretend: to bee the more assured, I appeale to your Lordships conscience, whether you thinke those were not sufficient to breede doubts of Religion in any man, in whom God hath left a sparke of his feare, or one graine of right knowledge. Assuredly they mooued me to great iealousie, and they were to me (as the first sight of the Angell was to the poore Asse of Balaam) terror albeit (I confesse sincerely) the strong opinion which I had drunken so long before, & the plausible shew of things, did for a while violently hold me into the same way, as Balaam did force his Asse to goe on, after the first sight of the Angell. But when I begun to looke vpon the manners of the The Manners of Rome. people, and to consider what were the faults which were so ordinarily and easily pardoned (which is the third thing in number of those which I most narrowly obser∣ued) what shall I say? I know not how to speake the trueth, and therewith to prouide that my penne be not slandered for contumelies and Philippicke passions, al∣wayes I shall so limitate my selfe, that I shall not blot so graue a purpose with an humour of rayling or shameles∣nesse: In the day of visitation and punishment, I shall
beginne at my sanctuary, saith the Lord, and wherefore is this? because Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, as the Prelates be, so are the people, the example of the Rulers makes the manners of the multitude, as the Spi∣rit of God doth testifie by the Prophet Daniel, Egressa est Dan. 11. iniquitas à Senioribus & ab ijs qui videbantur regere popu∣lum: Iniquitie hath gon out from the Elders and those who seemed to gouerne the people: For this cause in a iust censure of the manners of Rome, it cannot be auoi∣ded, first to looke vpon the Court, wherein is to bee seene such fastuous and intollerable pompe, and such a degree of glory as hath neuer beene vsurped by any earthly Monarch, to behold the maiestie of the Papall carriage, borne one mens shoulders, auro fulgens & smaragdis, shining amidst gold and Iewels, those who beare him treading vpon fine cloth, wherewith the Church pauement is couered, accompanied with a feare∣full guard, the thundering of Canons, the sound of trum∣pets, and all sorts of musicall instruments: at whose pre∣sence, numbers of Princes, stately Embassadours, great parsonages, and multitudes of people doe fall to the ground, saluting him holy, holy, as if he would not onely be Christs Vicar vpon earth, but also emulator of his diuine glory in the Heauens, and be worshipped like that glorious Lambe, before whom numbers doe fall downe to crie holy, holy, holy, that vpon the sight thereof I was indeed amased, as if it had beene a vision, and demaun∣ding a French Gentleman (who had newly also arriued with me, and was a zealous Papist) how he did esteeme of that which he had seene; he answered me in the termes of (be God) that he thought it farre different from the carriage of him who said, Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo, and who said to his Disciples, Exemplum de di vo∣bis vt quemadmodum ego feci it a & vos faciatis, which an∣swer I haue many times since thought to be as pertinent, as if the holy Spirit had inspired it into him: For if the kingdome of the world be called the kingdome of sinne and
what reason had Mr. Flud to frame his first argument, out of the vncertaintie of his Aduersaries opinions? Iudge yee &c. But put case Mr. Flud, that our Diuines were concer∣ning this point of your Popes being Antichrist equally diuided, or iust so as you affirme they are; what? would the same make their doctrine of the Popes being Anti∣christ, to be onely a fancie? See then how you may be whipped with your owne rodd: Are you a Rabbie in Iez∣reel and dispute so? what then will become of the feast of Conception, instituted in the honour of the immaculate and vnspotted Conception of the euer blessed Virgin Mary? Are not there many of your Doctors, who affirme, yea affirme not without the reproching of others with the note of errour, heresie, &c. that the blessed Virgin was not conceiued in original sinne? And are there not a∣gainst them others, who peremptorily affirme, that shee was conceiued in originall sinne? this being so, shall your feast of Conception, which is indowed with so many Papall indulgences, be a fancie? God forbid. Againe, what will become of your making, adoring, and worshipping of the Image of God the Father, as he Abul. in deut. Duar. alij. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2 cap. 8. Nic. act. 5. 6. is in the Deitie himselfe? Are there not many of your Diuines, who condemne the same? Doth not Bellarmine affirme it to be in opinione, in opinion? Did not your se∣cond Generall Nicene Sinod condemne, and inhibit the same? what then, shall your generall making thereof, and adoring the same, be a fancie? God forbid it; for if so, it would proue not onely a fancie, but a most damna∣ble impietie, as in truth it is. Further, what then Gentle Sir, will betide the inerrable Rule of your Faith, the vnappellable Iudge of all contro∣uersies? Is it not a dogmaticall position affirmed by your Canonists, deliuered by most of your Scholastickes, pe∣remptorily maintayned by all the learned Ignatians, the Goliasses of these daies, that the Pope is the absolute and
vnerrable Iudge of faith, that hee is aboue a Generall Councell, that he alone may with some prouinciall Coun∣cell Gerson de Au∣feribilit. Patae Conc: Constant. & Basil. omnes pene Anuq. define faith? And yet is there not a whole armie of your Diuine, both of this time, and of former ages, who resolutely deny the same? who teach your Popes to be subiect, yea corrigibly subiect to a Generall Councell, and that defining without approuance, and consent of the same, he may erre euen in matters of faith, deceiue and be deceiued. Call to minde, what the Councells of Pisa, Basill, Constance, yea and the 8. Generall Sinod, haue decreed; what the Sorbone of Paris haue done and taught concerning your Popes ouerhaughty presump∣tions in this kinde? may I now say to you? now iudge ye whether all the Romish faith, which dependeth vpon the Inerrability of this Iudge bee not a fancie, a dreame a lye? Lastly, to pretermit diuers other instances; what will you say to your Ignatianed disciples here in England? who peremptorily refuse to take the oath of Allegiance, concerning the auowing or disauowing of which, what a generall diuision is there in your learned Clergy of Eng∣land? It is to be sus∣pected that the Ignatians and Ignatianed, when they take the Oath of allegiance do egregioushe equiuocate. The Candidate Martyrs are tooth & nayle against it, diuers of your learn'd Confessours are for it; nay I bold∣ly affirme it, the learnedst of your Clergie in England are for it, at lest to tolerate the taking of it in the Laity! this vncertainty considered, shall I retort vpon you thus? and say now iudge yee, whether they who refuse the Oath refuse it, not vpon a fancie? God forbid I should doe so; no no, they refuse it not vpon a fancie in your o∣pinions, but vpon that grounded resolution according to your principles, that the Pope is an absolute Monarch and Christs Vicar vpon earth, to command yee to de∣priue Princes if they prooue Irregular and will not be at his becke and ordering. These things which I haue here produced, if you compare them in your owne weights and ballance, with
your now iudge yee, you will easily obserue, how idle your inference is, but let vs obserue how you florish it. Mr. FLOOD. Now be you iudge, whether one may with a safe conscience, vpon a fancie, or vpon a confessed vncertaine coniecture, deny the broadseale of God, despise his hand writing, which the eies and all senses of body testifie to be his? Asubiect, that should condemne the Kings warrant or his command, vnder the broadseale, what Iury would acquit him, of the plea that hee had a fancie, or a coniecture that it was counterfet? To giue to the Deuill, the workes that sense and reason iudge to bee Gods, is the most heinous sinne, which may be, which the Iewes did commit Athanas. tract. in illud se quis dixerit. when they sayd of Christ, in Belzebub the Prince of the Deuills doth he cast out Deuills: Math. 13. A sin neuer to be pardoned in this world, nor in the next. Is it wisedome to aduentare to commit such a sinne, vpon a coniecture! If con∣iectures might suffice, the Pharisies could haue alleaged di∣uerse for their blasphemie against Christ: Reason teacheth, that such smoakes must vanish away, at the shining of cleare truth, that fearefull surmises yeeld to the euidence of sense. This then is the first reason, to proue them inexcusable that they haue but a coniectur all defence, of so bainous a crime. ANSWER. Here is a deale of impertinent tautologie, florished ouer with a few thetoricall withered flowers, fitter for the fire then to be answered with penne: I haue already shewed and euinced, that we giue no such warrant vpon a fancy or coniecture, as you pretend and repeate so often, for lacke of better substance: we hold it, if not as a point of faith, yet at lest as a Theologicall conclusion, certaine and assured, that your Pope is the selfe Antichrist: and by Gods assistance I will euince that his miracles are not
Gods but Sathans, signed with his counterfet seale. But by the way, now I must tell you, that in the beginning, middle, and end of this your reason, you flourish with such an idle kinde of eloquence, that you seeme to mee, as if you were predicating in your chaire, to your blinde bedients at S. Omers. I cannot but smile, to obserue your elegancies; Sir, where I pray you, haue you lear∣ned, that point of diuinity, that the eyes and all the senses M. . of the body, are capable to apprehend, to be iudicious, or indicatiue of Gods handwriting, of Gods broadseale? and to be able to distinguish the same, from Sathans mendaci∣ous prodigies? I had thought, this had beene the office of faith, or of some gift of the holy Ghost, not of the senses; But seeing you talke so much of senses, and the euidence of all senses, did all Lipsius his senses, or all your senses or any others senses, (whom you know) euer e∣uidently feele and perceiue the hand writing of God at Sichem? or the broadseale of the Goddesse at Hall, Loretto, Montserratto? no, no; not all your senses, nor all the senses of any man liuing, had euer euidence of those your pretended Gods handwritings. All your euidence hath beene by hearing, that so both your faith, Lipsius his faith, and the faith of all the multitude might be ex auditu, according to that of the Apostle, fides ex auditu, faith, comes by hearing, hearing by the word of God; so your Epist. ad Rom. 10. faith comes by hearing, your hearing from the wordes of men, dead men, Fullanos, vnknowne, indiuidualls, indiui∣dua vaga. You say, that sense and reason testifies your miracles to be Gods workes; againe, that fearefull surmises must giue place to the euidence of sense, what M. Flud, were you in your senses, when you wrote thus? perhaps in some mu∣sing rapt hands vnder arme-pits, as your wont is. To confirme this your elegancie, you tell vs, that no Iury would acquit that subiect, who vpon a surmise should deny the Kings broadseale, whereby you seeme to
put his Maiesty of Great Britaine in minde, how vnde∣fensibly guilty, your Ignatianed disciples are, who vp∣on a bare arrogant precept of the Pope, without any lest instruction, refuse to giue him assurance by oath, of their temporall allegiance, against all papall pretences and presumptions in that kinde? Ah M. Flud, I feare, your mysterie in this kinde, is too too damnable; is it not this? yes, certainly it is: Iames of Great Britaine Te Paist Ignatian doc∣tne and pra∣ctise is agree∣ing to that of the old Fryers of whom W∣clif lib. de fn∣damen. leg. Aug. cap. 36. (whom God of his infinite mercy, vouchsafe to protect, as the apple of his eye for the confusion of Antichrist) is not (in rei veritate) King of Great Britaine; but onely in (opinione hominum haereticorum) in the opinion of men he∣retikes; whose opinion, whose election, whose confirma∣tion because they are iure, in law excommunicates is iure (nulla) in law none: so that this their King reigneth onely precariò, at our Holy Fathers pleasure; to him therefore we may not yeeld or sweare obedience, but dependantly from the Pope; he now forbiddeth vs to sweare, therefore without perill of eternall damnation wee may not sweare. M. Flud this is the misterie; answere mee is there any of your disciples who would refuse to sweare allegiance to his Maiestie, were this clause added, so long as his Holinesse shall allow and permit him for King? no there is not one, no not one; euident then it is to all sen∣ses that our most Gracious Soueraigne reigneth in your opinions, precariò, tanquam homo Papae, ad nutum & bene∣placitum Pontificis; as at his Holinesse pleasure, beneuolence, and goodliking. This is the damnable doctrin you teach; what proiect you would thereout make, who cannot iudge, that remembreth the 5. of Nouember? Is not this to deny the Kings broadseale? nay, is not this to denie him to be King? for take away from him, the naturall, absolute, and sacred allegiance of subiects, and wherein shall his kingly dignitie consist? What Iury will then ac∣quit you? Ah times! when as such as you are, and your disciples, shall dare to shroude themselues &c▪ shall dare
to passe in betwixt wickets and great Gates, Exulent vti∣nàm Egiptij ne pereant Christiani. For now the Transal∣pine detestable and most deuelish Art of poysoning is on foote, who? or what? can be sure? so long as so ma∣ny whom prudent Ielousie must suspect, are, and range, intra castra Christianorum, in the middest of Christians, what securitie can therebe, if the Lord of heauen doe not miraculouslie protect? Aspice dowine de sede sanctatua & protege Christum tuum. To proceede: whilest you pre∣conize thus fondly, of the euidence of your miracles to all senses, you play the Diuine as pithily to make the deny∣ing of these your broadseales, to bee the most heinous sinne that can be committed. It cannot bee denyed Sir but to blaspheme the workes of God, as the Scribes and Pharisies did, those of our Sauiour, is a most heinous offence; so likewise for you to compare your vaine trumperies to the admirable workes of our Sauiour is a greiuous sinne, not excusable. But call to minde Sir, that rule of law qui semel inuenitur malus semper presumi∣tur In regul. Iuris. malus in eodem genere mali, Hee who is once found to bee euill (that is deliberately and malitiously euill) is alwaies presumed to be euill, in the same kinde of ill; If this bee an axiome vnrefusable, applauded by your Ciuilians, ad∣mitted by your Canonists? what then may wee presume of your Church, who hath often been found purposely playing false-play with her prodigies? Are you not ashamed of your voraginous Iacob? voluminous Ʋincent? Eenc. lib. 1. digress. cap. 11. produceth the complaints of diuers of your owne Bishops and Doctours. Agobert lindam: Viues. fabulous Metaphrast? for diuers of their fabulous narrati∣ons? That ancient Genouyse Legend, written by your voraginous Prelate, for the excellencie of it called aurea legenda, the Golden Legend; how many copper Fables are in it, now exploded by your selues? Remember that rule, whereof I now put you in minde; haue not your owne Popes found such fabulous stuffe in your Portesses, that for shame they haue rased them out? witnesse your fa∣mous Sorbonist Espencaeus; witnesse the whole world
which seeth the Fables rased out; where then is your forehead, that you dare to compare your forged vani∣ties, with the most venerable miracles of our Sauiour? as I said before, so now againe with the Archangels words imperet tibi Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee. You Epist. Iudae will reply and say, these corruptions, haue crept into o∣ther Churches; but the Romane hath beene vnconta∣minate. What? Rome vncorrupt? which pretendeth S. Peters body to bee in more places? Rome vncorrupt? The Romane Church her fale fingers which glorieth in Constantines Baptisterie? where you pretend Constantine was cured of a corporall leprosie? Rome vncorrupt? which tells vs of a great horrible Dra∣gon, a Dragon (as your Legend saith) so malicious for Leg. Silu. Constantines conuersion to Christianitie, that out of hate thereof he did day after day, destroy with his venemous breath 300. men, (maruell that Constantine himselfe, that women and children escaped) and yet this prodigi∣ous beast, by Siluester (hauing two Priests accompanying him) had his chappes tied vp with a small thred, and so was starued and destroyed. Rome vncorrupt? when as in it, is allowed and read the Frantiscan prodigious booke Your Romane Darling allow∣eth sermones discipul your spcula exemplo∣um in which are innumera∣ble phantastick lies & dotages. of conformities; in which how many vanities are there, which you the Ignatians, the Dominicans, and all your learned smile at? witnesse that admirable miracle of the spider, which Fryer Francis drunke vp in the Chalice, and which came out of his shinnebone, hee after Masse rubbing the same. Witnesse Father Francis his large Sermon, at Eugubium to the deuout Wolfe with much like trumperie in the same to be read and found euen to the astonishment of the Reader. Rome vncorrupt? which sheweth the pictures that bowed and did reuerence to the dead body of Pope Formosus when it was brought into Saint Peters Church, your Baronius is not ashamed to approue the fable. Rome vncorrupt? whose Ignatian cheifetaines (Aquauiua himselfe) now approue vnto the world, a mendacious Legend of Ignatius his miracles,
amongst which at this present, I glaunce onely at that blasphemous one, where you make the mysterie of the blessed Trinitie, to bee reuealed vnto him, in that very forme and fashion, in which you haue pourtraited and drawne the same in your Church of the English Colledge An impious fiction of t Ignats and blasphemous against he most saed Trinitie. at Rome? to wit, The father is painted in the forme of a very old hoareheaded-man: the sonne is drawne out as nayled vpon a crosse; which crosse the Father holdeth before him; hauing the forme of a doue expressing the holy Ghost drawne vpon his best, ouer the toppe of the crosse: and euen in this sort and fashion, as your Riba∣dinera hath caused it to be expressed in the miraculous pictures of Ignatius his life, was the mysterie of the ho∣ly Doth not Cster publish most ide dotages in his Postilles? and yet in Rome vn∣der your Popes nose he is read and approued. Trinitie reuealed vnto him; Ah blasphemie of all blasphemies; doth the infinite maiestie of God, Trine and one, so reside, and represent it selfe vpon the eternall Throne? what? was this the secret of the most glorious Godhead which was reuealed to S. Ignatius? Doubtlesse some like Hobgobbline as deceiued their Francis in a Che∣rubicall Crucifixe, beguiled also (if it be not a fiction) your holy Ignatius, eager and hungrie after some vision. Rome not corrupt? when as the Romane Predicant Fryers, haue been so impudent, as publikely to preachin Chap. 1. pulpit, that there grew such amorous loue betwixt Christ and Catharine of Sienna his sweet Spousesse, that there was a true enterchange of hearts betwixt them? which impious vanitie of theirs I haue already refuted. I could particularize in sundrie like instances, but these are sufficient, to shew how inexcusable M. Flud is, who dareth to compare their trash with the most venera∣ble miracles of Christ. Is it not true, that if one vntruth could be found in the Gospell the whole credit thereof were at an end? what credit then, may wee giue to your Romane Church, which hath played falsefingers so of∣ten? It was foretold by S. Iohn, that your Adulterous Mother, should haue her mouth full of blasphemies which Apoc. 13 6.
to her confusion wee now obserue. And so ceasing to adde any more about this your first reason, I note by the way, another vnreuerent, if not sacrilegious speech of yours, when you thus write. If coniectures would suffice, the Pharisies, could haue alleaged diuers for their blasphemie against Christ. And is not this a Iolly Ignatian, who ra∣ther then he will seeme not to haue sufficiently refuted vs, will yeeld coniecturall proofes to the Pharisies a∣gainst Christ? Sir, bethinke your selfe of those coniec∣tures against Christ, and I dare assure you, that the Iewes will account themselues beholding vnto you for the same. But let vs now come to your second reason, and examine whether there be more modestie or pith in it then in your first, thus you frame it. CHAP. V. Wherein is examined Mr. Floods second reason shewing him to peruert the Fathers meanings. Mr. FLOOD. THe second reason is, that Protestants haue no more rea∣son to condemne these as Antichrists wonders, then the miracles reported by ancient Authors, long before Antichrist appeared, according to their owne account: For those ancient miracles, are thunder claps, that shake the foundation of your Gospell, no lesse then ours of this present age. Call to minde the points of our faith you most impugne in your letter, you shall finde most famous miracles to confirme them, recorded by most graue and learned Fathers: What Lipsius of Louayne, did euer write wonders either more for number, or greater for quantitie, done at the shrine of any Saint, then those, that Saint Austen in his 22. booke of his Citie of God hath registred, as most certainly wrought by the reliques of Saint Stephen Plurimi confi∣ciendi sunt libri nec tamen omnia colligi poterunt lib 22. de ciuit. cap. 8.? Read that booke Sir, and I dare
say, that you will there finde either miracles that may con∣uert your heart to some feare of God, or else matter for sense∣lesse infidelitie to driue away melancholie fits with loud laugh∣ing. You may behold histories as incredible to humane reason, and yet no lesse seriouslie tould by Saint Austen, then these are, of our blessed Ladies in both her chappells, which Lipsius doth recount. ANSWER. This your reason flowing à comparatis, is void of rea∣son: for whilest you in the beginning thereof are in your generalls, first you tell vs like miles gloriosus, that such mi∣racles as are recounted by ancient Fathers before Anti∣christ appeared; euen according to our owne account, doe like to yours of these times shake the foundation of our Gospell. Secondly you brauingly inuite Sir Edward to call to minde how such articles of yours as he impug∣neth, were confirmed by most famous miracles. Third∣ly, you elegantly flourish with a demand, what Lipsius of Lonayne did euer &c. These be bragging flourishes, your proofe in particular is; first pretended out of Saint Austen thus, who in his 22. booke of his Citty of God (say you) hath registred wonders as great for number, and quantitie, as certainly wrought by the reliques of Saint Ste∣phen, as euer any Lipsius of Louayne did write done at the shrine of any Saint. Hauing added thus out of Austen, as if you had got the victory you inuite Sir Edward, not without most bitter taunts to the reading of the same; you tell him of loud laughing and melancholie fits; and you your selfe may be told iustly, culpa carere oportet qui in alium paratus est dicere. To this your reason, which is not worth one blew point, to the matter we haue in hand: First I denie your proposition; for the miracles related by the ancient Fa∣thers, and yours, differ genere generalissimo: your profe
out of Saint Austen serueth not your turne. First, what if I should say that all you bring out of that booke is none of Saint Austens? can you euince the contrarie? no as∣suredly, you cannot; For if you obiect and say that the said booke hath beene reputed for S. Austens for many hundreths of yeares before this age, I grant it: And were not (I beseech you) these bookes, to wit; of Questions vpon the old and new Testament; the booke of 83. Que∣stions; the booke de fide ad Petrum; the booke de mirabi∣libus sacrae Scripturae; the booke de vera & falsa penitentia; the bookes de moribus Ecclesiae; de salutaribus documentis; the booke called Hypognosticon; his manuale, his Soliloquia, with his booke de visitatione infirmorum, with sundrie o∣ther bookes, epistles very many, Sermons innumera∣ble, reputed to be that Fathers for many hundreths of yeares before this age; and yet are they not now cashi∣red from being his some by one, some by another as ei∣ther by Baronius, Bellarmine, Turrian, Posseuine, Sixtus Snensis, Remists, Louanists, &c. If these your Champi∣ons, may cashire so many of his woorkes, because in them there are some things found not beseeming, or contrarie to Austen; why then may not some contrarie∣ties which are to be found in this booke from other of that Father bee a iust cause to call the credit of it in question? But I denie not the booke to be his; yet if I should af∣firme that he is corrupted by some false-fingers in this Chapter you cite, and some others, I should not want reason for so saying; for doth not Ʋines in his Preface protest, that there was such corruption in the manu∣scripts he had, that he could not know the true reading of Austen, but diuinando & coniecturis, by deuining and con∣iectures? And if you now in this light of the Gospell, dare by command of a Councell, corrupt, not onely the ancient Fathers, but euen your owne late Authors, by adding and taking away words, sentences, yea whole
paragraphes, and chapters? Why may not we think the same Spirit to haue been & raigned in your cloystered Viues saith there is no doubt but that in ths 8. chapter of the 22. booke ma∣ny things haue been added by those who wi their filthy hands haue de∣filed all the writings of no∣ble Authors, Viues annot. in 22. lib. August. deciuit. cap. 8. ones, when they might do the same without any touch of infamie? What? could they set foorth whole bookes and many in the name of that Father? and could they not corrupt by interlacing or paring out a few lines? for my part I am induced to thinke that this Father is cor∣rupted in this place, if some of his Epistles and his booke of retractations be his, see after. But I will admit the booke to be S. Austens, and that the wordes and sentences cited by you are all his: Hee relateth, that there were diuers miracles done at the me∣morie of S. Stephen; what of this? nay more, suppose that he had affirmed, which hee doth not, that the said miracles were done by the reliques of S. Stephen; shall this shake the foundation of our Gospell? might not God vse the reliques of S. Stephen to worke miracles, in that sort, and as he did, vse the Napkin of Paul? the sha∣dow of Peter? the bones of Elizeus, which the holy Scrip∣ture In the 9. chap∣ter of the 2. boke he affir∣meth that he knoweth not whether such miracles are done by God himselfe by his Angels, or by the Martyrs. Act. 5 15. recounteth? We are of S. Stephens faith, we honor his memorie, and haue a day for the same, (as those Christians had) wee are nothing enuious, that God should do miracles by the bones and ashes of his seruant whose honourable remembrance wee celebrate in our Churches; therefore for you to proue that wee despite the miracles done at S. Steephens memory, i, opus cui im∣par Achilles, you cannot euer doe it. No, no Sir, had we beene with S. Austen, we would not haue refused to haue assembled with him at the blessed memory of that Saint, there to haue praised and magnified his Lord & Master, for whose testimonie hee was stoned. Sir, wee ingenuouslie acknowledge, that it was a godly custome of the ancient Christians there to assemble for diuine worship of God, where the memories of his seruants were; there they prayed, there they praised, there they professed euen to the astonishment of the Infidels: and
where is it more likely, that God should put foorth his arme to doe signes and wonders, so long as the same were behoufull and necessarie for the planting of his Church, then at such places, and such assemblies, where his name was so christianly and religiouslie called vpon, and his sonne Iesus▪ so constantly professed? I said Sir, that had we beene with S. Austen we would willingly haue associ∣ated our selues with him, yet wicked and sinfull it were to doe the like now with you in Rome, either at S. Peters in your Vaticane, or at S. Paules without gates, or at S. Stephens memory vpon one of your hills where you as∣semble your selues, putting (I boldly write what I haue obserued) more confidence in the intercession and prayers of those Saints, then in the mediation of Iesus: so did not S. Austen, so did not his people. Further had we now S. Stephens body with vs, or the body of the blessed Apostle, or of the euer blessed virgin Mary, wee would not refuse to make our assemblies at them, by them, or nigh to them, for the loue wee beare to them, whose ashes they are; for the hope wee haue of their resurrection at the last day; but rather then wee would abuse them as you doe; by committing open ido∣latry in adoring and worshipping of them, as you doe; in putting any trust or confidence in them for blessings, for deliuerances as you impiouslie doe; wee would doe with them, as Luther, wished had beene done with all o∣ther Luther. serm. do Cruce. reliques before corruption came in; to wit bury them low in the ground, but decently, as becommeth the dust and ashes of Gods seruants; wherein, we should not want the warrant of God himselfe, who lest the Iewes should commit Idolatrie with Moyses his body, hath so Deut. 34. 6. disposed of the same, that euen vntill this day locus est ig∣notus, Jud. Epist. the place is vnknowne where it was buried. The De∣uill contended with Michaell for it, and about it, for what end thinke yee, but onely that the Iewes might haue so abused it, as you now doe the bodies and reliques of
Gods seruants? Saint Anthonie the Eremite, (whose life S. Athanasius as you deliuer did write) would approue our doing herein: He knowing how superstitiouslie the E∣gyptians were giuen to worship the dead bodies, of such Athanas. in vita Anton. as they honoured liuing, gaue most straight charge, that his body should so carefully be buried, that it might not be abused after his death by any such superstitious vses, as were then growing vp. What would that blessed man haue said, had he knowne the detestable practises, which Yet we finde in your forged Legends that your Saints haue cōman∣ded their bo∣dies to be reli∣giously buried and to be ho∣noured after buriall. Roberts the Monke execu∣ted at Tiburn, the night be∣fore gloried that he should after death be honoured as a Saint. are now afoote amongst the Papists? who are not con∣tent to repaire to the places, where such things remaine, but they must further and aboue carrie about them, some small peeces of earth and dust, thereby hoping for assured deliuerances from all dangers, making the same their hope and refuge. I know diuerse of their Popish herein England, and elsewhere, who continually weare about them little pretty carued wodden Images, made of the wood of that tree wheron their Sichimesse Image stood (from which it fell, to which it was fastened again, and from which it was last of all lost or stolne, and as not yet heard of) yea, they set vp those prettie babes in some places of their gardens and orchards, and to them doe make daily pilgrimages, yea they doe vow pilgrimages, thereby hoping for many blessings. O fatuas Gentes, quibus talia numina. To conclude, this is the summe of that which may be answered to that vnto which you direct Sir Edward in S. Austen; first, we acknowledge that at the memorie, of S. Steephen many miracles were done in confirmation of Christian religion; Secondly we grant there was an ho∣nourable remembrance of that Saint; Thirdly we deny that those miracles were done to proue intercession or prayers to that Saint; no, no; there is no mention made of intercession or praiers to him; but, put case, M. Flud, that it might be thought in those times, that some of those miracles were obtained by the praiers of that Saint
(I doe not say the prayers of liuing to that Saint) to God, what could you inferre thereout, but an extraor∣dinarie blessing which may not be drawne into an ordi∣narie example? But Mr. Flud, admit we grant all you desire (which yet by no meanes I may) that the Christians of those times did pray to S. Stephen, and did thinke they recei∣ued some benefits by such their praiers, must this their action, be a necessarie example for vs, that wee may or ought to doe like? Can such a practise make it an ab∣solute Rule of manners, according to the analogie of faith to all future ages? Must the priuate practise of some primitiue Churches, tye all the vniuersall Church, and this for all ages? If so; what then will become of your Church, which out of an opinion of libertie, doth not administer the sacrament to the Laitie vnder both kindes, which the ancient Church euer did, out of an opinion of necessitie grounded vpon Christs command and institution? Why then doth not your Church mi∣nister the sacrament of the Eucharist to Infants newly baptized, as the ancient Church did, out of an opinion of necessitie for their saluation? Why then doth not your Church continue profestiuall night▪ Vigills, which Antiquitie both approued and required? Time was in the ould Law, when it was not only be∣houeful, but also necessarie for such as were struckē with serpents, if they would be cured, to behold the brazen Serpent; but afterwards when the same was abused su∣perstitiously, call to minde how good King Ezechias 2 Reg: 18. was commended for destroying and abolishing the same. Againe, time was when it was not vnlawfull to eat of such meats, as had been offered to Idolls; but af∣terwards 1 Cor: 8. when the same eating was growne scandalous, and a signe distinctiue, then the same became abomina∣ble. So likewise, although we put case and admit, that the Christians did recurre vnto the memories of Saints
in former times, hoping to be ayded by their intercessi∣ons oth not Saint Austen lib. de Ciuit 8. cap. 27. relate a custom vsed by some Christians at Martyrs tombs wt yet as hee, so wee reiect: but you in steed thereof haue brought in more vaine, which Viues there repro∣ueth. to God; yet now the case is so altered, by reason of a sea of abominations, and detestable idolatrie, which thereby hath ouer-flowen the whole Church, that there is very iust cause to command such a practise and cu∣stome to surcease; and herein, there should not want the warrant of the Church of Rome hir selfe, who in di∣uers like cases hath so proceeded: some instances I haue already set downe, and more I could produce. These things I write, supposing what is related out of S. Austen be truly his; but so oft as I consider what hee writeth in his 7. Retractations, I can hardly so thinke; for there in∣terpreting, in what sense he had in his former works de∣nied the ordinarie working of miracles in the Church, 7. Lib. 1. Re∣tract. cap. 14. he saith thus; And this I haue said, because not such great ones, nor all such are done now, not because there are non done euen now. He would neuer haue written thus spa∣ringly of miracles, if there had been so many done at the memorie of one Saint, especially so many as your marginall note, cited out of that Father, promiseth, Plurimi confici∣endi sunt libri nec tamen omnia colligi poterunt. Flod. ex August. which note doth not accord with the first lines of this Chapter, so that either the text or margine must needs be corrupted. Mr. FLOOD. You cannot endure the adoration of the diuine Sacrament, which you blasphemously call a Lett: pag. 54. breaden Idoll, in a shaue∣lings hand. Saint Chrysostome writeth, Lib. 6. de sa cerd. cap. 4. that a certaine ve∣nerable ould man, to whom many mysteries were reuealed, had told, that in the time of sacrifice, he once beheld a multitude of Angells, with shining garments, compassing the wonderfull table round about, who with reuerence in honour of him, who lyeth thereon, bowed their heads, as souldiers doe in presence of their King. And though these blessed Spirits, be not euer seene, yet the maiestie of him, that is daily sacrificed is such, Quod credere abunde licet vel ex tanto illo sa∣crificio quod tum peragitur. saith S. Chrysostome, that we may beleeue they are in this
humble manner continually present. Now Sir Edward, you may send your Ministers to preach to these Papists, and bid them as you bid Lett: pag 106. vs very grauely, leaue their duckes, and luckes, and apish toyes, and serue God in spirit and truth. ANSWER. Here Mr. Flud imposeth against vs two points; the one that we cannot endure the adoration of the diuine Sa∣crament: the other, that we blasphemously call it a breaden Idoll &c. Against vs he frameth his argument out of Chrysostome, which done he commeth out with a vaine Io triumpho, bidding Sir Edward to send &c. Concerning the first, I answer thus. First, if wee did either beleeue, as they teach, that Christs body and blood were in the sacrament (ex vi sacramenti) truly, naturally, and substantially; yea that whole Christ perfect God and man were, as they deliuer, in perfect shape and humane forme, (ex vi concomitantiae) by necessarie conco∣mitancie, vnder the formes of bread and wine, then might wee adore and worship him, though not princi∣pally placed there for that end. Or secondly, if we did beleeue, as they doe, concerning the adoration of ima∣ges, to wit, that the same adoration and worship may be giuen to the image respectiuely, for the persons sake, as is to be giuen to the Prototypon or person whom it re∣presenteth; then doubtlesse wee would adore and wor∣ship this diuine image, being certainely instructed ac∣cording to the doctrine of the Fathers of the second Nicene Councell, and sense of holy scriptures, that it is the Sinod. Nic. 2. act. 6. liuelyest and perfect image, signe and representation, which the Sonne of God left with his Church of that his most dreadfull sacrifice vpon the Crosse, by which wee What we adore in the Sacra∣ment. were redeemed; the which so often as wee haue in re∣membrance by celebrating the diuine mysteries, we doe in the vse of them, worship and adore, with prone bo∣dies
and prostrate heart, the same sacrifice of our re∣demption, that is our Redeemer himselfe. But wee holding their first position to haue been forged in their Synagogue, when their God making-transsubstantiation some thousand yeeres after Christ was hatched; and accounting their second to be no o∣ther than a heathenish and pagan-like point of Sophistry, we dare not imitate their doings. Yet their Reuerences (who incessantly taunt with obloquies the Church of England with imputation of irreligiositie in this kinde) may vnderstand, that as we Christianly and religiously vse and worship the holy Sacrament of Baptisme, so we do re∣uerence this venerable mysterie of the Lords Supper; yea and at, and in the mysterie we vse religious adora∣tion and diuine worship, not to the Elements as they doe not to Christ corporally and carnally present as they philosophize; but to vse the words of the Fathers of the first Nicene generall Councell, We are not (humiliter in∣tenti Con Nic. in actibus. proposito pani ac calici, sed fide intelligimus situm in illa mensa aguum tollentem peccat a mundi) basely intentiue to the bread and cup that is proposed, but by faith, we vnderstand the lambe of God, who taketh away the sinnes of the world to be laid vpon that Table. How placed vpon that table? in grace, virtue, efficacie, and by a sanctifying power; in like sort as the same Councell teacheth, a heauenly fire, the sanctification of the Holy Ghost, the very power of God to be in baptisme; which manner of speaking I finde reue∣rently alleaged and approued, by the most learned and reuerend Iewell of the Church of England, whom I read citing those most Reuerend Nicaene Fathers thus: Bap∣tisme Jewell art. 5. must be considered not with our bodily eyes, but with the eyes of our minde, thou seest the water, thinke thou of the power of God, that in the water is hidden; thinke thou that the water is full of heauenly fire, and of the sanctification of the Holy Ghost▪ Thus he truly citeth the iudgement of those most learned Sages: So it is, that we by faith con∣sidering
the power of Christ orking in and by his di∣uine mysteries, doe by faith with prone hearts, yea and religious outward worship adore Christ, as present in efficacie, power, and vertue of sanctification, though he be personally distant, as farre as the highest heauens are from the sacramentall table. And in this manner of de∣claring I speake more confidently, because that most learned Iewell writeth thus; Doubtlesse it is our duties to Jw. art. 8. pag. 404. adore the bodie of God in the word of God, in the sacrament of baptisme, in the mysteries of Christs body and bloud. And the ground of this is that, which Mounsieur Plessis affir∣meth Pless. aga: msse lib. 4. cap. 6. orthodoxly, to wit, that the Sacraments are made instruments of the Holy Ghost for our soules foode. To de∣clare the same more particularly in this mysterie, we are to vnderstand that the Sonne of God, who by a perso∣nall coniunction hath vnited humane nature to him∣selfe, hath also been pleased to make a sacramentall re∣spect, relation, coniunction, yea vnton, (if I may so speake of bread and wine, which we religiously vse according to his institution in the diuine mysteries) to himselfe both God and man: so that when we religiously vse them in the mysteries, we doe not take Christ as absent in his Di∣uinitie, or as absent in the effcacie of his Sacraments, but powerfully working in them and by them, sanctifying our soules, consigning, sealing, and ratifying his promises vnto vs. Herehence it is, that whilest we religiously vse his Sacraments, and with a Christian faith consider these things, wee cannot but with reuerent and religious de∣meanour The reason of our kneeling when we re∣ceiue the Sacra∣ment. and cariage, both inward and outward take the same, and yeeld diuine worship to him▪ whose invisible hand is here efficaciously working and effecting the sal∣uation of our sonles: so that in the actuall and present vse of these holy signes and symboles, we doe beleeue and confesse, that Christ Iesus both God and man, is really, truly, and effectually working in vs, yea vnited to our soules by faith and religious vse of his sacred symboles
and Sacraments. And is not this that (I need not cite any Doctors of the Church of England, whose doctrine is most cleare in this point) which Caluin plainly deliue∣reth Caluin. lib. 4. Institut: cap. 17. thus: In sacra sua coena &c. He commandeth me in his sacred Supper, vnder the symboles of bread and wine, to receiue his bodie and blood: I nothing doubt but that he truly reacheth vnto me the same, and I truly receiue the same, thus he in his Institutions. And vpon the sixth and twentieth of S. Mathew, he Caluin. in 26. Matth. ingenuously acknowledgeth, that our soules are fed with the substance of his flesh, so that we are made one with him. Thus we religiously and christianly beleeue and pra∣ctise, notwithstanding we are not afraid to call the pra∣ctise See Isa: Caussab: ad Card: Pron: obseruat. 5. Re∣spon: Reg: what our Church holdeth. of Papists, a wicked superstition to a breaden Idoll. For if by consent of all Learned, that is to be reputed an Idoll, which being but a creature hath diuine worship and adoration giuen vnto it, then your bread and wine proposed, which are creatures in themselues, and so cal∣led by the Ancients after consecration, being adored with Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. Theodoret. dia∣log. Aij. diuine adoration and worship, cannot but be reputed an Idoll. We would not account your Sacrament an Idoll, if you taught the same to be onely an Image representa∣tiue, and in efficacie exhibitiue of Christ absent, but be∣cause you make it an Image contentiue of Christ substan∣tially, and naturally present, it being not so; this your image must needs be Imago inanis, a vaine Image, which as your Bellarmine deliuers, is properly an Idoll if ado∣red and worshipped, as yours is. You Mr. Flud (that Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 5. Lactant. Arnol. Orig: Euseb. & Theodoret. August. de Ciuit. lib. 7. Maximus Tirius serm. 38. Di Chrysost. orat. 12. Exod: 32. are learned, as I take it in the Ancients) cannot but haue obserued, how the Fathers call the Images and Statues of the Heathens, Idols, because they gaue vnto the same, being but Creatures, diuine adoration and worship; and yet notwithstanding they were perswaded, that (quaedam numina habit abant in illis) certaine Deities did inhabit the same; yea some of them were perswaded as the Israelites of their golden Calfe, that the Lord God of heauen
and earth did inhabite and reside in their Statues. So you vainely teach and beleeue, that (sanctissimum numen) that Christ Iesus doth corpoally reside and in∣habite in your bread and wine, making an Idoll thereof; in which respect, we desire your patience not to bee of∣fended if we call the same your Clerkes handy worke; & your Priests mouth worke a breaden Idoll, you adoring the creature for the Creator. For should we otherwise esteeme of any thing which the hand and mouth of a Creature can make, which the mouth and stomake of a Creature can vnmake as you all teach. And which (if we beleeue ancient Rabanus) the power nutritiue doth Rab. apud Wald. lib. 2. de sacra. cap. 29. Orig: hom. 15. in Math. Jsichius in Leuit. conuert into nourishment of the body; if Origen, the power digestiue doth cast in secessum into the priuy. which daily experience telleth that the theefe can steale, the fire consume, the mouse eate, should I say we other∣wise esteeme of this then as of a Creature, you might ra∣ther esteeme vs for idiotizing Idols, then reasonable crea∣tures. But to you, and yours, who are so full of your im∣putation of madnesse to others, may we not say as Chry∣sostome Chrysost. hom. 57. in Gen. to Laban; O excellentem insipientiam &c. O excel∣lent folly such are your Gods, that any man may steale them! Or in like sort as God by the mouth of Ieremie, reprou∣ed the Babilonians, O excellentem &c. so we you; O excel∣lent madnesse, such are your Gods that a man may make them. But ô most superexcellent impietie, such are your Gods Isichius in Leuit. as they may be burned! By this you may see M. Flud how little reason, you haue to say, we blaspheme, when as we call your bread and wine, or as you speake your di∣uine sacrament, being adored, a breaden Idoll. Remem∣ber Num. 21. Sir, how the brazen Serpent which was made by Gods speciall appointment, yea and religiously vsed by his command, yet afterwards came to be abused to bee made an Idoll, so that the religious King Ezechias de∣stroyed and burned the same: Call to minde what Da∣mascene 2. Reg. 18. deliuereth▪ how certaine Christians committed
Idolatry in worshipping the Image of Christ: In Epipha∣nius you may read (related also by your Bellarmine) how Damas. lib. de▪ haees. Bell lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 16. Carpocrates was reputed an Idolater, for worshipping of Christs Image. As these were accounted Idolaters for adoring of the Image of Christ, and the Images of Christ so adored (I say so adored, for God auert that I should account the Image it selfe to bee an Idoll but ra∣ther a worthy remembrance) no other then Idolls, euen so you, (if you did imitate Christs institution in your sacramentall action which you do not) are worthily re∣puted to commit Idolatrie in giuing diuine worshippe to that, which ought to haue no other then a religious and reuerent vse, which wee most willingly yeeld vnto the same, as by practise of our Church may and doth ap∣peare most clearely. To proceede, when you come to proue that your di∣uine sacrament ought to be adored, through penurie of sacred Scripture, and some direct command of the anci∣ent Church, you runne to a vision related by S. Chryso∣stome and that by a heare-say; you indeed telling the tale, deliuer the same as though Saint Chrysostome had heard it from the venerable visioners mouth but it was not so; he heard onely (quendam) a certaine one some one (he nameth him not) that reported it of an other old man; and this if you would not haue read so in Chryso∣stome himselfe, you might haue so found him cited by your Bellarmine, so that this tale comes to Chrysostome Bell. de Euchar: lib. 2. cap. 22. by a third Person, not by the Illightened Saint himselfe. For my part, as I finde you to relate this with false fin∣gers; so I doubt not but some false Lad hath abused that Father; For who will once imagine, that so learned and profound a Prelate, woule relate such a tale vpon a hear∣say? But, put the case to be so, and the vision to be true; do you not thinke that the glorious spirits haue that illu∣minated sharpenesse of eie-sight, that they alwaies doe (wheresoeuer they be) behold the face of the Father,
Sonne, and holy Ghost? alwaies behold the face of the Sonne both God and man? What maruaile then, if they adore the sonne, whom they behold powerfully and di∣uinely working pon the mysticall table, being in his di∣uine essence God head and Person present, yea his very humanitie is not there absent to the blessed spirits, whose spirituall eyes require no corporall presence, nor lumi∣nous space to behold what they see, but alway and euery where, they behold the diuine face, yea and the humane face of Christ also, God and man, from which they are neuer absent, But Chrysostome saith; they bowe their heads in reuerence of him who lyeth thereon. O well instan∣ced, for, yet now at last wee haue the manner of sit and disposition of their Christs body, vpon the Altar; the per∣plexed knot is now vntied, Christ lieth forsooth; but why resolueth he not, whether hee lie prone or supine? with what proportion of his parts and members? whe∣ther Christs head be where his toe is? whether his el∣bowes be where his knee is? and so throughout as your Vasquez, and most of your Scholastickes doe deliuer. But it is obseruable in this vision, how these Papists as M. Flud calleth them, do but only ducke like Souldiers in presence of their Emperour, Ah Sir! where is that prone adoration befitting Angells in the presence of their You should do well to tell the Spanish Gal∣lants that will not kneele to your Eucharist God how a certaine soul∣dier adoring the same let fall his cloake into the mire and yet it was not bemired Spect. Exemp verbo Eucharist. Exē. 9. God? especially God eleuated? that is presented pur∣posely to be adored? Surely they are like, vnto the Spa∣nish, Italian, and French Gallants, whereof many hold it sufficient to bowe their heads and to scrape a little with their legges, when your God is eleuated in your Masse▪ Or else they might haue a Papalike priuiledge, whose fa∣shion is, often onely to bowe when others adore at the presence of your God: I thinke with your good leaue we may imagine, that these your Angell-Papists had feet for else it cannot bee well conceited, how they should bow their heades, for if they had no other then heades and brests, it cannot bee imagined that the bowing of
their heades was any other, then the hanging downe of their heads somewhat sullenly in their bosomes: It may be you will grant they had legges, but kneeled not be∣cause they soared and hung in the aire about the altar, or in that they had no fit subiect, nor cushions to kneele vpon; be it as you please, your Visioner was not his Craftsman (though he had many reuelations) in this one so to mistake. Out of this one mysterie, and once reuealed, and to one, your Chrysostome goeth on to inferre thus; that we may beleeue, like blessed Spirits though they be not euer seene, to be in like humble manner continually present, and this for the Maiestie of him who is daily sacrificed: What Sir▪ must wee vnderstand this your Chrysostomes inference only of your Masse-time, when your Christ is sacrificed? or else also, whensoeuer your Christ is closely lockt vp in your Church Tabernacles? If your counterfet Chry∣sostomes reason of maiesty hold for masse-time, why may not reason of necessitie serue for other times, when your God hath neede of Attendants, to defend him from Rats, Mise? yea and sometimes from such Per∣sons as he was who of late broke some and tooke some of your Gods, from the Tabernacle of the Benedictine English Monkes in Loreyne: you cannot be ignorant, but that such an accident happened; The person who did the same hath since ingenuously confessed vnto mee, with many obtestations and execrations against him∣selfe, if he spoke not truth, to wit; that he himselfe being doubtfull about the truth of the Sacrament, your Tran∣substantiation, and reall presence; did the same: pray∣ing most earnestly and heartily, that God would be plea∣sed for the satisfying of his conscience to shew some mi∣racle either vpon him or against him, he desiring nothing more, then assurance of truth, and hee had this resoluti∣on; that if God had then shewed some token vpon your Sacrament, he had stayde with you: but seeing nothing
was done notwithstanding such his vsage of your Sacra∣ment (whereof your Monkes can best relate the manner by reason of such broken and scattered peeces as wee left behinde) he resolued finally to returne backe againe to the Church of England, where hee now liueth soberly and Christianly and telles no newes of any attendant or defendant Angells; surely had there beene any hee had smarted for it. This your counterfet Chrysostome telleth Lib. 6. de Sacerd. vs, that (per id tempus &c.) at the time of the sacrifice An∣gells do sit with the Priest yea Potestatum &c. The whole Order of the Powers doth moue clamours and shoutings &c. That the place is full of quires of Angells &c. If this bee so, surely heauen must needes be very naked and emptie of Angells, and blessed Spirits; or else there are not so many Quires and troupes of Angells attendant vpon your millions of Altars as this your Authour vainely pretendeth. Besides, if these your Angells doe familiar∣ly asside and sit downe at the sacrificing altar, with the Priest, how comes it to passe that your said Chrysostome saith that Angelividentes &c. The Angells beholding (your sacrifice) are surprized with honour, and dare not frely looke vpon the same in respect of the brightnesse which thereout shi∣neth? What coherence is here familiarly to asside with the Priest? and yet so ouertaken with horror and dread that they dare not freely behold the same? What Sir? the blessed Angell, who euer behold the eternall Maiestie of God? who intuitiuely contemplate the diuine essence & Gods face, do these conceiue such horror and dread of your sacramentall Gods that they dare not (libere intueri) freely behold the same (propter emicantem inde splendorem) for the splendour arising therefrom? O blasphemous voice of vanitie, your best defence for your forged Authour, must be he doth hyperbolize. Vnumquodque est quid in suo genere, sic vos in Ignatiano, so hee that corrupted Chryso∣stome. But seeing you are delighted with such a tale, to make it as a foundation of your bread-worship I will giue
a short glance at a few tales nay true histories which shall fit your purpose, and shew your Romanists vanitie in their bread worship and transubstantiating diuinitie. Where were these your Papist Angells, that none of them did smite in sunder that lewd Priest, who being caried to pu∣nishment, did in Rome as he passed by a Bakers shoppe say ouer all the bread that was in the same those alpo∣tent fiue words, by which hee consecrated all the bread, that was there? you haue heard what perplexitie fell to the Romanists thereupon. Not long since, there was in these parts a paire of The Papists sa∣crament▪ god hath needed the attendance of Papist-An∣gells. counterfet Fryers now returned againe to you; of which two, the Iulian one, related to me often, that in the Car∣melitane Cenobies some mad Fryers would (to quit them∣selues of drinking sowre wine) go and vse the words of consecration ouer the barrells and vessells in which it was, which done; knowledge being taken thereof, in a secret manner, all the same must be reputed sacred and conse∣crated A notable trick of Carmelite Monkes. so that it might not bee vsed or touched. The truth of this tale, be with the Authour of it Iulius; but if it were true, maruell that no one of all the powerfull Attendants Order did auenge so damnable Impietie. Per∣haps those blessed Spirits, were pleased to bee present at such a dreadfull sacrifice and did excite applauding cla∣mours for so diuine a worke, to haue a new consecrated God within a hogshead; a kinde numen neuer thought on before: What? were all these Angells keeping cen∣tinell in Italie, when as not long ago in Scotland the Ape of a geat Princesse, caught out of the hands of a Priest at Sacrifice your sacrament, and eate it: for which the Ape had surely died, had not the Princesse interceded for his life. You bid Sir Edward send some of his Ministers to preach to these Papists Angells: nay rather in good car∣nest The negligence of M. Floods Papist-angells. wee aduise you to perswade some of them to looke better to their charge then they haue done heretofore;
Tell them of their often negligence heretofore commit∣ted, by suffering the Sacrament to fall to the ground in Germany, France, Spaine, and England; you cannot for∣get, but that it fell to ground in the English Church at Rome; you cannot but haue heard, how a flye fell into a Liber Conformit. consecrated chalice, like vnto that Spider of Fryer Fran∣cis; only the difference was, that of Fryer Francis was A flic-heretike. drunke vp by the Fryer and came out of his shin-bone, he rubbing the same, the other though pursued hotly yet escaped; had she beene caught she had beene burnt for an Heretike. Put them in minde of their errour, that they suffered the people Romanists in Germanie, to trample with their feete such their sacrament Gods as were made and conse∣crated by married Priests: And how negligent they were, to suffer Gregorie the 7. that helbrand of Ciuill Benno Cardinal. in vita Hildebr▪ commotion, and warres, throughout all Christendome, to take the sacrament God, and to cast the same into the fire. Demand of them where they were, when that wor∣thy Christian Master Walter Marshe, did in Rome strike the sacrament-God out of the Bishops hand as he caried the same in publike procession, through the streetes; for My motiues preface. Pope Adrian a good Papist-Angell for their God. Adrian. quodl. 3. pag. 63. which he suffered death most constantly. Bid them be very vigilant against Heretikes that they catch none of the sacrament, lest that you be put to such a plunge which Adrian your Pope alloweth, to wit, rather to cast the same into the priuie, then to suffer it to come into the hands of Heretikes. If they will not be vigilant against Heretikes (as they haue not beene) at lest let them be carefull against Con∣iurers and Nigromancers, or else coniure them to tell you, Con Later. can. 20. Con. Brac. 3. how it commeth to passe, that the Deuills themselues are delighted to haue your sacrament God presented & offered vnto them, in their most detestable sacrifices and ceremonies.
Charge them with horrible negligence, for suffering the sacrament-god which Alphonsus King of Arragon car∣ried about him for his defence, to be transubstantiated by corruption into wormes. To conclude this point, and to pretermit many tales of like kinde, which might bee added; I thinke your order apointing certaine Deacons with flyeflaps to driue away flyes when your Pope celebrateth, were very super∣fluous Constitut. lib. 8. cap. 12. Turrian Durant. if there were such Quires of Angells, attending vpon your sacrament-god: Clement whom you make Authour of this flyeflap ceremonie seemeth not to haue beene of your faith herein. Mr. Flud pag. 146. num. 28. The sight of the bleeding wafercake at Bruxells, seemeth to haue made your eares glowe, Lett. pag. 106. but what stories of like mira∣cles might you read, were you conuersant in ancient Ecclesi∣asticall histories? A miracle done by Saint Basill in this kinde, to omit others, a graue Cyrus Theodor. Prodmus. who liued ann 440. in Epigram D. Basilij. Authour abone 1200. yeeres agoe wrote in verse, which one thus turned into English: Beholding bread and in the cup red wine, The lew did laugh at misteries diuine: Which when Saint Basill saw, both kindes of foode Reacht out, which straight turn'd into flesh and blood. ANSWER. If Sir Edwardes eares did glowe to heare the fond nar∣rations of your wafercake at Bruxells, his Christian zeale therein is to be commended, and the impudencie of Fablers with very spight to be reprooued; who still Mtorran. lib. 10 hist. Belg. ad▪ An. 1581. harpe vpon the same lying stringe alreadie exploded by publike proclamation of the Senate of Bruxells. I per∣ceiue Sir, you are willing vpon an old hearesay to take vp the fable to which none can giue testimonie by a
cleare sight say. There be who in time of their blinde zeale were at Bruxells, where also they made as diligent scrutinie and inquirie after the prodigious Wafer-cake as possibly might be, and yet they could not vnderstand any one good circumstance for the certaintie thereof; only cerae doubtfull rumors, as many, and as con∣trarie, as were the Relators. I haue obserued one essen∣tiall circumstance of all your miracles, your Mirabilists seeme to play boo peepe and alls hid in their miracles. And as I haue heard of some, who haue been said euery morning to finde gold in their old shooes, vntill they made that their good fortune knowne (for therevpon ther kinde Robbin left them) euen so you haue miracles, wonders, cures, restitutions, resuscitations in your Churches, Chappells▪ hills, woods, valleyes, vaults: vntill you made your good fortune knowne and gloried therein (as in a note of your Church you doe) wherevpon presently, all is past away as a blast of winde. Many were the prodigies, and sundry were the Ora∣cles which were of ould done and deliuered by Apollo, Iuno, &c. but no sooner appeared Christ, but the Oracles ceased, wonders vanished, yea the very presence of a Chrysost. lib. 4. contra Gentes. Christian: more; the vicinitie or neighbouring only of a Saints dead bodie, was able to stop their mouthes, and to binde their hands; such is the case of your Mirabilists and Oraclists, they can do no wonder in the presence of a true Christian, they can deliuer no Oracle, their mouthes are stopped, their hands are bound. How vn∣like are these of yours to those of Christ and his Apo∣stles, which were done in the sight and face of the Ad∣uersarie, yea vpon the enemie himselfe, so that there could be no exceptions against them. Sir, your heare-say of the wafer-cake, the bleeding thereof, and miracles done thereby, is like your hearesay when you write thus: That you haue heard, how those Purgat. trium. pag. 138. potent and pious Princes, the Arch-Duke and his Lady, did
(producing witnesses of the same) shew your miraculous A notorious vntruth of M. Flod. Creature Iohn Clement cured at your Ladies of Sichem (as Lipsius doth report) vnto the R: Honorable Earle of Hart∣ford when he was there in Embassage for his Maiestie: y you adde, that it was very probable, thus Sir Edward was then present at the same sight, he attending vpon the Earle in the same Embassage: but I thinke Sir Edwards Nick-Groome in his Purgatories knell, hath curryed you well Pag: 236. and handsomely for this Ignatian like ouer-reaching. I will not here relate the answer or the letter which the R: Honorable Earle wrote to refute this vanitie of Mr. Flud; I rather refer the Reader to that Booke, and wish him to read the chapter wherein the Lipsian miracles are morterized. For my part I must confesse, I neuer read a more fit kinde of refutation of Lipsian prodigies, for Purg Knel. cap: 5. Nick-Grome hath curryed them, euen so as a lade ought to be dealt withall. You proceed, and tell Sir Edward very wisely thus, that if he were acquainted in ancient Ecclesiasticall histories, what might he not finde of like kinde with your Lipssan mira∣cles? Now the Vicar of St. Fooles be your Ghostly Fa∣ther. If Sir Edward might finde, why do not you relate some autenticall one? why tell you vs only of an Epi∣gram written I cannot tell by whom? fetcht out of the graue of obliuion? why may not we make this Epigr (filium populi) a bastard as well as your ancient Amphi∣lochius (out of whom Harding and who else not of your side haue fetcht arguments for priuate masse &c.) is now found to be a very Spurye of some idle Monke, by your owne Cheifetaines? Your Rabbies of Babilon haue raked out of all corners, whatsoeuer obscure Manuscripts they could get, and haue obtruded the same vnto the world vnder the title of Bibliotheca Sanctorum Patrum, when as in many it is forged Fathers no other then Pseudotheca Falsariorum. You are not ig∣norant sir, how your Romane Papacie hath her cheefest
corner stones from out of certaine Decretall Epistles, which as yet stand in your Canon Law, and are very ve∣nerable in your Church. And yet of these your Cham∣pion Bellarmine (non audet affirmare indubitatas esse) dare Bell de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 14. not affirme them to be of vndoubted truth for their Authours. Some of them he in plaine termes accounteth suppositi∣tious: many of your learned Doctors affirme the same, yet in secret propter metum Purpuratorum: Contius that Con: in cap. Septuaginta, dist. 16. This point ex∣cellently hand∣led by Mr. Ry∣nold against Hart. your famous Canonist hath more constantly discarded them as bastardly Impes as indeed they are. If these bookes of so long credit in your Church, are now found to be spurious, what shall we thinke of this your lame and heauy Prodromus, which commeth out so long after the Faire? But to shew some pretty trickes of this your Falsarie; How silly is he in his inuention? hee seemeth to affirme that Basill did reach out mysteries diuine, when the Iew had laughed at the same, and that presently they were turned into flesh. Your Durantus doth out of Amphilo∣chius Durant. deritib: lib. 2. pag. 556. and this Cirus relate this prodigie farre otherwise, and in commendation of the Iew, but he speakes no∣thing of the Iewes laughing at the mysteries, but af∣firmes how hee comming in to behold the Christians fashion, obserued (Infantom partiri in manibus Basilij) An Infant to bee diuided in Basills hands. (O vanitie! Christ as an Infant is now become the Eucharistioall sa∣crifice of the Crosse) which after he had seene, he appro∣ched himselfe amongst other Christians, and there was giuen to him an Hoste, which was truly made flesh, part whereof hee carried home, told to his wife all hee had seene, and so he and his whole familie became Christian. How do these reports accord? compare them M Flud, and you shall finde, that the testimonies doe not agree; your Epigrammatist tells vs not what manner of flesh it was, but Durant does; that it was made truly flesh. Durant tells vs, that hee caried reliques, (cuius seruans reliquias)
part of that he tooke home to his wife, which your rela∣tion hath not; he had surely a strong stomacke to eate a peece of Christs flesh in the forme of flesh, and to carrie part of it home with him; perhaps it was either sodd, baked or rosted; pittie that the hoste did not appeare in the forme of the Infant which S. Basill diuided, that so he might haue caried home with him a little Babe for his wife to play withall. This tale of yours is related also by counterfet Am∣philochius; Amphilo. vita Basil. what if out of him your Cirus Prodromus tooe he same? then downe to the ground falls the credit thereof. And as I thinke, the credit thereof can∣not be great, though Prodromus be the first Authour of it. For all the narration depends vpon the Iewes hone∣stie, who affirmed himselfe to haue seene such and such things. A weake ground for you M. Flud to build so principall a point of faith thereon: and vnworthily is he termed a graue Authour, who vpon so slight a testimo∣nie, A feigned tale of a Iew. would commend to all posteritie so prodigious a narration. Your graue Authour should haue done well to haue told vs from whom hee had the tale; againe in particular to haue declared, whether the flesh were a peece of dead flesh, such as is sold in the shambles, or whether it were a liuing lumpe. Againe of what part of man it seemed to be, whether a peece of a legge arme, face, o thigh. &c. so prodigious a miracle deserued a more particular enarration then is made by your Au∣thour. But hauing done with the Authour I demand of you M. Flud, whether this flesh were Christs flesh or not; if so, then it was personally vnited to the God head; if not, then your poore Iew had neither Christs true flesh, nor a true Sacrament of his flesh, as is too too manifest: the latter to affirme were meere vanitie, the former blas∣phemous impietie. But you who dally thus prophanely with metamorphizing of Christs flesh, call to minde
what the Adam of all your Scholastikes, Alexander Hales Alexand. Hal: part 4. q. 53. apud Suarm. Marke the He∣resiarch caused blood to ap∣peare in the cup. Iren. cont. heres. lib. 1. c. 9. Suarez in 3. Tho. disput. 62. sect. 2. How the deuill may deceiue according to the opinion of the Schola∣stikes in 1. part. Aquin. affirmes, that by the operation of the deuill (a bold deuill who dare so presume with your God) there sometimes appeareth flesh in the Sacrament. Yea and that of your grand Suarez, to wit, that the deuill dare be so bold with your Sacrament as to touch it, and carrie it from one place to another. And to abide within the principles of your scholastike Diuines, is there any thing here related by you, which might not haue been done by the power of Sathan; either by transfusion of species into the ayre, or by casting some cloudy or aerie resemblance; or else by corrupting and deceiuing the phantasies of the be∣holders? Further it seemeth admirable to mee, how Basill so graue and learned a Father, would thinke of doing so strange a miracle, and yet not once invocate the name of God, but onely reach out the mysteries, and so (vi exten∣sionis) The Laickes of ould touched the Sacrament, now for feare of destruction they must not touch your Altar. clothes. Cap. vestiment. de Cons. dist. 1. by the force of an extension or reaching them out only to metamorphize them. Againe, it seemeth strange, how he reacht both the kindes of foodes together, perhaps one in the one hand, and the other in the other hand, that o both hands might be full with a god, or two gods at the same time. And if hee reacht out both the foods, he did surely reach them out to some who were ready to receiue the same, which condemneth your halfe-communion, in that you doe contrarie to Christs institu∣tion, denie the Cup to the Laitie, reaching to them but one of the foods only. But how did he reach out both to a Iew laughing & scorning? perhaps the Iew laughed not at first, but at the second, or else he laughed at both, because both were giuen at once? & did it beseeme Ba∣sill to giue the holy mysteries to a Iew laughing? &c. You tell vs that you omit diuers others of like kind, perhaps Johan. Dacon: vita Greg. lib. 2. cap. 41. that former tale of S. Gregorie and the Bakers wife; or else perhaps the tale when a fellow had stolne away a pixe, in which your Sacrament-God was, and how hee to
hide the same thrust it into his breeches, wherevpon his breeches became all bloody; you will not admit I trow that he was so be blooded with the blood of your Sacra∣ment-God: fie, fie, so to say were too vnseemely, and de∣serueth a saue reuerence before the tale can be mannerly told. You meane withall perhaps the Sacrament, which fell in Rome vpon the ground and left an impression in the hard stones of the same: ouer which there is made a small grate of iron, and through it superstitious women thrust their beades, to touch the same impression in the stones, and hauing so done, do often most fondly busse and rebusse their beades. You should not haue left out the tale of the woman, which threw your Sacrament God to the Swine, and how the Swine adored the same; and when shee rosted Speculum exemp. in discip▪ verbo Eucharistia. it how blood issued thereout, and how when shee (to conceale her offence) went and hid the sacrament in the ground, shee prevailed not, for whithersoeuer shee went blood followed her from the same: wherevpon she was moued to repentance, and did afterwards great pennance all her life-time for her so greeuous a sinne. I haue done with this your miracle, yet I cannot but propose one question to you; the pretēded blood of the Sacrament-God at Bruxells, is it true blood of Christ or not? if so; then it must be liuing, being personally vni∣ted to your God, how then doth the fresh colour thereof decay, and it appeare like dead blood? if it be not the true blood of Christ, what then doe you therein Their Sacra∣ment Christ become an Ignatian and can equiuocate adore? or, doth it beseeme Christ, so to delude and e∣quiuocate by making shew of that which is not? How vaine are these men, they neither adore Gods blood, nor the sacrament of his blood, but a forged resemblance of his blood.
Mr. FLOD pag: 146. num: 28. Our miracles, that concerne the keeping of Christs Image with honorable esteeme, seemeth to you to confirme Idolatrie; but what say you of that miracle, which Eusebius reporteth Lib. 3. ist. cap. 14. of the image of Christ, erected by the woman which was cu∣red of her fluxe, by the touch of his garment? vnder which a strange herbe growing, assoone as it touched the hemme of the garment of the Image, it had vertue to cure all diseases. ANSWER. Now we are to come to oppose against the fondest point of idolatrie, which is in Poperie: for although in their Masse, abominable idolatry is committed, yet be∣cause The idolatrie of Papists most horrible. in it they prtend to haue Christ totally and perso∣nally present, they may seeme to haue some pretenced ex∣cuse for their impietie therein. But for their worship∣ping and adoring Pictures with diuine worship, to wit, the Image of the Trinitie with (I conceiue horrour to write it) the selfe same adoration, wherewith the most glorious and dreadfull Trinitie it selfe is to be adored, Aquinas in 3. q. 25. Thomst. pene omnes. Vasquez Valent. Suarez. their impietie herein is most inexcusably fond. For as they all pretend, they giue the adoration of the prototipon and thing it selfe to the image, because the image doth represent the thing it selfe. O profound Diuinitie! as though the consideration of representing, were more then a meere relation, a nothing, (à parte re) but is only when it is thought on; and howsoeuer it be thought vpon, it is infinitely farre inferiour in dignitie, then the diuine Persons it doth represent: and so in no respect to The ground of popish Idolatry about Images founded vpon a relation. haue the same adoration with the persons themselues. But Mr. Flud wipeth his mouth, and would seeme to conclude all their worshipping of Images in an honora∣ble esteeme of them; for so be his words: Our miracles that concerne the keeping of Christs image with honourable
esteeme. But I demand of you in good earnest Mr. Fld, is your adoration of the Pictures of GOD (cultu latriae) Cultus latriae. with the worship of seruitude and seruice? the worship∣ping of the Images of the blessed Virgin Marye (cultu hy∣perduliae Cultus hyperdu∣liae. Cultus duliae.) with the worship of high seruice? the worship∣ping of the pictures of Saints (cultu duliae) with the wor∣ship of seruice, only an honorable esteeme? The least of these cannot be lesse then a seruiceable esteeme: there must needs then be more than an honorable regard: for honoramus cuius seruitium aspernamur, wee honour those whose seruice we disdaine. Hee who shall read what your Aquin part. 3. Bellarm: lib. 2. de Imag. Angelicall Aquinas, Bellarmine, Ʋasquez, Suarez, Valentia, and most of your learned Doctors do resolutely deliuer in this case, cannot be so purblinded as not to finde, but that your Church giueth more than an honorable e∣steeme to your Images. An honourable esteeme or re∣gard to the images of Christ pourtraited or drawne ac∣cording to truth, was neuer denied by any Oxthodoxe Christian of the reformed Churches. Our practise is cleare in this point, for we keepe such if they be without circumstance of superstitious vse or signification, with due regard. I except onely such humorous Precisians whom Maiestie hath excellently described to bee no other then Protestants runne out of their wits. These in∣deed cannot endure the sight of a Picture representing Christ crucified; I my selfe not long since hauing in my Parlour the picture of Christ vpon the Crosse drawne i paper, together with the pictures of his most excellent Maiestie, our Queene, our late Prince Henry, Prince Charles &c. I was by diuers reputed not to be a sound Protestant for hauing the same picture of Christ. To my face a Minister (in practise very vnconformable to the orders of the Church) made a scornefull demaund whose picture that of Christ should be. But leauing them, I demand of you M. Flud, is your religious cree∣ping to a wooden Crucifixe vpon Good-Fridayes with
fixt and prone countenance, prostrate bodies, three seue∣rall genuslexions, and religious kissing of the same; Is this (I say) only an honorable esteeme? that it is not so, may appeare by the three seuerall inuitations which your Priest maketh to the people, when hee vncoue∣reth the Crusifixe which is to bee adored. The fa∣shion of your Romanist Church is to keepe your Images all the yeere vncouered in their faces at lest, but in lent you veyle them for most part thereof with red or white; but after passion Sunday, you couer them with blacke veiles especially your Crucifixes, that you are to adore (herein you imitate both Grecians and Romanes, Polidor. lib. 2. cap. 23. these euer couering their Images, those hauing them alwaies naked &c.) Now vpon your Good-friday the Priest standing at the left end of your Altar, & begining to vncouer the same, maketh three gradations with his hands and three with his feete and at three seuerall times The Papists su∣perstition on Good friday. doth vncouer it; but at each vncouering, hee singeth a∣aloud vnto the people and Clergie thus: (Ecce lignum Crucis) Behold the wood of the Crosse; the Clergie and People falling or kneeling prostrate vpon the ground, answere and sing aloud (venite adoremus) Come let vs a∣dore: This is done three seuerall times; and so presently followeth the creeping to the Crosse, laid vpon a faire cushion with a linnen cloth thereupon; to which crosse the Priest first creepeth, he onely hauing charge, before he doth the same to pull off his shoes because the place is holy in which the wodden Crucifixe lodgeth. This being your practise answereable to your doctrine, with what face M. Flud doe you call this your doing an honorable esteeme only? Well said Polidore of your Churches pra∣ctise Polid. lib. 6. cap. 13. about Images, haec pars pietatis eò ventum est vt parum differat ab impietate. This part of pietie is come to that passe that it little differeth from impietie. So he, though in profession a zealous Papist. But that we may the better answere your argument,
out of Eusebius, and distinguish the vse of Images, wee are to consider three principall endes which may bee Three princi∣pall ends of Images. made of them. The first end that they may bee thankefull remem∣brances of those to whom we are in dutie bound. The second, that they may be as morall or historicall instructions to the beholder. The third, to haue them for religious worshippe and adoration. Touching the first I see no cause why it should be re∣proued, it being practised by all nations, towards their Soueraignes and Magistrates, both liuing and departed; only it is expedient, that great care bee had, that the pictures bee drawne (especially in Persons and mat∣ters of religion) according to the very truth of the historie, not as it is now practised in Poperie, according to the Painters fancie: whereof we haue amongst them a very late and fresh example to their shame and confusi∣on. It is not vnknowne to England how vpon the death of the Archpowder-Traytor Garnet, there was a preten∣ded miraculous strawe carried vp and downe with his face made miraculously vpon it; The same was seene, & reseene; viewed, and reuiewed by diuerse of all professi∣ons; high, and low; and for ought that I could euer heare, it could not be very perfectly discerned by any: I am assured many notorious Papists haue affirmed as much, yea the Great Gage of Bently (a man full of faith in their Church) looking vpon it very carefully could Diuers zealous Papists of very good ranke a∣mongst them haue tould mee that the face in the strawe was so obseure that they could very hardly discerne it. not perceiue it. But what followed? The strawye face was carried ouer into Flaunders, where it so mounted in clearenesse, that at Mountes and elsewhere, some shes Painteresses looking in their monasteries through  Ignatian spectacles haue drawn the face most gloriously▪ as adorned with shining celestiall beames round about it; with a crowne vpon the head, a Cherub vpon the chinne, a starre on the forehead, all the proportion of
the face cleare and perfect. Out of this one learne their false-dealing in all; what may future ages beholding so glorious a face coniecture thereout, else, but a notori∣ous and prodigious Ignatian likelye. Fie vpon such im∣pudent dealing frons meretricis facta est vobis, nescitis eru∣bescore, An impudent ingraued lye of the Ignatians. you are become impudent and cannot blush, and dare Rome approue these things euen in the face of the Ad∣uersarie? But to your argument out of Eusebius, all the Pheni∣cian woman did in the erecting of that brassie Image of Christ before hir doores, was nothing else, but to make a gratefull remembrance & monument to her Deliuerer; wherein she was not to be condemned, as neither some other Christians, which did the like. You might haue obserued this out of Eusebius, who censuring this wo∣mans Eusebius lib. 7. hist. cap. 8. fact writeth thus: It is not to be maruelled, that Eth∣nikes receiuing some benefits from our sauiour, did such things; for wee haue seene the pictures of Peter and Paul, and Christ drawne in collours, and kept by some: which seemeth to mee, to haue beene obserued out of an heathenish custome, by which they were accustomed so to honour those, whom they thought worthy of honour, and reputed for their deliuerers; so Eu∣sebius passeth his iudgement; And that the laudable Christian woman did not adore or worship it, is appa∣rent for that she placed the same before her doores; and that the After christians did not worship nor adore the same, it is also cleare by that which Nicephorus hath, to Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 30. wit, that it was so neglected standing (sub dio) open to winde and weather, that it was so defaced, that there was no resemblance nor shew in it, whose it should be: had they beene then of your now Romane faith, they would haue erected some Church or Chappell ouer the same, and the miraculous herbe, with farre more reason, then you haue done lately at Hall, Sichem, Lile, Montserratto, Garganum, Arras (and where not▪) for some of your feigned Dioses. As for the herbe whereof Eusebius mak∣eth
mention, though some giue little credit to the same; Bodin. method. histor. Ioh. 9. 6. I see no great reason why it should be denied; For Christ who did open the eies of the blinde with earth and spittle, might also if it pleased him, impart power to a simple herbe to worke like admirable effects: But as the blinde man cured would haue hardly beene thought to haue had his eies, at lest the eyes of his vnderstanding open∣ed, if he should haue adored with diuine worshippe the earth and spittle, wherewith his eyes were opened; so likewise would the Christians of Phenicia haue beene thought infatuated with the Spirit of Paganisme, if they should haue adored the herbe or Image, for the cures done thereby. Did the Christians adore Peters sha∣dowe? Act. 5. 15. & 19. 12. did they worship Paules napkines? because cures were done thereby? What Sir? may all those Creatures be worshipped by which God doth bestow his benefits? then vndoubtedly the Sunne, and Moone, the other If religious worship may be giuen to Creatures by which God worketh mira∣cles, then also some kinde of worship may be giuen to the Sunne and Moone &c. Planets and heauenly Orbes may be worshipped, with some kinde of worship, by which God doth cumulate benefits vpon mankinde. The heathenish sacrifices and superstitions were all founded vpon this principle; yea those who now in the Indies worship the Deuill; the rea∣son is, because by him they receiue some benefits: In summe Sir, as no kinde of worship can be without super∣stition, if giuen to creatures by which God imparteth na∣turall benefits; so neither may any be giuen to such crea∣tures, by which God is pleased to worke any supernatu∣rall effects, as he doth in case of miracles. Thus is all you haue produced out of Eusebius cleare∣ly refuted, and retorted vpon your owne head. Now to speake a word or two concerning those ends of Images which I mentioned before. Touching the first I see no reason to condemneit, the See Caluin lib. institut. cap. 3. de lege in exemp. 2. precept. num. 34. 35. same agreeing with the practise of the best and most re∣formed Churches. Concerning the second end for morall and histori∣call
instruction, I doe not consider any intrinsecall ma∣lice in the same, yet considering the pronenesse of mens hearts to superstition, whereof Saint Austen discourseth August. in Psal: 113. very excellently; I cannot but account it a point of great danger to haue the same drawne or set vp in the house of God, where Gods worship and adoration is onely to be giuen to himselfe: the ground whereof is that which ve∣ry truth extorteth out of Aquinas whose words are these: Aquin. 2. 2. q. 97. art: 4. ad 3. de ratione diuinae excellentiae &c. It is the nature of the diuine Excellencie, that it be singular and incommunicable, and ther∣fore it is all one to doe any thing against the diuine Reuerence, and to communicate diuine Reuerence to another, thus hee: So that the placing of Pictures and Images as religious obiects in Gods house, especially, if placed as vpon al∣tars; cannot be without danger of hauing diuine reue∣rence giuen vnto them. Our Aduersaries obiect against vs the authoritie of Gregory the Great, who in his Epistle to Serenus reprou∣eth him for defacing of certaine Images, which the peo∣ple did adore; but if his authoritie bee good against the Greg: epist. lib. 7. epist. 54. Aug. in Psal. 113. Arno: contra Gent: Lactan: Frm: institut. Epiphan. in epist. ad Ioh. Hierose∣limit. defacers of images, then it must be also currant & sound against the worshippers of Images, for hee is as earnest against them as either Serenus, Austen, Athanasius, Arno∣bius, Lactantius, or as Epiphanius, who in like sort as Se∣renus, pulled downe another Image placed in a place of prayer, imitating therein the holy zeale of good King Ezechias. You tell vs that Images are the Idiots bookes; I doubt not but historicall Images may bee allowed in some pla∣ces for the simple and learned to looke vpon; if they be such pictures, as are drawne according to the truth of historie not according to the Painters fancy, otherwise they will lead into errour; as for example, what do your people learne by hauing the sacred Trinitie pourtraited and drawne as you doe? I could tell you of diuers of your English-papists, who thereby were fallen into the
very heresie of the Anthropomorphytes; and when I tould them of their errour, they could very hardly be drawne from it, thinking it to be the faith of the Romane Catho∣like Church, by whose authoritie such pictures were allowed. What I pray you, may your Simples learne by ob∣seruing how you tricke vp with gownes and kirtles; with crownes and garlands; with bracelets, chaynes, and ringes, some of your Goddesses in your Churches and chappells? will they not thinke that your Saints are so attired in the heauens? that the soyle is cold? and wher∣as The vaine at∣tiring of Popish Pictures. they obserue how some of your Saintesses haue gownes and kirtells made of such Dames refuses, as an honest woman would hardly weare; yea to see the Queene of heauen so attired; will they not thinke that heauen is very poore; either hauing no silkes, or else wanting Taylors to make new gownes for the Queene her selfe? Againe, what may your Ignorants learne, when they shall behold our Sauiour pictured as in Saint Andrewes Church at Bourdeauz as ascending vp into the heauens vpon the backe of an Eagle? will they not in∣ferre that he mounted not vp to the heauens by his owne power, but rather by the helpe of an Eagle one of the li∣uing Creatures which are attending about the throne as wee haue it described in the Reuelation of Saint Apocal. 4. 7. Iohn? As concerning the third end of Images to wit adora∣tion, I haue in a few words already shewed the iniquitie of the same: M. Flud himselfe dareth not to call the childe by its owne name, but giueth it onely the name of honourable esteeme. But here I adde further that the Bishops of Rome shall haue this speciall priuiledge, to Polid. lib. 2. de Iuent. cap. 23. citat. Plutar. in via Numa. & Clement. Macro: lib. 1. Satural: cap. haue brought the adoration of Images into the Church. That so Rome popish may be like to Rome heathenish in all things. Rome at first had no pictures at all in their Temples, Numa his decree forbidding the same; after
they came in as monuments onely of the worthies, as when Hercules ouercame Gerion. This being obteined, in short processe of time, by cunning of the Archfla∣mines and false Priests they came to be worshipped: E∣uen so in Rome Christian, at beginning no pictures were to befound in Churches, as is clearely to bee gathered out of Origen disputing against Celsus: It may bee Orig. contra Cesum. lib. 7. versus Finem. thought they crept in to be in some credit not long be∣fore the time of Gregorie the Great, and shortly after, within lesse then an age, that which hee detested, came to be good by publike decree, of his Successours; espe∣cially in the time of Baniface the 3. who set open the Pan∣theon of Pagans in Rome, and in it, insteed of the Images of false Gods; set vp the Images of all Saints, making the Image of the blessed Virgin to be cheife; so that the Temple which in time of Pagamsme was called Panthe∣on, that is, the Temple of all Gods, is now also called the Pantheon, the temple of all Saints and Martyrs. Againe, whereas by reason of the abuse of Images, diuers Coun∣cells Sinod. Constan∣tinop. sub Leo: & Constant. the later had 338. Bishops at it. were assembled both in East and West for redres∣sing of the same; as your adoration of Images hath this priuiledge, to haue beene condemned by the first Gene∣rall Councell that was assembled about them, and by others that followed both in East and West: So haue your Popes Constantine, Gregorie 2. and 3. Zachary, Ste∣phen, Adrian, with others this prerogatiue, that for the adoration and worshipping of Images they haue preuai∣led against Councells Generall, against Emperors both of East and west; yea in the times of Charles the Great, though all Churches of the West were against them, yet they preuailed; yea and if what some Greeke Authours doe relate be true, not without many lying prodigies to confirme the same: yea Bellarmine is not ashamed to con∣fesse, that then the Romane Empire was taken away Bell lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 12. from the Emperour, by which S. Paules prediction ac∣cording to the Fathers exposition was in part fulfilled,
that the Romane Empire which letted the comming of Antichrist, should be taken away and so that man of sin 2. Thessal. 2. Austen. Tertul. Hierom. alij. come to be reuealed. I here obserue, how our Aduersaries to infringe and diminish the authority of one of those Councells which did condemne the worshipping of Images, do obiecta∣gainst it the wicked life of Constantine Copronymus, by whose command it was assembled: Admit we grant he was a wicked man, according as some Authors report of him, yet for wickednesse especially in Lucifers sinne hee came behinde a Pope of yours called Constantine; who was tooth and naile for adoration of Images, who also was the first that would suffer an Emperour to kisse his feete; he came also far behinde that Monster of crueltie Irene the Empresse, who not content with the regencie of the Empire vnder her Sonne Constantine, but aiming at all, and proiecting marriage with Charles the Emperor, she most barbarouslie murthered her owne Sonne Con∣stantine the young Emperour; whose impietie the hea∣uens and earth seemed to detest by Ecclipses and Earth∣quakes: and yet this glorious Dame was the cheifest Esta∣blisher of adoration of Images; vnder whom, and by whose command the prophane Nicene Councell appro∣ued the worshipping of Images, though in a farre more Conc. Nis: Idolo: sub. Irene. moderate sort then you now either teach or practise▪ Let not then the wicked life of Constantine, be more hurt∣full to our cause, then the barbarous Immanitie of your Irene, the luciferian pride of your Constantine be against yours, no nor let not Henry the eights vices (a note of∣ten song by yours) be more preiudicial to our Churches then those of Gregorie the 13. Clement the 7. and Sixtus the 5. to yours; you cannot iustly lay any such imputa∣tions of vice to any of our Soueraignes or Prelates, which indeed established Christian religion and refor∣mation amongst vs; as we can to your Kings, Emperors, Popes, Purpurates, and Prelates. As for Henry the 8.
we are not tied to defend him in all points, hee was for his faith more yours then ours: as it euidently appeareth by the Statute of his sixe Articles which are part of the very substance and marrow of Popery. Had he beene as he should, hee would neuer to the eternall perdition of innumerable Soules haue so disposed of Church liuings, and impropriations; he would neuer haue put to death some worthy Christians as he did, those I meane who professed the Gospell of Christ and denied your Popes supremacie. Mr. FLVD. pag: 146. num. 28. No lesse wonderfull is the miracle recorded by De passione Imag. Saluat. in Berito alleaged by the second Nicene Coun∣cell act. 4. S. Atha∣nasins, and by Lib: 1. de gloria Mart: cap. 22. Gregorius Turonensis of two images of Christ, which vpon violence offered by the Iewes vnto them, did mi∣raculously bleed. These and innumerable other most autenti∣call miracles, wrought and written for the confirmation of the cheifest points of our Catholike faith, before the supposed Antichrist was in the world, doe manifestly confute the wicked blasphemie, by which you would make our Catholike miracles to be his. ANSWER. You goe on and say thus; No lesse wonderfull is the mi∣racle recorded by S. Athanasius. What Mr. Flud? haue you wilfully stumbled into like errour with that, whih with so foule mouth you censured falsly in a learned Knight in your proiected ouerthrow? and for which in Pag. 134. Triumph Pag: 36. your Purgatories triumph, you spend much battologie to proue him either guilty of ignorance, or of intended fraud to deceiue the Reader. Yea in your Triumph you Pag. 34. v. 7. speake thus vnseemely and vntruly in print, and would It was well said by one, a Knight a lyer deserues to haue his spurrs strooke off from his heeles. make him culpable of that which in a Knight is most dishonourable. How grosse then is either your igno∣rance, who by profession are a Padre in Iesreel; or else how inexcusable is your Ignatian-like fraud, to deceiue
the Reader by citing vnder the name of that Grand Athanasius of Alexandria (for to no other can your agno∣mination of Saint be fitted, and him I know you meane a Treatise, which your owne learned men do discard as not his; and out of which the miracle cited by your holy Fathers of the second Nicene is reputed as a matter lately hapned? if lately, then some hundreths of yee after the Patriarke Athanasius his death. And the nar∣ration is so barbarous and legend-like, that it may not without great wrong be attributed to so learned and elo∣quent a Father. I intreat your learning to tell me what distance of time your Chronologists make betwixt the time of Athanasius the Great of Alexandria, and the Em∣pire of Constan: called the Elder, whose wiues name was Irene? If you cast your account rightly, you shall finde no lesse than 400 yeeres distance betwixt Great Athanas of Alexandria, & the Empire of Constant: & Irene. Your Legendarie fondly and contrarie to the truth of History, makes this Irene wife to Constantine, wheras she was only daughter in law to Constantine the Elder by mariage of his sonne Leo, and mother to Constantine the younger; but a barbarous and most inhumane mother. Shee raigned with her sonne Constantine when the second Ni∣cene Pseudosynode was celebrated in the 8 yeere of their Empire: so that the Bishops of that Pseudosynode relating this miracle as lately hapned in Beritum, it is to be presu∣med that the same either hapned, or was feigned to haue hapned, in some of those former yeeres, in which Irene the Empresse raigned with her sonne Constantine, accor∣ding as your Legendaries title pretendeth. And to con∣firme what I haue said, we may not thinke that Baronius Baron in Annot. in Martirolog. Roman. Nouē. 9. would haue forgone such a narration, as the worke of Great Athanasius, but that he saw such repugnancies in it, that it could not stand, and yet as loth to forgoe it wholy, he would faine finde a Father for it in some Bi∣shop in Siria. Alas good Sir, what Bishop in Siria could
be so ignorant, as not to know that Irene was not wife to any of the Constantines, as your Legendarie pretendeth? Further refutation of this fable shall not need, only I re∣quest The tale of the Image cruci∣fied at Beritum most idle. the iudicious Papist to read the tale it selfe, and hee will finde such improbabilities, nay such impossibilities in it, (as especially how the Image, so great a one, should bee forgot by the Christian who left the house; and againe how it should continue vnespied by the Iew that dwelt in the house, vntill it was espyed by one of his neighbours) I say he will finde such impossibilitie in it, that he will neuer giue credit to the same. What you adde out of Gregorie Turonensis, it is not worth a rush, the Authour is very fabulous. But put case M. Flud wee admit both your tales and miracles, what can you inferre thereout against vs? what if Christ for the confusion of that incredulous and perfidious Na∣tion, when out of hate to him and his sacred Person, they did abuse either his Sacramentall image, that is the sacrament of his bodie, or else any other Image of his, which Christians of those times might make and keepe only as monuments and remembrances of their deliue∣rer? what I say if Christ did shew some prodigious mi∣racles against them? was this any thing to confirme your idolatrous worship of images? It is one thing Sir to haue a picture of Christ burnt or defaced in despite of Christ, or to be defaced in despight of Idolatrie commit∣ted vpon the same, whereby Christ is dishonoured. Good King Ezechias burnt and defaced the brazen Ser∣pent The different end for which Iewes & Chri∣stians deface popish Images. in hate of the Idolatrie, which was committed by it, and his fact was pious; but had he done the same in contempt of God who commanded, or Moses who cau∣sed the Serpent to haue been made, his sinne had beene without excuse. Your selues may in your vaine practise giue an exam∣ple. When you cause a vomit (in which it is doubtfull whether the sacramentall species be decayed or not) to
be burnt: if you should doe the same in contempt of The hoste be∣ing vomited, was burnt at Ausre in France about the yeere 1526 The like done in the Romane Colledge of the English. your Sacrament-God, your sacriledge should be horri∣ble, but doing the same lest your Sacrament-God should continue in the vomit, you count it a point of re∣ligion. Many such like examples might bee produced out of your owne practise in burning old worme-eaten Images, Agnus Deies, in which, by long wearing in swea∣ting bosomes vermine may breed: in all these you think you commit no sacrilege, because your intention and end is pious as you thinke. Burbon ransackt Rome. The Gothes did the like. The Turkes may perhaps doe the like; but assuredly Christian Princes shall doe the like. Their ends were diuers, whereout it followeth, that their actions are different, commendable in some, cul∣pable in other. Euen so the Iew hee burneth and defa∣ceth the images or sacraments of Christ; wee likewise burne your images, not all, but such as haue been speciall obiects of idolatrie: but here is the difference, the Iew doth what he doth out of hate and contempt of Chris, we out of loue to Christ and hate of idolatrie: the Iew because he would not haue Christ glorified; we, bicause wee will not haue Christ dishonoured by your idola∣trous worships, but him onely honoured, exalted, glori∣fied. To whom only, with Father and Holy Spirit, be all ho∣nour and glory giuen, both now & in secula seculorum. Amen. And so I will end with this reason, not fearing to tell you, that all your shutting vp thereof is nothing else but an Italian brag with a few elegant termes. You challenge to your selfe all authenticall miracles, such as were done before the supposed Antichrist: they are rather ours, kinde Sir, for we only striue for Antiquitie, reiecting your Nouelties, and therefore in all right the miracles of anti∣quitie are ours, and these of noueltie yours, who are the Nouelists and seruants to the Beast, started vp in the roome of the decayed Romane Empire. And so let vs come to your third reason, which you thus frame with∣out all reason.
CHAP. VI. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS third Reason. Mr. FLOD pag: 149. num: 29. AND hence is declared a third reason, that your spight against our miracles, forceth your Doctors to ioyne against ancient Christians, and Catholike Fathers, with Infi∣dells and Heretikes, and to denie and deride the same miracles they did. ANSWER. This your glorious Maior is a forcelesse charge, and though it be third in order, a mysticall number and a number of perfection, yet it is farre weaker than any of your former, I repulse it with a deniall, let vs see your proofe. Mr. FLVD, pag. and number same. Your Osiander Cent: 4. pag. 326. Diaboli simulata fuga voluerunt vulgi superstiti∣onem confirmar. saith, that the Diuells vanishing away at the name of Christ and signe of the Crosse, made by Iulian, frighted by his sodaine appearance, in a fearefull shape was counterfeit, to bring the superstitious worship of the same, as though it had force to driue away deuills, wherein hee doth shake hands with Iulians Magicians, who likewise would haue it a voluntarie, not forced flight of that memorable miracle of the buried Corps of the Martyr Babylas, and of the Deuills forced confession, that he could not giue answer in his Idoll, by reason of Babylas being so neere, which S. Chrysostome Lib. 4. contra Gentes. so much vrgeth against the Infidells. The same Authour with whom your Cent. 4. column. 1446. Centurists ioyne, saith Cent. 4 p. 377. Respensum had dubie ide á Satana datum, vt paulatim cul∣tum Idololatricū reliquiarum in Ecclesiam in ve∣here. that it was an answer giuen by the diuell, without doubt to bring into the Church the idolatrous worship of reliques.
ANSWER. SIR, your proofe is a meere calumniation, you can∣not iustly ioyne Osiander and the Centurists with the Heathens, who derided the miracles of Christiaus: sup∣pose you could proue that they had derided them, yet because they doe it not (eadem mente & eadem ratione) vpon the same motiue and reason, you may not iustly ioyne them together. Some of your owne Papists deny the miracles done at Sichem, so doe also the Heretikes (as you call them) what, will you ioyne these together? Some of your owne more moderate Brethren, I meane Ignatians of your owne order, doe censure many of your selues to be busie Statists; so likewise doe most Seculars, The Deuil dis∣sembleth with crosses, some∣times seemeth to feare them, sometimes is pleased with them. It is pret∣ty to thinke how hee held both S. Ed∣mund. his hands that hee could not make the signe of the Crosse. vita Edw: and well nye all other Regulars amongst you. What will you ioyne these together? they doe it not (eadem mente nor eadem ratione) vpon the same motiue or same reason; the former out of pittie, the other out of enuy, to speake to your pallate and taste. What if the Centurists doe affirme as you relate them? will you become a Patrone for Satan, as though he could not equiuocate? That Sa∣tan can dissemble, euen with crosses, is so notorious a thing, as if you were not wholly ignorant in Histories, you could not denie it. Doth he not dissemble, when In∣chaunters and Coniurers in their most detestable exer∣cismes, doe please him with Crosses in the ayre, vpon the ground, vpon wodden or leaden tables? Yea he can dissem∣ble euen with the Sacrament. God himselfe; read your Gand Laterane Councell for this purpose. The deuill (God permitting) can doubtlesse for some Conc. Later. can. 20. wicked purpose flye the signe of the Crosse as affrighted therewith; which vtterly ouerthroweth Bellarmines re∣solution, who determineth that (ex instituto Dei, & ex ope∣re operato, signū crucis valet contra damonem) that the signe Bellarm: lib. 2. de Imag. cap 30. of the Crosse by the very institution of God, and as their
phrase is, ex opere operato, by the very force of the signe, is of Bellarmines eigthth Sacra∣ment. power against the Deuill to driue him away. The which, be∣sides that it is manifestly found not to be so by the Con∣iurers and Inchaunters; the same also bringeth in to the Bell: vbi supra §. Existimo. & §. Dices. Perhaps Reg∣lus his Asse wa taught this do∣ctrine of Bellar∣mine, for it made the signe of the Crosse with his foote against the De∣uill that would haue entered into him. Vinc. lib. 10. hist. cap. 29. Popish Church an eighth Sacrament (for here is Gods in∣stitution, a visible signe, a spirituall effect ex opere operato.) It is also against his owne resolution in this Chapter, where he affirmeth, that the signe of the Crosse hath not an infallible effect against the Deuill. Let this be numbred a∣mongst one of Bellarmines contradictions, and the for∣mer amongst his blasphemies. But admit wee grant that your Histories are true, and that Satans flight at the signe of the Crosse made by Iu∣lian was inforced; what if God for the confusion of that Apostata, and for the glory of the Crosse, which Iulian out of spight and hate of Christ despised, did put that terrour into Satan by the signe of the Crosse, that he was affrighted therewith? I thinke Sir there is no Orthodox Christian who will denie, but that God might doe it for such an end, and so Nazianzen is to be interpreted. Nay I tell you more Mr. Flud, the Church of England is no enemie to the signe of the Crosse, for shee commandeth the same religiously to be vsed in the administration of the sacrament of Baptisme, neither shall you finde any of the learned and Orthodoxe Diuines of the church of England to condemne the ancient Orthodox Christians vse of the Crosse in testimonie of Christ a∣gainst infidells, but your magicall abuses thereof. As, for that which you cite out of S. Chrysostome touching the bodie of Babilas Martyr, I answer for the Centurists as before; yet for my part I cannot but thinke, that as that learned Father relateth it, his silence was enforced. What hereout can you inferre? adoration of reliques? a notorious vanitie; O! you will argue à contrario thus; The Deuill was put to silence by the presence of the blessed Martyr Babylas his bodie, ergo we may adore and
worship his and all other relikes. Did S. Chrysostome make this inference? no Sir, he referred all the glory to Christ, for whose testimonie hee suffred, and so doe wee. But should wee according to your principles worship such creatures, napkins, shadowes and bodies, by which God is pleased sometimes to worke miracles, wee should be turned from the Creator to the creature wee should adore the Sunne and Moone, the Planets &c. the which how heynous a sinne it is, S. Paul will teach you in his Epistle to the Romanes. Ad Rom: cap. 1. I haue satisfied your reason; yet before I leaue you, I must tell you of one tricke of Lgerdemaine. You say that the Deuill vanished away at the name of Christ and signe of the Crosse &c. I thinke Sir, if you search into the Nazianz. orat: 1. in Iulia. historie, you shall not finde that Iulian did invocate or call vpon the name of Christ, when hee made the signe of the Crosse; but if you can so find it, your argument for the Crosse will be of lesse force; for my part I thinke no Orthodoxe Christian can deny, but that the name of Iesus and Christ, vsed faithfully and without any super∣stitious end or circumstance, is terrible to Satan, whatso∣euer some say to the contrarie. Mr. Flud pag. same, num. 30. But what neede I speake of particular miracles, in general of all the miracles done at there likes and by the intercession of Martyres, which were so many as Theodoret o writeth, their Lib 8. aduersus Gracos. Temples ouer the world, no lesse in the primitiue Church, then now, were full of tables and pictures of handes, feete, ies, heades, and other parts of the body, hung vp as tokens of mi∣raculous cures, obtained by the Martyres intercessions: These miracles Theodoret vrgeth against Infidells, whereof Saint Chrysostome saith Sententiae no∣strae abunde sidē faciunt quotidia∣na quae à ary∣ribus eduntur miracula. Lib. . contra Gentes. that the miracles done by Martyrs doe suffice abundantly, to witnesse the truth of Christianity.
ANSWER. Here M. Flood you flinch, for (qui agit in generalibus agit dolose) he who pleadeth in generalls pleadeth deceitfully: If you will speake adrem, you must vrge particulars, not onely the thinges themselues but most principally the end and circumstance of the miracles; to wit, that they were done for to confirme those questions which are now controuerted betwixt you and vs: No doubt, but See them. that both Theodoret and Chrysostome do relate miracles for the same end for which they were; to wit, for the proofe and confirmation of Christianitie; that is, faith in Iesus Christ and obedience to his lawes; not any immoderate ho∣nouring or superstitious inuocation of Saints, or adora∣tion of their relikes: that is your inference only &c. Do you thinke Sir, that the Church of England is so ignorant, as not to acknowledge that the infinite wise∣dome of God, is not tied to any of his creatures, but that he may worke miracles when hee shall please, and by whom, and what he shall please? Apud cum non est im∣possibile Luk. 1. 37. omne verbum; no word, no thing is impossible with him. It resteth you to prooue those miracles related by Theodoret (who I doubt not, ouer-reacht in some) and those expressely set downe by Chrysostome, were they expresly for this end, to proue adoration of reliques, and inuocation of Saints. What if you can prooue out of Theodoret that the miracles were done by intercession of Saints, not to Saints? (This I say if Theodoret be not corrupted) what will you inferre thereout? not your intended purpose; to binde the present Church to pra∣ctise the like, vnder iudgement of damnation. What Si, if miracles be done in any Church will you thereupon inferre, that all circumstances of the said mi∣racles, Churches par∣ticular haue erred. are to be admitted? that all rites, and customes, all lawes and doctrines, of such Churches, are to bee al∣lowed
and approued? beware what you doe. In the Iewish Synagogue, euen in Christs time, was there not a pond, at which by an ordinarie course admi∣rable Ioh. 5. cures were effected? will you thereout inferre that all rites, and worships vsed at the same season, in that Church were approueable, and allowed? you cannot doe it iustly. Againe, what say you now to the Greeke Church? especially, that of the Muscouites? wherein their Demy∣god Saint Nicholas worketh so many miracles? Will you deny them? you cannot, standing in your owne princi∣ples; will you thereupon haue all their rites, ceremo∣nies, decrees, and dogmaticall doctrines approued? be∣ware what you do: you cannot be so ignorant, as not to know, that the same Churches and Bishops thereof, in which these miracles are done, detest your Church of Rome and the Latine faith, euen as they detest the Deuill himselfe. Call to minde what miracles are recounted (with as great credit as any of yours) to haue beene done in the Greeke Church euen when she was at oddes with your Romane darling, and would by no meanes ac∣knowledge subiection to the same? Read Saint Luke and there you shall finde one doing Cap. 9. miracles in the name of Iesus; who, notwithstanding ad∣hered not to Iesus. Thinke of that which venerable Bede approuingly Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 25. relateth, when the Britons in the controuersie of Easter opposed against Augustine, the authoritie of their Father Columba; whose power was great in working miracles. Doth not Wilfrid reply to this effect, For as much as con∣cerneth your Father Columba, and his Disciples, whose holi∣nesse you professe to imitate, and to follow his rules and precepts, confirmed from God by wonders; I may answere thus; that at the last day, many who shall say vnto him, Lord haue we not Luc. 7. prophecied in thy name, and cast out Deuills and done many wonders? he shall say vnto them, depart from me yee worke
of iniquitie I know you not. By which it is euident in this The Councell of Cabilon. can. vlt. condem∣neth the cu∣stome of wo∣men singing in Churches apud Espenc. lib. 1. digress. cap. 11. perhaps your Battel-Presi∣dents in Sussex knew not this or regarded it not when they suffered a wan∣ton Lasse Mi∣stris S. to sing in their Quire. Hist. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 17. your Wilfrids iudgement, with Augustine, and Bede; that though miracles be done by any Church or Bishop, that thereupon may not bee inferred a iustifying of all such practises and customes as may be vsed and allowed in such a Church or congregation. God (sir) is able to distinguish the siluer from the drosse, & doth not alwaies for a small intermixtion of drosse reiect the siluer, but is pleased to passe by some errours for ends best knowne to his infinite wisedome. You cannot but haue heard, or read when a certaine Iew desired to bee baptized by a Nonatian Bishop, how presently vpon the instant of bap∣tizing, all the water vanished away: This was not done to confirme any iot of nouatianisme; but, whereas the Iew had beene baptized before, as was afterwardes known; God would not haue his Sacrament of baptisme, though ministred by an Heretike, to bee prophaned by damna∣ble iteration of the same. To proceed, I obserue those words of yours speaking of Martyrs, their temples ouer the whole world, no lesse in the primitiue Church then now, were full of tables, and pic∣tures of handes, feete, heads, eyes, and other parts of the bo∣dy, hung vp as tokens of miraculous cures. Pretermitting that this your fashion came, not by any imitation from the Iewish Church, but from the heathens; brought first Polydor. lib. 2. de Inuent. cap. 23. into Italie by Hercules, as Polydore relateth out of Ma∣crobius. I doe obserue two vanities in you: First, whereas you say that your Temples now are no lesse full of tablets &c. then those of the primitiue dayes, you haue committed a grosse er∣rour against your owne Church. For if you looke into the ancient Fathers cited by mee often in this treatise chap: 2. and 8. you shall finde that such an ouer-plus of miracles in temples in the last age, which is ours; is an euident argument of the Antichristian Sinagogue. Secondly, I obserue an other vanitie, when you glo∣rie
for the multitude of your tablets of hands &c. A most vaine shift of Antichrists Sinagogue! dare yo thus bragge in the presence and view of your Aduersa∣ries? doe wee not know sir, that whereas one (if any) waxen arme, hand, eye, foote, head &c. is hung vp in toke of some pretensed cure, that there are scores, nay hun∣dreths, which hang vp as oblations, and vowes for de∣sired cures, not obteined, but expected and hoped for? I conuent your conscience herein, whether this bee not true: The lying va∣nitie of Popish Tablets. yea it is most certaine, lippis & tonsoribus notissi. Which of your Pilgrimes, hauing himselfe, or any of his friends any disease, or infirmitie, doth not offer vp some one of those tablets! and do you vse to take them down if you heare not of their miraculous curing? your con∣science and all the world knoweth you doe not. What maruell then, you haue such multitude of tablets &c. Be it your priuiledge, among some prodigies you shall and must haue many lying wonders: And as Erasmus merily twitted your abuses, tell vs not onely of your cures, but also of your whole multitudes, which vowe and pilgrime it, without any good at all. About some 19. yeares since, I tooke ship at Genere in Italy, to passe to Alicant in Spaine; the ship was great, the number of Passengers about some 300. when wee came into the golfe of Marsiles, for some 7. or 8. nights together, through the extremitie of most tempestuous weather, we were in great danger to haue perished; but when the tempest was past, and a great calme expected, (which the Marriners presaged, by a light vaporous A pretty deuise of a Fryer. fire hanging about the toppe of the mast, and it did so happen) and that the third day after we were becalmed; A certaine Dominican Fryer a man of great credit in Spaine; conferred with the Captaine and cheife Passen∣gers of the ship about a vowe to be made for our safe ar∣riuall at Alicant. It was concluded by all, as with one Brother of Baldwine the Ignatian. voice (though my selfe thought it needlesse as I could
Master Baldwine who was then in my company) thus; that one by lot should be chosen to goe the pilgrimage vowed to the Lady of Mountserratto; and that to the charges thereof, euery one should contribute a portion as he should thinke meete, both for the expences of the Pilgrime, and for a great votary candle of waxe there to After the vowe made we wan∣dered vp and downe for di∣uers daies nei∣ther master nor marriner ges∣sing where we were. be offered: All was done, wherevpon after some seuen or eight daies further wandring vp and downe the gulfe, at last we light vpon a small creeke in the Iland of Maio∣rica, where our shippe was lodged for some sixe weekes: But my selfe, M. Baldwine, & diuerse others left the ship and on foote passed ouer the Iland to the Citie of Maio∣rica, where next morning we tooke bote for Peninsula in Spaine, where wee arriued the next day about three of the clocke in the afternoone; the ship remaining still with a creeke in her taile, but after some sixe weekes it arriued whether beaten and much wasted at Allicant. Thus was the manner of our vowe made wilily by the Fryer, when wee were past danger, thus was the manner of deliue∣rance by our vowe; and I doubt not but that as yet a great waxe candle as a monument of the same remaineth in the Ladies Chapple at Montserratto in Spaine; And this you may adde, M. Flud to make vp your number of tokens of miraculous and wonderfull deliueran∣ces. And here concluding, I tell you that if a Con∣gregation of your Cardinalls could resolue (Good newes for your order if it had beene accepted) to Pau∣lus the 3. that all houses of Conuentuall Monkes ought to haue beene dissolued, for abuses committed in them, then assuredly the Churches reformed haue done sin∣gularly well, in defacing your Tablets and pictures, the rotten remnants of most damnable impiety, consider∣ing what impious superstitions haue beene cloaked by them, and are yet where the light of the Gospell shineth not.
M. Flood pag. 148. num. 30. Of those miracles (I say) M. Robert Abbots Demonst. 1. de Ant: cap. 11. pag. 223. blusheth not to write, that the primitiue practise was superstitious, and those miracles the froth of the ancient Church, of which saith he, the Babilonian Venus was bred, that afterward brake foorth into all manner of abominable fornication: Thus they reiect the miracles by which Christianitie was bred in mens hearts, many Countreyes conuerted to Christ, the Church of God enlarged ouer the earth, which Church they must grant was a Venus, bred of some and froth. What writing is intem∣perate if this be sober? What can be blasphemie against the holy Ghost if this be not? To assigne the miracles, by which the world was made Christian, to the Deuill, making his some and froth the seede of Christianitie? ANSWER. For as much as concerneth your iniurious calumnia∣ting M. Abbots that learned Doctour, and now very Re∣uerend Bishop of Salisbury, I nothing doubt, but that hee will out of a Christian magnanimitie spernere se sperni. As for his saying, if it be arightly vnderstood, I cannot see but that it is warrantable: He doth not impeach any of the ancient autenticall miracles, for so much as they tend to the proofe of Christianitie, and glory of Christ; but in these respects, and circumstances, precisely and expressely; either first, for their doubtfullnesse and vn∣certainty; or secondly, because some immoderate zeale of the vulgar was intermixt therewith; or thirdly, for some in direct consequences, which were superstitiously August de ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 14. & 26. Espenc. de Chri∣st▪ mediatore cap. 12. inferred thereout: The Platonists indeed (as S. Ansten prooueth) gaue not onely a diuine worship to the one chiefe and supreme God, whom they professed to be the cause of all other things; but also they did acknowledge
vnder this God and from this God, certaine degrees of Creatures, which they did worship with a kinde of di∣uine worship; as those spirituall Creatures and Substan∣ces which we call Angells; and also the soules of such their worthies, as were departed from humane couersa∣tion and were assumpted into the number of their Gods. Now this Platonicall doctrine hauing ouer-spread those parts and prouinces where Christianitie first be∣gan; The vulgar and vnlearned of such as were conuer∣ted to Christianitie, by reason of their former inueterate customes (agreeing as they thought to truth and reason) were prone and inclinable, to giue a diuine kinde of ho∣nour, to such worthy Christians, as being departed out of this mortall life, by so glorious sufferings for the testi∣monie of Christ, were assumpted to the celestiall para∣dise of his Glorie; In which point if they were some∣what caried astray by humane affection, shall it be coun∣ted so heinous an offence to impute the same vnto them? we charge them not with any high point of su∣perstition, but of that which is termed by your glosse (quando traditioni humana religionis nomen applicatur) when Gloss. apud A∣quinat. 22 q. 93. art. 1. corp. the name of religion is giuē to humane tradition, as this their practise, & religious ouerwening of humane creatures, was grounded vpon mans tradition; and that such an ouer-diligence in worshipping of Creatures may be re∣puted superstition, I inferre out of your Angelicalls do∣ctrine Aquin. ibidem. thus. Alto modo potest contingere falsitas in exteriori, ex parte colentis &c. In another manner (saith he) falsitie (that is of religion) may happen in outward sort, from the part of him who worshippeth, and this especiallie in the com∣mon worship, which by the Ministers of the Church is exhi∣bited in the Person of the whole Church▪ for euen as he should be accounted a falsary, who should propose as from another, those things which were not committed vnto him; euen so, hee incurreth the vice of falsitie, or false dealing, who as on the Churches part, giueth worship to God, against the manner of
worship appointed of the Church, by diuine authoritie, and ac∣oustomed in the Church; whereupon Ambrose saith, he is vn∣worthy, who otherwise celebrateth the mysterie then as Christ dliuered; thus Aquinas: out of which discourse, I eui∣dently inferre, that all such manner of worship, is to be esteemed and reputed vicious in the Church, which is not commended to the Church, by diuine authoritie from Christ or his Apostles, as it is more then assured that this willworshippe of those Christians was not: as neither your Masse▪celebrating (to note this by the Let your masse be compared with Christs institution and there will bee found no shew of paritie be∣twixt them. way) is any whit agreeing with that which Chirst deli∣uered, and therefore therein both in your Aquinas and Saint Ambrose his iudgement, you doe very vn∣worthily. And why I pray you Sir, should you be so eager a∣gainst M. Abbots? or so nicely scrupulous as to be afraid to thinke, that any superstition might creepe into any of the ancient Churches? In this to presse you to the pur∣pose; what thinke you of that custome of the Ancients, who out of an opinion of necessitie to Saluation, did distribute vnto infants instantly as they were baptised Innoc. Epist. Decret. the Sacrament of the Eucharist? Did not Innocentius Pope the head of the Church, decree and command the same? did not Saint Austen approue it? yea this cu∣stome August. lib. 1. contra Iulia: lib. 1. de pccat. mr. & remis. cap. 20. Cipr. de lapsis. did so vniuersallie infect the whole Church that it is yet on foote amongst the Grecians. Secondly was it not a point of superstition (I argue to you) for the An∣cients, out of an opinion of necessitie, to distribute to the Laitie the Sacrament in both kinde? you now doe cen∣sure the same as hereticall superstition; therefore stan∣ding Both these cu∣stomes the Church of Rome doth now Anathe∣matize. within your principles in the Ancients it could be no lesse then superstitious folly out of their ignorance. Againe, the Ancients allowed and required the Laitie, receiuing the Sacrament of our Lords body, to take the same into their hands, but hee who should now require the same, should be reputed blasphemously irreligious,
or sacrilegious: you know that your Popes haue com∣manded, You may read in diuers cap. de consec. where your Laikes are inhibited out of feare of Gods heauy iudgment to touch Corpo∣ralls, Patines, &c. Authr: op: imperf. hem 49. cited by Aquin. 22. q. 98. art. 4. Contra. that no Lay person presume to touch your Patines and Chalices with their hands, much lesse the Lords bodie; Ergo the Ancient Church was irreligious in so vnreuerent handling and deliuering the Lords bo∣die, or else you are ouer superstitious in your needlesse, and will-curiositie. Againe, doth not the Author (operis imperfecti) vpon Mathew make mention, how certaine superstitious peo∣ple did carrie peeces of the Gospell about their necks, by the same hoping to be deliuered from dangers, this was tolerated in some priuate Churches. Further the Ancients, yea the Fathers of the second Nicene Councell, were in your opinion ouer superstiti∣ous, in that they durst not make nor suffer to be made the Pictures of God the Father, of the Deitie, or the bles∣sed Trinitie, yea as Auentine reporteth, your Boniface the Auent: lib. 7. hist. pag. 462. eight, did condemne to the fire as Anthropomorphites some for painting the Trinitie in the forme of an ould man, a young man; and a Doue. But you haue cast off that feare, for you haue hardly either Church or Chappell, in which some such pictures are not to bee seene and adored. Againe, did not S. Paul himselfe erre in your iudge∣ment, 1 Timoth: 5. 9. when he charged, that a Widdow should not be admitted, before shee were (60 annorum) threescore yeeres ould; and giueth a reason of his command, dan∣ger and perill of incontinencie; but your Church is so ouer-prudent aboue and against the Apostle, that shee not onely admits Widdowes, but she also receiueth girles, maides, yea corrupt ones also, after they haue passed fif∣teene yeeres of age, wherevpon follow those enormou impieties wherewith your Church is repleat euen to the astonishment of the heauens. Againe, you cannot but grant that a great part, yea the greatest part of your representatiue Church, to wit,
the Great Councells of Basill and Constance, did erre in their very dogmaticall decrees and decretorie processes; what Sir? might such assemblies so erre, and yet no small errour at least of materiall superstition creepe in∣to some of the Ancient Churches, before that generall Councells could be assembled, for the clearing and deci∣ding of doubts? Doth not our Sauiour in his seauen Epistles sent to the seauen Churches of Asia (by which as Antitypes, all Apoc: 2. & 3. future Churches are expressed, as both the ancient and moderne learned Expositors of the same doe affirme) fore signifie, the declinations of some particular Chur∣ches, which must make way for the generall apostacie and defection; and if, as S. Paul the Apostle affirmeth, 2 Thess. 2. the mysterie of iniquitte did worke in his times, what mar∣uaile if some ages after, some foame and frothe of su∣perstition might grow vpon some particular Churches, by reason of the many mutations, changes of Prelates, which then through persecution hapned? Which foame and froth might afterwards, as a superstitious sperme, breed your Babylonian Venus when the time of the gene∣rall apostacie was compleat. You proceed, and impeach that very learned Doctor, and our Church, that wee blasphemously impute to the Deuill those miracles, by which the world was made Christian. The blasphemie shall be yours Mr. Flud, ha∣uing forgotten that, which euery childe amongst vs knoweth, to wit, that the world was conuerted by the word of God powerfully preached; which word contey∣neth the doctrine and historie of our Sauiour Iesus. You leauing these fountaines of life, and seeking after dry cisterns of humane authoritie and fallible narrations, Eymeric. direct. Inquisit. 2. part. q. 9. Johannes de S. Auemaro his Gospell. what doe you else, then blaspheme? As Iohannes de Par∣ma brought in a new Euangile, called by your Predeces∣sours (Euangelium aeternum) the euerlasting Gospell, which was no other than Abbot Ioachims dreaming dotages; so
now Iohannes de S• Audemare, will tell vs of a new Euan∣gile, by which the world was conuerted; which is no o∣ther then a packe of humane inuentions (for most part) and fallible narrations cashired by many of their owne ingenuous and moderate Papists. CHAP. VII. Wherein is examined Mr. FLVDS fourth Reason. Mr. FLVD, pag. 148. num. 31. THE fourth reason is the impietie of this deuise, which I touched before. For this conceit doth much impaire both the loue of God in his seruants, and his feare in his enemies, seeing neither the one may expect from him miraculous helps, nor the other dread extraordinarie punishments: The Deuill only in this Age must rule the roste, and be thought the Au∣thor of all wonders. If God, when Heretikes blaspheme his Mother, and play with her nose, strike their tongues out of their heads, and their best noses from their faces, heresie tea∣cheth them to turne their hearts, that want tongues, and their faces without noses against heauen, and call the Authour of that miracle Deuill. So that if Atheists can keep themselues freinds with the Deuill, they need not by this doctrine greatly feare Gods miraculous power. ANSWER. In this reasonlesse reason, Mr. Flud taxeth our Church with impietie, for attributing the prodigies of their Synagogue to Satan. who would thinke then that this Sophy in this his reason should incurre grosse impie∣ties? His proofe that we commit impietie, hee frameth thus; Because our imputing their prodigies to Satan
doth impaire Gods loue in his seruants, and feare in his enemies; doth make his prouidence to be defectiue, hat neither one may expect miraculous helps, nor the other dread extraordinarie punishments; this is the substance of his triuiall proofe: which ended, hee runnes round and round about with his elegant skirmishes, hurting not so much as any mans nose, but shewing the idlenesse of his owne heart in so triuiall a pen. He obiects impietie to vs, but I aduise him to looke vnto it that his proofes against vs fall not out to be blas∣phemous impieties. for First, is it not a point of high tempting impietie, to binde the hands of God to the ordinarie acting of mira∣culous Mr Flods first point of blas∣phemie. helps, and sending extraordinarie punishments; or else his prouidence must be thought defectiue, and the loue or feare of his seruants impaired? I thinke Sir, the holy Scriptures, which are (ratio omnis veritatis) the ground of all truth; and the Ancient Fathers doe teach it to be a point of tempting infidelitie, for any man to expect, as a necessarie office of Gods prouidence, mira∣culous helps or punishments? What was the Israelites Exod 32. sinne in the desert? was it not a murmuring for Gods ordinarie prouidence towards them, wherewith they were not contented, and their earnest crauing and expe∣cting some miraculous helps? which their crauing and expecting, the holy Scriptures terme lust and concupis∣cence, but your Ignatian Diuinitie, Christian loue. This their lustfull desire God did heare, and granted their re∣quests, hee sent them water out of the rock, Quailes in great plenty; but what followed, (dum adhuc escae.) whi∣lest the meat was in their mouthes, the wrath of God fell vpon them, and the cheife of them were consumed: so is GOD pleased with such as are eager after miraculous helps. Those blessed Martyrs of God cast into the fiery for∣nace, were not acquainted with your Ignatian Diuinitie, Dan: 3. 16. 17. but the Tyrant was, who iumping in your doctrine, said
thus, Who is God, that shall be able to deliuer you out of my hands? But those blessed seruants replyed not saying, we As we are to pray that wee be not led into temptation, so the sin of Achas and others may teach vs that we ought not to tempt God. Isa. 7. It is the deuills Diuinitie to tempt God. Matth: 4. must expect some miraculous deliuerance from our God, or else his prouidence is defectiue, and our loue will bee impaired towards him; but thus, (Non oportet nos &c.) We may not answer thee in this point, Behold our God whom we worship is able to deliuer vs out of the fornace of fire, and out of thy hands O King, but if he will not, be it knowne to thee, O King, that wee worship not thy Gods, neither doe wee adore the Golden Statue thou hast erected. Doth this their answer sort with your Diuinitie? no God wot. Many like instances out of holy writ might be produced, but I am more then assured that you cannot iustly produce the example of any one Saint, who would haue thoght Gods prouidence defectiue, or that his loue to God ought iustly to be impaired, if in time and occasion of great dangers, God should not send him some mira∣culous helpe. I goe on with your impieties. Secondly, is it not a point of impietie, for a sinfull Second blas∣phemie of M. Flod. wretch to reproue that manner of prouidence, which God hath prescribed for himselfe toward, his Church, after the planting of the same? Now if we aske the An∣cient Fathers, and the Scriptures, they will tell vs that after the planting of the Church, and establishing the Gospell (which I hope is accomplished before these times) the ordinarie vse of miracles should cease. Heare August. de ver Relig. cap. 25. Gregor. hom 29. in Euang. Chrysost. Alij. S. Austen for this purpose most excellently; Since the Catholike Church hath been diffused ouer the whole world, neither are those miraculous things, permitted to endure vn∣till our times, lest the mind should alwaies seeke visible things, & by the custome of them, mankind should waxe cold, at the new appearance whereof, it was all on fire. thus he So that you Mr. Flud, requiring miracles now in these times as necessarie (to auoyde defect in Gods prouidence) to conserue loue & feare in mens hearts, seem to be one of those prodigious ones, which S. Austen twitteth, who will
not beleeue, credente mundo, the whole world beleeuing. Like Lib. 22. de Ciuit. 8. to what I haue cited out of S. Austen, you may finde in Gregorie, Chrysostome, Aquinas, others. yea your Bellar de notis Eccls cap. 14. Nota 11. Bellar∣mne Gregor. apud Pter in 2. ad Thessal. 2 & lib. 27 moral. 11. laying his cheifest foundation for his Note of his Church by miracles, affirmeth thus directly, Miracula sunt necessaria ad nouam fidem vel extraordinari am missionē persuadendam. Miracles are necessarie to perswade a new faith, or an extraordinarie Mission. If this Bellarmiian foundation be true, take you heed jest your ouer eager contention for your miracles, put this perswasion in your Readers minde, that you perswade necessitie of mira∣cle, because your Faith is new and your Mission extra∣ordinarie, out of order. Which conceit (I ingenuously confesse) the very reading of this your reason at first glimpse did put into my minde, hilest I was yours, and wholly yours in my ignorance. Thirdly, is it not a point of highest impietie, to giue by so pretended an occasion inducements for Christians Mr. Fluds hird blasphemie. to fall into despaire euen then, whenas most speciall cō∣forts shall be most needful? Now that this your doctrine Temptation tryeth and exa∣mine h Chri∣stian Bsil hom.  annos Call to minde th practise of Dad in the de. Joh vpon th dunghill. Iosh in prison. Duid, Jeremi, Isy, &c. none of, them chal∣lenged as a ne∣cessrie point of Gods helpe miraculous de∣liuerances. Apoc. 13. 10. so doth, I make it thus manifest. This your doctrine doth require, yea challenge from God, if hee will not have his prouidence reputed defectiue, then to send greatest miraculous deliuerances to his friends, and se∣ueest extraordinarie punishments to his enemies, in the time of Antichrist, and euen when he shall be in his grea∣test ruffe Whereas the holy Scriptures in that time doe especially require from the seruants of Christ (fidem & patintiam) faith and patience. Hic est fides &c. Here (saith the booke of Reuelation pointing at the dayes of Antichrist) is the faith and patience of the Saints, that is, in these times, their faith and patience is tryed and exer∣cised. Here they must not glory in the faith of miracles, but in the faith of expectation and hope. Here they must not looke for present miraculous helps, but with patience beare whatsoeuer that cruell Tyrant shall im∣pose
vpon them. Doth not Gregorie the Great say, that Greg: lib. 32. Mor. cap 12. re∣lated appro∣uingly by Bell: lib. 3 de Pont. cap. 15. in those times etiam tortores ipsorum Sanctorum Martyrū tunc prodigia & signa facturos. Yea (saith he) the executi∣oners and tormenters of the holy Martyrs shall doe prodigies and signes. How? euen in the very sight and presence of the tormented. But we stand not vpon Gregories au∣thoritie, but we produce vnto you, that of our Sauiour himselfe, that in the daies of Antichrist, the false Pro∣phets Math: 24. shall doe so many signes and wonders, that if it were pos∣sible the very elect (that is, all the elect, both learned and vnlearned, high and low, simple and prudent) should be in danger to be seduced and drawne away by them. We pro∣duce that of the Apostle, that the comming of Antichrist 2 Thessal: 2. shall be with all power, and signes, and lying wonders. We point you to the Reuelation, where Antichrist and his Apoc: 13. 12. 13. 14. false Prophets, are described to doe so many signes, prodi∣gies and wonders, that thereby the whole earth shall admire after the beast &c. This being the case of those times ac∣cording to the tenent of sacred Scripures, and ioynt consent of Ancient Fathers, how blasphemous is Mr. Fluds Diuinitie to perswade Christians in the time of Antichrists ruffe (before hi destruction by the breath of Christs mouth) to looke for many miraculous helps and deliuerances? Yea, how blaspherrous is his impure Mr. Flods 4. blasphemie. mouth, who as it were in expresse termes to confront a∣gainst Christ, yea and to giue &c. to the sacred Scrip∣tures, he dareth thus to write, that Antichrist and his, Flud pag. 152. num: 30. shall doe no other then a few toyes, and trifles which God shall permit him to doe to try the constancie of his faithfull. And so let this be your fifth blasphemie (that so you may haue aboue a messe in the first seruice) to wit, that Mr. Fld fifth blasphemie. for so much as lyeth in you, you make way for Anti∣christ, and are one of his Iohn Precursors. For what doe you else then make way for Antichrist, by taking away one of his cheifest markes and Characters, by which hee is to bee knowne according to the expresse tenent of
Scriptures, and sense of all the Ancient Church? And if the true Christians should (when Antichrist shall bee in his glory) haue power to oppose miracle against mi∣racle, so that for number and greatnesse of miracles they might contend with Antichrist, and his false Prophets, as Moses did with the Egiptian Magicians: if this shall Exod: 7. & 8. be so Sir, then I beseech you what great danger should the Elect be in, to be seduced by his signes, prodigies and lying wonders? in as much danger surely as Moses and the Israelites were, when his Serpent deuoured the Ser∣pents of the Magicians; or when he did such prodigies, that the very Magicians themselues confessed the finger of God to be with Moses against them. But leauing these impietie, iustly retoted vpon your owne Father∣hood, let vs trace you in your elegant footsteps. How idle is that you adde, that if this be so, then the Deuill shall rule all the rost: Not so good Sir, for al∣though S. Paul say, Antichrists comming shall be in omni 2 Thessal: 2. potentia, in all power, his meaning is not, that God shall leaue to haue a carefull prouidence ouer his Elect. He granted and permitted power to Satan ouer and against Iob. Hee graunted to Antiochus, ouer and against the Church of the Iewes; yet the Deuill did not rule the roste in those times. Thinke of those, and take them for resemblances of the powerfull times of Antichrist; who was powerfully, and aboue measure to vexe the bodies of Gods seruants; but God shall so inwardly illustrate with faith and patience, the hearts of his said seruants, that they shall not be daunted with all the fiery darts of Antichrist, & his. Non collidentur quia Dominus supponit manum, they shall not be broken for God will beare them vp. To proceed. It may seeme lost labour to answer your brauing eloquence, when you go on thus; If God when Heretikes blaspheme his mother &c. If you vnderstand Sir, that the Reformed Churches doe approue any to blaspheme the euer-blessed Virgin Marie, the mother of
our Lord Iesus, your calumniation is most impudent: for my part I know none such, should I know them I would execate their communion; and (to confesse in∣genuously the inward of my Soule) I little regard any of The most ho∣ly Mother of Christ alwaies to be blessed by vs and all Generations. those fonde Disciplinarians, who speake coldly of her, or of her due blessed praises. Sir, you may vnderstand, that the Orthodoxe of the Church of England, doe with honourable remembrance make mention of her in their publike assemblies, as desirous to be accounted children of those generations, which (according to her owne glorious prophecie) were to call her Blessed. We adore Luc. 1. 48. Epiph. heres. 79. contra Collirid. only (to speake with ancient Epiphanius) the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, est tamen in honore apud nos Maria, Not∣withstanding Mary is in honour with vs. We are not igno∣rant that it is (maximum scelus honorè Creatoris impendere Creaturae) the greatest wickednesse, to giue the honour of the Creatour to the Creature: wee therefore dare not adore her with diuine worship, neither dare wee associate her as a secondarie Mediatrisse with her sonne, in the worke of our redemption; but wee place and honour her as a∣mongst the redeemed ones: amongst them; and aboue all them calling her blessed, for those great things, which the Lord respecting her lowlinesse or humilitie hath done vnto her; and for this both the lippes and heart of my house shall euer call her blessed. But if you make vs to blaspheme the mother of Christ, because we permit, yea allow, yea in some cases com∣mand, the wooden Images or statues of her which you set vp and abominably adore, to be defaced, and remou∣ed; we cannot but maruell at your impudency. Do not you rather blaspheme, who after the corporall assumption of her, beleeued in your Church, doe yet Iuno or Pallas-like furnish her with many wodden noses vpon earth? and those so furious ones as she doth strike out and off, both tongues and noses of those, who dare but play with them: What is blasphemie if this bee not? What is religion if
our defacing of such idolatrous puppets be not? Sir, wee deny not, but that the blessed Virgin Maries pictures may according to the truth of historie bee drawne and kept with a ciuill due respect and vse, but such as are ado∣red by you we reiect as Idolls, and wee deface them, as being subiects whereon the mightie maiestie of God is blasphemed, and the reuerence of his mother dishono∣red. Durst your Adrian Pope command, that your sa∣crament-god, Adrian. quod∣libet. 3. pag. 63. should be rather cast into the priuie then suffered to fall into the hands of Heretikes who would abuse the God; why then, may not lawfull authoritie command such Statues or Images to bee defaced or re∣mooued, by which the infinite maiestie of God is blas∣phemed, and the reuerence of his blessed mother disho∣nored? You sir, that are so grand a Theologue, and dare grauely in writing cal the wooden noses of Schem, Hall, &c. the noses of the euer blessea Virgin, looke you to your blasphemie, for what you speake so grauely, your blinde Obedients beleeue grossely, to wit, that the euer blessed Virgin Monster-like hath many noses, one at Sichem, another at Hall &c. but leauing you to the meditation and adoration of them; for your paynes in this your discourse, we will leaue you the nose of Iohn Swickius & Risselman his tongue (if you can tell where they are) as fit to make reikes of as many, which you worshippe and adore. But if Swickius had his nose whift off and Risselman his tongue stroke out, what else may we therein obserue, but first, Gods iust iudgement in suffering you to be de∣luded by some miracles and signes of the beast? Second∣ly, to haue the faith of his seruants to be tried? and also I fit M. Floods tale with mo∣ther out of Spec. verbo Ima¦go ex 7 when two Souldiers were strangly punished for casting a none at an Image and striking of Christs arme, at which blowe bloud emaned and the virgins picture puld it selfe in peeces and rent her stony garments for horrour of the fact. Vinc. Bellnac. lib. 7. cap. 110. Motiues pag 79 Gregor. 3. lib. ep 30. such wicked laddes as you describe those to haue beene, to haue their iust guerdon and reward, not so much for their blasphemie as for their other sinnes; And yet for my part I cannot but thinke, that those lewd Souldiers did exceede in their sacrilegious insultations (as being
perhaps indud with some disciplinarian Spirit) euen a∣gainst the Person of the blessed virgin her selfe. Howso∣euer it happened it maketh nothing for you against vs, we do not allow any so to doe in your Churches, and kingdomes where such idolatrie by authority is allow∣ed and commanded. But shew vs M. Flood, where any one of our Churche remouing & defacing your Idol's, by the command of authoritie hath susteined any hurt? so much as a fingers ach; but I put you in minde in my Motiues, how it fared with some of your Worke-men at Dowy who being appointed to trimme vp and remoue a cetaine Statue &c. were very strangely smit from hea∣uen? tormenta paucorum exempla sint omnium. Yea anci∣ent Gregorie relateth, how prodigiouslie some were pu∣nished with death, who being by papall authoritie com∣manded, digged vp bones of Saints (which slept in rest) that they might be worshipped with your superstitious manner of translation and adoring. M. Flood pag. 149. num. 31. Our Aduersaries themselues, namely M. Chrashaw Iesuits Ghos∣pell. doe confesse, that such is the Athcisme and prophanesse of men, that neuer since the planting of the Gospell miracles were more needfull, might they be expected Why may they not be expe∣cted if they bee so needefull? Is Gods power or his loue lesse to mankinde since Luthers preaching? If his prouidence neuer faileth his children in so weightie affaire as marriage, as the same M. Crashaw Life of Gale∣acius cap. 21. saith, why should they thinke, the same defectine in working miracles, so necessary to maintaine his re∣ligion, against prophanesse? why should God be bound, vnder paine of being thought Antichrist, not to worke miracles?
ANSWER. What M. Crashaw may write in this particular wee cannot but approue, seeing that it is agreeing to that pro∣pheticall saying of our Sauiour speaking of the later times which are these; That charitie should waxe cold, ini∣quitie Math. 24. 12. Luc. 18. 8. abound, and faith should be so scarse that the Sonne of man comming should hardly find any vpon earth: Whereout, although human reason would inferre as you do concer∣ning miracles, yet seeing it hath not pleased his infinite Wisedome so to determine, we wretched wormes who are not of his Councell, dare not presume to thinke to the contrarie. We leaue that to your presumptuous Red∣hats and their Grandsire, who not content to bee of the Lords-councell will challenge to haue vpon earth the same Consistorie with him, yea and by dispensings, additi∣tions and diminutions to amend what in his Lawes may be thought defectiue and amisse. And if you looke backe into former ages you shall finde, how not long after the planting of the Gospell, the whole Christian world was most extreamely corrupt, as Saint Ciprian, Saluianus, and Eusebius do deliuer. And Cipria. lib. de lapsis, Saluian. lib. de prouid. Euseb. hist. lib 8. cap. 1. yet the Fathers of those times did not expect, that God by extraordinarie miraculous punishments, should re∣forme the same: They iudge rather how God (celests censura iacentem fidem, & pene dormientem er exit) by a heauenly censure, did awake the faith lulled and almost asleepe; which heauenly censure they interpret to bee those tragicall Ciprian. persecutions, which Diocletian, Decius, and others rai∣sed in the Church. Againe, when at aftertimes in your Church, the same was welny ouerwhelmed with mon∣struos impieties, did God send miraculous helpes, pro∣digies &c. no, he sent amongst you the Spirit of schisme, and diuision, as the many schismes in your Church can witnesse: He sent amongst you, the Barbarian sworde,
which well-ny deuoured you: He sent among you, a dreadfull Spirit of dissension, betwixt Popes, and Em∣perours; Papalls, and Imperialls; Guelphes and Gibelines; Sinod, and Sinod; Councells, and Councells; so hee tamed your impieties. And surely, if prodigies and punish∣ments may be thought necessarie, where may they bee thought more needfully to fall then vpon your Papall Caucasus and purpured Olimpus? The scarlet Fathers whereof, doe so exceede in those sinnes, which crie ven∣geance from heauen, that no tong can be able to expresse them: which one of your great Clerkes and learned Cardinalls seriously considering brake foorth into that dreadfull speach, that the Church was come to that Your learned Nonus homo describeth well the present State of the Papacie. passe, that it seemed worthy to bee ruled only by Reprobates. The like sayings full of dread I haue heard from others, lamenting, the most lamentable condition of the Ro∣mane Hellen. Sir, if you will consider how your man of sinne, hath beene the cheifest source and cause, from whom all tra∣gicall calamities haue light vpon the Church, you might easily iudge, that if Gods prouidence doe require extra∣ordinary miraculous punishments for the reuenging of sinne, they should be thought worthily to begin from the heads of your house. What hath diuided the East Churches from the west? the South from the West? but that most ambitious su∣premacie of your Popes, and the necessarie dependency from them? Who is that wicked (Paterfamilias) Master of the Fa∣milie. Luc. 12. 45. whereof our Sauiour speaketh and threatneth to Rmes ambiti∣ous corrupti∣ons. put his portion with the Hypocrites, but your holy Fa∣ther of Rome who for the establishing of his dictates like a Iouian Dictatour, hath smitten with his thunderboult of excommunications and Anathemes, at one time or other most of the Orthodoxe Churches of the world? Who but your holy Father, hath ruinated the Em∣pires
both of East and West? and insteed thereof, hath reared an effeminate Papacie? By his meanes haue the MENARDVS Prince of Tirol was wont to call the Popes, effeminate An¦tichrists and prodigious Eu∣nuchs. Auent. lib. 7. bist Bior: pag. 444. proud Solimans entred into the East Empire; yea and your Holies deuiding of the west Empire, hath made way for the said Turkes to ruinate Hungarie, Transiluania, and to plucke the feathers off from the German Eagle. What is he, who hath set Christian Princes so together that they haue not been able to withstand the common enemie? and who is hee who yet shall bee Authour of greater commotions, by which the Tyrant of the East (if God defend not) shall haue a gappe made him to ouer-runne the remainder of Christendome? Is not this he, your Pope? Oh that Christian Princes, would open their eyes! O that they would brandish their swordes, to abate the Pride of this Capitoline Ioue, and bring him into order! This and no other is the last of the Romane Bell. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 15. This agreeth to that of Saint Ambrose Anti∣christ shall re∣store the Ro¦mane libertie vnder his owne name Ambros. in epist. ad Thes. Emperours; Heare how Bellarmine to his owne confusi∣on hitteth the marke; Erit Antichristus supremum & vlti∣mum caput Impiorum, & est vltimus Rex qui imperium Ro∣manum tenebit tamen sine nomine Imperatoris; Antichrist shalbe the cheifest and last head of the impious, hee is the last King who shall hold the Romane Empire but without the name of Emperour. Thus he most truely; but of this elsewhere. Happy, yea thrice-happy then are such Prin∣ces into whose hearts God shall put to make this whore desolate, and to consume her flesh with fire; For till shee be ruinated, the mysterie of iniquitie will be still on foote, and thereby consequently an infinitie of all manner of miseries will ouerwhelme the Christian world. Againe, who but your Pope hath cut in sunder the very heart strings of the Church? who hath ruinated the Prelacies and Clergies? Surely his diuiding of Bi∣shoprickes, Archbishoprickes; his granting commendaes; his desolating of Parish churches; his impropriating & appropriating of Churches tithes: what hath it wrought, but the ruine of the Church in very many? and this hee
did, to cherish the locusts of Monkes, Fryers, and Nunnes, fit manciples for his owne turne. It is imputed to King How pernici∣ous to the Church Popes haue been aske Pelagius in Planct. lib. 2. Henry the 8. the granting of Parsonages and impropria∣tions to the Laity; it cannot be denied but hee did so; but who led him the dance? who else but your Holy∣one who had taken before from the ordinary Pastors and Curates, the principall Tithes bestowing the same vpon his Abbey-locusts; and had reserued the other for such as did attend the Cure; but it was not so ab initio; it was brought in by the man of sinne, and is now held on foot by men of sinne, who sacrilegiouslie keep the Churches tithes to the eternall perdition of their owne Soules, and the ruine of their Posteritie; my heartie prayer shall euer be, that such impropriations may be to the vniust vsurpers of them, as thornes in their sides to compell them to restitution, or else as cankers in their wealths to consume the same. There are M. Flood wellny innumerable other instan∣ces, by which the Atheisticall impieties of your Popes and Romanists might be discouered; and yet God hath Bellarmine said of him that sine penitentia descendit in in∣fernum: he dy∣ing without repentance went into hell: such is the end of all their sons of perdition: I defend not Sixtus yet I durst to vnder∣take to shew that all things considered hee was better then a hundreth of other their Popes. not often auenged them by miraculous punishments; you can easily call to minde what manner of prodigy was in the iudgement of your Ignatian Society that holy one Sixtus the 5. but I pretermit to speake of him; or those prodigious impieties, which your society obiects against him; by that which I haue said the iudicious Reader may obserue, how idle that inference of yours is, when you thus write; Is Gods power or his loue lesse to∣wardes mankinde since Luthers preaching? this your (is) is so idle, that it is fit for you to put againe vp into your budget and rescrue it for your blinde Obedients at Saint Omers. I say before that God had not often nor ordi∣narily auenged your holy Sires impieties, yet it cannot be denied, but that God hath sometimes auenged them with his furious rodde. I could out of your owne Au∣thours, put you in minde of disastrous ends of some of
your Popes your Bonifacies, your Beneaicts, your Sil∣uesiers, Gnebra. Plat. Baron. Anastasies, Iulies, Alexanders, Sabinian, Iohns, Paules, and your Gregories and  famous Peter Aleisius sonne of Paul the 3. was met withall. What thinke you of that prodigie from heauen which Glaber relateth thus in effect; one Fulco an Earle of Glaber. lib. 2. hist cap. 4. The temple of S. Idoc with the sacred things in it were quite burnt Aunt. lib 7 hist. pg. 495. Gaunt, had built a Church, for the sacring of which there must be sent (belike no Bishop of France was holy inough) a speciall Legate àlatere from your Pope Iohn of that time: what followed? he came, hee consecrated the same; which done instantly (the day hauing beene very faire and bright-shining before) there arose such a tempest, as though heauen and earth would haue rent in sunder by which your new sacred Churche was ouer∣turned, and by the Deuills ministery execrated, defaced. Call to minde, what prodigious punishments hap∣pened Gregor epist 30. lib. 3 mentio∣ned aboue. You cannot but haue heard how a late Pa∣pist Monarch was consumed to death with lyce, a iust gur∣don either for his uury, or his ury against Gods Saints you know whom I mean a Grand friend of yours and the tale is true. to those who by commande of your Popes and Prelates did dig about the body of S, Laurence; as like∣wise to those, who out of superstitious purpose, did dig about some Saints bodies in Saint Paules Church; with∣out the Citie of Rome; felt they not Gods reuengfull hand, smiting them with suddaine death? Thinke of that iudgement, which happened to the workemen at Doway when vpon command they were to remoue one of our Dioses made of stone, I haue related the same in my Motiues. And concerning the endes of some of your late Cheeftaines, I thinke you shall not haue any cause to re∣ioyce either in Allens end, Parsons, Sanders, Garnets, or Holts; with some other such like; but inough of this kinde. And so here I would end with a scorne to all the rest which followeth in this diuision sauing that you prouoke me iustly by your gybing at Master Crashaw for affirming truely that God is neuer wanting to his seruants in the affaire of marriage; and further by your reproachfull scorning, that famous Galeacius, for his
keeping of two maide seruants in his house, for his daily attendance, whereof you affirme, that it is one of the greatest miracles, which our Gospell did euer beget, that Ga∣leacius should keepe such flaxe in his house, and conuerse so many yeares together domestically with them, and yet abstaine from scorching of them. Wherein I first taxe that your rash iudgement, you hauing forgotten that of our Sa∣uiour, Nelite iudicare & non iudicabimini &c. Iudge not Matth: 7. 1. and yee shall not be iudged. This your headlong censure, putteth me in minde of as wicked a one, which yee vsed against that most Reuerend man and Martyr of God, Bishop Craumer, as if he should haue poysoned himself, and this you say to take away credit from a very credi∣ble Triumph pag. 14. num. 22. Fox his Acts and Monum: relation, which is that your cruell fire, could not burne the heart of that blessed man, when it was cast into the same. A like you calumniate, when you make Mr. Mason a Fulsarie, as though hee had cited some vnautentike re∣cords touching the Ordinations of the Bishops of the Church of England; but Mr. Flud I may tell you, that formy satisfaction when I came to the Church of Eng∣land, I saw them by the appointment of the Lord of Canterburie his Grace in Mr. Costines office neere the D. Commons. Where also of late, certaine of your Priests of the Clinke, did diligently view, pervse and consider the same, that so for the time to come, you may (if it please you with your Mr. Fitzherbert, D: Smith, & some others) leaue to harpe any longer of that lying stringe, as though there were no true ordination in the Church of England. I dare boldly make profer, to en∣ter into dispute with you or any of your side, and vn∣dertake The Ordina∣tion of Bishops in the Church of England more Ortho∣doxe then that of the Popes. to shew that the Ordination vsed in the Church of England is more Orthodoxe and sound, then the Or∣dination of your Popes themselues in your Roman See is, or hath been of later times; and yet neither will I, nor can I denie but that there is in your Church true Or∣dination
and Priesthood, howsoeuer most egregiously in∣fected with your superstitions. But not to adde more of this; seeing you idly tell vs of so great a miracle done in our Church in the person of Galeacius, giue me leaue to tell you truly and to purpose, of some such kinde of miracles done in your Church which you would fasten so willingly vpon vs. You inforce vs Mr. Flud to disco∣uer some of your miracles. Are there not great mira∣cles begotten by your Ignatian Gospell here in England, that your Priests with iolly Dames should be shut vp in secret places, (I meane such places as your Priests are The Ignatians and their Fa∣uourites for∣beare not in particulars and by name to personate, though falsly. We therefore are to be excu¦sed if contey∣ning our selues in generalls, do not nominate any in particu∣lar. hid in, whilest the Messenger is searching your houses) and yet there should be no burning, nor scorching of such flaxe? Is it not a great miracle, that your Priests should sit in secret chambers hearing the Confessions of their female Penitents, and yet all be well, no flaxe scor∣ched? Is it not a great miracle, that Priests should whi∣lest their faire Females are confessing vpon their knees, behold, looke, meditate, feele with their hands their faire necks; stroke their vermilion cheekes of such their Penitents, should take their hands into theirs and daily with them, and yet be no scorching or burning of such flaxe? Is it not a miracle, that some of your deuoted Priests, should desire to behold the length, thicknes &c. of some of their fine Dames feete, and leggs, and yet there be no scorching? Is it not a miracle that your Priests should stand nigh to the bedds of their Ghost∣ly Popish mira∣cles in M Flods phrase. children, and &c. and yet there bee no scorching? Is it not a miracle, that a Priest of yours should (others also intend it) in the time of a search, runne into the bed where one of your faire Females lay, so to auoyde the search, and yet there be no scorching fire and flaxe being so neere together? Is it not a miracle that some very chiefe Ignatians and Ignatianed amongst you, should of∣ten doe and speake things very vnseemely, and yet they neuer scorch nor burne any of that flane wherewith
they are daily conuersant? I could goe on with many like demaunds; but concluding all in one, Is it not a mi∣racle, that so many of your Priests, Ignatians and Monks feeding here in England daintily, arrayed gallantly, lod∣ging softly, should bee very domestically and priuily conuersant with Ladies, Dames, Matrones, Maids of all sorts, and yet none of all these be scorched? Surely it is a grand miracle, so accounted of by Allen, Parsons, Cres∣well and others, whom I haue heard glory of the miracu∣lous chastitie of their Priests, attributing the miracle to the bloud of Christ, whereof they daily drinke, which is (say they) (Vinum germinans Virgines) wine breeding Vir∣gins. Zach: 9. 17. But I dare confidently affirme, both by what I know, and by what I haue most credibly heard, that there are many of these wine virgins, who doe often more or lesse, doe, say, speake and moue vnseemly mat∣ters. I appeale to their consciences, whether this that I say to their charge be not true. Thus in a litle you haue heard of your English Mar∣tyrs chastities, but should I passe ouer into your hotter Climates, in steed of miracles we should haue prodigies. What? can you denie but that it is a prodigie, that those Religious once should not scorch any, who at Naples, Millayne, Ʋenice, yea Rome doe sometimes, not without Tramontane prodigies in M. Flods phrase. conniuencie of their Superiours, (who had rather they should doe so then within their Cloysters burne in abo∣minable Sodomie, whereto they are most prone) leaue their habits, and search after home or prostituted Cour∣tisans, with them to satisfie their lusts, and so returne to their Arkes againe? Perhaps you will answer, these scorch not but rather returne scorched, whereby they set on fire nefando igne, the greatest part of the new growne flane of their owne cloysters and houses; be it so, for so it is. Is it not a prodigie, that in your English Colledges both in Spaine and Italie there should hee such staines
Criminis possimi? it is rather a prodigie that at Dowaye where Commons are so short, there should be scorching A greater miracle that at Rhemes in the prime planting of your Seminarie there should haue beene any scor∣ching: was there none? Ah miracle of the Ignatian Chastitie? It was not a prodigie in Italie in Romulus his Citie, whenas within lesse then these two decades of yeeres, a dozen and vpwards of faire boyes were found guilty Criminis pessimi: but with whom? (oh Miralce) with the purpured Red-hatts. Some two of the boyes, if I misremember not, suffred for their sins and for the sins of the Fathers, but the Purpured ones escaped. Con∣cerning whom, a certaine Father Confessarie, (who inge∣nuously and very dexterously found by confession of the youthes who were their Abusers) spake thus boldly to the Pope (seeming desirous to reforme so abomina∣ble abuse) Padre Santo, é bisogna di cóminciare da casa vo∣stra. Holy Father, it is needfull to begin with your owne house. Which answer vpon further declaration of the mysterie so daunted his Holinesse, that therevpon his tongue was mute from further inueighing against the same, and his hands bound from doing further iustice, and so some of the delinquent boyes were not further looked into, but escaped. Oh Mr. Flud, should I adde further to speake of the innumerable Brothell-houses, which you haue in the middest of your Cities in Rome, Ʋenice, Naples, Millaine, Auenion, &c? If I should adde how your Scarlet-Ones, your Bishops, Mountsegniours, do caroche vp and downe in the open streets and to their Vineyards the Paradises of their pleasures, I should put the Reader to crie out aloude, Miracle vpon miracle, Prodigie vpon prodigie. These, these are those where∣of the blessed Apostle speaketh, Maculae conuinantes Epist: Iudae 11. sine timore, Spotts feasting without feare. And would God they would content themselues with naturall courses,
and not fall without feare into those damnable and vn∣naturall abuses, whereof the Apostle writeth so dread∣fully Epist: ad Rom: cap. 1. 26. 27. in the first to the Romanes. Could your Roma∣nists obiect any like matters against any of the late Re∣formers of the Church of England, would they be si∣lent? No God wot; and therefore they idly twitt vs with this imputation, that some Monkes, Fryers, Priests, Nunnes, who come from their deformed Synagogue do betake themselues to the honourable state of Wedlocke, de∣spising those idle vowes of theirs, which they made in the time of their incredulitie and ignorance. This is the greatest bullbegger they seeme to obiect against such Conuerts as come from them; concerning which the Reader may obserue hereafter in this my discourse, how This handled fully in my eight Chapter. iustifiable and laudable both in the sight of God and men this their cariage is. And here at the ending of this discourse, I craue par∣don of the Reader for that I haue (though in termes modest) discouered some little of their Sodomiticall filth. We are thereunto iustly prouoked by the impu∣dencie of some of them, who sticke not euen by name to traduce and calumniate some worthies of the refor∣med Churches. They cannot blame me, if they call to minde, what themselues and their Predecessours haue and doe daily very opprobriously obiect against Caluin, Luther, Beza, &c. yea if they call to minde, how them∣selues most shamefully and impudently endeuour to blemish the credits of some great Persons; I will not particularize, lest I should be thought to thirst after the occasions and inducements of blood. There are Dames of high ranke, and Nobles of like condition, who if they knew how they are traduced by the Ignatians and Igna∣tianed in this kinde, they would haue little heart to shew them or their Fauourites any fauour at all, either direct, or indirect. But God in whose hands the hearts of Princes are, and who standeth in the middest of the Gods, in the
very middest of Magistrates ouerseeing and indging The Ignatians haue are lued rule and order, where they can to conuey Lay-Iesuits into the Courts of Prin∣ces: and it is certaine as the practise of po∣perie now is, that an Igna∣tian-Papist cannot certain∣ly be discoue∣red but by refu∣sing to take the Sacraments or derly and ordi∣narily. them, be mercifully pleased to direct and awake those, whom it most concerneth. For should these Proteus-like Transcendents, which now are so bold as to runne ouer all the Predicaments, preuaile, (which God auerte) wee may expect not Marian, but Neronian times, fire and fagot should be our laureall Guerdon. For if now they neuer sleep from attempting disloyall cruelties; we shall be then most assured to taste of their fierce immanities, and yet when their furie is spent, and wee chastised and corrected, our heauenly and mercifull Father will bee pleased to cast the rod of his furie into endlesse punish∣ment; graunt refreshing here present for a time, and af∣ter euerlasting peace shall be restored, as I most hum∣bly pray and confidently hope. Mr. FLOD pag: 142. num: 32. Wre this true, we might pardon the same Mr. Crashawe for saying Iesuits Gospell, pag. 30. 31. that we alwaies paint Christ in our Churches as a Childe, but the Virgin is a woman and commanding Mother; that we say, that all the miracles be Hers, as though he being a childe, could not, or in the presence of his Mother would not worke miracles. He might adde with as great truth, that we say that he dare not, for shee being a shrew will rappe him on the fingers, did he stretch out his hand to doe any miracle be∣fore her. But though these be senselesse slanders, yet were your Protestant fancie concerning miracles true the B: Virgin Marie, might seeme to haue reason, to hold Christs hands from doing any miracles, whilest he is a childe, lest you make him Antichrist when he commeth to be a man: Shee is wise to worke all the miracles her selfe, whom her Sexe may war∣rant from being thought the man of sinne: Yet blessed Virgin be not ouer bold with miracels, lest they giue vs a Pope Marie to be Antichrist, as they haue done a Pope Ioane.
ANSWER. I thinke the iudicious Reader hauing perused this your Comedian like vagarie, will not thinke of an Igna∣tian Theologue, but of some Comicall Poet lately come from acting in the Blacke Fryers. If Mr. Crashawe (for I haue not his Booke by me) say as you relate him, he is doubtlesse to be vnderstood of such Tablets, in which you for most part ioyntly draw Christ with his Mother, hauing him euer in her armes as a little childe: If hee say that you euer paint her as a commanding mother, hee might so say and truly, for your such manner of painting him and her doth put him in minde of the law of nature, which euer comman∣deth children, especially such young ones, to be obedi∣ent to Parents. Also Mr. Crashaw (I doubt not) spake according to the apprehension, which your ordinarie people make of such your manner of painting the mo∣ther and the sonne. Againe, hee cannot but haue read, those superstitious and phantastike kinde of meditati∣ons, which some of your Friers &c. haue made vpon those words of the Euangelist, Iesus autem descendit in Nazaret, & ibi erat subditus illis. But Iesus went downe with them vnto Nazaret, and there was subiect to them. Further, if Mr. Crashaw affirme, that you teach that all the miracles done in your Church are Hers, he mea∣neth that you call them hers, because obteyned by her mediation and intercession. Wherein he mistaketh you Orat: Arch. Patra. in Sess: 10. Con. ater. sub Leo 1. Osorius Diez. Alij. not; for doe not your Diuines teach it, and your Con∣cionists preach it, as an elegant diuine Scripturian con∣ceit, that the Virgin Marye is the same betwixt Christ and his Church, as the necke is betweene the head and the bodie; so that, as no defluence or influence passeth from the head to the bodie, but by the necke; so neither are any graces or spirituall influences granted from Christ
to his Church, but they passe by the hands of his Mo∣thers intercessions: Doth not your practise approue the same? For whensoeuer any of your Friers, Monks, or Priests doe publikely preach to the people, doe they not alwaies premit (but pretermit the Lords prayer) the Aue Marie to the blessed Virgin Marie, thereby to ob∣teine both present graces for that time, and future gra∣ces for the time to come, by her prayers and intercessi∣ons? Doe not you say as much but a few lines after? When you making no exception of miracles, doe inde∣finitely Num: 33. affirme, that the miracles of your Church are done at her request, but by his (that is, her Sonnes) power, so that your selfe now affirme, what you reproued in Mr. Crashawe. Your other Comedian like arguing in this diuision, sauoureth not a iott of a Diuine; but I must needs tell you; first, that howsoeuer you paint the Mother and her Sonne, for so much as you giue to the Creature, that which is due to the Creator, you commit horrible Ido∣latrie therein. Secondly, your manner of writing is Pagau-like, blasphemous, when as you make colours drawne and shadowed in Tablets, to be Christ and his Mother, let your sense be what it may be, your manner of phrase is heathenish, fit to lead your blinde Obedients to that horrible superstition which is so frequent in your Temples, to praise, adore and invocate your siluerd and gilded Gods, as Balthazar did his siluer and golden Gods; and as long as you this doe, it mattereth not three blew Dan: 5. 4. points, whether your prodigies be done by such your Mother, or her painted Sonne, or not, they are ouer the lying wonders of Antichrist, and are seducements for that Idolatrie, which S. Iohn in the Reuelation doth ex∣presse and point at, and doth declare to haue been pra∣ctised Apoc: 9. 20. most especially at that time, when the Great Starre fell from heauen (which is your Pope) and the Locusts out of the bottomlesse pitt (which are your
Fryers and Monkes) ouerswarmed the whole earth: for euen at their appearing, and in the time of their florishing, the worshipping of Idolls of Gold and Saint Iohn in the 9. of his Reuelation pointeth ex∣pressely at Popish Ido∣latrie. Siluer, the workes of mens handes beganne to bee most rife in you Sinagogue; then began especially adoration of deuills by sorcery; then followed murthers for the main∣tenance of your Popes supremacie; then were on foote fornications and adulteries by reason of your Popes vnne∣cessary and sinfull lawes for his Clergies Celibacy; then was theft reputed religion, when as your law lesse men of sinne (incouraged thereunto by the writings of your Mendicants as Alexander of Hales, Aquinas &c.) did robbe the Pastours of their greater tithes, by appropria∣ting them to the vse of his manciples which now (I will not say his manciples but herein his disciples) men of large consciences do hold to the ruine and perdition of their soules: with which letargie of sacriledge they lye so inchaunted that they will not be cured, charme the Charmer neuer so wisely; nay which is more, the poore Vicar-Incumbents haue not this fauour from the Im∣propriatists (at the same rents) to farme the parso∣nage-tithes, as Laikes doe. Your conclusion, with a grauitie beseeming your le∣uity, doth aduise the Picture virgin not to be ouerbold with miracles, lest she be reputed a Pope-Marie Antichrist, as there hath beene a Pope Ioane Antichrist. Sir, pardon me herein if I say that you seeme like to Walihams calfe that went nine miles to sucke a cowe, and when hee came thither the Cow proued a Bull; perhaps in your Caluish meditation you thought for your paines in aduertising the Picture-mother to haue sucked her dug as your Ful∣bert is reported by your Baronius to haue done, but you are mistaken for you haue light vpon a Bull, which with his hornes will shake in peeces the mount of your Holy Fathers Supremacie. You were not well aduised M. Flud to stirre this puddle of Pope Ioane, whereout the igno∣miny
of your vnerrable See is so liuely discouered. You, with your Lipsius glory for your Hallian and Si∣chem miracles; your Turseline tells vs of the prodigious translation of your Loretto-house, from Bethleem, by many stoppes and stayes of the same by the way: But Sir I (who am none of the Great Clerkes) dare to chal∣lenge you or any of yours in this, that standing within your owne principles (touching the credit of humane history) there is farre more reason for vs, to beleeue that there was a Papisse Ioane, then you should beleeue the remouall of the house wherein Christ was nourished in his infancie, from Bethlehem to Loretto, or for you to be∣leeue the miracles reported to haue beene done at Hall, or Sichem. What M. Flood? shall a historie of Popisse-Ioane bee carried by your owne Authours for diuers hundreths of yeeres together? shall the same be related, without any expresse contradiction of any Historian for those hun∣dreths of yeeres? shall the same be receiued with con∣sent of Peoples and Nations? shall there be publike Mo∣numents thereof in streetes, as at Rome? in a glorious Ca∣thedrall Church, as at Sienna? where your eyes might haue seene (when you and I trauelled thorough that Ci∣tie) amongst the Image ranke of Popes the very Femall picture, and portraict of Pope Ioane; what? shall all these things be so with much more, and yet the same The historie of Pope Ioane breifly exami∣ned, I wish the Reader if hee desire fully to be satisfied in this tale of Pope Ioane to read M. Cookes booke written purposely of the same sub∣iect. narration not be true? durst your owne Authors, to the euerlasting ignominy of Peters See, haue deuised such a tale? no, no; the veritie of the thing enforced them thereunto; and doubtlesse had not God awaked some of his Seruants to haue reuealed other ignominies of your Romane Hellen, this very tale would haue runne on still for currant: For you cannot bee ignorant, how the same tale was not flatly gain-said by any of yours, vntill it was obiected to your shame by some of the re∣formed Churches; then, and not before, did your Onu∣phrius,
Baronius and others exercase the very quintessence of their wits, to take credit from the history. Their de∣niall of the history, resteth vpon some few generall heades of arguments which I with the Readers patience will briefly lay downe and by Gods help fully confute. Their first head is, because some Authours about those times, and some presently after, haue not related the same, ergo it was not so: What an idle ergo is this? what reason haue you to thinke, that all Historians were so vn∣tender of your Romane-darlinges credit, as to relate such an eternall ignominie of their deare Mother? Let vs ar∣gue à simili thus? Iohn Chattle, as it is presumed by the instigation of some of your Order, attempted the mur∣thering (with stroke of a knife) of King Henry the 4. of France, how many of your Order, or of your deuout friendes, will bee forward to commend the same to posteritie? Againe, will all acobine Predicants, be eager to com∣mend to future ages how a Iacobine Fryer did treache∣rously murther his dread Lord and Soueraigne? Do all your Popish Hstorians, relate the nefand and execrable endes of some of your Popes? as Iohn the 12. Boniface the 8. Anastasius, Benedict, Gregorie 7. Sabiman, Silue∣ster &c. The presumptuons arrogancie of your Pope Alexander the 3. who at Saint Mrkes Church doore in This of Alex∣ander and Fre∣derike is painted in the Popes vatican Paliace in Rome. Vnice; did in the face of the whole Citie tread and tram∣ple vpon Fredericke the Emperours necke: doe all your Historians relate it? the same indeed is reported by some, and it is drawne out in pictures at Ʋenice and yet your grand Baronius would willingly bring the same into doubt, as hee doth this of Pope Ioane. Your Garnet, Tesmond, Hall, with other of their complices attempted, the blowing vp by Gunpouder of our dread Soueraigne, his gracious Queene, the Princes, and Princesse of their bo∣dies, together with all the worthies and honours o our Kingdome: how many be there trow ye of your Order or
of your deuoutes, that will commend to posteritie their most hellish attempts? the processe made against the Traitours and the iust execution and iudgement of them? By infinite like instances which might be produced it may easily appeare how idle the first ground of your ar∣guments is. Some of the Historians Syn-Chronists of the same times with your Ioane, durst not; most of them, out of a deare loue to your Darling would not doe it: and it is a petty wonder, that any one (veridicus) Tell∣troth could be found, who had the heart to commit to posteritie, so infamous and prodigious a note of igno∣minie to your Church: and doubtlesse both loue of truth, and euidence of truth perswaded them to make publike so great a paradoxe as it might then seeme; and this I hold to be the reason why some of them relate it somewhat frearefully, and some of them would seeme willing to cast some mists of doubt vpon the tale, there∣by to salue your vnerrable Sees sore and wound, but it may not bee. Your second generall defence, or head of arguments is; because, some succeeding Popes, after this supposed Ioane, had very hatefull Aduersaries in the Empire; mar∣uell, that none obiected the same to those Popes. To this I answere, as Grammer Schoole Boies are wont to doe when their fellowes boult out any stollid and bloc∣kish arguments; Nunquam tam stolidum argumentum au∣diui, I neuer heard a more blockish reason. Sir, those Ad∣uersaries of your Popes, were enemies to their Persons not to your Church; In the obiecting of this ignominie, they should haue rather stained their Darling-mother-Church, then the Popes, and haue bewraied their ownenest; what sir? did those Aduersaries obiect all other criminous ignominies of precedent Popes such as your selfe cannot denie? Had your Ioanes Child liued whereof she was deliuered processioning to Saint Iohn
Lateranes; perhaps some might haue obiected to his confusion so spurious a birth? or had your Ioane beene mounted to your See from out of some of the great Ro∣mane Families; then some one might haue obiected the same to their shame; but as she was deliuered of a spuri∣ous childe, so for any thing can be said to the contrarie, she was also a spurious Ioane her selfe: so that there was not any of her stocke, which might haue beene twitted with her ignominie; so that the discouering of the same by your owne Historians, should haue brought no grea∣ter profit to your Church, then shame, by reuealing their deare Mothers turpitude. Doth not your Bergo∣mensis and some others relating the History affirme, that in respect of the most shamefull turpitude of the tale, she was not numbred in the Catalogue of your Popes, as Paris lib. de po∣test. Papae. Plat. in vitis Genebrard. Chronic. Baren. Annalls. in like sort your famous Ioannes Parisiensis saith of Ciria∣cus Pope, and your Platina, Genebrard, and Baronius de∣liuer of some others, the point is cleare, I go on. A third ground of your defence is the impossibility or vnlikelihood of the tale, why vnlikely? In respect of her wickednesse? not so; for Iohn the 23. Siluester the 2. Boniface the 8. Alexander the 6. Iohn the 12. Sergius, Sa∣binian, with diuers other most wicked Popes (of your owne approuing) for wickednesse of life haue by many degrees surpassed her: Why impossible? In respect of her sexe? Alac good sir, might not she as well liue in the habit of a man vndiscouered, as your Euphrasina, Ma∣riana, Melania, with some others whereof your Legen∣dists How diuers women haue liued as men in the habits of men, See Ra∣deru, in Vrida∣rio 1. p. annotat in Apolinar. Epist. Petri An∣tich. apud Br: Ann. 1054. make mention; being women, liue for many yeares together in Monasteries with your Monkes vndiscouer∣ed. Why might not the same happen in the Church of Rome as well as in the Church of Constantinople, as by yours hath been obiected against the same? because they admitted Eunuches to Episcopacy. The likeliest matter to haue discouered her sexe might haue beene want of a beard: but your Church had taken
order for that before, for your Masse-Priests and Monks vsed to be shauen. Againe, Physicians will tell you, and that truly, that as there be waies to procure the growing of haire where nature had not determined the same, so likewise there are waies to hinder the growing of haire where nature had otherwise appointed it: whereof your Papisse Ioane being so singularly instructed in all humane literature could not be ignorant; and it is to be presumed that she hauing resolued to liue in that sort; shee vsed her most cunning meanes to conceale her sexe, both to auoide pu∣nishment due to such dissembling being against the law of God; as also to purchase those honours at which she aimed; and which by her excellent learning she knew she was reputed and reported to haue deserued. Adde to this, that there be women who by nature appeare Semi∣barbatae, halfe bearded, vpon whom the Italian prouer be∣goeth Da donna barbata í huomo raso dio mi guarda, From a bearded woman, and a shauen man, God deliuer me. Why might not your Ioane be of some such constitution? Why might not she, beardlesse by nature, liue in Rome amongst breadlesse by Arte; as well as some of your mincing women of late yeares, being of the age of thir∣tie (pretending to be younger) passe the searches at our Portes and liue in Flaunders in the habit of men? as though they were men amongst bearded men? The case is cleare: some of your Gallant Maides which come to you to be Nunnes, know well how to case themselues in the habit of Gallant youngsters; Ipsae viderint, whe∣ther any of them did scorch, or bee scorched, as your phrase is against Galeacius. A fourth ground of your reasons, ariseth out of some contrarieties which are in Authours, touching the time of this Ioanes sitting. What of this? they are all general∣ly agreed, that she sate betwixt Lee the 4. and Benedict the 3. the yeere of our Lord 855. or 856. or the reabouts.
Shall their varietie concerning the time of her Papacy ouerthrow the truth of the historie? beware of that: For how familiar a thing is it in your Historians and Crono∣logists, to varie in the setting downe of the order and sit∣tings of your Popes? shall such variance make the mat∣ter doubtfull? if so; what then will become of the suc∣cession of your Rockes? whereon your Church is buil∣ded? What will become of Saint Peters being and dy∣ing at Rome, (whereon your Papall supremacie is foun∣ded) concerning which Authours are so diuers and so various? The Septuaginta-Translatours Sir, and others, do they not differ in the account of the worlds age some hundreth of yeares? what shall we therefore play the A∣theists, and either deny Moses credit, or the worldes creation? Concerning the birth, life, and death of our Sauiour, is there no variance in Authours? shall wee therefore blas∣pheme, and call the truth of Christianity in doubt? Touching the death of the euer blessed Virgin Mary, is there not great varietie and contrarietie in Authours? what? shall we therefore say she is not dead? we may not; for then your practise touching her corporall assumpti∣on after her death would bee found superstitious. Thus by the way I haue refuted in a few wordes your groundes for your deniall of Popisse Ioane. In the con∣clusion hereof I will aduertise you, that if you will needs deny the history to take vp (and to content your selfe therewith) that answere, which your Onuphrius makes: Onuph: Annot. in Plat. in Pap: Ioh. 8. you haue great reason to listen vnto him (though he be a very fresh writer within lesse then an age) for hee a∣mongst your Authours denying this history is the Bell-weather. He thus saith and proueth out of Luitprandus Luitprand. Ticin: lib. 6. cap. 6. 7. (an ancient Historian and an obedient childe of the Church of Rome) how that Iohn the 8 was a most no∣torious, luxurious, and impudike Person, who not con∣tenting himselfe like a common Bull to abuse other
mens wiues, he further kept in his Serralls apart for his lecherous vse, three most impudent Strumpets, Rainera, The best po∣pish defence can be made concerning Pope-Ioane. Anna, and Stephana. (Onuphrius guilefully to make his tale seeme more currant calleth one of them Ioane) with whom he liued in most detestable sort; in hate whereof, for his effeminatenesse the Romanes termed him by the name of Ioane. And so was the faire childe named and a Pope-Ioane deuised. This is your Onuphrius coniecture, and the same seemeth more likely, because Auentine a Auent. hisi. lib. 4 pag. 285. no great Fauorite of Popes seemeth so to haue coniectu∣red, saue only that Auentine calleth the Strumpet Theo∣dora. For my part though I refuse Auentines coniectu∣rall authoritie herein; as your men do reiect him in a world of his other narrations, yet I aduertise you Master Floode to sticke vnto it, for of all your defences it seem∣eth most likely; and yet I ingenuously confesse I am somewhat doubtfull whether I should so aduise you or not: For in very truth it seemeth more infamous for your Church, to haue had such a Pope-Iohn then such a Pope-Ioane as the Historians relate. In the first there should haue beene a succession in a Person most abomi∣nable; In the other no succession but onely as it were a See-vacancy, an Interregnum, In the first the keyes of Da∣uid; should haue beene in the handes of a lewd Beast and Monster; in the other the keyes and all power should for a time haue resided in the Church, for whose vse and good it is, and there should haue beene onely a ma∣teriall errour, in the choise of one sexe for another; and that for a short time only: But I will leaue you to your choise betake you to which answere you will: I must see what followeth whether it be as idle as your former, or worse.
Mr. FLVD, pag. 130. num. 33. But is it not a miracle thinke you, that men endewed with reason, should let such lewd lyes passe to the Print? Doe we neuer paint Christ as perfect man redeeming the world vpon the Crosse, and iudging the same by fire? Are not these pi∣ctures frequent in our Churches? And when Christ is pre∣sented in the Ʋirgins armes, shee is painted not as a comman∣ding, but as a mother adoring her Sonne, that by her counte∣nance one may see, that whilest her breasts gaue him suck, her heart did offer him the frankincense of prayer, as to her God; doe we not make the miracles of our Church rather his then hers, done at her request, but by his power? which mira∣cles shee doth aske not for her owne honour, but for his, to establish in mens hearts, that faith Miracula mar∣tires faciunt vel potius illis oran∣tibus Deus vt fi∣des illa proficiat quae eos non deos esse nostros, sed vnum Deum no∣biscum habere credimus. Aug: lib. 22. de Ciuit: cap. 10. which doth beleeue, that not shee but He is God, and shee only honourable for his sake, and saued by his blood; holy by his grace, glorious by his mercy, powerfull by his hand; why should we not thinke, that the deuill doth hate this faith? Hw can any Christian thinke, that the Deuills doe miracles to confirme so pious doctrines? ANSWER. Tracing you here Mr. Flud, I might iustly harrow you ouer with a few lines; but your calumniating of our whole Church for the fault of a few (if it were a fault) doth giue me iust occasion to put you in minde of some of your holy Fathers, and your owne calumnious and lying dealings. You demaund thus, Is it not a miracle, that men endewed with reason, should let such lewd lyes passe to the Print? Soft and faire Sir; If Mr. Crashawe doe so interpret himselfe, as I haue insinuated he may, then there is no lewd lye in his saying, but a loude truth, com∣mitted to Print for your confusion. But say it is a mista∣king of a priuate man, allowed by some inconsiderate
Censour, what of this? will you scoffingly call it a mi∣racle? what a miracle? nay what a prodigie? Nay what prodigies then are daily acted in your Church, not by priuate ones only, but euen by your Vice Gods after consultation had with their Purpured & Scarlet creatures in their Consistorian Synods? And to touch one of in∣numerable, what a lewd fable is that of your S. Catha∣rine, Breuiar: Rom: in Fst. Cathar. whom your Holy Ones feigne to haue suffered martyrdome vnder Maxentius the Tyrant at Alexan∣dria; whom also you describe to haue confounded by her disputing fiftie Philosophers sent from that Tyrant to convert her? Further that shee converted to the Christian Faith, Porphirye Generall Master of the Warre, and Faustina the Empresse, with innumerable others; that shee being adiudged to be broken vpon wheeles, by her prayers brake the wheeles in peeces; by which an infinite number of people were conuerted to the Chri∣stian faith. These things, with some like, are yet remai∣ning in this your tale; I call it not a tale, because I doe not thinke that the like, or as great, may not haue beene done by some Martyrs, for the confirmation of Chri∣stian Religion; but I doe call this a fable, because it is not supported with any sufficient witnesse, and seemeth to haue been scraped (though cunningly) out of her old idle Legend-life and Martyrdome, in which there are so many fooleries, that impudencie it selfe hath beene ashamed of them. None of your Holy Fathers as yet Breuiar: Pij 5. iussu editum. haue been able to legitimate the Childe; indeed your Pius 5. in his castigation of your Breuiarie, caused Euse∣bius his seuenth booke of his Historie and the 26 chap∣ter Euseb. lib. 7. cap: 26. to be prefixed before the fable, by which hee would haue fastned the bastard vpon Eusebius; but diligent scrutinie being made, it was found that Eusebius would none of it, which perhaps is the cause that in your later Editions of your Breuiaries, Eusebius is left out; So that now the babe remaines without a Father; bestirre your
selfe Mr. Flud, perswade some of your Fathers to name the childe; at least some Hermaphroditian Padre &c. or else the childe is like to remaine to your deceased pious Vice-God, to be God-father to it; or else if you rather please, to your voraginous Iacob in his Golden Legend. How idle now is your insultation against vs for Mr. Cra∣shawes priuate ouersight, if it be so? But leauing your Holy Ones of Rome, to their such kinde of miracles, let vs consider a little whether any of your Scarlet Grand-Ones of the same, doe worke such miracles; which of them doth not? To pretermit o∣thers, Bellar: Prefat: in Contro: de Sanct: Beatitu∣dine. your grand Clerke Bellarmine what a loude and lewde lye (amongst many others of like nature) doth he commit, to print against the reformed Churches, espe∣cially against Calum, thus: Nefas est enim apud eos, Epis∣copum creari nisi vnius saltem vxoris virum. It is a wicked∣nesse not to be spoken of amongst them, to haue a Bishop made, who is not at least the husband of one wife. The impuden∣cie of this lewd and loude lye, I referre to be censured by the eye of the whole world, which cannot but ob∣serue, that vnmarried men are made Bishops in the re∣formed See the harmo∣nie of Confes∣sions. Churches; yea and in some of them, if there be any preeminence or precellencie giuen for such re∣spect, it is giuen to the vnmarried. Mr. Flud, the Chur∣ches reformed are well pleased that your Synagoguists and the head of them, should simulare castitatem, dissem∣ble chastitie; it is one of the Notes of Antichrist, as I declare elsewhere. But call to minde, what some of your owne Authours haue reported long agoe of your Priests and people, to wit, that the people of Parishes would hardly admit vnmarried Priests to be their Pa∣stors, for feare of their assaulting and attempting of their wiues &c. How the case now standeth in your popish Kingdoms, you cannot be ignorant, and what might be added more in this case I willingly pretermit. Now to you Mr. Flud, let vs consider whether you
can doe so great a miracle as to make a lye, and to print Triumph pag. 99. num: 10. the same. In your Purgatories Triumph thus you write; Of these foure words, Hoc est corpus meum, conteyning not aboue foureteene letters (they conteyne sixteene) you haue deuised aboue foure times fortie expositions 200 Exposi∣tions of those foure words, printed ann: 1577. apud Bell: de Euchar: lib. 1. cap. 8. so diffe∣rent as the Authours of the one damne the Fauourites of the other to hell. thus you there. If some Parsonian N. D. had the calculating of this your saying, hee might finde more lyes then lines. Your lines are few, but your lyes come very nigh to two hundred. You seeme to charge the Church of England (for to vs you speake) to haue 200 contrarie expositions, for which &c. where was your for head Mr. Flud, when you wrote thus? will you say (though you write to vs) yet you meane all the seuerall Protestant Churches, whether they be Lutheran, Calui∣nian, &c? Admit you did so, yet I dare boldly charge you, that in so saying you haue at lest made and printed You Mr. Flud, that obiect such contrarie∣ties to vs about the Sacrament, may read your owne ignomi∣nie in that kind well expressed by Licentiat. Boxhornius lib. 2. harmo: Eu∣charistica, and by others, Wil∣let, &c. 150 miracles, if to make and print lyes, be to doe and make miracles. I am assured you cannot finde out halfe a hundred of seuerall reformed Churches, who do con∣demne ech other to hell for any articles, much lesse for their seuerall expositions vpon these few words &c. If you be your craftsmaster shew vs the Authours, or Churches, which do thus condemne ech others to hell, or else looke to it, that your selfe be not condemned to hell for this your shamefullying. But to presse you further, where was your forehead when you did so egregiously belye Bellarmine himselfe, making him the Parent of your conceit? All that Bellar∣mine writeth, is this: Nuper &c. anno 1577. prodijt libel∣lus Bellar: lib. 1. de Euchar: cap. 8. in quo ducentae numerantur hereticorū &c. Of late there came forth a libell, in which there are numbred 200 either expositions, or deprauations of these words, This is my bodie, notwithstanding the chiefest are onely nine, whereof three are grounded vpon the Pronoune HOC This; two in the verbe Est, Is. Three in the Noune Corpus, Bodie.
One in the Pronoune Meum, Mine. Thus Bellarmine com∣menteth vpon his owne Note. By which it appeareth Mr: Flud, that your lying is malicious; for Bellarmine affirming that onely nine of these 200 expositions are principall, what probabilitie is there, that for sundry of other the Petty ones, that the Authors of them should condemne such as should denie them euen to hell for such their deniall. Againe, seeing Bellarmine termeth the booke a Libell, (which wanting name wanteth also authoritie) with what face can you out of a namelesse Libell lay so heauy an imputation vpon all the Reformed Churches? I tell you truly Mr. Flud, you may be ashamed of such your dealing, I aduise you not to learne your Ladies this your Churches A. B. C; Learne rather of some of your La∣dies, how many letters there may bee in these words, Hoc est corpus meum: Your Fatherhood saith, there is not Triumph pag. 99 num: 10. Mr. Fluds skill in numbring. aboue fourteene (such is your skill in numbring) & yet I thinke that some of your Ladies, out of that little skill they haue in reading their Latine Primmer, will finde out sixteene; but if you speake them faire they will perhaps read for est, ē with a tittle ouer it, lest you should also be found lying in so slight a point. Perhaps you did num∣ber only fourteene, that so both your lying foureteene, and your foure times fortie, might begin with the letter F which is the first letter of your name &c. I will leaue to adde any thing more in this place concerning your ly∣ing, wherin your Becans, Gretsers, Campians, Parsons, &c. are so well nurtured, that they seeme all of them in their writings to contend for the whetstone. But let vs goe on. After calumniating, you Thraso-like brag thus against Mr. Crashawe; Do wee neuer paint Christ &c? Yes Sir, you doe it, and too often (against the decree of the Eli∣bertine Elibert: Con: Can: 36. Councell) vnlesse you did the same for better vses. what and if you paint the Ʋirgin Marye sometime as
you talke? what of this? was there euer any heresie so detestable, which had not some intermixion of good with bad? You goe on Sir, and tell vs that you make the miracles of your Church to be rather Christs then his Mothers. It is true Sir, we denie it not, but we are beholding vnto you, when you tell vs in what sense you grant the same, for you adde thus, done at her request, but by his power. Well fare your heart Sir, here is plaine dealing; whereas in the working of miracles three At∣tributes of God doe seeme specially to concurre, his Wisdome, his Goodnesse, and his Power; his wisdome, by which the miracles are conueniently and orderly done; his goodnesse, by which he is moued to doe them, and to doe them profitably for the good of his creatures; his power, by which he is able to doe them. The latter you leaue to Christ, and the other two, at least originally, you attribute to his mother, saying, done by his power, but at her request. And whereas Goodnesse tasteth best to wretched creatures, and is most powerfull with man, you attribute vnto her especially, Goodnesse; thereby to induce your Blinde-Obedients, to cast their greatest confidence vpon her, and to say and sing vnto her; Salue Regind Mater misericordiae, vita, dulcedo, & spes nostra &c. All haile Queene mother of mercy, our life, our sweetnesse and our hope &c. Herein Mr. Flud you seeme Turseline-like to long after Biells lesson, where he resolueth, how God the Biell lect: 8. in Can: Missa. Father diuiding his goods, keeping Iustice for himselfe, gaue Mercy to the Virgin Marye, &c. You haue found power for the Sonne, but what office shall the Holy Ghost haue in the working of miracles? Let vs if it please you heare your full diuision; If the miracles be done at the Virgins request, what part and office hath the Holy Ghost? doubtlesse his office is by inspiration to pur∣chase the Virgins motion, that she may say to her Sonne, fiat, let it be done. After your boasting and calumniating, you goe on
pretending great modestie, for thus you adde; which There is a glo∣rious vision of brother Lee, who saw all those who would haue as∣cended vp to heauen by the red ladder, on the top of which Christ sat, to fall downe, some at the third step, some at the fourth: but those who as∣cended vp the white ladder, on the top of which the Vir∣gin Marye sat, they entred heauen with∣out any diffi∣cultie. related in Spec. ex 7. verbo Iudicium Dei ex Chron: Lat: Mino lib. 6. cap. 17. & Gall. lib. 2. cap. 26. miracles she doth aske, not for her owne honour, but for his, to establish in mens hearts that faith, which doth beleeue, that not shee, but he is God; and she only honourable for his sake, and saued by his blood, holy by his grace, glorious by his mer∣cie, powerfull by his hand, why should wee not thinke that the Deuill doth hate this faith? thus you. Would God your words and your practise would consort. Put case you make her not a God, but how can you excuse it but that you make her a Goddesse? Do you not yeeld vnto her attributes befitting a Goddesse, to redeeme, to saue, to protect, to defend, to rule, to command all earthly crea∣tures? How can you say shee was saued by Christ his blood, seeing that in your doctrine (whatsoeuer the blacke Fryers teach to the contrarie) shee neuer contra∣cted originall sinne, nor committed actuall; you should rather say she was preserued from sinne by his Grace, ra∣ther then saued by his Blood. How can you say, that she is only glorious by his mercies, whenas your Apud Valent. in 3. Thom. Valent. Disp. 1. q. 2. de vnio: duar: nt: pun∣cto 8. See Sal∣meron in Euang. & Act: tractat: 6. Doctors teach that she merited at least, ex congruo, out of a congrui∣tie, to be the Mother of God, and Christs incarnation. Mr. Flud, if your faith were no other then you haue set downe, is it not to be maruey led that wee who haue the same faith herein with you, cannot with that faith doe the same miracles as you doe? surely there is somewhat in it. It is said (and truly) that Sorcerers and such like, as your Spanish Saluadores doe pretend (being deman∣ded how they do their cures &c.) that they do the same by saying the Lords Prayer, Creed, &c. But let it be re∣plyed vnto them, that others saying the like prayers, can not doe the like cures; they will presently answer you, that though they say the prayers, yet they say them not with like faith, nor haue not that strong Confidence in the Pater-noster as they haue; Euen so it fareth betwixt you and vs, for although we beleeue that Christ is God, and not his Mother, that shee is honourable for his sake,
saued by his blood, holy by his grace, glorious by his mercy, powerfull by his hand, yet this faith in vs wor∣keth no miracles, the reason is wee haue not so strong faith as you Baltazar-like, to praise and adore wodden and siluered Ladies, at Loretto, Sichem, Hall, &c. as you doe, and thus goes the game of miracles away from vs, and you haue them, for which we enuie you not. And so let vs come to your fifth argument. CHAP. VIII. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS fifth Reason. Mr. FLVD, pag. 150. num: 34. AND this is our fifth argument to proue our miracles true, that they are beneficiall both to the bodie and soule of men, which therefore without blasphemie, may not be giuen from God to the Deuill. Those wicked Spirits, doe seeke in their workes, to make themselues (mirabiles, non vtiles) as S. Austen saith, wonderfull not beneficiall vnto men; they de∣sire to amaze and astonish, rather then to relieue, and helpe senses. ANSWER. The force of this your argument consists in this, to wit, that the Deuills and Antichrists miracles shall bee only wonderfull, and not profitable or beneficiall as yours are. But the edge of this your reason is made blunt by your Rhemists, who in their Annotations vpon the Epi∣stle Raemist. in 2. Thess. 2. to the Thessalonians write thus, Satan whose power to hurt is abridged by Christ, shall then be let loose, and shall assist Antichrist in all manner of signes, wonders, and false miracles, whereby many shall bee seduced, not onely Iewes: thus they, being euicted euen by truth it selfe so to write.
Now if Antichrist as they say shall bee powerfull in all manner of signes, why doth your Fatherhood to the aduantaging of his and your cause restraine his power to the working of some small trifles. Chry∣sostome or the Authour vpon Saint Mathew, is so Hom. 49. in Math. Operis imperfect. confident that he dareth to write, that in the Antichristi∣an daies, power of working miracles shall be taken away from the true Christians, and that the same shall bee granted to the false Christians, in whom, and amongst whom, the Deuill shall haue such great power permitted vnto him, (vt faciat signa vtilia vt iam Christi ministros non per hoc cognoscamus quod signa vtilia faciant, sed quia haec signa omnino non faciant) that he may doe signes profitable, so that then we may not know the Ministers of Christ, by doing of such signes, but that they doe not any such at all. Saint Gregorie saith, that the mira∣cles Greg. lib. 34. in Iob. cap. 3. apud Pater: in 2. ad Thessal. 2. of Antichrist shalbe (tanta) so great that those of ours shall seeme few or none at all. And in another place he writeth thus, nunc enim fideles nostri &c. For now our faithfull, suffering peruerse things doe wonders; but then the Ministers of this man shall euen then, when they inflict per∣uerse things, doe wonders: Let vs consider therefore, how great the triall of mans minde shall then be, whenas the godly See how in the title and your owne mens ar∣gument to the 25. chap. of S. Greg. his 33. booke vpon Iob Antichrist is said to doe so many miracles that by many he shall be ta∣ken for Christ. Martyr shall submit his body to torments; and yet before his eyes the very Executioner shall do signes: Whose inward vir∣tue may not then bee shaken, from the very bottome of his thoughts? whenas he, who tormenteth with stripes doth also shine with signes and wonders? Thus Gregorie, with much like matter, which might be produced; wherein hee is not dissonant, from all the Ancients; according to that of Christ, that Antichrist and his, shall do so many, and so great signes, that if it were possible the very elect should be deceiued. But if Antichrist and his, shall doe no signes profitable, the danger of the elect to bee de∣ceiued by them would not be so great, but seeing that Math. 24. 24. according to our Sauiours prediction the Deuills will labour by all meanes possible, by such signes to deceiue
the elect, it is not to bee imagined, but that they will haue some of those signes, which are aptest to deceiue, See Stapleton in Dom. 20. post Pent. loc. 5. to wit signes profitable and beneficiall. Whereas you say, that it is blasphemie to ascribe to the Deuill your miracles, which are beneficiall both to body and soule; I cannot thinke but that your Aduer∣sary reading the same, will smile at such your vaine beg∣ging of the question. Nay sir, though we deny them to be beneficiall to your soules, which are seduced there∣by, notwithstanding we cannot but account them pro∣fitable to our soules; which by them are instructed to take your holy Father for that man of sinne, who was foretold should come in the power and efficacie of such signes. By which you may obserue how fond your Re∣mists annotation is, in which they write thus: They that In 2. Thess. 2. now follow the simplest and grossest Heretikes that euer were, without seeing miracles, would then much more follow this great Seducer working miracles. This great Seducer then must worke miracles such as are aptest to deceiue, to wit, profitable. And to adde a little more of this kinde, I aduise you Master Floode to call to minde, first how the Deuill in times of Heathnish ignorance is reported by Liuie, Eli∣an, Apollonius Tianeus, and others, to haue done many profitable signes; Secondly, how vnder the new Testa∣ment, the same Satan is by Gods permission to trans∣forme himselfe into an Angell of light, by doing or pre∣tending 2. Cor. 11. 14. to doe workes of light, workes beneficiall, works profitable, workes beseeming (in the opinion of the Se∣duced) Antichrist and his in the opi∣nion of the se∣duced shall do miracles be∣seemng God himselfe. euen God himselfe; What? may he be able to do some workes of light, euen for the time of those 1000. yeeres in which he is bound? and shall it be thought, that his power will bee lesse in the time of Antichrist when he shall be set at libertie, and when (as the Scrip∣ture saith) he shall shew great rage? knowing his time to bee Apoc. 12. 12. but short.
If it be an opinion receiued by all Diuines, that the power of wicked Angells is so great that they can apply (corporales causas ad producendos corporales effectus) corpo∣rall causes to produce corporall effects. Why shall it bee de∣nied but that they may do by such meanes, God permit∣ting the same, some beneficiall and profitable effects? Aske Aquinas and he will tell you, that Magicians (per Aquin. 1. q. 110. art. 4. ad 12. priuatos contractus) by priuate contracts, can doe (mira & miracula quoad nos) as to vs, wonders and miracles; and I thinke it was neuer denied by any sound Philosopher or Diuine, but that the Magicians do, or may doe some∣times profitable wonders and beneficiall effects: and yet notwithstanding howsoeuer the same may seeme profi∣table to man, doubtlesse Satans proiect is thereby to hurt both body and soule, if not at the present, yet in the end and winding vp of the matter. Mr. Floode pag. 151. num. 34. Such are miracles which Antichrist shall worke, as making the picture of a beast speake, bringing downe fire from heauen, feigning himselfe dead and rising againe. For neither is the Antichrists mi∣racles in M. Floodes opini∣on. Deuill so courteous towardes mankinde, that hee will bestow benefits on their bodies, nor God so hard as to let him entrappe their Soules by so strange illusions, as multitudes of such mira∣culous helpes and benefits are. ANSWER. What manner of miracles Antichrist and his mini∣sters shall worke, the Scriptures with the Ancient Sages of the Church, haue sufficiently declared vnto vs; It pleaseth you following Bellarmines tracke, to cast a mist of errour before your Readers eyes, by putting him in minde of three kindes of miracles, which (as you pre∣tend most vainely) shall be proper to Antichrist; euen
4. modo; so that by them as by a speciall badge hee may be knowne. The first miracle is that hee shall make the picture of a beast to speake; Secondly, hee shall bring downe fire from heauen; Thirdly, hee shall faine him∣selfe dead and rise againe. To answere you and shew the most childish vanitie of your conceits. Touching the first, I challenge your fingers of leger∣demaine, for where (I beseech you Sir) haue you read that Antichrist shall make the picture of a beast to speak? We read indeede, that the second beast which rose out of the earth, (by which all with one consent vnderstand Antichrist as he pretendeth to be a spirituall Monarch) shall cause the inhahitants of the earth to make the image of the beast which arose out of the sea, and which is descri∣bed Apoc. 13. 14. 15 ibidem v. 2. 3. in the beginning of the chapter to haue had seuen heades and tenne hornes, being in body like a Leopard, in feete like to a Beare, and in mouth like to a Lyon; and further that the said second Beast should giue to the I∣mage of this first beast both life and speach, and should command all the inhabitants of the earth to adore the same. This being so, I doe now demand in good earnest of your Fatherhood, of which of the Ancients haue you learned this your literall theologie, that there should in very deed arise such a beast, out of the Sea hauing seuen heades, tenne hornes, and in body, feete, mouth, repre∣senting a Leoparde, a Beare, a Lion? Againe, of which of them haue you learned, that there should arise a pret∣ty lesse beast out of the earth with two hornes (like vnto a lambe) vpon his head? which of the ancients euer taught you that such two beasts should in such shapes & and formes succeede each other, and in the same shapes and formes be adored, and worshipped by the inhabi∣tants of the earth? Sir, bethinke your selfe, what time the inhabitants of the earth shall haue to assemble them∣selues to the place where this picture shal be erected, that they may come and worshippe the same? A Iubily of
three yeares and a halfe will hardly serue the turne: A∣gaine, bethink your selfe how great this picture shall be, which the Inhabitants of the earth shall bee caused to make, greater surely then the cabbage, for seething of which (as the idle fable goes) a 1000. workmen were a whole yeare in prouiding a caldron. Bethinke your The Papists li∣terall diuinitie touching the Beasts Image. selfe what adoe there will bee to raise vp and set vp this picture, greater doubtlesse, then your Pope Sixtus the 5. had, to reare his Pyramis before Saint Peters Church in Rome. Bethinke your selfe how the deuout feminine sexe will dare to appeare before a God of so monstrous, so fearefull shape. Bethinke your selfe how many sheep lambes &c. are to bee prouided for a Bell that hath so many mouthes. Consider how the elect may be in dan∣ger to be seduced by such abominable Idolatrie, which the very sense of men will seeme to detest? Idolatrie more vaine then that of the Calecutians, which adore their God in the shape and forme of a Cat, and equall with that by which they adore and worship the Deuill in a most horrible dreadfull shape. Answere sir I pray you; you and yours, which talke Ignatians most fond in their literall inter∣pretation of the two beasts, they regard not what they either say or write so they may cleare their holy Fa∣ther from be∣ing Antichrist. so much of the madnesse of others may it not iustly bee replied vnto you. Insanitis si ita dicatis, you are madde if you so vnderstand the Euangelist and Prophet, that such beasts shall arise in the very property of forme and shape as the Prophet doth describe them and rule the world. What then else are these Beasts thus arising, but types, signes, and formes representing two different Empires, rules, or formes of gouernment, each succeed∣ing other? What else doth the beast arising out of the earth portend by his lambe-like hornes but Antichrist, who pretending the lambes power (that lambes which taketh away the sinnes of the world &c.) shall set vp a forme of gouernment; which shall not be the same of the first beast; but an Image-representation of the same; one in manner, forme, and effect like vnto the first? To this
interpretation the very context and consent of Scrip∣tures do enforce vs; you will none of it, because it pearc∣eth your holy Fathers sides; who hath indeede preten∣ding It is cleare as noone daies, that Antichrist must pretend the lambes hornes, that is his power, to wit, to bee his Vicar; for so wee re of ne∣cessitie to vn∣derstand the same. the lambes power (denie it if you dare and say if you dare that he is not the lambes generall Vicar) substi∣tuted a Papall Monarchicall Gouernment; which is not the same with the first beast; and yet is so perfect an mage of the same, that both for place, manner, forme, effect, ending, and rising vp it doth in all respects pun∣ctually, represent it. But leauing the examination of the same to an other occasion; by what hath beene said you may easily vnderstand, how idle your conceit is, in tel∣ling your Reader that one of Antichrists miracles shall be to make a picture to speake; why said you not that he should also giue life vnto it; that so it might walke vp & downe, and be thereby as a fit Monarch and Emperour to rule according to your literall theologie in this place? Perhaps you thought not of it, or else you were willing to passe by it, to wit, that Antichrist should giue life to the Image (as Saint Iohn speaketh) of the Beast; and this, because your Crucifixes, which haue vsed to speake and nod to your Saints had not life in them; but why did you not call to minde the Cherubicall Angell, which in the forme of a Crucifixe, spoke to Saint Francis? or why did you not thinke of Saint Francis his Wolfe at Eu∣gubium, with whom your Saint made so long a dis∣course? or why did you forget Saint Anthonies Satyre which ould him of a generation of Satyres, which hoped for saluation and desired his prayers? Oh Master Floode what a gallant Giant-like monster god befitting Antichrists idolatrie, would the Image of the beast (ari∣sing out of the Sea) be, if besides speach which you & yours giue him, he might also haue life giuen vnto him as the Prophet speaketh; that so hee might walke and stalke vp and downe, and sit in his throne of Maiestie; he would surely put downe your Saint Christopher were
he farre huger then your Idle Legendists, and your and our most prophane Stageists make him. But I let passe to speake any more of this miracle; I hasten to your se∣cond, yet I must not forget to tell you of your tricke of legerdemaine; when you put in this place, picture for image; the fraud is peculiarly yours, you could not bee ignorant that in our common vse of speech, the word Image is, and may be taken for any manner of represen∣tation of another thing; but the acception of picture is more strict, euer signifiing a representation made by the Painter or Drawer. Your fraud was to deceiue your Rea∣der, to make him thinke of some picture or Statue & to cause him to mistake the Prophet when he saith, that the second beast shall cause the Image of the first to speake. But I leaue you here in this; giuing the Reader this ad∣uertisment only that according to the old prouerbe hee who would eate with an Ignatian had nede of a long spoone. Concerning the second miracle, you attribute to An∣tichrist, Antichrists se∣cond miracle. which is fetching fire from heauen, whether you vnderstand the same literally or improperly, and by a metaphore, the beane is broake vpon your holy Fathers head and crowne; If you vnderstand the same literally, then not only Antichrist himselfe but his minister haue alreadie brought fire from heauen. Concerning Anti∣christ himselfe, I will here only relate how twice he fetcht fire from heauen. First, when your Holy Hildebrand Gregorie the 7. accursed such as tooke part with their Em∣perour, Auent. lib. 5. annal. Larn: pag. 362. then by virtue of that curse a certaine Bishop was stroken dead with a fiery thunderboult from heauen A∣gaine was it not fire from heauen whenas certaine fiery torches did miraculously appeare ouer your most holy Pope Innocent celebrating Masse before Lotharius the Emperour? Touching the like miraculous bringing of fire from heauen by Antichrists ministers, I referre the See my Tenth Chapter. Reader to what I shall fully in many examples adde of
the same, in my reasons following taken out of my first ground of reasons. Your third miracle which you here fasten vpon Anti∣christ, Antichrists third miracles. is, of his feigning himselfe dead and rising vp a∣gaine; For my part, I maruell whence you fetch this mi∣racle; what sir out of the Reuelation? where the Pro∣phet saith, that he saw one of the heades of the first Beast, Apoc. 13. 3. as it were wounded or slaine to death; And doth this woun∣ding or being slaine to death, signifie a feigning onely? doth a deadly wound seeme to you no other then a dis∣sembling? Againe, how idle is your conceit? for by the interpretation of almost all, yea your owne Authours also, Antichrist is signified by the second beast; which ariseth out of the earth, and not by the beast arising out of the Sea, much lesse by any one of his heads, but lest of all by that head which was wounded euen to death. No sir, your Antichrist commeth after the seuenth head, and is the Eight, (not as head, because his gouernment is not the very same with the first Beasts, or the heades thereof but as an Image thereof) Eight I say in forme of gouernment, and yet he is also of the seuen, because he exerciseth the very power of the seuen, and yet is the Eight, and is that Eight of whom these words of Bellar∣mine are most truely and perfectly verifyed; Erit Anti∣christus Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 15. &c. Antichrist shall be the last and supreamest head of the Impious, and is the last King which shall hold the Ro∣mane Empire, and yet without the name of Romane Empe∣rour. Surely Bellarmine hitteth the marke aright. Who, I pray you, hath now absolute command ouer the Romane Empire, and State without taking the name of Romane Emperour? your Holy Father: Who tooke the Emperiall Gouernment of the Romane State with∣out the name of Romane Emperour presently after the fall of the seuenth head? your holy Father. S. Iohn tells vs fiue of the heads were fallen in his time, and that the sixt then was. (which I hope you will not denie but
that it is fallen before this) and that the seuenth was shortly to come, and to last but for a short time. Which seuenth cannot be your Papacie, it must then of necessi∣tie be a short Roman Imperialtie or Empire which fol∣lowed vpon the destruction of the sixt; which can bee no other then that of the Gothes, which followed in∣stantly vpon the destruction of the sixth that which was in S. Iohns time. Now let vs aske all your Historians who succeeded in Romes gouernment without the name of Emperour after the destruction of the Gothes and Lombards, and they will all tell you that your holy Roman (Pater Patriae) Father of the Church. Now that this your Holy Father hath in Rome, in the Roman Empire and ouer the Romane Empire, Regall, Impe∣riall, and Sacerdotall power, his triple Tiare and Crowne Rocca his Scholia in S. Gregor: eius{que} Parentum Imagine dedi∣cated to Clem: 8 doth euince the same; the interpretation of which I will here adde out of Angelus Rocca their famous Scholiast vpon S. Gregorie, his words are these: Illud autem scitu dignum videtur, quod Tiara tribus Coronis &c. But it see∣meth worthy to be knowne, that the Tiare adorned with three Crownes, representing (to wit) Regall, Imperiall, Sacerdotall power, (that is, plenarie and vniuersall power ouer the whole Popes Turbant interpreted by Rcca. world) was not in vse before Boniface the 8. Pope, who was of the most Noble Caietane Familie. thus Rocca. By which it is as cleare as noone daies that the Pope of Rome, who cannot be the seuenth head is the eight, hauing Regall, Sacerdotall, and Imperiall power, ouer the whole world without the name of Romane Emperour. Whereas you goe on idly, and tell vs of the Deuills want of courtesie to mankinde, your selfe should haue been more courteous to haue spared your speech in this kinde, which is already sufficiently answered. You seem ouer-hardie to charge God with hardnesse, if he should suffer mankinde to bee intrapped in their soules with multitudes of beneficiall helps; what maketh you Sir thus blasphemously presumptuous? haue not the Scrip∣tures
most expresly expressed, that God will suffer such as haue not hearkned to the charitie of truth, to be intrap∣ped, 2 Thessal: 2. and seduced by strong illusions? Hath not the spirit of God foretold, that (vniuersa terra admirabitur post e∣stiam) Apoc: 13. 14. the whole earth will admire after the Beast, and that the false Prophet shall deceiue them, who dwell vpon the earth by the meanes of those miracles, which he hath power to doe in the sight of the Beast? Hath not Christ himselfe foretold, that many shall be deceiued, the Elect shall be in hazard, that if the times were not shortned all Matth: 24. flesh should not be saued? Which being so clearely true, and agreeing to Gods iust prouidence; what mattereth it whether the deceptions and illusions be altogether by strange prodigies of wonder; or partly by them, and partly by some beneficiall miracles of helpe and profit? And if God permit Antichrist and his, to doe the grea∣test signes (to bring downe fire from heauen) which are most powerfull to seduce, why may  not be permitted to doe the lesse? You see (vnlesse your Hellen haue made you starke blinde) that the Scriptures doe foretell a ge∣nerall apostacie and defection to be effected by signes, what blasphemous idlenesse then is it in you, to say that Mr. Flods blas∣phemeth. God will not be so hard to mankinde, as to suffer it to be entrapped with multitudes of beneficial helps. He suffe∣reth it to be entrapped, yea and the Elect to be in ha∣zard; which cannot be without miracles of high nature and profitable, great and many, &c. Mr. FLVD. pag: & num. ibid. Now the miracles of the Blessed Virgin and other, where∣with God doth daily adorne our Churches, are sutable to such as Christ wrought, and haue still been done by Saints in all ages since, as casting out of deuills, healing incurable diseases, deliuering from dreadfull dangers, and the like, which either deforme or afflict mankinde; some punishments laid vpon
blasphemers excepted, which are so few, as they may seeme a drop or two of gull in a sea of honnie; which is a signe they proceed from a boundlesse Ocean of goodnesse, through the sweet conduit of the intercession of his blessed mother. Yet the benefits which by these miracles come to mens soules are greater when by them some are conuerted from heresie, o∣thers reclaimed from bad life, many perswaded to frequent Sacraments, to make sorrowfull confession of their sinnes, restore things vniustly taken, satisfie for wrongs offered, spend much time in prayer, to be bountifull to the poore, finally to giue themselues to heroicall exercise of Christian vertues, which things Catholikes doe daily behold, and haue cause therein to glorifie God. ANSWER. The more I read in you, the more boasting I obserue of your multitudes of miracles, a fashion familiar to An∣tichrist and his, so not to the Apostles and primitiue Christians; if the disciples once gloried for their power Luc. 10. 20. of miracles they were not approued but reproued by Christ. How and in what sort your miracles are done, you haue taught vs already; by the Virgins intercession, and Christs power. Here you againe adde, they proceede from a boundlesse Ocean of goodnesse through the sweet con∣duit of the intercession of his blessed Mother. In that you honour the Mother of our Lord Iesus, with the title of Blessed, wee gladly approue the same; but whereas you make her asweet conduit, by whose intercessions Christ bestoweth his benefits vpon mankinde, because therein you want warrant and commission for your so saying, we dare not ioyne with you. Wee are taught by the A∣postle, that Christ our high Priest is euer at the right hand of his Father (interpellans pro nobis) making intercession ad Rom: 8. 34. ad Hebr. 7. 25. for vs. Why then doe you obtrude vnto vs another
Mediatresse? Doe you this, because hee hath so prescri∣bed? Hovv superstiti∣ously you teach concerning the Virgins Media∣torship. See Orat. Steph. Ar∣chiepisc. Patrac. in Con. Later. sub Leo 10. Sess. 10. shew vs the warrant and we will obey. Doe you this because shee will be ready to receiue some desperate wretches which Christ her Sonne will reiect? if you say so, then you make her, not Christ, the boundlesse Ocean of goodnesse, seeing he refuseth some, she receiueth all. But tell me, those that come to her, must they not of ne∣cessitie come with prone hearts and humbled Spirits? You cannot, nor dare not say otherwise: if so, what neede then of going to her, seeing there standeth an e∣uerlasting invitation of Christ himselfe recorded in S. Matth: 11. 28 Matthew, Venite ad me &c. Come to me all ye that labour and are heauy laden, and I will refresh you. I dare vnder∣take, that it is as cleare and as certaine a truth as any is in the Gospell, that Christ doth not, nor will not reiect any who commeth vnto him in humilitie of spirit, without which it is a meere vanitie euen in your Gospell, to goe either to Him or to his Mother. What needlesse de∣uotion then is this of yours to the Virgin, when as you may in full assurance of faith appeare before Christ him∣selfe, Hebr: 10. 22. he requiring and commanding the same? You compare your miracles with those of Christ and his Apostles, wherein you shew your selues to bee of Antichrist, for both hee and his shall doe the same, pre∣tending Matth: 24. the name of Christ and power of the Lambe. Your profound Diuines, who are not ashamed in diuers Apoc: 13. points to assimilate Antichrist with Christ, why do they in this point of likenesse of miracles refuse to doe the same? What else is it, but (conscientia imbecillitatis) a conscience of your owne bad cause, knowing that the multitudes of your miracles are an argument of the mul∣titude of your nouelties; for standing within your own grounds, miracles are necessarie for the confirmation of nouelties, but not for further establishment of receiued truthes, data infidelibus, giuen to the incredulous, saith the Apostle, not to the faithfull. 1 Cor: 14. 22.
Whilest you are talking of the multitudes of your beneficiall miracles, you except (as I take it to answer an obiection by the way) some few punishments laid vpon blasphemers, which are so few (say you) that they may seeme as a drop or two of gall in a sea of honie; well said you few, for they are so few that you cannot mention any one autenticall related as laid vpon any one for the opposing against your superstitions. We are able to relate many, and those autentically, out of your owne Authours, concerning dreadfull punishments and most scelerate ends, which haue befallen your most holy Pon∣tifies. But let them passe; and so I leaue you to meditate vpon the clemencie of your Virgin Mother made of wood at Sichem, who when shee was stolne away, and is not yet to be found, did not lay any reuengefull punish∣ment vpon such as stole her away; a good cause why, shee had eyes which could not see, and hands shee had but such as could not strike, as King Dauid sings of the Idolls of the Gentiles. God grant Mr. Flud that true Christians ne∣uer receiue hurt from your holy Fathers bloody fingers, vntill they be hurt by the wodden fingers of your God∣desse at Sichem, and we shall nothing feare what you and your Factionists, (I meane not onely your Ignatianed and the Church-Papists, but all those that side with them, as &c.) may proiect for the ruine of this Church and Kingdome. To proceede, touching the spirituall benefits arising to mens Soules from your miracles, of which you are pleased to make so long a beadrole: I for my part could wish it were true as you write, both for the good of your people as also for our good and no small benefit, who are enforced often to haue commerce with them. But God wot Mr. Flud it is farre otherwise; and that truth may stand in the mouth of two or three witnesses, com∣pare that which I shall here write in generall termes, with those imputations which Mr. Copley hath truly and
ingenuously laid vpon your congregation, and especi∣ally Mr. Copley in his Doctr. Ob∣seruat. chap. 11. and elsewhere. vpon the Cheefetaines of the same. If your mira∣cles are so powerfull to conuert sinners, how commeth it to passe, that at the very Marte. Faire of such wares (Roma Sancta) holy Rome, sinne doth more vnmeasu∣rably abound, then at, or in any other Popish Church or Kingdome. What? is it necessarie that an ouerflowing of pride, enuie, hatred, malice, iniustice, rapine, murder, simonie, incest, Sodomie, should take her beginning from Rome? Hath it not been a crie of all times, a voice of all ages (Roma altera Babilon, Roma mater fornicationis) Mysterium ini∣qitatis. Rome another Babilon, Rome the mother of Fornica∣tions? And although your Seminarists who now come from Rome to peruert soules, are wonted to speake and pled much for the sanctitie of that place; the truth is, they are so taught, nay they are commanded and coniu∣red with promises to protest, that they will neuer here discouer in England what they may haue heard of their Holy Fathers turpitudes, his Purpured Brethrens enor∣mities, their Clergies and Prelates abominable irreligio∣sitie, their Monkes, Friers, and Ignatians impurities, and hypocrisies. For the experience that I made in your Congregation, I found the old sawe to be verified, to wit, the higher a man climeth in your Ecclesiasticall dig∣nities, the worse the man is; so that it seemeth your Chaire of Sanctitie, to be the very Seat of pestilence, the neeer vnto which any may approch, the worse hee Psalm: 1. shall be. You cannot be ignorant Mr. Flud, how the Histori∣ans of old, and your owne, haue described the orna∣ments of Rome, of your Consistories, Serralls, Con∣claues, Nunryes, Brothell-houses; witnesse Mantuan, Vbstota est lu∣paar. Mantuan. Iouius, Sabellicus, Paris, Clemangis, Dantes, Petrarcha, Sa∣uanarole, Auentine, Grotshead, Ferus, Espencaus, and who See Auent: lib. 5. pag. 346. else not? Yea Bernard that excellent man, who, though dazeled with the mistes of the time (non vidit omnia) saw
not all things, yet he so liuely described and proclaimed the mysterie of iniquitie, that in delineating Romes and the Romish Clergies enormities, hee commeth behinde none. thus in former daies. But should Rome now be searched, with no neerer and narrower a scrutinie, then was vsed here in England at the dissoluing of your male and female Sodomites, good God, what abominations would be found within her penetralls? Some say that your now Holy Father Paul the V, is not tainted crimi∣ne pessimo; bee it so; but who cleareth him from the crime of Auarice? the which whosoeuer followeth can∣not be innocent. Who can free him from the sinne of Impatience and most wrathfull outragious anger, which worketh not the iustice of God? Who can defend him from an high point of Luciferian pride, who dareth to the prouoking of heauens vengeance, suffer his Ne∣phewes to haue their plate engraued with this and like posie, Burghesianae Aeternitati dicatum. Consecrated to the Burghesian Eternitie? Who dareth to permit any, to giue vnto him the name of a Vice-God? Who dareth to haue the title of Pontifician Omnipotencie giuen vn∣to him? himselfe to be styled Paulus Quintus Optimus, Maximus, Sanctissimus, Aeternus, Omnipotens, Vice-Deus. What thinke you Mr. Flud? Paulus the V. mounted vpon mens shoulders, hauing his triple crowned Regnū vpon his head, is acclaimed vnto by people vpon their knees, with the said Title and Epithets of Diuinitie? May not we that are grosser-headed Tramontanes, ima∣gine and conceit that hee is adored as a God amongst you? What Luciferian pride in him a man of sinne, to admit, yea to delight in the same? These your accla∣mations giuen to a sinfull wretch doe farre passe those which were giuen to the Sonne of God, when he entred into Hierusalem some fiue daies before his passion; those were as publike protestations of his true Diuinitie; and these of yours are as applaudings of your Vice Gods
forged Deitie and yet si Dijs placet, you doe not honor him as a God sitting in the Temple. Further, who can excuse him for his most shamefull dilapidating of S. Peters Patrimonie? his impudent pro∣fusing of Church liuings, vpon his Nephewes and kin∣red? of which he hath made no lesse then fiue Cardi∣nalls, a very monster and Portent in your Church. Pius the V. was so Saintly at his entrance into the Papa∣cie, that by no meanes he could be induced to create any one of his kinred Cardinall, for which Marphorius blasphemously applied that vnto him, (Qui propter nos homines, & propter nostram salutem descendit de coelis) who for vs men and for our saluation came downe from heauen. But not long after being changed by the working of the chaire of Pestilence, and making one of his kinred a Car∣dinall, your said foule-mouthed Marphorius applyed vnto him, that which followeth in the Creed: (Incar∣natus est & homo factus est) Hee became fleshly incarnate, and was made man, that is, like vnto his Predecessours men of sin, and sonnes of perdition. But this your Paul surpasseth them all (so doth your chaire of Pestilence make the Insidents (proficere in peius) to proue worse and worse) for hee hath made diuers Cardinalls of his owne blood, and vpon him who beareth the name Burghesius, Nonus Homo fine. (of his exhaust and spent Familie) he hath heaped such a world of wealth, that it passeth all measure; Him hee maketh as it were the necke betwixt himselfe the Head, and the Church the bodie; so that no Church can be prouided of a Pastour, but through his hands. Where∣vpon it followeth, that there is an infinitie of Concur∣rents (at Rome where the Marte is kept) of such as seeke to chaffare for some Church-liuing; (non vt dentur dig∣niori) Not that the same may be giuen to the more worthy; for present pay carries all away, and so goes the game, whereof you Mr. Flud cannot be ignorant; and such a one is your Optimus Sanctissimus Ʋice-Deus: to him and
his you may sing, Gloria Patri, & nepotibus in secula se∣culorum. I haue touched briefly some of your holy Fathers virtues, I will pretermit many others as his rashnesse, effeminatenesse, inconstancie &c. yet may I not let passe his Iudas-like sinne who by a kisse betrayed his Master. When your holy Prouinciall Garnet his Brethren, and Garnet. Tesmond. Gerrard. Holdcorne. Cateby. Percy. their Associates, were about their pouder barrells and billets in Westminsters vault; with which they inten¦ded (if the heauens had not letted them) to haue blown vp our Cesar, his progeny, and all his worthies; this most detestable plot of them was not vnknowne to your Ioue of Rome: yet then, he (to dazell the eyes of our State-gouernours) must send forsooth a Breefe, by which he chargeth most strictly all Romane Catholikes in this Iland; not to attempt any thing against his Ma∣iestie our most dread Soueraigne; and to whom must this breife be especially commended (as obteined by It was colou∣rably directed to Blackwell in∣tended for Garnet. his procuring) to Garnet forsooth; euen one of the cheifest Architects of the Pouder proiect? O treachery of treacheries, and most perfidious treacherie! Orcus it selfe may be astonished thereat: and notwithstanding all this, euen yet dare some, (abusing Clemency and ver∣tue of affabilitie, and integritie her selfe which is prone to iudge the best of all) to suggest, to speake in the be∣halfe of the suspected Confederates of such Infernall lo∣custs, yea to vse as instruments Church-Papists and cōmunion Recusants, for what further proiects, future times and occasions may make easie. O Lord be plea∣sed to open the eyes of those who sit at the sterne, Giue them, yea engraue and imprint in their soules a resoluti∣on neuer to giue credit to any promessos or Iuramentos whatsoeuer made by the Ignatianed or their disciples. Be pleased ô Lord to grant, that our Lyon may defend and exalt the glory of the Crosse, that he may sleepe and rest in securitie; in securitie yet apertis oculis; dormiat vi∣gilans,
let him sleepe ô Lord waking and vigilant, with his eyes open against the Machauilian pollicies of these times; Cadant à latere, cadant à dextris, let them fall both at the left hand and at the right hand which intend ill to Sion, and let all who pray for the peace of Hierusalem say Amen. I could adde much more in this place, concerning the enormities of Rome and your serralls; but I willingly o∣mit so to doe; whereby you may vnderstand Mr. Flood with what great reason I was moued to wish, that your miracles would worke some good conuersions in the Cheeftaines of your Church; especially at that place, where the Marte of your miracles is kept; and in such other places where like Markets are kept, as at Brussells, Louaine, Doway, S. Omers, Arras, Seuill &c. I will not enter into particulars concerning such places, your own consciences are best witnesses, what pernicious proiects, what calumnious detractions, what odious imputati∣ons, what abominable hipocrisies, are there on foote; I onely say that the standing Stationers, and Assistants at your miracle markets and miracle forges, are for most part of lewdest life, and wickedst behauiour, so power∣full are your miracles for the working of sanctity in the beholders. To proceede; you tell vs Master Floode of diuerse conuerted from heresie (you terme Christianitie here∣sie) to your Catholike faith: Alac, what pittie that those Laddes were not conuerted who stole away the Sichi∣mite Lady-image? can you tell vs any newes of their conuersion after so many yeares, since the pretty God∣desse was stolne away? what maruell, that none were conuerted by some miracles for the defacing of your I∣dolls here in England? O that Margaret Iesop that Brus∣fells-lasse, or lame Clement had liued sanctified liues, vp∣on their miraculous pretenced recuring! You haue heard I am assured of Ginkes, who at the time of the
sweating sickenesse was condemned at Oxford, your Ig∣natians and ignatianed, haue proclaimed euery where, that for the wronges then offered vnto this your sancti∣fied Ginkes (who gaue testimonie to your Poperie) God sent that greeuous punishment which tooke both Bell & Barham away; happie it had beene, if that your roling Ginkes had liued vpon so miraculous a deliuerance a more sanctified life then he did at Rhemes, where how vainely he liued you cannot but haue heard. What? did Master Newtons late vision, which he hath pretended to haue had at Staunford against the Oath of Allegiance, any whit transforme that man into a more sanctified course of life, then he liued vpon the very point when he was honoured by the heauens with so gracious a vision? Of what nature that idle vision was the Reader may finde in Master Widrington, who handleth the same, Disputat. Theol∣ogica de Iuram. Fidelitatis. cap. 10. and doth in part discouer the vanitie thereof; I my selfe had examined the same from toppe to toe aboue two yeares since, and shewed euery part and parcell thereof to be meerely vaine, yea most of it and the manner of it, to be flat repugnant to popish principles, which trea∣tise ere this had seene light had it not beene that Master Newton the Visioner was reputed by those that sit at the sterne of this Kingdome to be fitter for Bedlam then to haue any answere made to his phantasticke dreame. The rest which followeth in this diuision, is either wholy ostentatiue or wholy impertinent. That many are perswaded by these your miracles to frequent your sacraments, and to goe often to confession I do not mar∣uell thereat, for one superstition leadeth to another; and none are more tainted with sinne (and so had neede to frequent confession) then such of yours, as are greatest listeners of miracles; they being for most part, such as the Apostle speaketh of; Men louers of their owne selues, 2. Tim. 3. Couetous, Boasters, Proude, Blasphemers, disobedient to pa∣rents, vnthankefull, vnholy, without naturall affection, Truce-breakers,
False, accusers, incontinent, sierce, Despisers of those that are good, heady, Traitors, high-minded, Louers of plea∣sures more then Louers of God, hauing a forme of godlinesse but denying the power thereof; Thus the Apostle: In which Catalogue (if the present occasion would permit mee) I durst vndertake to shew by former and late ex∣amples, that none can bee found more culpable then your Thrice-holy fathers and their purpured brethren. The very first (to pretermit all the rest) where the Apo∣stle saith that they shall be men louers of themselues, in whom is the prophecie fulfilled if not in your Popes, who are so wedded to their willes, iudgements and com∣mandes, that none may or dare gainsay them? who are so wedded to their owne lusts, that for the exalting of their Allied they will turne all topsie turuie? who are so eager to pleasure themselues, that for their tast they must haue weekely fish, herbes, and fruites brought wellny from all places of Italy: for their cloathing, their softell arraiments can be had: and haue continually such mag∣nificent attendance as is farre vnbefitting holy Peters Successour; yeares would faile mee for the declaring of their superfluous selfe-louing vanities in this kinde, and would God that by imitation, this Canker had not spred it selfe further. Whereas you adde, that yours by meanes of such miracles are moued to restore things vnlawfully taken, and to satisfie for wronges offered, I can hardly containe my selfe from laughter; Sir, whatsoeuer some of your simple Deuoutes may doe, yet I am more then most as∣sured that this manner of doctrine, is not lesse practised by any then by your Ignatians and their Fauourites the Ignatianed, which are as Stationers where this miracle-monging is. Call to minde Sir, the wrongs which your holy brethren the Ignatians and their Fauourites haue done, by the way of deffamation, and traiterous strata∣gemes to Popes, Kings, and kingdomes; to Churches,
Colledges, Seminaries; Vniuersities, Sorbones, and A∣cademies; to religious orders of all sortes; to Prelates and other Clergie of all degrees; and hauing done such wronges and being charged therewith most iustly, haue your miracles euer perswaded them to do any satisfacti∣on or to make restitution? no God wot. Consider what your Ignatian spirit is, concerning the Ignatians make no conscience to restore fame, Is it not lesse wrong for a man to haue his life taken away by poy∣son then his good name by calumny where and when thee cannot answer for himselfe? Restitution of debts secret to Heretikes is not needfull, saith the Igna∣tian. restitution of goods purloyned by your deuoted sisters and humbled Penitents, from their Husbandes; you cannot but haue heard that, whereof England, France, Germanie, Spaine, Italy is full, some examples I haue ad∣ded. But here by the way because you talke so much of re∣stitution of goods, I would haue the Reader to obserue, that the Ignatians doe procure for such their Priests as be sent into Countries which they call hereticall, one speci∣all facultie, from their holy Father, by which they haue power to compound with their Penitents, for all secret restitutions due to heretikes; I my selfe had the facultie granted vnder these wordes, (facultas componendi super restitutiones occultas debitas hereticis) Afacultie, to com∣pound for such secret restitutions, as are due to Heretikes. by which your manner of proceeding, it may easily ap∣peare what care you haue of restitution, when you can make any benefit by compounding. Mr. Floode pag. 152. num. 35. But a greater fruite reaped from our miracles, and a clea∣rer signe that they are of God, is the conuersion of Infidells; many Countreies partly by this meanes, partly by the good life of our religious Preachers of Gods word, haue beene in this age wonne to Christ, to the increase of the Christian name. These miracles haue beene so cleare, and the fruit of them so manifest, that some learned Protestants, Philip: Nicll. de regno Christi lib. 1. pag. 312. 313. 14. Iesui∣tae licet Idolola∣trae sin tamen pssunt per no∣men Christi mag∣nas virtutes condere apud Judos. herein not vnlike to the Magicians of Egipt, acknowledged both in the miracles,
and conuersion the finger of God. But they adde that such miracles Iesuitae in pri∣ma Indoris con∣uersi nesese Lu∣thoranos vel E∣uangelicos pre∣bent ibidem pag. 53. are done in confirmation of the Protostant Gospell, which the Iesuites preach in those Countries. ANSWER. Here Master Floode you goe on in generall termes which is not without some intention of fraude; Perhaps you meane the west part of the world, called America, conteining Peru, Brasile &c, which some abusiuely call the west Indies: if you intend these, heare for, answere; Victoria relect. 5 de Indis quinta propositio in ex∣aminatione Ti∣tult Hispanorū. what your famous and very learned protectour Victoria writeth of the same: thus he concludeth; Quinta conclu∣sio, The sift conclusion; To me it doth not sufficiently appeare, whether the Christian faith hath beene as yet sufficiently pro∣posed, and shewed to those Barbarous people, so that they were bound vnder paine of new sinne to beleeue the same; This I say because (as it is manifest by the second proposition) they are not bound to beleeue, vnlesse faith bee proposed with probable perswasion; But I heare of no miracles, nor signes; neither doe I see any such religious examples of life; nay rather I see It is affirmed as most certain of those Chri∣stians who first found the In∣dians that they vsed such cru∣el ie vpon the Inhabitants that they called Iesus Christ the God of crueltie &c. Diez with more to like effect serm. in Dom. de passione part. 1. See Acosta lib. de prcura. Jud. salu. many crimes and scandalls, and many impicties; wherefore, it doth not appeare, that Christian religion hath beene so conue∣niently and godly preached vnto them; so that they are bound to accept of the same: Thus this famous Prelectour, by which it is euident, that howsoeuer the Spanish; and Pa∣pall Emperour, haue drawne them into their subiection, they haue not done the same by the power of miracles and integritie of life; but only by dint of sword; which did so immanely and barbarouslie make hauocke of them; to the destruction of some millions of them, that no tongue is able to expresse the immanitie of their do∣ings. I doe here professe ingenuouslie, that whilest I liued a Romanist reading the outragious cruelties, which those most barbarous Spaniards, did then and there commit against those wretches, I could not containe
from teares, hauing these or like considerations offering themselues to my minde. Doth it not appertaine to the iust iudgement of God to auenge such immane cruelties? haue not Christian Princes iust occasion, to wage warre against that Nation for making such hauocke of man∣kinde euen against the law of nature her selfe? Can these men be endewed with the spirit of God, who thus tyran∣nize like Furies of hell? Are these the speciall deuoutes of the Masse? Are these the cheife pillours of transsub∣stantiation? do these challenge the defence of the same to be their peculiar glorie thus then; And be it so, let thein glory in their impieties? let immanitie, impietie, idolatrie, and treacherie runne thus euer handy pandie together vnder a brauing robe. But let great Britaine be thankefull yea euer thankfull to the great God of hea∣uen, who in 88. deliuered her from the like immanitie (as the Barbarians suffered) which their then imperious Commaunder the Duke of Medina threatned against her: it is well knowne, that he intended a totall and vt∣ter subuersion of all: what they doe now proiect and aime at, I cannot say; yet I will be so bold out of my ten∣der loue to my Countrey, to write what I haue heard some of them beforehand, purposing and consulting to proiect in these our halcyonian times of peace and pro∣speritie; It were meere stupidity once to thinke that the Pope and his Confede∣rates doe not incessantly ex∣pect an occasi∣on for the sub∣uersion of this Kingdome. which I do the rather because I doubt not, but that our enemies doe desire nothing more, then that we should sleepe in securitie the which by this one instance may appeare; when of late by iust command there was a generall reuewing and refurnishing of armour in this Kingdome, and trayning of men, how did the bristles of some corrouce and grow testie? Ex subitaneis cognostitur habitus; A habitods knowne by suddaine actions; but now I will to what I obserued in my trauailes. Wheresoeuer and whensoeuer I heard (as I haue done often) some, no small ones, of those Countries, and of those Courts, debate vpon eightie eights ouerthrow;
they euer resolued that Elizabeth liuing (so they termed that renowned Queenes raigne) there was no such like attempt to be made, but shee being dead, then if varietie of Competitours (which they hoped for) did bring confusion, it would be good fishing; otherwise if their follow a Successour peaceably to the Crowne (as by the gracious prouidence of God hapned, in our present most dread Soueraigne, to their feared confusion, and our vn∣speakeable comfort) then they resolued, that all meanes possible were to be vsed that Peace (whereof they stood The mysteric of the Pope and his confe∣derates against this kingdome. in great neede; a Renowned Queene hauing brought them vpon their knees) might be concluded, which be∣ing made, men by the secret endeuours of Priests and Religious (who might be sent hither with more securitie then before) we must draw (said they) if not wholly, yet at least to be our indirect fauourers and friends, some of the Commanders, and those who cannot bee wonne by pretence of Religion, must be purchased by gifts and large promises. But aboue all we must labour to shake hands with some of those, to whom the care of the Nauie, the Portes, and Sea coasts is committed, that if any such like attempt hereafter be thought vpon, by the Pope or his Catholike Maiestie, we may finde some fa∣uourites; till this be done (said they) it is in vaine to thinke of Englands conversion, so they termed her in∣tended conquest and subuersion. Thus and in like sort, they then proiected: which my sterie of iniquitie whe∣ther it be now on foore or not, I cannot say, Loue cau∣ses ielousie; and where fraude hath euer been found, treacherie may be suspected. I cannot say that Carro∣chings and Feastings; entercoursings and complyings; fauourings and giuings, haue any such intent, but Danai metuendi etiam dona ferentes. I will not say there are gifts or giuers, but if there be, (ex vno disce omnes) by one learne all. When I was prisoner in Newgate for profession of Poperie, the then Seniour Deu Pedro sent vnto the prison,
a pretty, nay a pettie diuident of fiue pounds to be deli∣uered It is more then to be feared that gifts may ballance and turne English Needels from the North pole to the South, &c. among the Priests that were there; it was sent by one Richard Pilson an Englishman, and one of the Pre∣sidiarie Souldiers of Dunkerke; a man familiarly knowne to me in former times at the same place. This man (not knowing that I had taken the oath of Allege∣ance) told me that his Lords pleasure was, that if any Priest there had taken the Oath of Allegeance, hee was to haue no part thereof; which afterwards I found to be true, for diuision was made, and I not minded. The Diuisioner, which was Freeman the Ignatian, and the other Priests, thought that I knew nothing of the grand Present; but afterwards, vnderstanding that I knew both of the money, and of the circumstances wherewith it was to be diuided; they fearing lest I would make the partialitie knowne to the State, gaue me a part, and also caused Pilson to denie what hee had before ingenuously told me. Thus much I write by the way, by which we may inferre, at what, and at whom they doe or would Highly to bee commended is that honorable Person, who of late refused a Ievvell of great value. ayme in their gifts, and what they doe proiect by them. Munera magna dabit fallat fallax vt in hamo; Et piscatorem piscis amare potest? Concerning the miracles which your Indian letters mention (of which you specially intend, as I gather by your marginall note) I answer; that your Ignatians haue been so bold of late yeeres to write at home, so many fonde and fabulous things of their Holy Father, that they deserue no credit for such narrations as they fetch from so farre of. Againe you, who of late haue so glo∣riously boasted of your miraculous childe, whereof I my selfe being amongst you could learne no certaintie: You againe, who haue most impudently endeuoured to gull so iudicious and learned a Nation as this is, with a stramineous miraculous face of the chiefe Powder-plot
Artchitect Garnet. You who haue obtruded vnto vs so See my second addition in the end of this booke, about nings. many papers of forged miracles, doe you now come out with your Indian wonders? Wee cannot beleeue you. Call to minde that rule of the Law, Qui semel est malus semper presutur malus in eodem genere mal. Hee who is found once ill (that is, habitually ill) is alwaies prefu∣med to be ill, in the same kinde of euill, vnlesse the contrarie dee euidently appeare. Call to minde, how gloriously you boasted within these few yeeres of the Great Sophy of Persia his conversion, by one of your order? Call to minde, how euen in the faces of your Aduersaries, that your holy Father Edmundes (a proud contentious arro∣gant head of faction) did with other Priests, publish most fabulous tales concerning the exorcismes and deli∣uerances Confession of Mr. Tirrell Priest vpon oath. The examina∣tions of Sara Williams, Anne Smith, Friswod Williams, recor∣ded in the Court records of high com∣mission, &c. of some possessed lasles, Maryes and Fiddesses &c? Know you not, that the possessed ones haue dis∣couered their forgerie vpon oath and deposition? And if it were not so, there are yet Priests liuing amongst you, (whom I will not name) who laugh in their sleeues at those fables, and those merriments whereof themselues were eye witnesses, they professe ingenuously that they liked not your Father Edmunds proceedings, though for feare they durst not speake against them. Demurre with due consideration, vpon those mira∣culous and prodigious narrations, which the famous Fryer Sebastian Michaelis, together with his brother The admirable historie of Lewes the Ma∣gician, and Magdlen, by Sebastian Mich. Domptius haue published in Fraunce, to the euerlasting confusion of Poperie, concerning the conversion of Magdalene, obteyned by the diligence and praiers of the Papist-Deuill Ʋerrine. Papist-Deuill I call him, because the Deuill gaue himselfe the name of Verrine, and be∣cause all his elegant and Fryer-like discourses, tended to make Magdalene a Roman Papist Conuert. Such Verrines, were fit to be sent to Iapan, Sina, Ormus, &c. to forward your haruest there, for I dare assure you that such your prodigious narrations are idle here, for they
doe greatly confirme vs in our opinions, that your Holy Father is the Antichrist, and sonne of perdition, whereof 2 Thessal: 2. S. Paul speaketh. How our Church esteemeth of Fryer Sebastians narrations, you may vnderstand by this: Our most iudicious and learned Soueraigne, hath in his wisdome (with the good liking of his most learned Archbishop of Canterburie) caused Fryer Sebastians booke, to be translated into our English vulgar tongue, by reading of the same to auert his people from Poperie; and it is translated so ingenuously without the adding of any annotations or caueats, (for the booke of it selfe giueth aduantage inough against Poperie) saue onely, that a iudicious and exquisite Scholler in all points for his yeeres, hath prefixed before the Translation, the reasons and end of the same. Demurre vpon this Mr. Flud seriously, and then your selfe cannot but yeeld, what litle reason wee haue to regard your narrations, which come from so farre as Iapan, Sina, &c. You glorie here much of the sanctitie of your prea∣chers and their holy conuersation (their iustice I hope is more abounding then that of Holt, Garnet, Gerrard, Parsons, Creswel, Walpole, Warneford, &c.) and you twit vs with idle life and sole faith. Sir, our faith is so clothed (I speake not of the Precisians and Sectaries, neither of those that are in aperto or in secret such,) with good workes, that I dare boldlie say standing within the limits of modestie, manie of our men are in no de∣gree inferior to yours: I doe suppose verilie sir, that if his most excellent Maiestie should offer for one Church and Minister permitted in Rome, or Naples, or Millain, or Madrid, to permit two, both Churches and Priests in his City of London; your holie Father and the Spa∣nish monarch would not, nor durst not admit of the same. Tell me in good earnest sir, dare your Spanish Monarch permit in Spaine such accesse of his subiects into the house of our English Embassadors there, to see
our mens liues, and heare their doctrines as is dailie tollerated in some places where his Ambassadors are. Perhaps when you twit vs with single faith naked of good workes; you meane such workes as building of Churches, Chappels, Hospitalls, Colledges, &c. There are sir, who dare vndertake to shew that (due proportion of time and place being obserued) there haue beene as manie such good workes done since reformation as be∣fore; the taske I leaue to them: this I note onelie by the way, that the dilapidations vsed by King Henry, and the wicked appropriating of impropriations haue cooled the deuotions of a great manie, so to obserue such sacri∣legious hauocke, made of Testaments and Wils of our ancient Kings, Priests, Nobles, and all other our prede∣cessors; but as in the Statute containing sixe Popish ar∣ticles, (which your Popish called the whip with sixe strings) he was led awry with humane spirit and worldly policie: so likewise in this dilapidating and ill appropri∣ating of Church estates; but caueat emptor & possessor, lest their possession turne to their vtter ruine. Let them meditate vpon that of Salomon, It is a snare to the man Prou. 20. 25. who deuoureth that which is holy, and to make inquiry after vowes. A snare which will doubtlesse insnare their soules into eternall perdition vnlesse they make restitution, and restore vnto God that which is his. The miracles you speake of, and the fruits of them (say you) haue been so cleere, that some learned Prote∣stants haue acknowledged the finger of God in them. You tell vs of learned Protestants, yet you point vs on∣lie to one in your margin, and him I take it of no extra∣ordinarie note and fame in our Churches; but what if he say as you quote him? hath not your Coster said Coster contro. 2. as much of the Nouatians? It is said (saith he) that some of the Nouatians did miracles in time past, but that was done for testimonie of the Catholicke faith, amongst in∣fidels, but not for strengthening of their errors, as hee
who in the ninth of S. Luke cast out Diuels in Christs name: thus he with more to like purpose. Againe haue not your Remists explaned the same more cleerly in these words? miracles are wrought sometimes by the name Remists annot. in 9. marti. v. 38. of Iesus (whatsoeuer the men be) when it is for the proofe of a truth or for the glory of God, &c. Againe a little after; and so also heretickes may doe miracles among the Heathen to proue any article of the Christian faith. Thus they; com∣pare now this of your men with that which the learned Protestant writeth, for he teacheth no more but that your miracles are done (if done at all) in confirmation of some true points of Christian religion for the glory of Christs name. For further clearing of this point, I desire the Chri∣stian Reader to consider with me, how that the Ignatian and Popish Preachers, doe at the first of their preaching endeauour, or seeme to endeauour to laie for the foun∣dation and first corner stone Christ Iesus, whom they teach and proach to be the onlie Messias, and that by faith in him, and true repentance; with obseruation of his commandements, saluation is onlie to be purchased; and vpon this ground worke they endeauour to ouer∣throw all contrarie worships of Iewes, Infidels, and Gen∣tiles; And so long as they rest here, their manner of prea∣ching is Christian and Apostolicall, for confirmation of which preaching to the Pagans, if God be pleased to shew some miracles, it is not much to be maruelled at: But hauing by such manner of preaching conuerted some to be christians, then they deliuer their owne Ad∣ditaments to this foundation; not of hay and stubble, but of brambles and bryers, then talke they of Indul∣gences, praying to Saints, Popes supremacie, worship∣ping of Images, with a thousand vanities; and that we may better conceiue this their practice with the Infidels, I will in some instances shew their manner of procee∣ding here in England.
When they assault anie they doe not at first inuite them to adoration and worshipping of Images, or knee∣ling to the Crosse; nay rather if occasion of speech of them be offered, they will professe and protest, that they The she man∣ner vsed by Popish Priests to make their new Proselytes doe not adore them, but that they haue them onlie be∣fore them in their Oratories and Churches, as memori∣alls and remembrances of Christ and his Saints; but being fullie conuerted, then they impart vnto them the mysterie of adoration of Images; yet in nice termes, at first, to wit, that they adore and worship them not for themselue, but for God and the Saints whom they re∣present. Againe, they doe not at first teach to their new conuerts (especiallie if men of some good estate or discretion) the Popes absolute, and vnlimited power ouer Princes and kingdomes, to depose or dispose of them; no, no, that is a point reserued, vntill they be of age fit for solide meat, and when they doe teach the same, it is done verie circumspectlie, as that Sussex Igna∣tian, G. . whom I mention in my motiues who denied me absolution, because I held that the Pope had not power to depose Princes, yet the same equiuocating Padre, the same day, after Masses were ended, we sitting at Table I proposing the question vnto him, before the gentle∣man of the house, his wife and some seruants, whether the Pope had power to depose Princes, made this di∣rect answer that he could not, nor would not affirme so much; they were not as then capable of that solid meat; but since as I heare they haue imbraced it. Againe, when they tell their new conuerts, that their sinnes cannot be forgiuen without a Priests absolution, doe they acquaint them with the mysterie of their In∣dulgences? no assuredlie; such excrements they leaue for solide meat and their postpasts. So likewise (to con∣tract much in briefe) at their first dealing with new con∣uerts, they auoid as much as is in them to debate those questions, which are controuerted betwixt them and vs,
and for that their maine fundamentall point of their Popish Gospell, to wit their Popes Inerrability and In∣fallibilitie of iudgement in matters of faith: do we thinke that they impart it to their new conuerts? no, no, they rather teach him to be subiect to generall Councels; and that in their Church no point of faith is, or can be decla∣red without the consent of a generall Councell; thus they for the most part doe deale with most of those, whom they seduce to their side; first perswade, and then teach as Tertullian of old wrote of the heretickes of his time: All which considered, their practice being answerable amongst the Infidels, it is not to be maruelled if God (who hath his elect in all places best known to him∣selfe) doth for the confirmation of some fundamentall points of Christian religion (which they at first truelie deliuer) effect and worke some miracles, whereby his elect out of the thickets of Idolatrie may be called to the Pastour of their Soules. And so I end this discourse with a notable saying of S. Ciprian. To prophecie, to cast out de∣uills, and to doe other great wonders vpon earth, is a high and Ciprian de simp. Prelat siue de vnit. Ecclesiae. a wonderfull thing, yet he who is found to haue all these, doth not therefore obtaine eternall saluation, except he walke-in the obseruation of a iust and vpright way. Thus he Which I desire you to consider Master Flud, and so I come to examine what followeth in your reason. Master Floode pag. 152. num. 35. I thinke sobrietie will smile at the Protestants felicitie in this point, who may sit by the fire-side, or lie quiet in their warme-beds, whilest the Iosuits go into barbarous Countries, to worke miracles, to proue forsooth their Gospell, that Fryers may marry Nunnes; and be saued by idle life in sole faith. I should thinke it more probable, that Luther in his nights con∣ference with the Deuill, De missa An∣gul. did conuert and make him
a friend to Christ, that now hee will bee content to worke miracles, to glorifie and extoll his name. ANSWER. Nay rather Master Floode, sobrietie cannot containe from Ʋatinian-like laughter, at your Ignatian felicitie in bragging and calumniating; Of your bragging, we haue alreadie giuen some touches, a few words here. Whereas you glory of your Iesuits going into barbarous Coun∣tries; I pray you sir, though they goe into barbarous Countries, yet they goe not like Mendicants or without scrip and hauing only staues in their handes and san∣dalls vpon their feete; no, no, sir, they goe plentifully furnished, with all manner of necessaries, fauourablie countenanced, and very honourably prouided for, by those Marchants Portugalls, or Spaniards, who conduct I haue heard some of yours glory of the great and ho∣nourable en∣tertainments yours haue there, and they spoke by expe∣rience. them into those Countries; not to by corners or deserts, but to principall or royall Cities, or cheife townes of the same; where their wants cannot be great but rather none at all. Their manner of proceeding in those Countries, is not vnlike vnto that of their brethren here in England; amongst whom you shall hardly finde one of threescore, that will reside in a mans house of meane note; No Sir, honourable houses are fit residences for your men, and seruices of esteeme (the reconciling of Ladies, Nobles, Noblesses, and other Persons of worth) but if there be any worke of hazard, of labour, or of meane sort, that your brethren vse to put ouer to some Secular Priests, their Pendants and Creatures, which either reside neere vnto them or with them at their pleasures, to go, come, or stay as they shall appoint. Whereas you talke of sitting by the fire, or sleeping in warme beds, I dare boldly say, number for number; the same is more practised by your Priests and Ignatians, then by our Ministers, except some few disordered ones;
the reason whereof first is, their neuer intermitted dili∣gence in preaching, which cannot be performed with∣out much studie and labour, whereas few of yours take care for Sermons; their ordinarie taskes being to heare some pretty tales at confessions, to mumble vp their of∣fices, and to say their Masses. For sleeping in warme beds, I dare vndertake you surpasse for time most of our Ministers; and to speake more specially of you Ignati∣ans, what else is your manner of liuing, then a meere philosophicall (I will not say Epicurian) summe of con∣tentment? All your rules, orders, gouernment, disciplines, tend to this end, that you may enioy your contents; free The Ignatians hard & austere liues. from sorrow or greife; for this end your apparrell is con∣uenient, warme, sweete and soft; your diet sweete, of the best, wholesome not without often varieties of dishes, pasts, postpasts, antepasts; you ordinarily feede thrice a day, in the Sommer you haue your afternoones collations; For sleepe you haue seuen houres and a halfe in winter; more vpon your recreation daies, and ordi∣narily eight houres in Sommer: if you were restrained from walking abroad, (considering the pleasantnesse of your Orchards and Gardens) the same were tollerable; but it is not so, for you haue your often parambulations abroad, through cities; and into the pleasantest fieldes and vineyardes; For your studies and exercises you haue your competency of bookes, and all other con∣uenient helpes; In time of sickenesse, what doe you, or can you want, which arte or nature may afford? In breefe, your whole manner of liuing, is a summe of phi∣losophicall content. And this I take to be the cause, why you doe not willingly permit any (no hardly of your priuates) to enter into the secretter roomes of your most neete and daintily ordered houses; lest they should ob∣serue in you, too great an Epicurian like care: I doe as∣sure my selfe, that there are very few Ministers in En∣gland,
who would not gladly bee content to be so well prouided for as you Ignatians are; they might haue been all of them sufficiently prouided for (without that com∣petencie of meanes which our Benificelesse precisians prate of) had not your holy Father the lawlesse Outlaw when hee domineired in this Kingdome diuided the Tithes of Parishes bestowing the best and fattest of them vpon his seruiceable locusts &c. Perhaps you will make answere and say, that though you haue all these worldly contents, yet you vse them moderately, and doe also containe from voluptuous pleasures of the flesh. What your moderation is, all those know who know you; how moderate (I pray you) was your holy Padre Gerrard, who reuelled it lustily in Sir Euerard Digbies house whilest the poore Knight himselfe, was mewed vp to meditate his weeke-contem∣plation of your vaine exercises? What your voluptuous∣nesse is it would appeare, if particulars might be produ∣ced; would God too many of your popish Monkes, Fryers &c. were not acquainted with that nefand positi∣on of your Italian Cynedes who haue not been ashamed publikely and in print to commend and extoll vnnatu∣rall pleasures, which a modest penne cannot so much as touch, before the holy State of matrimony which God hath instituted and approued? If you would seriously consider, what voluptuous abuses are committed in ma∣nie of your Congregations, you would haue litle cause to twit our Church for that she christianlie alloweth and approueth with the Apostle, Mariage to be a thing honou∣rable in all, yea in Fryers and Nunnes, comming to the truth, and shaking off the bonds of blindnesse, wherein they had superstitiously enthralled themselues. Much hath been said by the learned of our Churches, in defence of such mariages, yet considering how vni∣uersall the calumniation is, euen by those Priests, Dames, Matrones, Maides, Youthes, (who are guiltie Criminis
pessimi,) and further considering that some Protestants for some politike respects, doe not greatly arride or ap∣proue of such mariages, I haue purposed in this place with the Readers patience, in all possible breuitie, to shew the lawfulnesse of such mariages, euen out of popish principles, and their dogmaticall Tenents. For clearing of this truth, I am first to prefixe some suppositions, and out of them to make my inferences. First, I suppose as a truth confessed by them all, or  most of them, that Christ and his Apostles did not pre∣scribe necessitie or vow of single life, to any of the holy Aquinas 2. 2. q. 88. art. 11. Alij omnes. Canon. Apost. Can. 5. Gratian: causa 26. q. 2. cap. Sors dist: 31. cap. Quoniam. Durand: de Conc: Celebr. Aquinas vbi supra art: 2. Orders; as Presbyterie, Decanrie, Subdeaconrie, either before the taking, or after the taking of the same: but that concerning the vow of chastitie either from Christ himselfe, or his Apostles, there is no other order then the order of Counsell; which is of this nature, according to the doctrine of all Pontificians, (no one Doctour ex∣cepted) that the vse, acceptance, and admittance of the same, is meerely of free choice and election, not out of necessitie. Thus they constantly deliuer concerning Euangelicall Counsells, which they distinguish into a threefold number, Obedience, Pouertie, Chastitie; of all which their doctrine is with the Apostle, Preceptum 1 Cor: 7. 25. Domini non habent, sed solum consilium. That they haue no precept of the Lord, but only his Counsell. thus they. Secondly, I doe suppose, that as the sonne of God  made no limitation from mariage in any, so doubtlesse in that point he had respect vnto his Fathers prime in∣stitution, who in Paradise made an euerlasting ordinance approuing and commending the same. This is a truth confessed by all sides, howsoeuer some popish Authors may sometimes seeme to denie it, in that they would seeme to fasten sinfull impurities vpon the state of ma∣riage it selfe, but being called in question for the same, they crie peccaui, yea they will reuile you if you seeme to lay such an imputation vpon them and their Church.
Thirdly, I suppose that which the Aduersaries them∣selues  cannot denie, as being clearely to be proued out of their owne Historians, Canonists, Diuines; to wit, that the inhibition and restrayning of mariage in some Per∣sons; first by precept and law onely, after by vow and promise, was brought into the Westerne Church, by the ordinance and command of the Bishops of Rome; I say Westerne Church, for the East Churches would ne∣uer Disi: 31. cap. Alter. Can. 13. apud Gratian. dist. 37. cap. Quoniam. Gloss. in cap. Cū in preterito. dist. 84. admit of the same, as it is euident by a Cannon of the Councell in Trullo flatly decreeing against it. Now it was brought into the Westerne Church thus vnder a shew of godlinesse, the first shadow of it we finde in Siri∣cius Pope commanding the same. The like in Calixtus, and after them in Gregorie the first; but these preuailed not to make their commands vniuersally receiued. But when Gregorie the seuenth (that Hildebrand who tram∣pled vpon the Crownes of Emperours, who exalted him selfe aboue all that vpon earth is called God) came pre∣sently vpon the thousand yeere; hee indeed preuailed more for the promise of single life in such as came to the Clergie, then all his Predecessors could before; and yet Auentine hist: Boior. lib. 5. pag: 355. & p. 346. alias. not so vniuersally, but that he was stoutly gainesayd by many Prelates, innumerable Priests, and the greatest part of the Laitie, who were growne to haue that perswa∣sion of their Clergies incontinencie, that they would hardly admit any vnmarried Priests, to be their Pastors; thinking otherwise, that their wiues, daughters, seruants would hardly liue in safegard from their letcherous as∣saults. So that then in this supposition, it resteth invio∣lably true, so true that there is no gainesaying it, that some Popes with their Italian Synodes, or some prouin∣ciall Councells of other Countries, haue endeuoured to establish the promise and vow of single life in their Cler∣gie, notwithsttanding there was neuer yet any I meane a true generall Councell; the Hellen of Trent is not worth naming, being in truth not Generall. Generall Councell, which by Canon decreed the same. Yea more, neuer yet any Prouinciall Papall Synode, (obserue this)
which hath dared to decree the same, as a speciall insti∣tution of Christ himselfe, or of any of his Apostles; they make it onely an ecclesiasticall institution, or ordinance of their owne. And in this point I am so confident, that I am assured no Aduersarie can proue the contrary. Fourthly, I suppose, how with ioynt voice and loude  cry, euen to the actishment of the Hearers and Rea∣ders, their owne Canonists, Historians; Diuines, Fathers, Bishops, Priests, Likes (yea euen those who themselues liued vnmarried) haue proclaimed to the world a con∣fluence of heastly impurities, sodomiticall abhominati∣ons, sacrilegious villanies, nefand buggeries, to haue ouerflowen and ouerwhelmed their Clergie and their whole Church, occasioned and following by reason of the more stricter obseruing the said law of single life. For the proofe of this point, I dare vndertake to bring more then a Iurie of their owne Classicall Authors. Such is the fruit of the vnprofitable and pernicious tree plan∣ted Matth: 7. 16. by the Papall hand. Fiftly, I suppose as a doctrine taught and receiued by  them all, that no vow or promise whatsoeuer is of force Aquin: 2. 2. q. 88. Summista & Canonistae omnes. obligatiue, by binding the conscience or pleasing to God, which is made of a thing vnprofitable or vaine, or which hindreth a greater good, and that in all such cases, dis∣pensation or commutation and changing of such vowes is lawfull; yea and in case that a vow is vnprofitable or vaine, dispensation by a Superiour is not absolutely ne∣cessarie, but only for declaration sake, and to remoue scandall, otherwise such vowes in themselues are meerly Aquin: vbi sup: ar 2. ad 5. & 12. idle, vaine, and of  and are securely to be broken, faith Aqains  be had. Sixthly, I suppose,  a  and good dispen∣sation, Popes haue dis∣pensed with some religious professed Vo∣taries vpon temporall re∣spects. or a good and effectuall commucation of any vowes, it is sufficient if there be a just cause. This is the generall doctrine of them all yea their resolute Ignatian Sá resolueth  Ad dispenfandum sufficit putari causam
esse rattonabilem. To dispense it is sufficient, if the cause be Sa his Apho∣rismes, verbo, Dispensatio. thought to be reasonable. Seuenthly, I suppose, that whereas all Pontificians doe agree, that vowes and oathes may be dissolued, yet  it is controuerted amongst them, when vowes and oaths be dispensed, whether there be a true relaxation and re∣leasing of them or not, but onely a declaration that the same binde not, to wit, that the matter of the vow or oath being changed either by circumstance of time, place, end, or condition of person, the vow or oath, which did binde before, is now changed and altered, so that now it bindeth not; as for example. Such subiects as are by oath for confirmation of their fidelitie further bound to their Soueraignes, if the said Soueraignes hap∣pen to be excommunicate and denounced by the Pope (as it hath hapned in this Kingdome) the question is, whether such Subiects shall need a very relaxation or re∣lease from such their oathes, or rather only a declaration, that such their oathes binde not, the matter of their oathes being changed, to wit, they that were Soue∣raignes before, being how none; their Soueraignties being taken from them, by vertue of their Popes denun∣ciatiue excommunication or deposition. This and like questions are indeed controuerted amongst them, in See Azor: his Institutions lib. 11. Tom. 2. their Scholastike Disputations; yet generally the lear∣nedst of them doe hold, that there is only a declaration, no relaxation or release; and their reason and ground of this is very strong; for otherwise (say they) it cannot be auoyded, but that the Pope shall be thought to haue power to dispense in the Commandements of the first Table, to which the obligation of vowes and oathes doe appertaine. Thus they; and this is a point, which the Reader must carrie well in his minde; for if their dis∣pensations be no other then declarations, that vowes Nota bene. and oathes binde not in such cases, by reason of some alteration either of matter or person, or circumstance of
matter and person, then such dispensations are not acts See Sá Aphor: verbo, Vot. Irritatio 9. of iurisdiction and power, but rather are effects and acts of knowledge; which are sooner to bee found in a learned Priest, then in an ignorant Prelate; out of which supposition it may be clearely inferred, that in case di∣uers learned men shall declare, that such and such vowes, or oathes doe not binde the makers of them, but rather that they are hurtfull, vnprofitable, pernicious, that then the consciences of such Vowers or Swearers shall be asse∣cured, if they keepe not the same; when their Bishops and Superiours be maliciously bent, and will not graunt any dispensation or relaxation for the same. Eightly, I suppose as a truth manifest, taught in ex∣presse  termes by many of their Cheifetaines, and eui∣dently deduced out of them all; to wit, that when two vowes incompatible (that is, which cannot be kept toge∣ther) doe concurre, if they be both alike good, the first is to be kept, otherwise the better of the two, and that Sa. verbo Vote. 33. Alij. which is necessarie vpon command, before that which is voluntarie, and vpon free election. Ninthly, I suppose that, which (though not deliuered  by all) is taught by their most and best learned; I might say all, to wit, that any one, who shall vow to enter into some one speciall religion and to continue in the same; if in the yeere of his probation or tryall, hee shall finde himselfe not fit nor able for the same, he may freely and safely goe out, and leaue of that course of life betaking himselfe to marriage. Tenthly, I suppose, that which is expresly deliuered  by some of them, not gainesayd by any; to wit, that hee or shee, who maketh a vow, which in the roote and be∣ginning of the same is not sound or valid, if afterwards he shall vpon an erroneous iudgement thinking himselfe Sa. vbi supra 7. & 13. bound therewith, ratifie, confirme, and approue the same; yet vpon a better consideration he may perswade himselfe that he is not bound therevnto, but is as free as
if he had neuer vowed the same. Eleuenthly, I suppose that he or she who voweth any  thing for an ill end, and vpon a wicked cause, is no whit tyed by such a vow, or bound to keepe the same Sà vbi supra 4. & 18. Aquin vbi sup 2. ad 3. ex vi vots, by the force of the vow, and as it is obliga∣torie before God; howsoeuer by humane authoritie, they may be compelled therevnto. This is a truth ma∣nifest in it selfe confessed by them all. Twelfthly, I suppose, that which is deliuered by  them in all expresse termes, to wit, that a vow which is made of an impossible thing, bindeth not; which is not Sa, Azor: Na∣uare Tolet: mes. only to be vnderstood, of that which is physically and naturally impossible, as if one Icarus-like should vow he would flie to Rome; but also of that which is mo∣rally impossible, as for example, if a man should vow, he would vpon his knees creepe to Rome from Paris; or that hee would neuer commit sinne at all; or if a wo∣man should make a vow that she would neuer speake an idle worde; Or if a man that is by nature hastie, should make a vow that he would neuer speake one hastie word: These vowes, and all of like nature, are in themselues voide, as being of such things as are morally impossible. Thirteenthly, I suppose, as an euident truth deli∣uered  also by the Aduersaries; that no married Person either Husband, or Wife; no Childe vnder gouern∣ment of Parents; no Religious Person vnder obedi∣ence of Superiours, can make any Vow, which shall binde their consciences, without approuance of the Husband, or Wife, allowance of Parents, or approba∣tion of Superiours. Yea their Cardinall Tollet pro∣nounceth Tollet. lib. 4. cap. 18. resolutely, When the matter of the Vow is contrarie to those things in which the Inferiour is bound to obey the Superiour, as the Childe the Parent, pre∣sently the vowes are voide, vnlesse they be approued by the Superiours. Fourteenthly I suppose, that which is defended by
most of the Aduersaries; to wit, that it is not a verball vowing of the mouth, which bindeth any man before God, but that further there is required an expresse inten∣tion of him that voweth if not to binde himselfe yet at Sa: verbo voto 6 Aquinas 2. 2. q. 88. 3. ad 3. & art. 1. per totum alias. lest an intention to vow, and make a promise; So that he who shall with his mouth vtter wordes of a vowe, if he had neither intention to vowe, nor to binde himselfe; he is not bound before God, howsoeuer hee may bee compelled by authoritie of man to obserue the same, which he seemed to vow and promise. These things thus supposed as clearely maintained by the Aduersaries, I doe out of them deduct certaine con∣sequences (agreeing to the rule and analogie of faith) which do approue and commend the marriages of such Fryers, Nunnes, or Priests, who conuerted from Pope∣rie, shall adioyne themselues to the reformed Churches. Out of the first, second, third, and fourth suppositi∣ons  I thus euidently inferre; that considering Bishops Canon Apost. 5. Athanas epist. ad Dracentium. See Brigets Re∣uelat. lib. 7. re∣uelat. cap. 10. and Greg. lib. 3. epist. 34. Priests &c. in the primitiue Church were indifferently married, and that there is no order nor command from Christ, or from his Apostles, touching the vow or pro∣mise of single life in Clergie-men; and further, that the same was brought into the Church by the Bishops of Rome by degrees; First, by law and command only, that such as tooke orders should lead single liues; afterwards, (because the same law was not well obserued by diuers Greg. lib. 1. Indict. 9. epist. 42. Auentine saith that the forbid∣ding of marri∣age in Priests was reputed by many Prelates &c. a pestife∣rous heresie, Auent. lib. 5. pag. 355. after they had taken orders) it was deuised by the Bi∣shops of Rome (whereof wee haue example in Gregorie the first) that none should be admitted to sacred Orders of Subdeaconship who would not at the taking of the same, promise to liue single liues; and weighing further, that to the very astonishment of the heauens, and the prouoking of Gods wrath against mankinde, (by the meanes of the said lawes and vowes (there haue follow∣ed such Seas of most abominable and nefand sinnes in their Church; I should thinke him or her, sinfully wick∣ed,
who pondering that of the Apostle that the Church 2. Cor. 10. 8. hath no power giuen her but (in aedificationem) for edi∣fying, shall not account the holy Father of Rome most desperately malicious, who knowing what nefand abo∣minations are practised by his Clergie, by meanes of his said enforced lawes and vowes, will not reuoke the same, and leaue the point of marriage in the Clergies free choise, as Christ and his Apostles left the same. For is Aquinas 12. q. 96. 3. 4. it not an axiome in diuinitie, a principle in philosophie, that any humane law, whatsoeuer which is made for the benefit of soules, and auoyding of sinne, or iniustice: if the same law proue afterwardes to be pernicious, that it ought to be remoued and reuoked? I dare vndertake there was neuer yet Lawgiuer, who doth not approue this; only the Outlaw of Rome because hee must (accor∣ding to Daniels prophecie simulare castitatem) dissemble chastity; he will not do it in this: Answere me directly Master Floode: are there not innumerable Ecclesiasticall Lawes and Canons in your Church, some enacted by Generall Councells? some decreed by your Popes, wich notwithstanding vpon some inconueniences arising in the keeping of them, haue growne out of vse, and haue become (nullae) none, of no force? how many of the Ec∣clesiasticall Canons of the Nicene, Constantinopolitane, Sardike, Laterane, and other Councells haue beene cashi∣red either by expresse order, or conniuency of your Popes? what; shall inconueniences remoue lawes esta∣blished by supreame and vniuersall authoritie? and shall not such a confluence of most abominable impurities, cause your holy Father to remoue an vnnecessarie Law of his owne hatching and bringing foorth? How haue I heard your great Statesman Parsons in presence of some of the Spanish (muy Poderosos seniores) most mightie Se∣niours, inueigh most bitterly against some of the ancient lawes of this Kingdome, especially that, concerning triall by a Iewry of twelue, for some inconueniences
which his Fatherhood conceiued to be in it? wherupon he in his booke of reformation, vpon Englands conuer∣sion, did Dictatour-like decree an amendment of the same; especially in that point, because in case of triall for life and death, amongst vs in England no man is permitted to haue his Aduocate or Counceler, though in all other ciuill causes, so much is allowed. But this we must leaue to the Lawyers (whom it concerneth) who are to defend the equitie of their Lawes: this I obserue and inferre, if Parsons thought a law of so great antiquity, (he constantly affirmed the same to haue been brought in by William the Conquerour, for the ruinating and sub∣uersion of the English) worthy either of correction, or remoueall, for some temporall inconueniences arising Apud Eneam Siluiū de Gestis Conc. Basil. Multisaluaren∣tur in Sacerdotio coniugato qui in sterili damnan∣tur. See Panor. cap. Cum olim de Cleric. coning. thereout? why shall not the losse of innumerable soules (for as one of your owne said, multisaluarentur &c. Ma∣ny would be saued in a married Priesthood who are damned in a barren Presbiteracie) be a sufficient cause to remoue so vnnecessarie and wicked a Law? which as it is cause of eternall perdition to many; so I boldly and constantly affirme it is cause of sinne in wellny all, who vndergoe the same; and this I confidently set down, both in respect of what I know by experience; and what I haue heard from diuers others, who haue been intimely acquainted Hieron: in dan. Lyran. Hipol: de consum. with your votaries. But be it as it will, I doubt not but that of some ancients speaking of Antichrist must bee accomplished in your Pope; Simulabit castitatem vt plu∣rimos decipiat; He will dissemble chastitie, that he may de∣ceiue very many; which case standing thus, the Pope continuing obstinate in his tyrannical enforcing of such a law, I wish Pontifician Priests and others to call to minde, that doctrinall and resolute position, which is Sa. verbo lex. See Azor. Tom. 4. lib. 5. Siluest. generally taught by all their Diuines, Canonists, and Summists, to wit; that lex humana &c. a humane law bind∣eth not in conscience, when it is either vniust, or it is vnprofi∣table, or when it is not for the common good, or when it bring∣eth
great hurt, or when it is very hard to be kept, for thou it is reputed in the law to be impossible; thus they, so that if the Pope and his Ministers shall still continue in their ty∣rannicall enforcing of such lawes, they may bee con∣demned and contemned; yea further, who may iustly condemne those, which take orders in that Church, if at the taking of the same, they doe vse some amphibologi∣call equiuocation or mentall reseruation (such as his Ignatian Proctours doe teach their blinde Obedients to vse towards their Soueraignes & his lawfull Magistrates) thereby to delude, and deceiue such tyrannicall procee∣ding, for what is it else then (arte artem fallere) by honest Arte to deceiue that wicked mans practise? Secondly I inferre out of the 5. 6. and 7. suppositi∣ons;  which haue that avowe prouing either idle, vnpro∣fitable, or vniust, or nociue and hurtfull to the common Where necessi∣tie vrgeth, dis∣pensation is excusable, where vtilitie moueth dispen∣sation is lauda∣ble; profit I say common, not priuate. Bernard. de cons. lib. 3. good; and in speciall if hurtfull to the spirituall good of the Vower; the same may be for such respects dispensed withall or changed: And as wee haue it in the sixth sup∣position, It is sufficient for a dispensation or change, if the cause be thought and reputed lawfull: and further as we haue it in the seuenth supposition, this dispensation is rather to bee called a declaration of the inualidity or nullitie of the vowe, then a relaxation or release of the obligation of the same; So that if the Prelate or Supe∣riour be wilfully bent; that he will not dispense (as he is bound and ought, otherwise he sinneth greatly) then the declaration of learned men, touching the vnprofita∣blenesse, hurtfulnesse &c. of such a vowe shall be suffici∣ent, for clearing and appeasing the conscience of such votaries. Now what shall we thinke to be a iust cause for a dispensation of a vowe, if that may not be so reputed, which Popes, Prelates, Synodes, Doctours, the generall voice, and noice of all people doe repute to be such; as they doe in this case of Nunnes and Priests marrying? What? said not that your pious Pius the second thus?
That as marriage was taken away from Priests vpon certaine Pius apud Plat. reasons so there were more reasons to haue the same restored to them againe. This said your Pope vpon consideration of the horrible enormities committed in yout Church: which saying of his hath been receiued with applause of deuines, Canonists, Princes, Emperors, and the voice See Fricius lib. 4. de Eccles. in Apologia pro matr. sacerdes. of all people. Much might be said in this kind but the matter is cleere, I goe on. Thirdlie, out of the eight supposition thus I do most  cleerlie inferre, that whereas there meet two vowes to∣gether in a Frier, Priest, Monke, or Nunne: the one and first which they made to God in baptisme; the other which vpon an erroneous conceit, and inforced law, they made to man: in case these two vowes are incom∣patible, and cannot be both kept, (as they are in him or her who vpon due examination and long triall finde themselues not to haue the gift of continencie) then doubtlesse the better and more necessarie of these two must take place; which without all controuersie is that, which was made to God in Baptisme. Now by vertue of that law such as haue not the gift of continencie, are bound vnder paine of damnation to hearken to the Apostle declaring and commanding thus (melius est nu∣bere quam vri) It is better to marry then to burne, and thus 1 Cor. 7. 9. Qui non continet nubat; He or she who containeth not let him or her marry; The Apostle doth not say he that cannot containe let him marrie; but thus, he that doth not con∣taine let him marry; that is who hauing made triall of himselfe or of her selfe, and findeth by daily experience either of often lapses or else of morosous desires (which is burning) let such a one marrie: and this is the very case August. de vir∣gin. cap. 34 Cy∣prian. ep. 11. lib. 1 Bern. in serm. ad Clerum. de conuers. whereof S. Austen, Cyprian, Bernard, and some others haue spoken; inueighing and exlaiming against such as made pretenced vowes and kept them not; affirming that it was better for them to marrie. And here I an∣swer an obiection by the way which may be thus made:
By our first vowe in Baptisme we are bound to keepe all after promises or vowes; which we may make either to God or man. It is true indeede, in such vowes and pro∣mises that are iust, and in such things that a man hath li∣berty to vow; now in case a man or a woman cannot containe or hath not the gift of chastitie (which is eui∣dent they haue not if they doe not containe) then they It is impossible for him to con¦taine who hath not the gift of continency haue not libertie to vowe; for in such cases the law of God prescribeth and commandeth marriage; reiecting such sinfull vowes which the votaries cannot obserue, but are by them more and more enthralled in the bon∣dage of sinne. If they reply and say, it was indeed in the votaries free choice, whether he would vowe or not; but hauing vowed, he is absolutely tied to the performance of the same, and is no more at his owne libertie: I answer thus cleerlie, and returne the argument against themselues: If there may be no error in vowing, then downe falleth My faculty for dispensati∣ons, &c. was deliuered in these words. Facultas, &c. A faculty to dispense with all vowes and oathes; excep∣ting those of perpetuall cha∣stty and reli∣gion. After was added power to dispense in simple vows of chastity, &c. 1. Tim. 5. 11. to the ground all their pretensed power of dispensing and changing of vowes; and if there may happen error in other vowes, why not in the vowes of chastity, where presumption of vowing is most frequent? (sed victoria rarissima) but the victory most rare and seldom? If our Pontificians could shew vs out of the word of God, that a promiscuous and indifferent liberty of vowing chasti∣ty were allowable in all sorts of people, then they should say somewhat to that purpose; but concerning this we may take a scantling out of that which S. Paul ordereth touching yonger widdowes: (which all the aduersaries generally vnderstand of vowing Nunnes) that they are not in any case to bee accepted or admitted before they be threescore yeereold, (a competent and sufficient time for triall and probation) wholly to dedicate them∣selues to God by renouncing of the world. O Mr. Flud what defence can you make for your Churches admit∣ting Boyes, and Girles, to vowe before they come to
sixe times three yeeres old. How expresly is their pra∣ctise against the holy Apostles ordinance? He will haue none admitted before they be threescore yeere old, and after long triall; you admit yong girles of fourteene yeeres of age, and are not ashamed to permit them to professe after a yeeres probation; yea more then this, (for the consummating of your impietie in this kinde) though such yonger probationers in the yeere of their tryall doe finde themselues continuallie buffeted with temptations on all sides; yea and oftentime to be most vnconsolablie afflicted, yet rather then such shall depart from you, if they may proue beneficiall to your Mona∣steries, or at least for auoiding of scandall, they shall haue strange incouragements giuen them, to continue in that wicked course, whereby their Soules are very likelie eternallie to perish. Fourthly, out of the ninth supposition, I euidentlie  deduce; if it be lawfull for one who hath vowed to enter into some one religion, not to stand to the keeping of his vowe, if in time of his triall and probation he finde not himselfe fit for the same: Why then shall it not be lawfull for any Monke, Frier, Priest, or Nunne, after they haue made their vowes, if they by experience find themselues altogether vnfit, and that they were both in time of their probation, and at the time of their vowing deceiued by some delusion; why (I say) shall it not be lawfull for them to vse such remedies against those temptations as God hath appointed? Standing within the obligation and nature of a vowe, what difference can be found betwixt that which is simple, and that which is solemn? Your Celestine affir∣meth, Extra: qui cleriti. that a simple vow bindeth no lesse before God then a solemne one doth: The summe is, neither simple nor solemne vow pleaseth God, which is begun with sin; prosecuted and consummated with sinne; and if such please not God, assuredly they cannot binde the con∣science
of any man: For (to vse Caluins wordes, si in hu∣manis Lib. iustitut. cap. devotis. contractibus &c. If in humane contracts, those onely promises doe binde vs, in which those to whom we promise will haue vs bound, it is absurd, that wee should bee enforced to performe those things which God doth not require at our handes: thus he. Now cleere it is, that God doth not re∣quire, nor neuer will require continencie or chastitie from those, to whom he hath not giuen the gift thereof; and that he giueth not the gift thereof to all it is euident by that of the Apostle vnusquisque &c. Euery one receiu∣eth 1. Cor 7 7 37. See S Hirum in cap 19. Math. S. Chrysst. his proper gift from God one after this sort an other after that manner. Now Master Flood, put case that diuers of your Monkes, Fryers, and Nunnes, haue vowed chasti∣tie; and yet afterwardes by a lamentable experience finde that they haue not the gift thereof, but doe inces∣santly burne (as it is certaine some of your owne Igna∣tians do) what will you haue such to do? will you trans∣uert the words of the Apostle, and say let them rather burne, then marry? if you should so say, you should shew your selfe to be but a very simple Theologue. Per∣haps you will reply and say, that although God doe not giue the efficacious and congruous gift of continencie to all that vowed; so that infallibly they shall thereby containe: notwithstanding, he giueth them all, or prof∣sereth to them all, sufficient grace, whereby they may bee able to containe; so that they haue a posse to con∣taine, although they shall not thereby effectually con∣taine. If thus you answere, I aske of you, where haue It is the vngra∣cious vice of the vnprofita∣ble seruant; that God reap∣eth where hee soweth not, and gathereth where he hath not strawed Math. 25. 24. you learned of such a dallying of God with his Graces, towards your votaries? Whence learned you to impose so blasphemous an immanitie and crueltie vpon God, that he will require a reall performance, and an effectu∣all effect of continencie in your Priests, and yet giueth them not an efficacious gift of continencie to performe the same? but onely a posse, a power, a possibilitie; which infallibly, shall neuer take effect: let this bee re∣corded,
as one amongst the rest of your blasphemous positions. Fiftly I deduce, out of the tenth and eleuenth suppo,  sitions; in which it is set downe, that what vowe soeuer is tainted with an ill end, or which is made vpon a sinne∣full and erroneous occasion, though ratified by a conti∣nued custome, is notwithstanding vnpleasing to God; now the occasion of such vowing in your Priests is wick∣ed, The endes of popish votaries vowings. and naught; fot it is vpon an erroneous iudgement and opinion in most of them, that holy Orders and the vow of chastirie are so annexed together, by Christs in∣stitution, that they cannot be seuered: or that matrimo∣niall estate of life is so impure and vncleane, that it can∣not well consort with Priestly puritie: or else vpon an apprehension, that thereby they shall be more honoura∣ble and regardable to their Laitie: or with some such like respects; all which are meere phansies and sinfull vani∣ties. Againe, your Priests by the vowing and perfor∣mance of vnnecessarie vowes, doe approoue the Popes tyrannicall and Antichristian Supremacie, which is no lesse, then a point of impietie against Christ. So that whensoeuer it shall please him to open their eies, that they may see the errours in which they formerly walked; doubtlesse they are no more tyed to such vowes then all archers are tyed to Robbinhoods lawes of archerie; and lesse then S. Paul being conuerted was to the ceremoniall lawes of the Iewes. I doe not by this reproue those who comming from Rome do liue in single life: but I con∣stantly maintaine, that if they do continue still in single life, by vertue of their erroneous vowe, founded vpon Papall superstitious commaund; they doe therein grei∣uouslie transgresse: by which I inferre how idly politike, He partaketh with sinne that doth by act or practise main∣taine a law of sinne. that Doctour was, who aduised a Priest (who was con∣uerted from the Church of Rome) thus; that as hee euer tendered his credit, he should not marrie: which his idle counsell did make so deep an impression in the Conuerts
minde (the Doctour was then in a place of great note) that whereas before, he was doubtfull whether to marry or not; he resolued fully to make vse of his Christian li∣bertie; and to enter into that course of life; being not a little scandalized at the Doctours aduise, as in like sort another Priest, was at the censure of some other, who greatly reprooued him for that euen at the same time, when he was conuerted, hee entered into the holy state of matrimonie. Further to touch some other speciall ends, & motiues, which moue your religious to vow; they are doubt∣lesse vaine and superstitious: the superstition of which being opened vnto them, the inualidity of their vowes is thereby also opened; so that they may for some ho∣nest ends, as to make vse of their christian liberty, to pro∣create children, to shake off Antichrists yoke, &c. law∣fully and freely enter into the state of matrimonie. How idle an end is that, whereby you make a single life to be more satisfactorious for sinnes, then the other? How vaine that, that no man entring into the estate of marriage, can so carefully looke to the charge of soules as those which are vnmarried? How pernicious an end is that, and most iniurious to Christs death and passion? (which is indeed the cheifest end, all your votaries aime at) by which you teach them, that by meanes of a solemne profession of your vowes; they are made as cleare and free from all their sinnes, as the childe or Adult Person which is presently taken See Azor: instit. tom. 2. lib. 12. cap. 5. from the font of Baptisme. This is a high point of your superstition, to equalize your solemne vowe-professi∣on, with the Sacrament of Baptisme. Yea some of your Doctours grant that, to this your owne pretended tradi∣tion of solemne vowing, which they denie to baptisme; to wit, that so often as a professed Person shall renew in his or her minde their former profession ratifying and
approuing the same, they are thereby anew expiated, and made cleare from all their sinnes; so potent a lauer, and sacrament it is. By the which it is most cleare, that all your professours haue their vowes grounded vpon most superstitious ends. Let vs now make application to some of your Religi∣ous, especially your Nunnes. The Apostle decreeth, that younger women and widowes should marrie, and that the Juniores viduas nubere volo. 1 Timoth. 5. Church shall admit none into the number of Church-widowes, (you and yours commonly interpret this of your vowing Nunnes) before the age of threescore. This is the Apostles speciall decree; wisely weighing how rare the gift of continencie is, especially to widowes. Compare now this together with your presumptuous doctrine, who to draw young boyes and girles to make profession of chastitie, before they can conceiue what chastitie is, yea to make profession of chastitie, when as some of them, know themselues to be luxuriously vn∣chaste; doe gilde ouer your Vowes of profession, with such incomparable perfection, that you equalize it with Baptisme. But this your end being so pernicious; the motiues and inducements so superstitious, who can doubt, but such (to whom God shall be pleased to re∣ueale his truth) as haue made in your Church superstiti∣ous Vowes, but that they are as free from them, and the All your Au∣thors confesse vna voce, that vowes made for a sinfull end are not to be kept. obligation of them before God, as if they had neuer made them? for they are (ipso iure, iure diuino nullae) euen by Gods owne law, of no force and validitie, and so in all lawes ought to be (nullae) voide and none, and of no force. Sixthly, out of the twelfth Supposition I euidently  inferre, that such as haue not the efficacious and effectu∣all gift of continencie, they are in the case of impossibi∣litie; and so consequently, are no more bound to keepe such Vowes, then those who haue made Vowes of things apparantly impossible; whether naturally or morally
impossible, it little mattereth: as also it is no matter whether the impossibilitie be apparant or not; it is suffi∣cient that the conscience of the Votarie, telleth him, by his often conflicts, falls and foyles, that he hath not the gift of continencie. Neither shall it helpe you to answer and say, that such haue the gift of continencie, in a re∣mote power, possibilitie, or sufficiencie, to be able to keepe it, though infallibly they shall neuer therby actu∣ally and effectually keep it: for this your answer besides that it is blasphemous against the goodnesse and wise∣dome of God, so it is also idle in it selfe. For, what would you thinke of that man, who should make a Clocke, with wheeles, barres, hammer, bell, hand, and all other parts and instruments belonging to the same, and yet hee should so place and order them together, that they should infallibly neuer strike? would you thinke him wise, if hee should say he had made a Clock, which had a posse, a sufficient ablenesse to strike, though infal∣libly it should neuer strike, as being disorderly placed? Or what would you thinke of such a ones wisdome, if he should be offended, that the Clocke did neuer strike? Make you application Mr. Flud, and see how blasphe∣mously you speake, and write of God. He giueth, (for so you all generally teach) to all Monkes, Priests and Nunnes, such sufficiencie of grace, whereby they may be able to conteyne, yet he so proffereth these his graces, in such circumstances of time, in such condition of place, or in such proportion to others, or in such dispo∣sition of the bodie or minde of them, to whom the gra∣ces are proffered, that infallibly they shall not, nor will not effectually and actually conteyne therewith, no not one of all them, to whom grace onely sufficient is offered. Againe; what would you thinke of the wisdome, iu∣stice, and goodnesse of that Magistrate, which should commaund some Citizen, to a needlesse peece of worke?
for example, to goe and keepe sentinell in a time of no danger, and should for that purpose, furnish him with Musket, and all other things belonging to that charge; yet should keepe his doores shut vp so fast, that the poore Citizen could not possibly stirre abroad. Would you commend his wisdome, goodnesse or iustice, if after∣wards hee should tell the Citizen, that hee gaue him a Musket &c. wherewith to keepe sentinell? he gaue him a sufficiencie to doe it, and therefore because he did not effectually and actually performe so much, hee shall be punished for so treasonable an offence? make you the application Mr. Flud. God giues all your Votaries a remote sufficiencie, and power, to be able to conteyne, and yet doth not so congruously, and effectually moue and excite them, that they shall and will actually and really conteyne; and yet hee damneth them to euerla∣sting punishment, because they doe not actually and ef∣fectually conteyne, which they neuer can doe without his efficacious grace, which notwitstanding hee denieth vnto them. I tell you Mr. Flud, that though the win∣dowes of heauen were opened to showre downe graces vpon your Votaries, yet if God by his speciall hand ac∣tually excite not their wills and mindes, to make vse, and to take hold of such graces, they are like vnto the Citizen which is commanded to keepe Sentinell, and yet hath his dores so shut vpon him, that he cannot pos∣sibly stirre abroad. Perhaps you will answer, that when the graces be offered and proffered, the will is able to make vse of them, and by them actually to conteyne; beware of that Mr. Flud, for it is deepe Pelagianisme so to affirme; and to make the vse and application of grace to be from mans will, and not effectually and effi∣caciously from grace it selfe. Seuenthly, out of the thirteenth Supposition I eui∣dently Seuenth Infe∣rence. inferre; that seeing all are seruants to Christ, and vnder his obedience, it cannot be, that any may be ad∣mitted
to vow any thing, which is against his command, Now his command is rather to marrie then to burne: his expresse precept is that those which conteyne not must mar∣rie: and that onely those are to conteyne, which haue the gift thereof. But hee who findeth by a long conti∣nued experience that hee can not get it (as an infinitie of your Priests, Fryers and Nunnes, doe) such a one doubtlesse is to looke vpon Gods expresse command; and not to tye himselfe with any priuate law of Vow, for performance of that, for which he wanteth strength and abilitie. Lastly, out of the foureteenth supposition, I do most clearely inferre, that all such, who at the taking of Or∣ders Eight Infe∣rence. in the Papall Church, doe vow with their mouthes onely, and haue no intention to binde themselues there∣with; that all such are free from keeping of such verball promises; howsoeuer whilest they liue in those Chur∣ches, they shall be compelled to the keeping of the same. Now that many so doe in that Church, it may easily be supposed, considering the frequencie of their doctrine and practise of equiuocation; especially in the point when violence is offered against a mans libertie; or else See Azor. an vniust question is proposed to be answered, as in this case both doe happen. This being so; all those, who haue so deceiued by their owne arte, the Pope and his Officers, are doubtlesse no more tyed to single life, then any other thing, whereof they neuer made any promise or vowe at all. And in the Reformed Churches, if any should disrepute a Conuert for marrying vpon or after his conuersion, such a one sheweth himselfe either to be a politike Christian, or an vnconstant Neutrall. Gods cause needs no vnchristian policie, to bolster vp the same. If it be said that the Papists are scandalized there∣with; alac, what is there in the reformed Churches wherewith they are not scandalized? But wee must say of them as Christ said of the Scribes and Pharisies, Coeci Matth: 13. 14.
sunt & duces coecorum; and so I end this discourse with those two excellent axiomes of Law, Turpevotum quod scelere impletur. Dishonest is that vow which is kept with crime. Againe, In malis promissis rescinde sidem. In bad promises breake thy fidelitie. Keep them not, neither with Iudg: 11. Mar: 6. Act: 23. Iepthe, Herod, nor those, which vowed to kill S. Paul. Thus Mr. Flud I haue cleared out of your owne principles the lawfulnesse of mariage in your Votaries; if occasion doe require it, I doubt not but that accor∣ding to the analogie of faith, I shall be able to defend these, to strengthen and enlarge them. Out of which you may easily iudge, how idle your calumniation is in obiecting against vs that we allow your Professionists be∣ing conuerted to marrie. Let vs see what followeth. Mr. FLVD. ibidem. That Fryers may marrie Nunnes, and be saued by idle life in sole faith. &c. ANSWER. Your idle girde at marrying wee haue largely answe∣red already; now to your other two calumnies of idle life and sole faith. Touching the first, let Luthers, Me∣lancthons, Bezaes, Caluins, Peter Martyrs labours which they did vndergoe being conuerted, be compared with those of them, whilest they liued in Poperie, and they will seeme as a handfull to a heape. As touching the doctrine of sole faith, you doe egre∣giously Ignatianize, that is, calumniate; for all the Chur∣ches reformed doe giue the Anatheme to all those, who teach sole faith, that is faith iustifying to be voide of the fruit of good workes. Yea your selfe being a Rabbie cannot be ignorant, how your Tridentine Synode giues Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can: 28. the Anatheme to vs, because wee teach, and constantly
teach, that true faith, iustifying faith cannot be voide of good workes. After you haue generally twitted the reformed Churches for receiuing of Monkes and Fryers, then you begin particularly to dispute thus grauely against Martin Luther. I should thinke it more probable, that Luther in his nights conference with the Deuill, did convert and make him a friend to Christ, that now he will be content to worke miracles, to glorifie and extoll his name. thus you argue for want of better matter. Wherein Mr. Flud, you behaue your selfe like a wrangling Lawyer, who ca∣reth not what he saith, so hee may thereby disaduantage his Aduersaries cause. You call it a nights conference, when as that worthy man deliuereth it as a nights con∣flict, by which the Deuill endeuoured to draw him to despaire; & withall declareth by what arguments (euen the chiefest grounds for your massing sacrifice) hee did repulse his wicked suggestions. And can you thinke it to be an argument of reprobation, if a man be assaulted by Satan, Who like a roaring Lyon goeth about seeking whom 1 Pet: 5. Matth: 4. he may deuoure? Was not the Sonne of God assaulted by Satan? Did hee not assault him with arguments taken out of Scripture, to moue him to presumption? And might not the Deuill also produce arguments either true or false, thereby to haue led Luther into despaire? Christ repulsed him by reasons; so also did Luther; which reasons you must sticke too, or else your Masse will to the ground. But with what face doe you pro∣duce Luthers conference with the Deuill, when as your Dominican Fryers haue published to the view of the world, how the Deuill called Ʋerrine, did in a possessed person, labour by all meanes possible to perswade Mag∣dalene to become a Popish Conuert? With what forehead doe you obiect this vnto vs, whenas the Superiour of the Nunnes of Brussells, doth bring ten wicked Deuills, Robert Chambers pag. 214. which were cast out of one Catherine Buis by vertue of
the Image-Lady at Sichem, to cry out thus vnto her, with a redoubled note, Viué nostre Dame du Sichem: Viué nostre Dame du Sichem: Liue our Ladie of Sichem, Our Ladie of Sichem liue. Here you haue Satan with your selues, ioyne in one manner of worship to that Image-Ladie of Sichem, calling her their Ladie. Are not you ashamed to impose thus against vs, when as your Denham Deuill-dalliances, conferences & dispute, both by night & day, are so learnedly published by the Bishop of Chichester? What meane you so to calumniate Luther, whenas in diuers of your Saints legends, it is to be found, how the Vita Elzearij comitis, vita Hi∣larionis, Antonij &c. Deuill did assault them with conferences at their depar∣ting out of the world? you might Master Flood, if ma¦lice had not blinded you, haue considered, that, that worthy man, would neuer haue published this dispute to the world, if hee had taken the same to haue beene a friendly conference: you should rather commend his humilitie, for laying open his infirmities to the world, and Satans wiles; that others by his wisedome, patience, and constancie, might in like cases know how to behaue themselues. And to answere a further instance, which many of yours vrge against that man; as you cannot thinke those texts of Scripture, which Satan brought a∣gainst Math. 4. Christ to be warrantable in that sense, in which they were brought by him, so howsoeuer Satan did pro∣duce true reasons and arguments to haue moued Luther to despaire, although the same are not good in that sense they were brought against him; yet they are good, and sufficient in their true and naturall sense, against the ido∣latrous communion of your Church, and your Massing sacrifice; & so your calumniation falleth to the ground, as likewise the pedantlike inference of yours. When you shall proue that your miracles and prodigies, turne to the direct glory of Christ, (otherwise then that they are in∣ducements to vs to abhorre Antichrist) rather then to the honour of the Image-Ladies and Roode-Lordes, Crea∣ture-gods,
which haue eyes and see not, hands and smite not; in whom there is no spirit of life, then you might bee thought to speake to purpose; till that time wee will e∣steeme them as they are, Antichrists Characters and signes; now let vs examine the last and worst of all yours reasons. CHAP. IX. Wherein is examined Master Floods 6. reason. Master Floode pag. 152. num. 36. MY sixth & last reason is, the prouidence of God, most de∣sirous of the saluation of mankind, not permitting them to be tempted aboue their power 1. Cor. 10. much lesse will he lend his infi∣nite power to Sathan, to tempt men Iacob. 1. Deus intentator malo∣rum. that they may be damned. Some few toies and trifles, God doth permit to trie the constan∣cie of his faithfull, as were the miracles the Donatists did brag of, August. de vnitate Eccles. cap. 16. strange visions that their sacred sisters saw sleeping, or dreamed of waking: Those which Antichrist shall worke are greater, yet the vanitie of such signes, a constant faith with competent diligence may easily discouer; but the Catholike miracles are great, many, and most witnessed, as hath beene prooued. Such I say they are, that our Aduersaries in the end, are forced to graunt that they are true miracles, done by Gods owne hand, which no power vnder his omnipotencie can worke. ANSWER. This your last reason hath so many ignorances and fond applications in it, that I maruell you were not a∣shamed to commit it to the presse; you ground it vpon Gods prouidence towards mankinde, most desirous of the saluation thereof; so that hee doth not permit the same to be tempted aboue its power. To shew the vani∣tie
of this discouse, let mee aske you what you meane when you say that God is most desirous &c. do you meane by (most desirous) Gods efficacious will, and by man∣kinde all people and nations of the world? if so (as so you must and doe) then how blasphemous are you, to make God so impotent, that hee doth not bring that to passe, whereof hee is most desirous, and hath an effica∣cious will to doe? concerning the other part, how vain∣ly doe you applie that of Saint Paul to mankinde, which the Apostle specially intendeth of the faithfull; yea and if you will vnderstand the same of Gods aide, and suc∣cour 1. Cor. 10. against finall temptations, it is onely to be vnder∣stood of the elect. How ignorant a Rabbie in diuinitie are you, to affirme, that God doth not giue ouer any into a reprobate sense? that he doth not permit any to be enthralled euen in the bondage and slauerie of sinne? how vnacquainted are you with sacred Scriptures, which often inculcate the contrarie? When you say that God much lesse will lend his infinite power to Satan to tempt men, that they may bee damned; I maruell, that you a Diuine know not how to speake like a Diuine: God cannot lend his infinite power vnlesse he lend himselfe. Surely you are confident of the excellency of your miracles, that you thinke they cannot be done by Satan, God permit∣ting; vnlesse God lend his infinite power in a peculiar and proper sort for Satan to worke thereby. God work∣eth with all his creatures intimely and immediately with a generall concurse; and more is not needfull, for the effecting of any of your prodigies. When you said that God will not lend his power to Sathan to tempt men whereby they may be damned; against whom doe you dispute? you beate the aire; and fight with your owne shadowe. Some ignorants there may be, who may teach that God pur∣posely without any prescience of any sin at all hath or∣dained some for damnation, and doth appoint Satan of
purpose to tempt such, that they may be damned. There may be some such peruerse Diuines, as I doubt there are; but what of these? all Gods Churches doe detest them; all the whole current of sacred Scripture doth condemn them; and all honest minded people, which cannot en∣dure Gods infinite iustice, and goodnesse to be blasphe∣med, doe hate and execrate them. For my selfe, I say (Perfecto odio oderam illos) with Dauid, I hate them as Psal. 139. 22. the Lords enemies with a full and perfect hate. But that you may consider, vpon how sandy a ground you haue builded this your last reason; call to mind how your owne Remists translate Saint Paul writing to the Thessalonians of Antichrist, and his miracles; thus they 2. ad Thess. 2. v. 9. 10. 11. 12. there read; whose comming is according to the operation of Satan, in all power and lying signes and wonders. And in all seducing of iniquitie to them that perish, for that they haue not receiued the charitie of the truth; that they might be saued: Therefore, God will send them the operation of errour, that they may beleeue lying, that all may bee iudged, which haue not beleeued the truth, but haue consented to iniquitie: thus they translate the Apostle. Where now is your forehead Master Flood, who write the flat contradictorie of this? and dare twit Gods prouidence, that he will not permit such things, whereof the holy Apostle so clearely pro∣nounceth? and so I obserue how idly you applie that of Saint Iames Deus intentator malorum, God is no tempter of Iam. 1.  euill; for though God doe tollerate and permit these things, yet he is not the Tempter, but Satan, Antichrist and his Ministers. Further the Reader may obserue, how toyishly you come in with your toies and trifles, and tell vs a tale out of Saint Austen, of the Donatists dreames and visions; Newtons vision and phantastick delusion. you should rather haue tould vs of Master Newtons visi∣on at Staunford, against the Oath of allegiance, of which your Gatehouse Candidates were so iocond, that they consulted whether it were not meete to send the same to
a Person of very great and high note, thereby to make him a popish Conuert. But lest you should be taken af∣ter tripping, to halt altogether, you confesse a little after, that Antichrists miracles indeede shall be greater, notwith∣standing they shall be such that the vanitie thereof a constant faith with competent diligence may easily discouer. It is the Mat 24. 24. 2 Thessal. 2. Apocal. 13. truest sentence of yours, in your whole booke: Anti∣christs miracles indeede shall be greater, and such as may be discouered; for alreadie, (though they be great, strong, many, as che scriptures speake) yet they are dis∣couered; and by them the man of sinne is reuealed. And he who will be pleased to read but what your owne men Canus, Espencaeus, Lyra, Baronius, Halensis, with diuers o∣thers, yea Popes, haue deliuered concerning some of your lying signes, and wonders, whereof your legends and Portesses haue beene full, will easily discouer Anti∣christs pawes to bee in them: I dare vndertake out of your owne legends and popish Authours, to discouer di∣uers hundreths of miracles, which you your selues will acknowledge either in part, or wholy, to bee forged, or else such as by themselues will appeare whose brattes they are. Whereas you adde insulting lie, that your Catholike miracles are many, and great, and most witnessed; wee inge∣nuously See S Gregory in Iob lib. 33. cap 25. lib. 34. cap. 3. confesse it in part, for so the holie Scriptures haue deliuered, that those of Antichrist shall be such; but when you adde that your aduersaries doe confesse, that they are done by Gods owne hand, before we can yeelde thereunto, we must needs examine your proofe which thus followeth. Mr. FLVD, pag. 153. num. 37. Now their last refuge is, that which your greate Champi∣on master Whitaker betakes himselfe Whitaker de Eccles. p. 348. nen ignoro vera miracula non nisi diuina visieri posse. vnto, to wit, that true miracles which none but God can doe, though knowne
to be such Ex neutro genere miraculo∣tam, sufficiens testimnium aut certum argumen tum clligitur. doe not demonstrate the truth of religion, be gi∣ueth this desperate reason, Constat deum non modo veris sed & falsis do∣ctoribus vim tribuere hutus∣modi miracula faendi, non ta∣men quo cnfir∣met eorum falsa dogm it a sed quo tentet eos ad quos mittantur to wit that God doth giue power to worke true miracles to false teachers, not to confirme their false opinions (saith hee) but to tempt those to whom they are sent. Can any doctrine be more dreadfull or harsh in a Christians eare then this? How can any man know, that God doth not allow that doctrine, which false Prophets say he doth allow, and shew his broad seale for their saying? But this master Whitaker cannot deny, but that Catholikes in the day of iudgement may haue that plea, which a learned and ancient Father thought inuincible, which he sets downe for our comfort in these words. Ricard. de Sancto victore lib. 1. de Trinit. c. 2 domine si error est quod eredin. us a te decepti sumus. O Lord, if it be an error which we beleeue, we are deceiued by thee, for thou hast confir∣med these things vnto vs, with such signes and wonders, which could not be done but by thee: Protestants will grant that we are deceiued by God, by the wonders and miracles which our teachers say, that he wrought and worketh by them, to confirm this truth, yet say they we must be damned. ANSWER. When you haue but an inch granted, you will take an ell; you may be ashamed of your impertinencies. But to answer your inference; That verie learned and reue∣rend Clarke Master Whitaker (as I gather out of your marginall notes, for I haue not his booke) saith onlie that God may worke some true miracles, by false tea∣chers, though not to confirme their doctrine, but onlie to proue and make triall of his seruants; you translate his word tentet, tempt, wheras it is euident, he hath it here for to trie or proue. Now master Flud if master Whitaker must be put to his purgation for this his saying; what then will become of Moses, who saith in expresse termes thus, euen as much as master Whitaker doth if not more: Deut. 13. v. 1. 2. 3. &c. If (saith Moses) there shall arise in the middest of thee a Pro∣phet or a dreamer of dreames, and shall tell thee a signe or a wonder, and the signe or wonder come to passe, whereof be spea∣keth
to thee; saying let vs goe after other Gods (which thou hast not knowne) and let vs serue them. Thou shalt not hear∣ken vnto the words of that Prophet, or dreamer rf dreames; for the Lord your God tempteth you, to know whether you loue the Lord your God withall your heart and withall your soule. Thus Moses speaking the same which master Whitaker doth. Now cry out against Moses, master Flud, & say vn∣to him; can any doctrine be more dreadfull and harsh in a Christian mans eare then this? what harshnesse or dread sir, if God be pleased for the triall of his elect (he still vpholding them) to permit some false Prophet to doe some great miracles; which to them may seeme and appeare a true miracle, though indeed it be not aboue the extraordinary course of nature? Call to mind what I haue alreadie cited out of your owne Remists; who ingenuously confesse, that some false Prophets may doe some true miracles for confirmation of some Catholike point of doctrine; which when they doe, will they not say further, and brag, that such mira∣cles are done also for the confirmation of their errors, and false doctrines? And is not this the dailie practice of yours? so voluminous Coccius, so great Bellarmine, so Stapleton so Bristow with his Pedanty, D. Hill, who quar∣tered his idle reasons, wholly out of Bristowes Motiues and Vlenbergius his causes, so that most superstitious Co∣sterus worthilie and wittilie was termed by maiesty foulemouthed and shamelesse Coster. Call to minde how Stapleton that vndanted Pillar of your Synagogue speaking of Antichrists miracles hath these words: Et sivera sint prodigia, quoad actus superna∣turales, Promptua moral. in dom 24. post pent. loco 4. &c. Although the miracles be true, in respect of the supernaturall actions, notwithstanding they shall be no other thenlying; because they shall serue alye: Certainly for the grea∣ter triall of the faithfull; (For therefore heresies must be, that 1 Cor. 11. those who are tried may be manifest) not only Antichrist him∣selfe and his ministers, but all sorts of heretickes (God permit∣ting)
shall be able to doe miracles as well, and no otherwise then the magicians did. And Stapleton not content with his owne bare assertion, draweth authoritie to the same out of S. Austen, who discoursing vpon those words of S. Mathew (there shall arise false Prophets) hath much for this purpose. Admonet haec dominus, &c. Our Lord doth admonish these things, that we may vnderstand that cer∣taine August lib. 83. questionū q. 79. wicked men shall doe also certaine miracles, such as the Saints cannot doe; and yet they are not to be thought to bee of better place with God. And a little after, whereas there∣fore the Magicians doe certaine things which the Saints neuer doe, they are done for a different end, and vpon a diuerse title; for they doe these things seeking their owne glory, these doe seeking the glory of God. And those doe as it were by cer∣taine priuate contracts and benefits, granted from the powers in their kind; For it is oftentimes granted by diuine law vnto the Diuels, that they may performe some things (euen by that priuate right of miracles) to those, whom according to their demerits they haue subdued vnto themselues, but these by a publike administration by the command of him to whom euery creature is subiect. Out of all which the iudicious reader may obserue, how impertinent Master Fluds ex∣clamations are; as likewise he may easilie discerne, how impertinentlie he alleadgeth the saying of Richard de Sancto victore. Who speaketh onlie of those miracles which were done by Christ, his Apostles, and other saints, for confirmation of the chiefest points of Chri∣stian religion; not for defence of any Popish nouelties; and yet neither is this his saying (if meant of other mi∣racles) so victorious, that it may preuaile against truth deliuered in sacred writ: for that indeed is the touchstone which must trie all visions, dreames, miracles, and signes whether they be sounde or not, for whatsoeuer are not according and agreeing with the same, must and ought to be cashiered, and exploded. Those words of yours when you speake thus; Prote∣stants
will grant that we are deceiued by God, &c. are verie obscure and darke, perhaps you meane strictly; then as the words sound we doe ingenuouslie graunt that by Gods secret permission the efficacy of error doth worke in your Churches; in which miracles are done for the deceiuing of such who haue not beleeued the truth, nor re∣ceiued the charity of truth; and yet we doe not say you are deceiued by God, as though he reioyced in your perdi∣tion, but you are deceiued by Satan, who hath such po∣wer permitted vnto him, to worke vpon the children of misbeliefe. We most humbly pray that God would be pleased to illustrate your vnderstandings, in the true knowledge of Iesus Christ, and to take away from you these darke scales of error and illusion. Mr. FLVD, pag. 154. num: 37. The best is, we firmely beleeue, God is not Satan, nor a tempter of men; much lesse will he worke miracles to deceiue them: lest of all, lend the diuels his omnipotency to draw such as desire to serue and loue him for euer to hell. This is our comfort grounded vpon an infinite goodnesse, which is so great that we cannot enuy you the mirth you take in reading our miracles, and rosting your Grabs by the fire side, to driue away your melancholly fits: God send you greater comfort in the next world and that you may not there eat sowre crabs, and worse meat Caputspidum suget. Ib. 10. with Infidels, deriding the miracles of Christ, in that dreadfull fire that hath no end. ANSWER. The vpshot of your reasons if it be your best refuge as you seeme to speake thus; The best is we firmely beleeue God is not Satan &c. If this be your best, then it will proue no better, then the knowledge which the Deuill himselfe hath, and yet trembleth; What if God lend not Satan his
omnipotent power, yet he granteth to this deceitfull Be∣hemoth so great power, as none vpon earth can be com∣pared with it; it is great inough to deceiue your Holy Father, his Purpurats, and all other of your congregati∣on, who are so sharpely set vpon miracles, that they seem to dote vpon them; yea and you doe in many of your legends, recommend such fooleries, that no man rea∣ding of them can abstaine from laughter, so that if wee sit by the fire, and laught at your miracles, as you vainly, scoffe at Sir Edward, you may thanke your selues for the same in your publishing of such risible stuffe. For example, will not Sobrietie it selfe (to vse your owne phrase) laugh and smile, to heare out of your booke of Confor: of one Fryer Francis who dranke a spi∣der in a chalice and presently rubbing his shinne-bone, after Masse the Spider came thereout. Who can containe from laughter to read how Aidius Bishop of Bisontium was vpon holy Thursday carried vpon the Deuils backe in the forme of an Ethiopian from Bisontium to Rome and how hee carried with him to the Pope one of his slippers which the Ethiopian-deuill had taken from him then and at that time when he had per∣swaded the Pope to commit fornication; and how the Bishop hauing done his message to the Pope and mou∣ed him to repentance, said Masse in his steed, was carried againe to Bisontium by Saterday Easter eue vpon the Deuills backe. Speculum out of Sigebert in Chronolog. ad annum 411. Who can abstaine from laughter to heare Seuerinus Seer. via Hya∣cinth. relating how a young maide praying for her calfe (that was newly dead so that the Butcher was fleying of it) vn∣to the Polonian Saint Hyacinthus so soone as she returned from prayer the calfe reuiued. Who can hold from laughing, to heare Costerus re∣late very grauely in his Postills in Dom. 3. Quadrag. how a young maide being of fiue yeares olde was possessed
with a Deuill because shee ate milke contrarie to her Fa∣thers command; and how when the Deuill was cast out at Saint Peters in Rome hee cried out aloud thus, This girle shall suffer no other purgatorie in the next life then this she hath suffered from me. Who can abstaine from laughing to heare the same Cester ibidem. Coster relating how a Deuill promised to cease from tempting a certaine Eremite if he would sweare to him that he would neuer bowe his knee to a certaine Image of the virgin Mary? Who will not laugh to heare of such often sweating, bleeding, weeping, bowing, nodding and speaking of your Images? Who will not smile to heare when your Sacrament Downham de Antich. god was lost in a medow, how it was found by a light frō heauen, and by the adoration and worshipping of beasts and horses about it, all kneeling vpon both knees, sauing onely one blacke horse, which was possessed by a De∣uill, and was a theeues horse, hee would onely bend one knee? Who can do other then laugh to heare how the vir∣gin Maryes Statue fearing the Tartars cried pittifully to Saint Hyacinth to cary it ouer Boristhenes to Craconia which he did? Seuerin. lib. de mira. Hyac. 1. cap. 13. Who will not laugh heartily, to read, what your S. Dunstane found raking in the ashes of Saint Editha? A∣gaine, how he held the Deuill by the nose, with a paire of tongues vntill he cried Oh! as in like sort, who can read without laughing how your Saint Dominike, made the Deuill appearing vnto him in the forme of an Ape, to hold his candle vntill the Deuill-ape burnt his fingers? None I thinke can do other then laugh, to heare how the Deuill himselfe was carried out in your holy Pari∣sian Genouefaes closestole; as likewise, who smileth Legend. Gen. not to thinke, how holy Martin putting his finger into the mouth of a possessed Person, the Deuill was so tor∣mented
therewith, that he hauing no other passage, was glad to flee away at the fundament conduit. Would not Melancholie it selfe laugh, to heare how S. Francis stood preaching to the beasts and fowles of the field, they standing very demurely and listning to his doctrine? To heare how grauely hee disputed with the Wolfe at Engubium? How hee made a league or truce betwixt the people of Engubium, and that religi∣ous and intelligent Wolfe? To heare how hee brought his Cade-Lambe with him to Masse, and how the same did euer pronely adore and worship at the time of ele∣uation? Bellarmines Asse left haye but once and came and worshipped, but S. Francis his Cade-Lambe wor∣shipped and adored daily their Masse-Lambe. Who can doe other then laugh to read in your Spe∣culo Exemp: how certaine Monkes were rosted like geese vpon spitts in Purgatorie? Or who conteyneth from laughing to heare how that when the people would not heare your S. Anthonie preach, he went to the Sea, prea∣ched to the fishes, and how some of the fishes spoke to him, others bowed, all heard deuoutly. as Sedul: the Apologist for your booke of Conformities, relateth. May wee not smile to thinke, how the Irish Patriarke S. Patricke, made a sheepe to bleat in the belly of the fel∣low that had stolne the same? I should make no end if I should seeke to adde more of this kinde; these are suf∣ficient, to giue the iudicious Reader to vnderstand with what reason many of your miracles are rather to be de∣rided then admired. To proceed, howsoeuer your simpering modestie tel∣leth vs, that you desire to serue and loue God, yet your words are but winde, so long as you set vp your Bethell calues, and leaue the worship which God hath prescri∣bed, deuising so abominable a one, as surpasseth for im∣pietie all which as yet haue been heard of, fitly compa∣red to that of the Mexicans, who adored their God in
the forme of paste. Boter. For your conclusion, which is an Ignatian-like prayer, mixt with the gall of your malice, I cannot tell whether you deserue thanks or not. We rather aduertise you to take heed lest by your subiecting your selfe to that (Ca∣put Aspidum) Triple Crowned Monarch, who sitteth in the Temple of God, bearing himselfe as if he were God, you enthrall your soule in the guilt of eternall perdition. As for vs, who lay no other foundation for our salua∣tion, then Iesus Christ; wherein we may transgresse his most holy precepts, we are most heartily sorry, and doe with prostrate soules, beseech his goodnesse, that hee will be pleased, so to illustrate our vnderstandings, and to correct our affections, that we may more and more in∣crease in his faith, and alwaies do those things, which are most acceptable in his sight. Amen. CHAP. X. Wherein is examined the speciall miracles of Antichrist. Certaine reasons shewing Popish miracles to be Anti∣christian. HAuing thus shewed the imbecillitie of your rea∣sons, I referre what I haue done to the iudicious Reader. Yet for further confirmation of the Truth, I will by Gods assistance, adde certaine reasons out of holy Scripture, to proue the very contradictorie of your proposition, to wit, that your Popish miracles are no other then Antichrists lying wonders. But before I de∣liuer my reasons, I am to prefixe some few Suppositions, which our Aduersaries themselues cannot denie. I suppose first that the furest and certainest way, to
finde out the nature of Antichristian miracles, is to search the Scriptures, and there to examine what those quali∣ties and properties are, which they doe fasten and attri∣bute to the miracles of Antichrist and his Ministers. Secondly, I suppose, that in most places of holy  Scripture, where any mention either expresse or impli∣cite is made of Antichrist or his Ministers, and their mi∣racles, the specialties and speciall kindes of such miracles, are no where so specified as in the Reuelation; so that what we may learne of them in other places and passa∣ges of Scripture, must be (ex adiunctis) by circumstance of the places, and context of Scripture, in which the miracles of Antichrist and his, are in generall termes de∣liuered. Thirdly, I suppose, out of the consent of all, whether  ancient or moderne, that the Apocalypse is a booke wholy mysticall, which doth (excepting some few do∣ctrinall rules and exhortations to virtue) in types, fi∣gures, formes, and resemblances, describe and foretell the future euents of the Church. Now the nature of these typicall and figuratiue prophecies is such, before they are fulfilled and accomplished, that no man can tell well without speciall reuelation, what to make of them; or how out of them to draw any firme or solid argument; but the same being accomplished, there pre∣senteth it selfe vnto the serious meditator, such a clearnes of truth, that out of them not only coniecturall, but euen necessarie arguments may be gathered for this purpose. I suppose fourthly, that in the very obscurest passages  of that hidden booke, if it happen (as it often doth) that the vnderstanding of some principall part thereof, is made cleare, by reason that some part of the Vision is accomplished and fulfilled; then the other parts and adiuncts of that Vision, are to be interpreted and ex∣planed by the same, prouided, that he who expoundeth,
hath a carefull eye to other parts of Scripture, and the analogie of faith; as also to examine carefully and dili∣gently, the autenticall Histories of those times, in which the principall part of the vision is accomplished. As for example, in the thirteenth of the Reuelation, we haue the arising vp of two beasts described; The first out of the Sea, with diuers heads and hornes and Diademes vpon the same: The second out of the Earth, hauing two hores like the Lambe, with other particulars, de∣scribing him to be rather a pretended spirituall Gouer∣nour, than a Temporall Monarch. Now wee haue in Apoc: 13. 12, 14, 15. this same 13. Chapter in the 12 and other verses, it most clearely described, that this second Beast is so linked, and ioyned to the first, that they seeme both to make but one totall, compleat and monarchicall Gouernment, the one being subsidiarie and helping to the other: and this is deliuered by most of the Pontificians, who will haue Antichrist himselfe to be signified by the first, by the other, either a multitude of his false Prophets, or else some one most notorious and immediate Precursor of his, as Ʋiega with diuers others. By which it is most Viega in Apoc. cleare, euen by the confession of the Aduersaries, that by these two Beasts, is signified, the whole Antichristian Gouernment, both in head and members, which also seemeth to be deliuered by the Prophet himselfe; who Apoc: 17. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, &c. declaring how the Beast was described by the Angell that appeared vnto him, maketh mention of one onely Beast, including and conteyning the latter in the former. Now that we may come to know, what manner of false Prophet, or false Prophets are signified by the second Beast, working miracles and prodigies, for the seruice of the first Beast; wee are to search what manner of Go∣uernment, Rule, and Monarchie; and where, in what place, and what time is signified by the first, that had heads and Diademes vpon it: the which wee may very easily performe, seeing it pleased God by his Angell, to
interpret the same vnto his Prophet S. Iohn. By whose interpretation, together with that which Pontificians themselues doe deliuer, wee may easily come to know what Gouernment or Monarchie is described by the first: which being knowne, the vnderstanding of the other will be facill and easie; the examining of which, I refer till anon. These things thus supposed, I come to my reasons, which I ground vpon three seuerall heads or foundations. The first shall be out of the very specialties of Anti∣christs miracles, described in S. Iohn. The second head shall be out of certaine qualities and conditions, which the holy Scriptures doe fasten vpon Antichristian miracles. The third shall be out of some cleare circumstances of holy Scripture, by which we are pointed both to An∣tichrist and his miracles; which performed, the Courte∣ous Reader may not expect more in this place concer∣ning this argument; and withall hee may vnderstand that wee are not chiefly to proue the Pope to be Anti¦christ by his miracles, but that truth being otherwise euicted and convinced, wee confirme the same position by the Antichristianisme of his miracles. I might adde a fourth head of such places as point vs to Antichrist, but make no mention of his miracles; but of them hereafter if occasion require, some of them I haue examined in my first Prelude. Out of the first ground, thus I argue. First reason. Whosoeuer in himselfe, and in his Ministers hath done those speciall miracles, which S. Iohn describeth in the thirteenth Chapter of his Prophecie, hee hath in himselfe and in his Ministers done Antichristian mira∣cles. But the Pope of Rome, both in himselfe and in his Ministers hath done those miracles described by S. Iohn verses 13. 15. in the 13 of his Prophecie, Ergo the Pope of Rome in himselfe, and in his ministers hath done Antichristian Miracles.
The Maior or first proposition, I suppose as manifest, confessed by all, gainesaid by none. The second or Minor, thus I proue. The miracles described by S. Iohn in the 13 chapter of his Prophecie, and in the 13 and 15 verses, are two. The one, to make fire to come downe from heauen vpon earth, in the sight of men. The other, that hee should giue life to the Image of the Beast, so that the Beast should speake: But the Pope of Rome and his, haue done these two, Ergo. That the Pope and his, haue done these two, thus I make it manifest. And to begin with the first, which is to make fire to come downe from heauen vpon earth, in the sight of men. If wee vnderstand this according to the plaine sense of the wordes (as probably wee must) like as Elias caused fire 1 Reg: 18. 38. 2 Reg: 1. 12. to come downe from heauen, against the false Prophets; vpon and against the fiftie seruants; then cleare it is, that the Pope and his, haue caused fire to come from heauen. For what else then fire from heauen, when Constantine the Pope making tryall of the Archbishop of Rauennas Caution at S. Peters memorie, the same was scorched and made as blacke as a burnt cole? What other then fire from heauen, were those torches which gaue light from out of the clouds to Zacharie Pope as he iourneyed to Rauenna? What else then fire from heauen was that which burnt Tilman: lib. 2. Sac. Collat. cap: 26. the house of a Lutheran Matrone, because she comman∣ded an ouen to be heated vpon the day of the Virgin Maries assumption? What else then fire from heauen, when as to shew the force of Excommunication, bread hath been excom∣municated, and therevpon scorched and made blacke as a dead burnt cole, as we may read in your Speculo exem∣plorum? What other then fire from heauen, was and is the miraculous Arras Candle? What else then fire from heauen, was that splendent light (like vnto that of
your young Saint Bently in Rome) which appeared to a Monke attending at Masse? Like was that when your Specul. v. fletus ex. 5. Sacrament-god skipt from a mules backe hanged in the aire with resplendant and fiery beames ouer it and round about it. What else then Fire from heauen, was that, Spec. v. Euchar. ex. 26. when a certaine Bishop being excommunicate by your Pope, for taking part with Henry the 4. he was as Auen∣tine reporteth from the mouth of another, stroken with Auent. lib. 5. a thunderbolt from heauen? What else then fire from heauen, consumed the sacrifice of those boies at Apamea, when they setting bread vpon a stone, and imitating the Priest in saying the Allpotent transsubstantiating fiue wordes, their bread was suddainely consumed with fire? as Bredenbachius relateth. What other then fire from heauen; when your Saint Edmunds candle was so strangely lighted by his prayers to the Virgin Mary? What other then fire from heauen, is that your Saint Liadan. lib. 2. de fug. Ido: cap: 1. See Spec: ex: : Imag exem. 8. & 9. Authonies fire, whereof you draw signes and shaddowes vpon your Churches walls, to keepe Passers by from fouling of them? An example of this fire see in Lindanus. A glorious and resplendant Fire it was from heauen, which to shew the sanctity of the Pope Eugenius, and the Baron. an: 1145. : 24. holinesse of yout Masse, shined ouer and vpon his head whilest he celebrated Masse; yea the Armenian Legates saw doues (that is Angell-doues) from the fire and in the fire ascending vp and downe vpon your holy Fa∣thers head. Torches of fire, and from heauen were those, which appeared whilest your holy Innocent celebrated Masse in the presence of Lotharius the Emperour. Was it not fire from heauen, which so gloriouslie shined vpon the bodies of those, who were slaine by the Albigians neere to the towne Lauallis at a place called Mountioy, the sight Mons Gaudij. whereof greatly amazed the beholders as Altisiodore re∣lateth?
From heauen surely came that fire, which pointed out in a meddow your Sacrament Eucharist-god; which had beene lost by a carelesse Priest, as he went to housell a sicke person. Other such like I could relate, these are sufficient to shew, that Popes and their Ministers, haue How powerful is their excom∣munication? whenas com∣ming only from an Abbot it can cast a crow for stea∣ling a ring into a horrible and languishing feuer not to be cured but by absolution. Spec. exem. Ex∣communicat. exem. 4. caused fire to come downe from heauen; and this if we vnderstand the same in the literall sense, & as the words sound: but if we vnderstand the same wordes in a mysti∣call sense, and doe by fire according to vse of Scriptures, and fittest application meane, either the fire of venge∣ance and reuenge by excommunication; or else the fire of heauenly gifts and graces, in this sense also; it is most euidently cleare, that both the Pope and his doe in the opinion of men make fire to come downe from heauen. What other then such a mysticall fire from heauen, is their thunderbolt of excommunication? by which they dethrone and cast down euen to hell, whom they please? What else then mysticall fire from heauen, are those graces and blessings which the Pope, yea euery Priest can fetch from heauen, by saying certaine prayers ap∣pointed Oratio ad bene∣d cendum quod∣cunque. in your Ritualls? yea they are so powerfull, that they can call downe, and pray downe the Graces and presence of the holy Ghost vpon what Creatures soeuer they shall please: witnesse your Pontificall and Rituall bookes. These things which I haue here deliuered are very true, and you cannot deny them, out of which it follow∣eth by most cleare consequence, that in the sight and o∣pinion of the men of your Church, the Pope and his, doe make fire come from heauen, whether wee vnder∣stand the same mysticallie or literally; and so wee see the first Antichristian miracle accomplished in your Church. Now to the second. Before I declare my second argument, I note that the Prophet himselfe, doth not call Antichrists making the image of the beast to speake, either a miracle, or a
wonder, neither doe I thinke it is to be esteemed as a mi∣racle in strict termes, and strict manner of speaking; vn∣lesse we may call it a morall miracle, that is a miraculous effecting of that, which was morally impossibly by wonderfull restoring of a collapsed and decayed estate, but speaking of the same as most doe wee will call it a miracle. This Antichristian miracle then, is described by the Prophet in the fifteenth verse thus, to wit; that hee Apoc. 13. shall giue life or breath to the Image of the Beast; so that the Image of the Beast, should speake, and cause that as many as would not worshippe the Image of the beast should bee killed. Here the Pontificians especially their great Augustine Bellarmine, do triumphantly inferre, that seeing neuer any Pope did make any Image of a Beast Bell. lib. de. Pont. 3. cap. 15. to speake; or propose any such Image to be worshipped, that consequently their Pope cannot be Antichrist. But weighing this their triumphant inference (before the victorie) I cannot but exclaime and call the very hea∣uens to witnesse against their wilfull obstinacie and im∣pudencie herein, who here will rest and insist vpon the plaine and literall sense of the wordes, vnderstanding them as they sound, whereas the whole context of Scrip∣ture, together with their owne principles must of ne∣cessitie enforce them, to some mysticall and figuratiue interpretation of the wordes: for to dispute out of their owne groundes, must not the Image of the beast be the same (at least genere in kinde) in shew, resemblance, and representation, which the beast it selfe is in veritie and truth of the thing? Now is it not a confessed truth by themselues, (clearely also to be euinced out of Scrip∣ture) that by the beast, with so many heades and hornes, with Diademes vpon them, are signified some manners of State, Rule, Gouernment or Monarchie? if so; then most assuredly, the Image representatiue, and significa∣tiue of such a beast, must bee some state, gouernment,
Empire or Monarchie, in semblance and shew represen∣ting the same: to say that the Image should be represen∣tatiue, in the nature of other Pictures, or statues, such as hange vpon walls, or are placed in publike places, is meerely a vanitie. How improbable and morally impos∣sible, that the whole world should be brought to adore a picture of such a beast, whether it be massie of siluer and gold, or drawne in collours? Consider Master Floode, the forme of such an Image, it must bee made with sea∣uen heades, tenne hornes, with Diademes vpon them; Apoc. 13. 1. 2. 3 in the forehead must be written the name of blasphemy; in body it must be like a Leopard, in feet like to a beare, in mouth shewing a Lyon; this is the goodly Image af∣ter which the whole world must wonder, and which it must adore; for the holy Ghost saith expressely, that he who maketh this image, will cause and compell the first Beast to be worshipped, and an image of the Beast which was wounded to be made and to be worshipped. Now most e∣uident it is, that the first beast whereof the image is to be made, is of this and more monstrous proportion, then I haue described. Further (to speake according to their owne principles) is it not a likely thing, that Antichrist who (as they say) shall be an vtter enemie to all Idola∣trie, who shall worship no God publikely, saue only the God Maozim in secret; that he should set vp, so ill fauou∣red, so ill shaped, and so monstrous an Image, compel∣ling all to worship the same? and the Refusers thereof, to be slaine? is this agreeing to your owne principles M. Floode, or is it likely to agree with Antichrists pollicie, pride, hipocrisie? fie fie vpon such fictions. Further, if this be to be vnderstood literallie of the making of some image representing the first beast, a Leo∣pard, Lyon, and Beare, why then doth the false Pro∣phet with two hornes, cause the inhabitants of the earth (meaning all vnder his obeisance) to make the same? why rather doth he not require Image-makers, Painters,
or Statuaeries? belike the Image was so massie and huge, greater then that of Nebuchodonozor, so that the Inha∣bitants Dan. 3. of the earth must be required to make the same; And if it be so massie, yea if it be a materiall Image, how is it possible, it should be carried vp and down from one Kingdome to another; so that in three years and a halfe, the whole world may worship the same? If it be to be car∣ried, Master Flood, prophecie vnto vs the manner, whe∣ther like your Pope vpon mens shoulders, or like your Loretto goddesse, transported miraculouslie by the hands of Angells. Perhaps you will answer and say, that though the Massic-image or principall picture it selfe, be reared vp in one place, yet the Inhabitants of the earth shall be enforced euery one of them, to haue some pretty Images, and representations of the same. Be it as it will, I pray you to rest merry with your conceit of your ma∣teriall Image, for my part I professe ingenuously I am tyred to be put to dispute against these your vanities. The true meaning therefore of this place is thus; to wit that the second Beast which hath two hornes like the Lambe, that is pretendeth by a two-fold power of iuris∣diction Claues Potestatis & Sientiae. and doctrine, to be the Lambes (that is Christs) vicar; shall cause and compell the in habitants of the earth, to make some kinde of Rule, Gouernment, Mo∣narchie, Empire, like to the first, wherof it is an image  representation. Now it resteth to be proued whether the Popes haue done this or not: the which because it is a point manifest, and (in confesso) confessed I will dispatch it in a word or two. What the Image-state, or Image-Empire is, we shall easilie know if we can first find what the first State and Monarchie was, signified by the first Beast, arising out of the sea: the nature and property whereof it pleased the Angell to declare to S. Iohn in the 17: of his prophecy, where agreeing to the interpretation Apoc. 17. of all ancient and moderne Interpreters whether Pon∣tifician or of the reformed Churches; by the Beast is sig∣nified
a State, Rule, and Monarchie, which was Romane, hauing her chiefest shew, glorie, and pompe in Rome, taking denomination from the same, signified by the name of Babilon the great: which is so clearely deliuered by the Angell to Saint Iohn, that he doth as it were with finger demonstrate so much; saying, the woman which thou sawest (sitting vpon the scarlet coloured beast) is that great Apoc. 17. 18. Citie, which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth. Which great Citie, who of the ancient or moderne learned, did enterpret to be other then Rome? So then we haue it proued and confessed, that a State and Gouernment of Rome and in Rome is signified by the first Beast; now we are to examine, when the States and Gouernments sig∣nified by the first Beast were ended, so that the first Beast became dumbe, being wounded or destroied; for it is most cleere that the first States and Rules must remoue and giue place, before the second which are the Images of the former, can succeede into their roome. Of whom shall we learne this? marry from the Angell himselfe; who in the 17. Chapter describing the durance of the Vers. 10. 11. Beast, in seauen Kings, that is seauen gouernments each succeeding other, speaketh thus: And there are seauen Kings, fiue are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he commeth he must continue but a short space. And the beast that was and is not he is the eight and is of the seauen, and goeth into perdition; thus the Angell. To con∣sider vnto what shifts the Pontificians are here put, it would make the Sumners Asse to breake his halter; some of them say, that by these fiue Kings are to be vn∣derstood those fiue Romane Emperors, who after Nero held the Empire to wit Vespasiā, Titus, Galba, Otho, Vitel∣lius, by the one that was when S. Iohn wrote, Domitian, by him that was to come shortly after, and to continue but a short time, Nerua Traiaenus. The vanity of this con∣ceit needeth no refutation; Viegas relateth it as the opini∣on of Victorinus and vtterly reiecteth it; yet himselfe, as
if he were hired to play the Popes foole, produceth a farre worse, which might make (to vse Master Fluds phrase) sobriety it selfe to smile. The grand Clarke after he had (being thereunto enforced by euidence of truth) confessed, that by Babylon and by the woman is signi∣fied Rome it selfe, and Romes Gouernment; yea and for further cleering of this same, sheweth that the Angell by the seauen hills did vnderstand those hills, on which Rome standeth to wit Palatine, Quirinall, Auentine, Coe∣lian, Viminall, Esquiline, Ianicular; yea, and that by these seauen hills seauen Kings are signified; yet afterwards comming to declare what manner of Kings these seauen are, he saith, that by the seauen kings are signified the sea∣uen ages of the worldt he first from Adam to Noah, the Viegas inter, pretation of the 7. Kings. second from Noah to Abraham, the third from Abra∣ham to Moyses, the fourth from Moyses to Dauid, the fift from Dauid to Christ, the sixt from Christ to Anti∣christ, the seauenth from Antichrist vntill the end of the world. Thus he: what coherence courteous Reader be∣twixt the seauen hills, on which Rome stands, and the seauen ages of the world, whereof fiue were welnigh past before the walls of Rome were thought on? so that Rome could not well stand vpon fiue of them which were ruinated before her foundation stones were laid. I will not loose time to dispute against this their idle conceit, common amongst them. Yet I cannot (wishing my pen were able as a trumpet to sound in the eares of all Christians) but obserue, how Viegas the grand Ignatian, commenting vpon the 17 of Viegas sect. 2. Reuelation, doth most impiously blaspheme against Christ himselfe. This profound Clerke, hauing shewed in the beginning of the chapter, how by the seuen heads are signified (Omnes Reges Impij & Idosolatrae) all the im∣pious and idolatrous Kings; Towards the latter end of the Chapter, he dareth to say, that vnder the signification of the sixth King, Christ is signified. Now if by the An∣gells
interpretation, the seauen Heads, Hills, and Kings, signifie the same things; what blasphemie for Viegas, to bring in Christ vnder the signification either of Heads, Hills, or Kings? What is Antichristian Theologie if this be not? Who euer yet read in the Ancients, but that by the heads, hills, and Kings in this place, such senses were to be gathered, which might better fit Antichrist, then Christ Iesus our Lord and Sauiour: And who (that is in his senses) can otherwise interpret these heads, hills, and Kings; then of such as shall bee seruiceable to the Beast? who beareth them, and of whom they are parts and members? With what for head then, can they in∣terpret Christ, and his gouernment by Christian Kings and Emperours, to be signified by the sixth King? And if I mistake it not, there is a mere impossibilitie in it, for how doth the Angell say to S. Iohn, that the sixth was when he wrote? Were there then Christian Kings and Emperours, who ruled vnder Christ, and professed his Regall authoritie? not any God wot. I am wearied in tracing of their follies; let vs then consider, what the true meaning of the Prophecie is, as it shall please God to assist with his grace. By cleare consequence then of the Prophecie, agree∣ing to that which is recounted in ancient and autenti∣call Histories, we are inforced by euidence of truth, to interpret the seuen Kings (signified by seauen Hills of Rome) for seuen kindes and sorts of Gouernments; whereof fiue, to wit, of Kings, of Consulls, of Dictatours, of Decemvires, of Tribunes, were past; the sixth, of Em∣perours was then; the seuenth, to wit, the vsurped Regall rule of the Goshes, was to succeed, but to continue for a short time. This being so, then by ineuitable conse∣quence it is must needs follow, that the next Rome-Go∣uernment, which succeeded the Emperiall (which was and ruled whilest S. Iohn wrote) and the seuenth, that of the Gothes and Longobardes, but wounded &c. must
be the Antichristian gouernment, after which wee in∣quire. Here I demaund in good earnest of the Pontifici∣ans, what forme of Rome-Gouernment succeeded the Em∣periall, and that of the Gothes, and by whose meanes? What? was it not Papall? was it not by the Popes au∣thoritie and power, pretending for the effecting of the same, the Lambes Vicarian power? Of long time they pretended an idle donation of Constantine, but the same being found to be (Palea) trash and ille gitimate; the Anchor they afterwards euer stucke vnto, the hornes they euer leaned vnto, are the Lambes, that is, the double power of the Lambe, of gouernment and doctrine for these hornes and in respect of them it is, that their Di∣uines, Canonists, Fryers, Ignatians, Monkes, Summists doe all (plenis bccis concrepare Papae suprematum) with open mouthes proclaime the Popes absolute Imperiall Gouernment; as Roman; in Rome and which cannot be seuered from Rome: so that the Lambes hornes, that is, the Lambes power is so fixed and fastned to Rome, that it may not be remoued thence. For this is a decree amongst them more inviolable, then any Persian or Median law, that whosoeuer is Bishop of Rome hath the Lambes hornes, the Lambes power, and no other Bishop whatsoeuer can weare the same hornes, haue the Lambes power, no not though the whole multitude of Christians would ende∣uour the same; so that the Lambes hornes are the Popes, and none but his. Now that the Pope did giue life to the image of the Beast after the sixth and seuenth head; and after the Beast was wounded, either by the Gothes and Ʋandalls, or by the Henries and Frederikes (if wee should so interpret) it is confessed, and thus it may bee made manifest. First, in that hee hath by his double pretended Vica∣rian power of the Lambe, brought himselfe and his Papall Seat to that Imperiall and Monarchicall forme of Gouern∣ment, According to Bronins iudge∣ment no Prince which for extent and absolute manner of com∣maund,
passeth those of old Rome, of the first Beast, and ought to be sti∣led a Monarch but the Pope. Ad ann. 1097. n: 30. 31. his heades: yea he causeth all those to be killed, which will not worship this his supremacy, which is no other then a very Image and representation of Romes former gouernment: so liuely, that they may both seeme to haue beene spit out of the Dragons mouth at the same time. But if wee will not interpret the Pope by his pre∣tended Vicarian power, to haue made the Image of the first beast to speake in himselfe, and in his owne Papall Imperiall gouernment; then secondly wee may vnder∣stand it thus, that he maketh an Image of the first beast to speake, in such seeming Image-Emperours, as hee hath substituted vpon the wounding of the beast in one of his heades; I said Image-Emperours; for they are no other then Images and shadowes of Imperiall dignitie; for so much as concerneth Roman Emperial dignitie or the command ouer Rome: I said truely they are no other then Images, and shadowes for so much as concerneth Romes soueraigntie. For what are these Emperours else then Homines Papae, The Popes liege men? are they not to be destituted at his pleasure; and to bee instituted at his pleasure? so that none of them can speake Romanus Au∣gustus, vntill they shall haue renounced all right and ti∣tle to Rome, and to Saint Peters Patrimony, as they speak. But for my part I cannot thinke that the Popes making of the Image of the Beast to speake, is to be vnderstood thus; for there are some strong reasons against it, which yet are for the former. First, the Prophet saith, that the Apoc. 13. False-prophet should cause all to be killed, who would not worship the Image of the beast; the which as it hath beene plentifully accomplished, vpon such as haue de∣nied his Supremacie and Papall gouernment: so wee doe not finde that he hath been so carefull to cause any to be killed for denying the dignitie of his nominall Emperours. It is apparant hee keepeth them vp only to cloke his An∣tichristianisme, which was not to appeare before the re∣moouing
of the Emperiall dignitie from Rome; so that Apoc. 13. 15. he laboureth still tooth and naile to vphold some nomi∣nall Emperours, lest the ignominie of his Antichristia∣nisme, should be more liuely discouered. Apoc. 13. 16. Secondly we finde, that all both great and small, free and bound, are to professe subiection to the Image of the Beast; the which as it was neuer fulfilled touching sub∣iection to his nominall Emperours either of the Franckes or Germaines; so it is most fully compleated in the Ro∣mane Image-monarchie of the Pope where it is an Article of faith, that all Creatures are bound vnder paine of for∣fetting Bonif. vnam sanctam, de ma∣ioritate & obe∣dientia. saluation, to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome. Thirdly we finde, that the tenne Kings, which had not receiued power in the Prophets time, but were to receiue the same presently vpon the dissolution of the beast; we finde I say, that these tenne Kings were to giue their power vnto the beast, whose wound was healed, and whose Image was made, vntill the wordes of God were fulfil∣led. Now as this hath neuer beene accomplished to∣wardes their nominall Emperours, who haue scarsly in Ger∣many, (for without Germany they are sans terre) a few free common-wealths at their command; so it hath been most perfectly compleated in the Romane Papall State, where iust at the very time, when the Pope made the Image of the beast to speake in his Papall gouernment; those tenne Kings, which came out of the same Empire with him vpon the dissolution of the heads, gaue their power vnto him; subiecting their thrones and their king∣domes to his command. And this exposition seemeth more cleare, if we doe withall consider, that these Kings which were at the first her deuoutes, were afterwardes to fall into so great disliking of her, that they would by de∣grees make her desolate, eate her flesh, and in the end con∣sume her with fire; the which how in part it is alreadie performed, the conditions of England, Denmarke, Sweue∣land, Scotland &c. doe declare and make manifest: For
as the Countries with their Soueraignes, were at the first together with all other kingdomes of the west subiected to the Pope; so now they are become his fatall enemies. And here we are not (for further confirmation) to leaue vnconsidered, how the subiection to the Pope when he made the Image of the Beast to speake, was so vniuersall that all kinreds and Nations were subiect to his power, as it is described in the 13. of the Reuelation, yea they were with him to fight against the lambe and to ouercome the lambe, that is to take away as it were from open view and knowledge the true and intire profession of Christi∣anitie; which accordingly happened, as it is manifest; and the Papists themselues doe glory, that all Kings and kinreds, all Nations and Kingdomes, were then subiect at lest, to the Pope, when hee first came to make more speciall vse of his vniuersall Supremacie; which was vp∣on the decay of the beast, as is most manifest. And as his extent grew then on by degrees to be vniuersall; so by degrees as by experience it is euident, it hasteneth to bee confined within Saint Peters pretensed Patrimonie; Lord Iesus say Amen. There is a third speciall miracle, which some Ponti∣ficians would gladly for the clearing of the Pope ascribe to Antichrist; It is, that Antichrist should feigne him∣selfe dead, and by the Arte of the Deuill should raise himselfe vp againe, which as yet say they none of the Popes haue done; ergo they are not Antichrist. Alas good Sirs, into what plunges are you driuen? your Ʋie∣gas with many other of yours, doth for very incongrui∣tie of the miracle relect the same, and how filly the con∣ceit is, it thus appeareth: For first, the Prophet doth not say that the Beast was wounded, but that one of his heades was (quasi occisum) as it were slaine, by which we must of necessitie vnderstand, one of the Kings, and Kingly gouernments expounded in the 17. of the Reue∣lation, to haue beene so neere vtter ouerthrowing, that
it seemed dead; and yet was raised againe. Doth not your vulgar reading expresly say, (plaga mortis eius cu∣rata) the wound of death was cured; that is, a mortall wound was cured; but it saith not, he was reuiued after he was dead. Againe, how incongruous is your Bellar∣mine, and your Rabbies in their declaration? who say, that Antichrist shall feigne himselfe dead, and yet should be raised vp, by the power of the Deuill? What Sirs? if Antichrist doe but counterfeit, and dissemblingly shut his eyes, what neede shall hee then haue of the Deuills Arte, to raise him vp againe? Againe, what falsaries are those, who say Antichrist counterfeits his wound, when as the holy Ghost saith expresly, that one of the Beasts heades was as it were slaine? that the wound was (plaga mortis) a mortall wound, that the wound was cured? And all the world admired after the beast? but seeing our Ad∣uersaries, would needes hereout drawe an argument, to cleare their Pope; let vs endeauour out of the true mea∣ning of the same, to shew him to be Antichrist: For clea∣ring of which: Wee must vnderstand according to the exposition of the Angell himselfe to S. Iohn in the 17. Chapter, by the head, which was wounded, one of the seuen Kings; and so by comparing the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses of the 13. Chapter, with the 8. and 11. verses of the 17. Chapter, wee shall clearely finde, that the King or kingly state wounded, must probably bee that, vnder which Saint Iohn wrote his prophecie; which being so, I doe in good earnest demand of the Pontificians, by what Rome-go∣uernment succeeding after the Emperial was the wound cured? wounded as the 7. but recured as the eighth? for so saith the holy Ghost; And the beast that was, and is not, Apoc. 17. 11. euen he is the eight, and is of the seauen, and goeth into perdi∣tion. Now I demand in good earnest, what Rome-go∣uernment, other then that of the Emperours, hath been wounded as it were to death, and yet recured againe?
what mortall wound can be better thought vpon (then either that of the Gothes and Longobardes? or that of the Henries, and Frederikes) if we think of that of the Gothes and Longobardes, cleare it is the wound was cured by the Popes, by their meanes and procurations, and for their owne good and their reuiuing againe. But what if a man would leaue the former, and vn∣derstand this wounding, of those woundes, which your If we make the Pope the se∣uenth head then we are to take him ruling Rome with his intermixt hornes of the Lambe at Con∣statines relin∣quishing the same. Papall Rome-gouernment receiued from the Henries and Frederikes, in your Alexanders and Gregories, and make them the 7. head? for then were your Popes brought so low vpon their knees, that they seemed dead, yet (see the Fate of Rome for reigning) on a suddaine they were so reuiued, raised vp, and their deadly woundes healed, that one of them, Gregorie the 7. made Henry the 4. dance his leasure three daies and nights bareheaded and bare∣footed at Canusium: the other Alexander the 3. set his foote vpon the necke of Frederike Barbarossa, in the sight of all Venice at Saint Markes Church doore; and thereupon it was that the whole world admired after the Beast, that was and is not; that was the eight and is of the se∣uen, Apoc. 17. 8. and yet is not, because sixe of his heades are quite abolished; and yet is in the seuenth and in the eight. For my part I referre this to bee censured by the more lear∣ned, I haue called Antichrist both of the seuen and the eight: of the seuen because in his Papal-spirituall Mo∣narchie, whilest the Gothes ruled, hee next succeeded the Emperiall, in which hee was wounded afterwardes; but his wound being cured, he so trampled downe the Hen∣ries and Frederikes, and all succeeding Emperours, that hee ioyned the Scepter and the keyes together. And whereas before hee pretended by vertue of the lambes hornes, that is Christs Vicarian power, to bee absolute and supreame in spiritualls, hee was so reuiued and animated by the curing of his deadly woundes; that since he hath challenged an absolute Monarchie both in spiritualls and
temporalls; so that by this meanes we haue an eighth Beast (Antichrist in his perfection) which was of the Gregory dareth to call him that challengeth to be vniuersall Bishop Anti∣christ Greg. epist. 76. lib. 4. seuen; of the seuen for his spirituall Supremacie and vni∣uersall Episcopacie in spiritualls in time of the Gothes: Eighth for his Monarchicall and Emperiall Papacie in temporalls; In the first he pretendeth, and pretended like the lambe with the lambes power; In the second he roareth like the Dragon, his lambe-like pretences sound in all their pulpits; his Dragon-like roares, haue filled all Kingdomes and prouinces; so that hee hath fought against the Saints, and for a time hath ouercome them. These pointes though cleare in themselues, yet Apoc. 13. 7. may seem darke and obscure vnto vs; but let the Intelli∣gent Reader compare this my discourse, with the E∣uents of things, and accordingly iudge. That which I haue here breifly set done, I shall (if God please, and occasion doe require it) more amply declare and con∣firme; and so I come to my second ground of my rea∣sons, which is the generall qualities, and properties of Antichristian miracles, deliuered in the holy Scriptures; out of which I argue thus. CHAP. XI. Wherein is examined the generall properties of Antichrists miracles. FIrst, out of the greatnesse & quantirie of them, they  must be great for quantity, and many for number; for so our Sauiour hath foretould in Saint Mathewes Math. 24. 24. Mark. 13. 22. Gospell and other passages of Scripture; and the ioynt voice of the Ancients doe deliuer as much. Now which of the Pontifician, can or will denie their miracles to be many? which of them doth not exult and insult against vs for the greatnesse of them? doth not Master Floode
heere, both for number and excellencie compare them, with those of the primitiue Church? this point is cleare; I goe on. Secondly, I argue out of another condition of Anti∣christian  miracles, that they shall be (mendaeia & falsa) lying and false. The miracles of Antichrist are called in Scripture mendacia, lying, not because all of them shall be fictious or forged; nor because all of them shall indeed tend to the perswasion of lyes; but also in this respect they are called mendacia, mendacious, lying, because many of them shall be counterfet; for Antichrist and See Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 15. 2 Thessal. 2. 10. his, amongst many great miracles they shall doe, shall also pretend many false and counterfet ones, (in fallacia erroris) in the deception of errour, saith the Apostle. And I suppose, there is no Pontifician will denie this; so like∣wise no ingenuous Pontifician can denie, but that there is store of mendacious and counterfet miracles related by the Legendaries of their Church. Many are the won∣ders See Canus Lec: lib. 11. cap. 6. Lira in Dan. which are recounted in the booke of Franciscan Conformities: but how many of these are derided, and scorned by many learned of that Church? Great are the miracles and many, which our late Ignatians doe father vpon their Founder Ignatius Loiola; but small e∣steeme The great su∣perstitious Vi∣count of Sussex reading the tale of S. Francis his preaching to the Wolfe at Engubium laughed hear∣tily at the same. is made of them, either by the Benedictines, or by White or Blacke Fryers, and by their superstitious Allies, in name the Iesuattes. I my selfe haue heard diuers laughing at the Ignatians policie, who so long after the day, begin to set Ignatins his miracles vpon the stage; the reason doubtlesse is, lest if they had produced them soo∣ner, some might haue been found liuing who knew the Souldier, and could haue reproued their forgeries. The matter is plaine, I need not stand vpon it, for there would be no end if any should stand to relate an infinitie of lying narrations, which many of themselues deride. Thirdly, I argue out of the effect of Antichristian mi∣racles,  to wit, that many shall be seduced by them, yea the Matth: 24.
very elect if it were possible, and that for them the whole Mar. 13. 2 Thess. 2. 10. Apoc. 13. world should admire after the Beast, the which how it is accomplished in the Roman Synagogue, (where there is such a confluence of people of all Nations after their miracles; where all the world admireth the Romane Papacie, for the number and greatnesse of their mira∣cles) who seeth not, who obserueth not? Fourthly, I argue out of the manner, by which the Antichristian false Prophets doe their miracles, to wit,  they shall doe them in the very name of Christ himselfe, Many saith Christ (speaking of them) shall come in my Matth: 24. 5. 23. 24. Marc: 13. 6. 21. 22. Luc: 17. 22. 23. name, to wit, as pretending his faith, his power: for by no meanes it can be vnderstood, in that sort as the Pontifi∣cians commonly expound it; that is, that many shall come in the name of Christ pretending themselues to be Christ, and denying Christ himselfe. For if such a thing were prophecied by Christ, how could his infinite wise∣dome haue added, that the very elect should be in great danger to be seduced by them? What? are the elect such inconstant reedes, to be shaken with that which eue∣rie common Christian at the first sound would abhorre, hate and detest? No, no sir, Antichrist and his shall come in the name of Christ, pretending his doctrine; they shall make an apostacie from Christ, yet not pro∣fesse the same by denying Christ, their working shall be as the Apostle termeth it (mysterium iniquitatis) a mysterie 2 Thess. 2. 7. 10. See Apoc: 7. 5. of iniquitie (in fallacia erroris) in the deception of errour. Now manifest it is, that the miracles done in the Pontifi∣cian Church, are pretended to be done in the name of Christ, and therefore it is, that so many are seduced by them; therefore it is, that when some Christians of the reformed Churches doe heare of the same, they do as it were in some sort begin to stagger, to heare that Rome doth flourish with the glory of miracles, which they pre∣tend to be done onely in the name of Christ. This in∣deed is a dangerous blocke, at which the very Elect
might be in danger to stumble; were they not vpheld by him who hath promised that no man shall take his sheep Ioh: 10. 28. out of his hands. Fifthly, I argue out of an vniuersalitie of Antichristian  miracles, which shall be done by Antichrist and his mi∣nisters in all places, for the whole world must admire after Apoc: 13. 13. them; they must be done (in conspectu hominum) in the fight of men and view of the world. Now the same is punctually performed, or pretended to be performed by the Pontificians; who haue in all such Countries as obey their Pope, some Miracle-Sanctuaries; as for ex∣ample, at Burgis, Compostella, Montserrato in Spaine; at Lile, Sichem, Arras, Mechline, Hall in the Low-Coun∣tries; at Rhemes, Shallon in France: And in England, time was, we had the Ladies of Ipswich, Walsingham, &c. It bootes not to adde of other Countries, the point is cleare. Sixthly, I argue out of the specialtie of the Ministers  of these miracles; It is apparant in holy Scriptures, that they are not to be the ordinarie followers of Antichrist, Matth: 24. 24. Mar. 13. 22. Luc: 17. 2 Thess: 2. Apoc: 9. 13. but they are to be his speciall Deuoutes, and as it were sworne slaues. Now in Poperie it is most cleare, that their Miraculists, are Monkes, Fryers, Abbots or Bishops, such as are by a more speciall bonde and linke more then ordinarie people or Priests, tyed fast in slauerie and subiection to the Sea of Rome. This point is cleare, so cleare, that I vndertake there is not any of their Church (if zealous) who will dare to attribute the ordinarie working of miracles to any that are not, at least in pro∣fession deuoted to their Holy Father. For this cause they cannot endure to heare that Ignatius the blessed Martyr and Patriarke of Constantinople, did any mira∣cles, because he did oppose against the Popes, arrogating iurisdiction ouer the Churches of Bulgarie. Seuenthly, I argue out of the circumstance of the  time when Antichristian miracles are to be most rife.
The time is pointed out vnto vs in holy Scriptures, at 2 Thess: 2. Apoc. 13 & 17. the dissolution of the Roman Empire, and at the setting vp, and in the time of another Monarchicall Rome Go∣uernment in steed thereof; which, that it is now accom∣plished, See aboue in my first ground of reasons. who seeth not? The Romane Emperour being a meere Nominall, a very shadow of the Imperiall dignitie resting in the Bishop of Rome, who is his absolute Lord, the Emperour his Substitute; the Pope the Liege, the Emperour the Liegeman; and hath in the opinion of the Pope, his Purpuratts, and other, no more Soueraigntie in Rome, then the King of Spaine hath. And hereout ariseth another consideration of time, to wit, that at the very time when Antichrist his mini∣sters shall doe many and great miracles, then the true Christians shall worke either none at all, or else so few, that in comparison of the great multitudes, that Anti∣christ Seé aboue saepe. and Greg. lib. 33 & 34. mor. in Job. christ and his shall do, they will seeme none at all. Now cleare it is, that the Popish Church aboundeth with won∣ders, and doth with insultation twit and reproue the re∣formed Churches for want of the same; and this is a very expresse Antithesis or opposition, which is to be be∣twixt the true Christians and the false in the time of An∣tichrist, Chrysst. vel Author. imperf. in Mat. hom. 49. Greg. sapissime. the false shall exult in their miracles, which to the true seruants of Christ shall be matter of tryall and probation. and hereout, Eightly, I argue thus. In the time of Antichrist such  people as shall be of his damnable profession, shall be eager and greedie after miracles, in which his chiefe mi∣nisters Apec: 13. 2 Thess: 2. and false Prophets shall egregiously exult. Con∣trariwise, the true Christians shall recurre only vnto the Scriptures, rest onely vpon Christs promises and assu∣rance of their faith, according as S. Iohn saith, Hic est fi∣des & patientia Sanctorum: Here Saints must vse their Apoc. 13. 10. faith and patience. This is now clearely accomplished in the Popish Synagogue, the disciples whereof are greedy and most eager after miracles; which appeareth by their
most tedious Pilgrimages. Contrariwise, those of the reformed Churches, are very well contented to want the same, relying onely vpon the assurance of their faith in Christ and his promises, deliuered in sacred Scriptures, and confirmed by such miracles as are there recommen∣ded. and so hereout, Ninthly, I argue, that in Antichrists time, those that  are his, as they are eager after miracles, so they shall also be very prone to beleeue them, the which is so apparant in all the whole popish Congregations, that I dare bold∣ly say, that if they were not bewitched (fascinations erro∣ris) 2 Thessal: by the spirit of errour, they would be ashamed to be so ouer-credulous of euery tale that is told them. I con∣fesse ingenuously, when I was amongst them, and was ouer-zelous for all doctrinall points of Poperie, yet I should sometimes be amaz'd, to obserue such an ouer-credulitie in many of them; such an admiring after new wonders; and I was not sometimes without trouble of minde, and some scruple, to consider how both men and women, otherwise of honest conuersation and ze∣lous profession in that kinde, would giue credit to such trifles, as I knew in my knowledge and reading, to be mee aities and fables, and so reputed of, by their great Clerkes. When I considered these things, then I could not diuine from what Spirit such illusions might arise, to obserue the best and most zealous of that pro∣fession to be commonly most inueigled in that kinde; but now I obserue it was no other then what S. Paul hath foretold, that God should permit such to beleeue 2 Thess: 2. 11. Apoc: 13. 3. lyes; and that as S. Iohn hath foretold, they should ad∣mire after the Beast and his wonders. I could here adde very many particulars, especially of English Papists who are most prone and inclinable to beleeue any tale that is told them of any of their mar∣tyrs, witnesse the fabulous narration of the shining face of Frier Buckley, vpon London Bridge; as also of the mira∣culous
stopping and staying of the horse that drew the hurdle, witnesse the prodigious standing of a pixe with an host-Christ in it, vpon a table in a Chamber, A pur∣seuant searching the chamber round about, and yet could not see the God. Witnesse the glorious end of mi∣strisse Line taken in Fetter lane and executed some 15. yeeres since. Witnesse their many miraculous escapes of some of their Priests, as they pretend; witnesse Doctor Norris his impassible Agnus Dei that the fire would not touch, &c. Thus I haue cleerly (though briefly) fastened all the generall qualities and conditions of Antichristian mi∣racles recounted in holie Scriptures vpon the Popish, so intirelie and fast, that I dare vndertake neither you master Flud nor any other shall be able to remoue them. I vndertake further that all other circumstances of the same recounted in Scripture will easily and with great facilitie be iustly applied to your Popish miracles. And so I come to examine some speciall passages of sacred Scripture, by which as by a line of truth, we are led to the finding out of Antichristian miracles; and excepting two I will especially examine some that are not much looked into by others; all I cannot stand to examine, yet this I confidently adde, there is not any one passage of Scripture in which there is mention made of Anti∣christ or of his ministers, which may not be applied and fitly be laid vpon the Pope and his, and so consequently all the adiuncts and properties of them, will in like sort adhere to him and his.
CHAP. XII. Wherein is examined a Prophecy of Christ in the foure and twentith of S. Mathew. THE first place I produce out of S. Mathew, where Mat. 24 26. it is most expresly foretold by our Sauiour, that the Antichristian false Prophets, which should doe great signes and wonders, should also teach Christ to be (in penetralibus) in penetralls, in secrets: the which prophecie as it is most fitly and necessarily fulfilled in the Pope and his Prophets, so by ineuitable consequence it fol∣loweth that their miracles are those, which are foretolde by Christ and his Apostles, to be Great, Many, Menda∣cious, Antichristian. Now for cleering of this place, and to proue that it doth punctually concerne the Papists; I must intreate the Reader to beare with my prolixitie: I confesse inge∣nuously I doe herein vndertake a hard prouince. And Pet. mart lc. Class. 4: lec: 10. although no man (that I know) hath with any examina∣tion so commented vpon this Text, as I vnderstand and take it; yet Peter Martyr, Caluin, and Mousieur Plessis, Caluin. doe giue a touch and glance at the same, so sensing it as I doe. And herein I hope that I shall not be censured by any ingenious Christian of nouelty: for although my Pless. de Sacra∣ment. lib. 4. cap. 9. such sensing of this place seeme new, yet so long as it is (secundum rationem fidei) according to the analogy of faith: so long as it is for the confirmation of a receiued point of faith, and against idolatrie; it cannot but be well accep∣ted of. I confesse that it is new, (noua cudo sed vt vetera astruam) but for the strengthning of a most ancient truth: let it at least be taken as an occasion to moue the lear∣ned, more narrowly to examine and sift this place; let my reasons be weighed and censured as they shall be found by the vnpreiudicate Reader.
For the declaration of this point that the Papists are here pointed at by Christ, for their teaching of him (ac∣cording to their transubstantiating diuinity) to be in secrets, penetralls, chests Tabernacles, &c. I am to make a suppo∣sition out of S. Austen, which is receiued by them all; to wit, that the sacred Scriptures are euer literally to be vn∣derstood; according to the plaine and ordinary sense of the words, whensoeuer the same doth not containe any absurdity, nor imply any impossibility, as the literall vnderstanding of this place doth not; but cleerly decla∣reth vnto vs, a Popish practice daily acted in their Churches. The ancient expositors of S. Mathews Gospell, either the primo primi, or secundo primi, as I may so call them, who liued in the purer times of the Church; Be∣cause in their daies this prophecy of Christ was not compleate (for before transubstantiation was hatched, the secret and mysticall presence of Christ in secrets, and pri∣uate chambers, was not preached nor beleeued) doe vn∣derstand this text mystically, of the priuate conuenticles and assemblies of heretickes, and schismatickes, preten∣ding Christs Church to be with them; which yet can∣not stand, for this one or two instances if there were no other in this passage: first, our Sauiour should not then haue deliuered any speciall property and condition of the great Antichristian Synagogue, which was to be vni∣uersall, not to be confined within any one kingdome, which yet that he doth; all, yea all, and of all sides doe ingenuously confesse. Againe, if the prophecy were so to be interpreted, of the mysticall and spirituall presence of Christ in priuate places, then it would most of all concerne the true Church of Christ; which in the time of Antichrist accor∣ding Apoc. 12. 6. and 13. 7. to the sense of all and of all sides, is to flie into the desert, to liue obscurely and hiddenly as welnigh ouer∣come; yea it would most neerly haue touched the Ro∣mane
Church her selfe, in the daies of her purity, when she made the mount Soract without, and the Cripts with∣in Euseb. hist. vita Siluestri. the City, to be her chiefest Sanctuary, and Assyle a∣gainst the fury of those times. There are some, who thinke that our Sauiour did in this his prediction point at Theudas mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, or Iudas the Galilean or such like; Acts 5. 36. 37. but their mistaking is not worthy of confutation, for besides that Theudas was at least twenty yeeres before Christs preaching; so all circumstances of the text doe euince, that the prophecy cannot be interpreted of any so base and contemptible leaders: no no, Christ pointeth vnto vs Antichrist the great and his false Prophets. Here by the Readers patience, I will shew how Mal∣donat the grand Ignatian shuffleth this text ouer with a very short cut; as though he were surprised (examining the same) with some fit of a feare-feauer, his words vpon it are these, and onely these, Posuit duo pro omnibus &c. Christ put (saith he) or mentioned only two contrary places for all, the desert, and the Penetralls; that is, the inwardest and most retired part of the house, that he might signifie in what manner soeuer, in what habit soeuer, in what place soeuer ano∣ther Christ should come, he should not be beleeued; further to examine and search of the desert, and Penetralls it is not the part of a sober Interpreter. Thus Maldonat: most of which his words, especially those, in what habit soeuer, in what place soeuer, in what manner soeuer, if they were throughly examined; they would make little for the Popish Gospel of Christ, vnder the habit of bread in a mysticall man∣ner, but reall in their Boxes, Pixes, Eucharist-arkes: but omitting them all, I especially obserue those words of his, It is not the part of a sober Interpreter to examine more of the desert and Penetralls, then his Father-hood bestowed vpon vs. What he feared, I will by Gods assistance per∣forme; which done the reader may easily obserue, that this deuise of Maldonat was (ex conscientia imbecillitatis)
from a conscience of his owne weake cause; hee wilily obser∣uing, that if the same text, were narrowly sifted, and ex∣amined, it would vtterly ouerthrow their desert-pilgri∣mages, pixc-adorations, his boxe and Eucharist-worshippes. For clearing of this point, wee are diligently to examine, what is the genuine and naturall sense of the word (pene∣tralibus) secrets, in this place. The latine word, according to their vulgar edition signifieth (as also Maldonat confesseth) intimam maxime{que} reconditam domus partem, the most inward, and retired part of a house; but seeing Saint Mathewes Gospell was first written in Hebrew (which edition is either lost or of doubtfull authoritie) and after, it was translated into the Greeke tongue, either by Saint Mathew, or Saint Iames, or Saint Iohn as the ancients herein are diuersly conceited: Let vs consider diligently what is the natiue significati∣on of the Greeke word vsed in this place.  then . which is the Greeke word, hath in Authors diuers sig∣nifications; yet taken in any of them in this place, it Stephanus in Thes. Scapula in dict. maketh against the Papists Idolatry. For it is indifferent∣ly taken to signifie either first, a secret closset or close and lockt parlour; or secondly, a very hutch, chest or ampere, such as victualls are vsually put in & preserued; or third∣ly, a coffer, Arke or boxe, such as treasure is laid vp and conserued in: this is cleare; because as the learned know; that of Stephanus is most true ( pro  passim See Stephanus his Thesaurus and his Greeke Concord: obuium)  for  is euery where to bee found and very common in Greeke Authours; now that the later worde is taken in the three significations aboue mentioned by me, it is very manifest; and so as cleare, that the first is vsed in the same significations; and so in this place  (in penetralibus) in penetralls, in secrets, may be taken in any of those significations; but doubtlesse it is most cleare, that the very signification in∣tended by Christ, is, that which we see now most agree with the accomplishment of the Prophecie amongst the
Papists; who in the three significations of the word, doe teach Christ to be amongst them; either as a spirituall food and viction, in their tabernacles, amperes iutches; or as a mysterie in their lockt closets priuate Chappells; or as a treasurie saide vp in boxes, borne in pixes. car∣ried about them as most rich ornaments and treasures. And to thinke, that Christ in this place did aime at this their Pseudchristianisme, I am induced thereunto, by this one reason if there were no other; that seeing the pseudochristian Synagogue, was to teach and doth teach (to the perdition of innumerable soules and high con∣tempt of Gods Maiestie) a corporall, carnall presence of Christ vpon earth in Arkes, secret clossets, boxes, cof∣fers, there to be eaten; yea sensibly to be eaten, as Beron∣gorius his recantation hath it: It cannot be thought, but that Christ would in some place foretell the same; and no where more likely, then in that very place, in which so many other properties, practises, and conditions of the great Antichrist and his are foretould, as in this  Chapter they are. Christ answer∣eth his disciples question con∣cerning his owne cōming made vers. 3. See Luc. 17. 22. 23. Closets are in the sense and vse of all nati∣ons not any places for any conuersation, but to preserue and keepe any daintiest neces∣saries for mans vse, they are re∣puted secret storchouses. My first reason that these wordes of Christ are literal∣ly to be vnderstood, against some who would pretend to teach a secret corporall presence of Christ himselfe (not another Christ) vpon earth; I frame out of a dou∣ble reason of Christ himselfe, which hee maketh against them. First, beleeue them not (saith Christ) if any shall say behould he is in the penetralls, in the secrets (or as the Remists interpret it, in closets.) For at the lightening com∣meth out of the East, and shineth into the west, so also shall the comming of the sonne of man be; thus argueth Christ: now as cleare as the very heauens it is, that this of Christ is to be vnderstood of Christs corporall, and reall comming in person to iudgement: which granted, then our infinite∣ly wise Sauiour, (who without blasphemie may not bee impeached of an impertinent discourse) must needes be thought to oppose this his publike comming in per∣son
against some secret, reall presence of him, before that time, pretended by the false Prophets. For if hee should haue spoken this only against the priuate Conuenticles of Heretikes and Schismatikes, pretending his Church, and spirituall or mysticall presence to be amongst them; then shall he be thought thus to argue: If any false Pro∣phet, shall teach you any false doctrine, or seeke to draw you to any priuate Conuenticle, beleeue them not, for my comming at the latter day to iudgement shall not be secret, but publike, in glory; like as the lightning which shineth from the East, and appeareth vnto the West: and shall such maner of arguing beseem the infinite wisdom of the Father? who dare say so? but vnderstanding the same as the truth, and the Text requireth, then is the reason most diuine, befitting the infinite wisdome of God, thus. If any shall teach you, that I am in any secret place, or desert, here or there, for you to make pilgrimage vnto me, or to worship and adore mee in your priuate closets, or in the retiredst, and most priuate part of the house, (my house is the Church or Temple) beleeue them not; for I shall not be corporally and presentially (thus I interpret according to Christs ordinarie power and prouidence) present vpon earth, vntill like as the lightning appeareth from the East vnto the West, so also I shall appeare in Glorie and Maiestie, filling with glory the heauens euen from East to West. And this exposition as consequent, is confirmed by the comparison or second reason, which our Sauiour maketh against the false Prophets, thus: Wheresoeuer the dead bodie is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. Matth: 24. 28. Touching which saying of our Sauiour, all interpreta∣tions being seriously weighed; that of Chrysostome with Chrysost. in hunc locum. many of the Ancient and moderne writers, will be agree∣ing vnto the truth, to wit, that like as the dead bodie be∣ing openly exposed in the fields, the Eagles by naturall instinct doe repaire to the same to prey thereon; so like∣wise
where hee himselfe should be in presence, there should not be wanting multitudes of Angells, assisting and ministring vnto him, and by spirituall contempla∣tion feeding on him: So that our Sauiour argueth thus, If any false Prophets shall teach, that I shall be obscure∣ly in some hidden manner vpon earth, in Coffer, Celler, or Desert, beleeue them not; for like as the carcase is ne∣uer without Eagles, so for hereafter my presence after my ascension, shall neuer be without multitudes of Angells, assisting and ministring vnto mee. And surely if wee Act: 7. & 9. 2 Cor: 12. Apoc: 1. & 2. & saepe. search the Scriptures wee shall finde, that those extraor∣dinarie apparitions, which our Sauiour made after his ascension, to some vpon earth, were neuer but of him∣selfe, as in glory; neuer without the presence and atten∣dance of Angells. And so I come to another reason of this my exposition. My second Reason I make thus: Our Sauiour in this  place, for the fore-instruction of his faithfull, giueth vnto them certaine cleare and euident signes, which should Behold I haue told you be∣fore. Matth: 24. 25. happen before his comming to iudgement, and by which they should be armed against the wyles and tyran∣nies of Antichrist. Now signes that they may be accor∣ding to their nature and kinde, significant, they must be facill and easie to be vnderstood, and must be taken as they sound, vnlesse it be otherwise expressed. And for this cause, as all other signes in this chapter, deliuered by our Sauiour, are literally to be vnderstood (as the Ponti∣ficians themselues do interpret them) so neither is there any reason, why this passage should not be also literally vnderstood, it being of so great consequence, as concer∣neth the perdition and saluation of many soules. And to adde a confirmation to this reason; if these words of Christ were onely to be vnderstood mystically, against the assemblies of Heretikes and Schismatikes, chal∣lenging Christs Church, and spirituall presence to be only with them; I cannot see for my part, what certain∣tie
for the faithfulls instruction, might be gathered out of this signe, which yet is the importanst of all the rest. For, is it not most euident by a neuer intermitted expe∣rience since Christs time, that euery seuerall Congregation of Heretikes or Schismatikes, as it challengeth to it selfe, the power and mysticall presence of Christ, so it obie∣cteth to all other, the lacke of the same? yea and the most Orthodoxe Church of Christ it selfe, hath her ebbs and flowes; and then was shee purest, when in criptts, de∣sorts, secret woods, and holes shee made her assemblies. Therefore to preach Christ present in secrets, in this sense, cannot be a note, propertie, or signe of the great Anti∣christian Synagogue, as by all it is supposed and granted to be, and is by the faithfull to be taken according to Christs forewarning. A third reason I deduce, out of the energie and pro∣pertie of certaine words here vsed by our Sauiour. I ob∣serue  the word, Behold, thrice repeated, which as it is an Aduerbe of Admiration, so it is alwaies demonstratiue of some singular matter worthy admiration, worthy be∣leefe, as is cleare throughout the Scriptures: So that, as S. Iohn Baptist pointing the sonne of God to his disci∣ples, said, Behold the Lambe of God, see the Lambe of God, Ioh: 1. 36. &c. so these false Prophets, doe pretend to inuite their disciples and followers to behold and see Christ in the deserts, secrets, closets, &c. which is egregiously acted by the Papists. I obserue also, the Aduerbs here and there, which euer doe designe some speciall circumstan∣ces of place, as through the Scriptures it is apparant; and if to them we adioyne the specialties of the places, in the secrets, in the desert, the force of the Preposition in, and the verbe substantiue is, (He is in the desert, He is in the penetralls) my intent will more easily appeare, that the false Prophets do pretend some secret corporall pre∣sence of Christ, requiring faith and beleefe, and sigh also, with beholding of him; which is clearely con
firmed by our Sauiours doubled precept and charge, beleeue them not and goe not out; as if hee should say, the false prophets will inuite you both to goe out and to behold, and to beleeue, that is, to see me in that se∣cret manner as they shall preach, and yet also to beleeue the hidden mystery of my presence which they teach: but looke to it, behold I haue foretold you, neither goe out to see me in any mysticall or hidden forme or shape, nor yet beleeue their mysterious diuinity teaching my carnall presence tending and leading to Idolatry. My fourth reason, that this prophecy is thus litterally  to be vnderstood is this; because so vnderstood, it is most euidently fulfilled, and compleated in the Roman Syna∣gogue; who make it a prime mystery, yea the corner∣stone of their religion, to preach and teach Christ to be so in penetralls, secrets, boxes, closets, &c. A prophecy vntill it be fulfilled, is as a riddle, or a booke sealed; but once fulfilled it is no longer a hidden, but a manifest truth. Now that it is compleated in the Romane Syna∣gogue, it is ouer manifest: For this cause they cry out dayly; Behold he is in the Tabernacles of our Churches; Behold he is in the Penetrals and secrets of our Sepul∣chers; Behold hee is in our Eucharist-arks; and miracu∣lous Hostes at Meclines, at Brussels, &c. Behold he is in our lockt Coffers, and arkes; borne vpon the backes of white ambling Palfreyes, preceding our Holy Father whē hee maketh his remoucalls: Behold hee is in our secret Chappels, locked Coffers, priuate closets; you must be∣hold (cry they) the outward accidents, but beleeue the in∣ward mystery; the true and corporal presence of Christ; you must see and beleeue, behold and admire. And for the further clearing of this matter, and to con∣firme Al circumstan∣ces of the pro∣phecy fulfilled in the Papists. that this point is fulfilled in the Romane congre∣gation, I adde some few obseruations concerning diuers other, yea most circumstances of this prophecy. First I obserue, that these false prophets were for the
confirmation of this their Pseudo-Christianisme, to doe many signes and wonders; so saith Christ (Dabunt signa & prodigia magna) they shal giue great signes and prodigies; Mat. 24 25. So doe the Papists; the case is cleere. I proceede. Secondly I obserue, they should seduce many, so saith Christ (seducent multos) they shall seduce and deceiue many;  Mat. 24 11. which is most fully accomplished in the Romane Syna∣gogue; in which no one point of doctrine, doeth more tye and binde their disciples, then this point; Behold he is in the Penetrals, hee is in our Church-tabernacles; For this cause, if any man would indeuor to draw them from that confusion of errours, they will ordinarily obiect thus; Alacke you haue taken from vs Christs true cor∣porall presence, and would feed vs only with tropes and figures; how then shall wee come to you? how can wee forsake Christ truely and corporally present, and feede onely vpon your bread and wine, which you only haue? Thus they, and yet they doe heerein egregiously calum∣niate our Sacraments. For, for as much as doth concerne (rem Sacramenti) the vertue and efficacy of the Sacrament of grace, and of reall communion of Christ by grace; we teach and beleeue Christs reall presence, onely we de∣ny his carnal fleshly presence, and their transsubstantiatiue diuinity. There haue been heretofore some as Iudas and Theu∣das; as Simon and Menander, who called themselues Christ: and the Helcesaeans, as Theoderet writeth of them, taught two Christs, the one in heauen, the other vpon earth; and England (in this most vnhappy) hath seen a most wretched Hacket, making himselfe Christ; but these or few of these except Simō, did any wonders or prodigies for confirmation of their impieties; and further they no sooner appeared, but they vanished away; together with their disciples: But this Graund Antichrist, and his here spoken of, were so to preuaile, that the world was to bee shortned, lest by their seducements, no flesh should bee sa∣ued, Mat. 24. 24.
the very elect being in hazard to be withdrawen from Christ by them. Thirdly I note, that these false prophets, were to se∣duce  many, not onely by their miracles and wonders; but further they should adde great tribulations, and af∣flictions to inforce the same: For so much importeth the speech of our Sauiour, who presently vpon his dou∣blecharge, Goe not out, Beleeue it not, mentioneth tribu∣lation, saying thus; after the tribulation of those dayes, and Verse 29. in the 21. verse before, ayming at the tribulation in these dayes, at least in figure; he protesteth that the tribulation of them should be so great, as the like had not beene since the beginning of the world. Whereby he instructeth his faith∣full; that the elect who would not be drawen to beleeue their speudo-Christ to be in secrets, closets, deserts, should for the same suffer great tribulation; the which how it hath beene performed by the Romanists; the Bohemian, French, English, Italian and Spanish Fire-immanities, with their French, English and Dutch Masacres, acted or in∣tended; doe euidently complaine, and proclaime. Fourthly I note, and gather out of our Sauiours  speech, that these false prophets were to teach Christs presence to be here and there, vp and downe, that is, in many hidden and secret places at once, and at the selfe same time: which as it was neuer performed by any o∣ther; so it is punctually acted by the Papists; who at the selfe same time do preach Christ to be in so many places here and there euen in one Church, that it is not possible for any of their worshippers, if hee will adore any one, but that hee must at the same time turne his backe vpon three or foure other Christs eleuated here and there, in the corners and Chappels of their Church; or reserued in the tabernacles of their Church. Further, it is not vnworthy of obseruing, that our Sa∣uiour specialising and nominating the places in which these false prophets should teach his presence to be; hee
neuer mentioneth City, Towne, nor villages; but only the secrets, Penetrals, closets, deserts; instructing vs, that the presence wch these false prophets wold teach of him, should bee mysterious, mysticall, and not such as is ioyned with conuersation amongst men. By all which, and more that might be said, it is as cleare as noone dayes, that whether we interpret the words ( in pe∣netralibus) for in the secret closets, or for storehouses, or of chests and cubbards, or for boxes and chests, to lay vp treasure in, or for arks or cellars; in all these significati∣ons, they doe touch the Papists, who in all these man∣ners of places and secrets, doe proclaime their Pseudo-Christ to be, either as a spectacle to be beheld, or as a se∣cret to be beleeued and admired, or as a treasure to bee sought after and visited, or as a Christ-God to bee ado∣red and worshipped, with vowes, sacrifices, inuocati∣ons, pilgrimages. And so I conclude these my proofes; yet before I passe from this argument, I am to answere some few obiections, which may be made against this ex∣position; I will answere onely the chiefest, the rest will fall of themselues. First it is obiected, that our Sauiour in this prophecy, First obiection doeth foretell of some false prophets, which should come and deny him to be the Messias, and should teach another Christ: This obiection falleth easily, by all that which I haue  said; and is refuted by the ioynt consent of all those, who do apply this prophecy to all Schismatickes and He∣retickes, because they pretend Christs Church, and spi∣ritualll presence to be onely with them. For it is most e∣uident, that all such haue contended to haue Christs true Church with them, and the true Church of that Christ who suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, Christ Iesus our only Lord and Sauiour. Let Theophilact in this point speake for all: Si venerint inquit Impostores, &c. Christ Theophilact. in 24. Matth. saith if Impostoures shall come, saying Christ is come, but is in
the desert, or is hid in some house, or in the promptuaries of the same, or in the more inward places of it, bee not deceiued, for the comming of Christ, shall not neede any one to shew the same, for it shall be manifest vnto all, euen as the lightening is. Thus Theophylact agreeingly to our Sauiours reasons, a∣gainst the false prophets in the 27. and 28. verses, which I haue examined heere before in my first reason, and to that I referre my Reader. And in S. Luke our Sauiour saith, that the false prophets shall pretend to shew the son of man. See S. Luke 17. ver. 22. 23. 24. Secondly it is obiected thus; Christ fore prophesieth Second obie∣ction. of some false Preachers, who should teach him to be pre∣sent amongst men, as conuersing with them, in humane shape, though in secret, in clossets, or abroad in the de∣sert, but this maketh nothing at all against the Papists, who teach Christ onely vnder the forme of bread and wine (not in humane shape) to be present in their boxes, clossets, penetrals: To this I answer diuerse wayes, and each of them sufficient. First, our Sauiour (to insist vpon his expresse words) First Answer. speaketh nothing at all, touching his pretended conuer∣sation in humane shape amongst men; neither doth hee vtter any words, by which the same may bee gathered; he onely foretelleth his faithfull, that they should be in∣uited by certaine false prophets, to behold him as present in penetrals, secrets or closets, and this as we euidently ga∣ther in some admirable sort; requiring faith. (Beleeue them not, saith Christ) now I hope the Papists will not de∣nie, but that all this is fulfilled with their Christ in their Secrets, Closets and Tabernacles; whereof Parsons was so Parsons against Reports of the right hon. L. Cooke. chap. 10. pag 236. well perswaded, that reioycingly he relateth out of Wal∣fingham, the answer of King Henry the third of England, to King Lewis of France, called the Saint: For whereas King Lewis said, hee had rather heare many Sermons, then many Masses; King Henry replied and sayd, that for his part, he had rather heare many Masses, then ma∣ny
Sermons; and yeeldeth this reason, that hee had ra∣ther see his friend, then heare any man, though neuer so eloquently discoursing of him: then I hope Christ is to be seene in the Popish Penetrals, though with a behold, requiring beleefe and admiration. Secondly, I answer; touching conuersation; that Second An∣swer. the Pontificians cannot denie, but for their parts there is conuersation betwixt themselues, and this their Christ; for they are presentially with him, they see him, they handle him, they speake to him, they adorne him, they locke him vp, and carrie him about, they walke to him, they watch with him and for him, they cloath him and beare him; and they do all seruices to him, as to a Christ present. As for their Christs part, I hope they will not denie, but that he knoweth himselfe to be with them; that hee heareth them and their praiers, hee seeth them and their gestures; he weareth their ornaments and clothings, he doth secretly worke with his graces in their soules, and doth oftentimes many miraculous and prodigious ef∣fects, and cures amongst them: is not this a kind of con∣uersation? yes doubtlesse, because it is of an Intelligent pretended Christ, with his intelligent and vnderstanding Deuoutes. If it bee obiected, that their Christ doth not speake vnto them with vocall words, or sound of mouth; alac, that is but one point of conuersation, and the same may be supplied by signes, and some motions and ge∣stures, which the Priests make vpon him or about him, as well as a certaine Gentlewoman at Chichester, was Mist. . wonted by signes to vnderstand, what sinnes a dumbe boy of hers had done, and so make for him a confession vnto the Priest, who gaue thereupon the boy his absolu∣tion. M. Mang. Howsoeuer it be, if there want no other poynt of conuersation, then speech, it can onely be said, that the conuersation is manke and defectiue, with a mute Christ, but not; that it is none at all.
If they should say, they see him not properly, that cānot be; for standing within their own principles; I dare vndertake to shew, that there is as intime and intire a v∣nion betwixt the accidents of bread & wine, and Christs bodie; as there is betwixt mans soule and his body; so that as properly, and as truely, as a man may be sayd to be seene by his outward shape, (although his soule or his humane nature be not seene) so properly and truely may Christ in their doctrine be said to bee seene in the formes of bread and wine. Thirdly, I answer, that although some readings haue, Third answer. that these false prophets should teach Christ to be in Pae∣netrals, as the vulgar; and Closets, as the Remists; or pri∣uate The Remists interpret clo∣sets. I desire of them to know what humane conuersation is vsed in closets, if they cannot tell, let them but aske their Dames and Ladies for what purposes they haue clo∣sets: surely for their Penates, preserues, con∣serues, but by no meanes for men to haue any conuersati∣on with them, or with their Attendants. Matth 24. v. 3. Luke 17. 22. 23. 24. Chambers; as other, in all which manner of places, the Papists teach Christ to bee: notwithstanding the Greeke word vsed by the Translatour, doth properly signifie a hutche, or ampire to put victuals in; or a chest to lock treasure in, into which places if they would needs thrust Christ (as they doe) what conuersation may bee imagined to be had there, I referre to the Papists them∣selues to consider: and so I shut vp this discourse, ma∣king the application of it thus: I hauing prooued, that the Pope and his are the false prophets, of which our Sa∣uiour in this place doth foretell: it followeth by euident consequence, that the miracles heere spoken of, are also his and theirs, and so consequently, diuellish Antichri∣stian; the contradictory proposition of that which Mr. Flua deliuers, and so the Christian Reader may obserue, what excellent diuinity may be gathered out of this pro∣phesie of Christ, by which he answereth the demand of his Disciples, concerning his comming, and the signes thereof, by which his diuine answer wee haue found out both the Popish Psendo-Christianisme, in their teaching of Christ, to be in Penetrals and Closets, and in their vaun∣ting of their many, and great prodigious miracles
CHAP. XIII. Wherein is examined a prophesie of S. Paul. THe second place, shall bee that of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, where the Apostle affirmeth in ex∣presse 2. Thessal. 2. termes, that hee who shall extoll himselfe aboue all that is called God, (the Apostle saith, not aboue all that is God, but aboue all that is called God) as the Bishop of Rome doth, that he, who should sit in the Temple of God; bearing himselfe as if he were a God, (that is, challenging by vsurping Tyrannie, absolute gouernment of the same, & worship and adoration in the same) as the Pope doth; that he, who shall come vpon the destruction of the Romane Empire (as S. Iohn speaketh) as the Pope Austin. Chrysost Hierom. Tertul. & alij. of Rome doth, that to him and his Ministers, shall bee giuen all the power of Sathan, to worke lying signes and wonders, for the seducing of such as perish. This place is a cleere prophesie concerning Antichrist and his and their miracles, the place also is well knowen, hauing beene discussed by sundry Diuines, who doe generally apply the same to the Pope and his. A word or two, how euery iot and title of this Apostolicall predi∣ction fitteth his Holinesse. First of all, This Aduersarie is to come presently vpon the desolation and ruine of the Romane Empire, accor∣ding to the common opinion of the ancient Fathers, & Hiero. q. 11. ad algas. Agust. de Ciuit. lib 20. cap 19. Tertull. lib. de resurrectione Carnis alij plerique. to succeede in the Latine or Rome-Gouernment. Be∣hold then the Popes first Mornarch of Rome, when the Romane Empire was dissolued into diuerse King∣domes: Behold him acknowledged by the Canonists, professed by the Ignatians, beleeued by the Papists, to haue beene for these 1000. yeeres well-nie sole and only the absolute independant Monarch of Rome, which is now accounted as part of Peters Patrimonie; no part nor
member neither head, nor arme of the Empire. Behold the 8. Monarch (which both Pontificians and Prote∣stants interpret for Antichrist) succeeding the seuen in the same place; and like vnto them in the manner of be∣ginning, and in forme of gouernment. I said in the same place, for all the seuen Kings being all heads of one Beast, are to rule and reigne in the same place: Cleare it is that the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seuenth did rule and reside in Italie, yea in Rome it selfe; there also must the eight rule, presently vpon the destru∣ction of the former; which that the Pope doth and hath Dist. 63. cap. Ego Lodo: Adri in epist. ad Fred. done he himselfe doth glory thereof, and we willingly yeeld vnto him that he is (vltimus Rex Romanorum) the last King of the Romanes, without the name of Em∣perour. Secondly, this mirabilist, must be a man of sinne; If Man of sinne. a man of sinne for his priuate conuersation, the heauens themselues will witnesse, what Portents and Prodigies for wickednes that meretricious See did beare & bolster at and after the time of the dissolution of the Empire; (& inimici nostri sunt testes) and our enemies themselues will be witnesses, Baronius, Platina, Genebrard, Bellar∣mine, others. But if he be called a man of sinne, because by his wic∣ked lawes, and tyrannicall gouernment, hee should oc∣casion sinne in others, good God, what nefand sinnes hath his law for celibacy brought into their Church? What most abominable Regicides, rebellions, treasons, ciuill commotions, prophanations of Churches, ruine of Kingdomes, hath the arrogant Supremacie of this Ca∣pitoline Ioue both in spiritualls and temporalls, brought into the Christian common-wealth? Who can expresse the inundation of corruption, and presumption, which his Dallila of indulgences, hath bred in the Church of God? What tongue can expresse the enormity of simo∣ny, of all sortes, which hath ouerwhelmed the Church
by reason of their most vaine pompous and magniicent eleuating of their Seruants, and their purpured brethren, together with their carnall, and for most part sottish Ne∣phewes? And what may we not thinke he may attempt by his wicked lawes, whenas Bellarmine their great A∣chilles dareth thus to write? yea in his booke of recogni∣tions (which should be the best but is the worst he euer made) to wit, that the authoritie of the Pope is so great, Bellar. lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 5. lib recog in re∣cog lib. de Pont. cap 19. Isa. 5 20. that though he command by his lawes any thinges, that are vices, as vertues; yet the whole Church is bound to obey the voice of their Pastour, and to receiue the lawes as lawes of vertues, thus he; incurring the malediction of the Pro∣phet accursing those who call euill good, and good euill. By this we may iustly inferre, that as this Batissimus Pater is the man of sinne, so is he also the sonne of perdi∣tion, because by his most sinnefull lawes, and superstiti∣ous commandes, he is cause of perdition to innumera∣ble of his owne Congregation. I do not say all of his con∣gregation, but I speake of those which are formally his; subiect to the Pope as he is Pope, and drinking of the cuppe of his abominations. For it being so, that in his Church there yet soundeth that confession of Saint Pe∣ter, Math. 16. 16. Tues Christus filius Deivius; Thou art Christ, the son of the liuing God; and also that in it, there are the holy Scriptures (though not without many corruptions) in it there is the Apostles Creede (though in some Articles peruersly interpreted) in it the Sacrament of Baptisme, (though not without many superstitious circumstances) for substance thereof truely administred; In it there are many Priests, and Preachers, who though in other points doe teach the Doctrines of that Church, yet they doe oftentimes in the vehemencie of spirit, in their Ser∣mons deliuer, that saluation is onely to bee had by faith in Iesus Christ, that no man is or can be without corrup∣tion of sinne; with many such doctrines to like purpose. It is not a thing vnpossible, yea it is morally probable,
that God hath of his Elect in the very thickets of that idolatrous Congregation, who being led by Gods spirit doe willingly embrace that onely which is sound, and for the rest do grone vnder the burthen of humane tra∣ditions, herein not vnlike to those seuen thousand, or many of them, of whom God spake to the Prophet E∣lias, 1. Reg 19. 18. Reliqui mihi &c. I haue reserued to my selfe seuen thou∣sand who haue not bowed themselues to Baal. To proceede, this man of sinne, must exalt himselfe Exalt himselfe. Vers. 4. aboue all that is called Good (The Apostle doth not say all noted before that is God, but that is called God) Now that the Bishop of Rome, is (supremum in terris Numen) the supreame power or diuinitie vpon earth, not onely to di∣rect earthly Gods, and such as are called Gods vpon earth (as Princes, Emperours, Magistrates &c.) but further Psal. 82. 1. 6. Exod. 22. 28. Ioh. 10. 34. also by a coercitiue power, to punish them, to roote vp and to plant, to build and to destroy; It is a very prime Principle and a most fundamentall Article of their Church. The Apostle saith he must exalt himselfe aboue all that is called God: which the Pope so singularly acteth that I dare vndertake, there is none of all his Presidiaries shall be euer able, to shew, that this his arrogant, abso∣lute, and vnbounded Supremacie in temporalls and spi∣ritualls, ouer Kings and kingdomes, was yet euer giuen vnto him by any generall humane consent, no not of his owne Church, before he had exalted himselfe thereun∣to: no nor since hee hath exalted himselfe. It is well knowne how Gregorie the 7. was the first, who oared out those ambitious Dictates of his owne inuention, by Vers. 4. Dictat. Greg. 7. apud Bar: ann. 1175. which he exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God vpon earth, whose spirit, those who haue succeeded after him in the Panacy (as much as hath lyen in them) they haue imitated, and do as occasion requireth put in pra∣ctise. A most honourable and gainefull merchandise doubtlesse, to be so vniuersall a Dictator ouer the whole world, that hee shalbe able to vnking whom hee shall
please, and to dispose of the Kingdomes of the world to whomsoeuer he shall iudge meet, that is, take from those who will not adore him, and giue to those who fall down Math. 4. and worshippe him; as of late hee attempted (ex pleni∣tudine Bulla. Pij Quinti. potestatis) out of the fulnesse of his power, to haue de∣priued our most famous Queene both of life and King∣dome, and to haue giuen her Kingdome vnto that Monarch, who fell downe and worshipped for it. And doubtlesse, our now dread SOVERAIGNE, (whom the Lord of heauen and earth bee pleased euer to defend and protect as the apple of his eie) may looke for no other from Romes-Pope, and his de∣uoutes, if God by his mightie arme doe not crosse their perfidious plots and designements; I say plots and de∣signements, for who will thinke, but that both the Lion and the Beare sleepe with their eyes open, expecting e∣uer when they may deuour and how they may deuour. Thus then it resteth cleare that the Pope hath exalted him∣selfe aboue all that is called God or worshipped. To proceede he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himselfe as if hee were God (so doe the Remists read this 2. Thess. 2. 4. place): By which words what else can fitly bee vnder∣stood, but that he shall assume vnto himselfe as God (that is, in Gods steede) the absolute and independant go∣uernment of the temple of God? that is the vniuersall Catholike Church? ouertopping all, by an vnbounded Supremacie, and vnexhausted dependancie: so that of this Ioue (omnia sint plena & de plenitudine eius omnes acci∣piant) In the Romane Synagogue the Pope is all in all for power & iurisdiction Con: Later. Sess. 10. Bell. de Pont. lib. 1. cap. 9. all must be full, and receiue from his fulnesse. All which is so precisely and punctually the state of his ho∣linesse; that there is no power nor iurisdiction in their Church, which is not from him; and is so dependantly at his pleasure, that he may with or without cause, take the same from whom he shall please validly and effectu∣ally. For he is a Ioue amongst them, a very absolute Mo∣narch, subiect only to God.
But, I note the wordes of the Apostle, that hee must Beare himselfe and shew him∣selfe. shew himselfe, and beare himselfe as God; which is most punctually performed by the Pope for this his vnboun∣ded supremacie, and vnlimited Independancie; is assumed by the Popes themselues: For howsoeuer the Ancient Church for orders sake did account him to be the first Bishop in (ordine) order, at least of the West, yet I dare All those cere∣monies, which are for adora∣tion, acclama∣tion, &c. and for deportatiōs of his Holines vpon mens shoulders are by his owne approung or appointment. See Lib. 1. Cere∣mon: sect. 5. vndertake there was neuer any Councell or Father of the first sixe hundred yeeres, that gaue him any degree or sort of that Supremacy and vnlimited independancy which he now challengeth, (he now challengeth I say) For though most of his Parasites, both Canonists, Monkes, Friers, and Ignatians, doe giue him as much as he desireth, yet (I speake what I know) there are very many of the learned of that Church, which doe grone and sigh to thinke of this his arrogant presumption, and both for his challenge and practice, but yet they dare not say Domine cur ita facis; Lord why dost thou so? I note againe, the Apostle saith he shall shew himselfe as a God () as if he were a God, that is he shall not beare himselfe for God who made heauen and earth but for a Vicarian God, a God substitute, an Antichrist, or a Vice-Christ. Cleere it is as noone daies, that Anti∣christ shall not beare himselfe for the absolute and one onely God, who made heauen and earth; for if so, where is then mention made of such apparate and order for publike sacrifices, as are beseeming to such a one, bea∣ring himselfe as God himselfe? If so, how then shall he Dan: 11. 38. 39. Matth: 24. worship the God, Maozim with Gold and siluer and pre∣tious stones? If so, what danger should the elect be in, to be seduced by him, if he shall deny both the God of heauen and Iesus Christ his only Sonne? If so, why and how ac∣cording to the Pontificians, shall he cause an image of the Beast like a Leopard, Beare, and Lyon to bee made and worshipped? If so, how can his comming be a mi∣stery? How in fallacia erroris, in deceiueablenes of error?
Further I obserue the word of the Apostle, that he sitteth; if this wee vnderstand of absolute gouerne∣ment, as it is most probable, then I haue spoken thereof already; but if we take the same literally, so also the Pope sitteth as God, as a God; I haue beheld him with mine owne eyes, often sitting vnder his Throne in the material Temples of Rome, God like, as a God, hauing as great outward adoration giuen vnto him, not only by the people but by the purpured brethren, by the Priests and others who assist at the altar, as is giuen by them vnto Christ, whom they beleeue & adore as presentially there present, the difference only is they adore their Sacra∣ment-Christ, as true Christ, their Pope-Christ, as a Vice-Christ; Antichrist, a Christ-substitute. The Apostle saith, The Temple of God, which we must not so vnderstand, that he shall sit in the Temple of God and yet not defile and prophane the same: for how is it possible that Autichrist should fit in the Temple of 1 Machab. 1. 52 Ioseph. li. Anti∣quit. lib. de Bell: Iudaico saepissime God against God, and yet not prophane it? But as the Temple of Ierusalem, was called Gods Temple, and the Temple of God, though most impiously prophaned first by Antiochus, and after by Caius: so shall the visible Church in which Antichrist shall sit, be still called the Temple of God, though most impiously and sacrilegi∣ously prophaned by him; yea so prophaned by him with such abhominations, that doubtlesse whosoeuer shall therein partake with him shall for the same perish eter∣nally. And so we may see how idle that bragging in∣stance See Chrysost. Theodor. Ambr: Oecumen: Aqui∣nas, and others in 2 Thess: 2. of the Papists is; when they obiect vnto vs, that we make the Pope to be Antichrist, and yet to sit in the Church of God, and (so say they) we make their Church to be the Church of God; but how vaine (I say) is this instance? we confesse indeed, that their Church is the Church of God, but prophaned, yea impiously, sacri∣legiously, prophaned: so that all who partake formallie and willingly with the Pope, in his prophanations, shall
eternally perish. I said formally and willingly, for I doubt not to affirme, but that there are very many, who grone after a reformation of that Church, and hope for a re∣demption, making welnigh as small account of many of their Tridentine Decrees as I do. That there are many such in Popish kingdoms, I refer my selfe to the Ignati∣ans, & other Professionists consciences, who know how many there are in their Churches, which can neuer be setled in their minde, without continual doubtings, con∣cerning diuerse points of popery; as adoration of their Sacrament, adoration of Images, vse of Indulgences, praying to Saints, Iustification of workes; the Popes vnbounded Supremacie worshipping of relikes sacrifice propitiatory for the dead, Transsubstantiation &c. To proceede, this man of mne must beare himselfe as a God, in the temple; which argueth that he will chal∣lenge and assume vnto himselfe, some Godlike and di∣uine worship; the which, that we may vnderstand how it is acted by the Pope, wee are to consider how the true Lord, and true God is honoured by his Saints and Ser∣uants in the temple. The holy Prophet declareth the same thus; Omnes Apoc. 7. 11. 12. autem Angeli &c. But all the Angells stood in sight of the Throne, and of the Elders, and of the foure liuing creatures, and fell downe before the throne, vpon their faces and wor∣shipped God, saying Amen; Blessing, and Clarity, and Wise∣dome, and Thanksgiuing and Honor, and Power, and Forti∣tude, be to our God for euer and euer. Thus the Prophet; & is there any one iot of this honor & adoration which is not giuen to Romes-vice-God by the Papists, and by The Pope ma∣king a Cardi∣nall saith, Creo¦te &c. or thus: Sis frater nester & Princeps Orbi his creatures the Purpured? They when they first ac∣knowledge him, (I meane the Cardinals) for their holy Father & Pope, do they not the same by adoration? he sitting in a chaire, they one after one adoring: for vntil their adoration be finished and compleated, he is not compleate Pope, by adoration he is made Pope, and
being made he is adored. And for as much as is con∣teyned in the 12 verse, doe they not fully yeeld vnto him euery point thereof? What generall acclamations are made to him, by all in the Temple, and of that Tem∣ple? calling him, Beatissimus, Sanctissimus, Diuinissimus, Supremum in terris Numen, most Blessed, most Holy, most Diuine, the supreamest Numen vpon earth: and in like Benedictio. Blessing. sort, his Holinesse, his Sanctitie, his most Holie Holinesse, &c. he hath then Benediction, Blessing &c. As for Charitie, Glory, or Magnificence, which is the second attribute giuen to God by his Saints and Ser∣uants; Claritas. Claritie. do they not yeeld the same to their Holy Father? What glory? then at that time, and in that place, where the Lord of heauen is pretended to be worshipped, to haue him borne vpon mens shoulders, and so mounted euen in S. Peters Church, vntill he come to the Throne, where his Maiestie is to sit, there to be worshipped with adorations, genuflexions, and acclamations: Liue Holy Fa∣ther, Liue most Holy Father? What Claritie, by making and creating Kings, to giue Kingly authoritie, where none was before? What glo∣ry, Suar: lib. 3. c. 23. teacheth that the Pope hath power to cha∣stise Kings euen with death, and he maketh this doctrine an ar∣ticle of faith. to depriue Kings of that Regaltie and those Crownes which the hand of heauen had set vpon their heads? What claritie, to be able to create, yea to create Princes ouer the wholeworld, wch he doth in creating Cardinals, making them his Brethren and Princes ouer the world? What Claritie, as a Monarch to summon all Councells? as a supreme Head, to sit and gouerne all Councells, Gene∣rall and Prouinciall? to make or vnmake them? dis∣solue or confirme them as he shall thinke good? What Claritie, to be a Monarch-Exlex, Outlaw, to make lawes Outlaw. for all, great and small, high and low, and to be tyed to none himselfe? This Claritie was not vnthought vpon by the Bishop of Modrusium, when he sang thus in the Councell of Laterane, to a iouiall and a Iuuenall Pope Leo the 10: Ecce venit Leo de Tribu Iuda radix Dauid
&c. Behold the Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda is come, We have Cone. Later. Sess. 6. in rat: Ep. Modrus. expected thee a Sauiour, O most blessed Leo. thus there, with more like stuffe. The third Attribute, giuen to God by his Saints, is Sapientia. Wisdome. Wisdome; touching which, who is ignorant that the Pa∣pists make the Pope, the fountaine of all Christian wis∣dome? the Rocke, Pillar, and Fountaine of Inerrabilitie in the whole Church, whether it be for articles of doctrine and profession, or lawes of discipline? Yea Bellarmine and most of the Ignatians, giue vnto their Holy Father this Inerrabilitie, not onely as he is Pope, and as hee tea∣cheth Bella: de Pont: lib. 4. cap. 6. Alb Pighius lib. 4. hierar. c. 8. their whole Church; but further also, that as hee is a priuate Person he cannot be an Heretike: and for this purpose I will here insert a true tale. There was in Rome a Courtier, who vpon an occasion affirmed, that the Pope might erre in faith; being a man of great note, hee was convented before some Cardinalls to answer for himselfe, to whom he affirmed as much as before; wher∣vpon the Cardinalls replyed vnto him, and said, that hee was an Heretike for so saying; to whom the Courtier thus answered for himselfe; Pope Paul being at dinner, said in my hearing, that he did beleeue, he should reco∣uer Placentia before he died, and yet he did not, and so I am assured he erred in faith; O said the Cardinalls, we thoght you had meant the Pope might erre in the Chri∣stian faith; no truly, replyed the Courtier, I could not so thinke, for, for ought that I can see, I cannot say whe∣ther the Pope or any of his Cardinalls haue any iot therof at all or not. And this his last answer is doubtlesse best; for a man who hath liued amongst them, will hardly by their liues iudge, that they haue any faith at all, whether christian or morall. Thanksgiuing, is the fourth Attribute giuen to God by Gratiarum actio. Thanksgiuing. his Saints wherein how egregiously the Papists do flat∣ter their Pope, their Epistles Snodicall and Dedicatorie; their Orations and acclamations Gratulatorie, doe euince.
Doe they not acknowledge him, to take away the sinnes The arrogancy of the Pope, re∣quiring accla∣mations of Thanksgiuing, when England was reconciled to him by Card. Poole. Aemilius lib. 7. post medium. of whole Kingdomes? Let vs call to minde, how Car∣dinall Poole the Popes Legate, did vnder King Philip and Queene Marie, reconcile this Kingdom of England to Rome; wherevpon there followed and were requi∣red great Gratulatorie acclamations of Thanksgiuing vnto his Holinesse. Is it not recorded how the Cecillian Le∣gates, with a pitifull miserere, did cry to his Holinesse, Qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nostri &c. Thou who ta∣kest away the sinnes of the world haue mercy vpon vs; Thou that takest away the sinnes of the world giue vnto vs peace? Doe not Kings, Emperours, Patriarkes, Primates, Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Generalls, Absolute and Vi∣carian, with gratefull acknowledgment, confesse him to be their Holy Father, their Patrone, Protectour, and that they doe all (ex plenitudine eius accipere) receiue from his fullnesse? The case is cleare. I passe on. The fifth Attribute of praise giuen to God, is Honour; Honor. Honour. the which being coincident with some of the former al∣ready handled, I passe it ouer as cleare. The sixth is Power. And is not this giuen vnto him, Potestas. Power. whenas their Decretall article of Boniface standeth a∣mongst them in absolute force as a point of faith, Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae Creaturae definimus, declara∣mus, De maiorit. & Obed. cap. Vnam Sanctam. pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Wee defiae, wee pronounce, we declare, that it is altogether neces∣sarie to saluation, that euery humane creature be subiect to the Bishop of Rome. How vniuersall is his power and iu∣risdiction? For charge mounting vp to the heauens, commanding Angells. For blessing, piercing Purgatorie, and deliuering soules. Yea according to their owne principles, in his absolute power he is able to deliuer all soules out of Purgatorie flames, and Antonine affirmeth Anton: part. 3. titul: 22. cap. 5. the like: pittie, his charitie is not as absolute as his power. For punishment, penetrating hell it selfe, coniu∣ring, commanding the Deuills by his Exercists; aug∣menting
and increasing their paines and torments in infi∣nitum, Flagellū Daemo. if they proue refractarious. For glory, heauen seemeth beholding to his power; for his Canonizing and Sainting, (with the vnspeakable Charges of those who desire it) Saints and Saintesses: as of late Spaine did their Didacus; Polonia, Hyacinthus; and the whole mul∣titude of Ignatians hauing already procured their Father Ignatius to be Beated and Beatified, doe continually ex∣pect They expect the same for their Zauerius Gonzaga. and desire to haue him Sainted and Canonized, that as now they say, Beati Ignati orapro nobis, Blessed Ignatius pray for vs; so then they may say, Sancte Ignati ora pro nobis, Saint Ignatius pray for vs. The seuenth Attribute is Fortitude, the which that it Fortitudo. Fortitude. is giuen to the Popes by the Romanists, who can doubt, who hath heard of that fundamentall article of their Church, by which they make the very Persons of their Popes, to be that very Rocke vpon which their Church is Bell: de Pent, lib. 1. cap. 10. Matth: 16. built; and against which the Gates of Hell cannot preuaile: so now as there is no power vpon earth which may be compared with that of Leuiatban, and the Gates of Hell; so neither is there any Fortitude which may be compa∣red with that of their Popes; which hath been so forci∣ble, that it hath by reason of the Popes most arrogant Supremacie, beaten from it most of the Churches of the world. For, for this cause, and for this Papall Fortitude, the Persian Christned Churches do reiect the Commu∣nion of Rome; the Aethiopian doe detest it; the Mus∣couian execrate it euen as they doethe Deuill himselfe; the Arabian condemne it; the Armenian scorne it; all Reformed Churches of Sueueland, Denmarke, Norway, Low-Countries, France, Germanie, Scotland, Ireland, Eng∣land, doe refuse and accurse it. And though for this cause, the Papall Fortitude hath often thundred out her Anathemes and Excommunications against them, notwith∣standing by Gods blessings, they stand, grow, and in∣crease, maugre the spite and force of this Roman Rocke.
Thus I haue briefely shewed, (omitting an infinitie of particulars to confirme the same) how all the diuine Attributes, giuen by the creatures to the Creator, are in a kinde of imitation giuen by their Papists to their Creator the Pope, of whom they are begotten, and from whom they take their name. And as they giue him these At∣tributes, so they haue not been afraid to giue vnto him the name of God; so their Extrauagant boldly, Dominus Extrauag. Cum inter Joh: 22. Glossa. Deus noster, Our Lord God. Caraffa in his Theses more mincingly terming their now Pope Paul the 5. Ʋice-Deus, Vice-God; and as they giue him this honour, so they doe beleeue that he shall haue it (in secula seculorū) for euer and euer, vntill the end of the world; for they doe make his Seat to be Sedem aeternam, an euerlasting Bell: de Pont: lib. 4. cap. 4. Matth: 16. Seat, against which the Gates of Hell shall neuer be able to preuaile. So then, to summe vp all this, the Papists song vnto their Pope, sitting in the Temple of God, vpon his Throne, in the presence of his Elders and liuing crea∣tures, thus it is: Benedictio &c. Blessing, Claritie, Wisdom, Thanksgiuing, Honour, Power, and Fortitude, to our God for euer and euer: This man then sitting in the Temple of God, is honoured as God; if then Hee and his, doe signes and wonders, doubtlesse they must bee such, whereof the Apostle speaketh, and so consequently, 2 Thess: 2. mendacious, Antichristian. CHAP. XIIII. Wherein is examined another prophecie of Christ in the seuenth of Matthew. THE third place is that of Saint Matthew, Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, haue we not Mat. 7. 12. 13. prophecied in thy name, and in thy name haue cast out diuels, and in thy name done many wonderfull workes?
And then I will professe vnto them, I neuer knew you; de∣part from me ye workers of iniquity. That all these things here spoken, by these false pro∣phets, are vttered and acted now by the Popish Monks, Friars, &c. No man can be ignorant, who daily heareth them chaunting out their doing of wonders, and casting out of diuels in the name of Christ, and by the power of Christ. Two things rest to be proued; first, whether they bee operarij iniquitatis, the workers of iniquitie here spoken of. Se∣condly, whether it be probable that our Sauiour in this place, doe aime at Antichristian false prophets, or rather at some true Prophets and teachers, who teach his do∣ctrine truly, confirming the same by miracles, and yet liue very wickedly. Concerning the first, that the Popish mirabilists, are workers of Iniquitie, I referre the Reader to what I haue saide already: but that they are the speciall workers of iniquitie, heere mentioned by our Sauiour, it may thus appeare: first, because our Sauiour in this place seemeth most to reproue the iniquity of sacrilegious iniustice: now what greater iniquitie of iniustice amongst the Prea∣chers and Prophets, then the iniquitie of symony: which maketh such a generall inundation in all Popish Churches, that there is hardly a man to be found, who receiueth any benefice, dignity, &c. at lest from the Ho∣ly Romae omnia ve∣nalia Dus ipse Diabolus ipse. See Tax. cam. Apostal. See Nonus Ho∣mo his orat. to Christ: Prin. most truly de∣scribing this kinde of ini∣quitie. Acts 8. 23. Fathers hands, or his Deputy-nephewes, Cameriers, or other Substitutes (non numerata pecunia) paying not for the same. Againe who hath enacted all those Lawes, which are so nigh and cosin germans to Symony: but the Holy Father, and his mirabilists? Againe, which of all their Popes doe euer enter into the Papacy, without diuers contracts of bargaines, bets, layes, promises, &c. and is not this (Iniquitas maxima) the greatest iniquitie that may be, which maketh their hearts and minds (as Simons was) full of gall and bitternesse, that is, of enuy and malice,
the bitterest weed of iniquity which can grow in the heart of man. Secondly, our Sauiour also in this place, seemeth spe∣cially to reproue the iniquitie of fraud and deception, as if hee should say vnto the false prophets; you glory in your miracles and wonders as done in my name, and for my glory: but it is farre otherwise, for by them you pra∣ctise a highest point of iniquity; to wit, by fraud and de∣ception, to draw my faithfull to the base worship and ser∣uitude of Creatures, and thereby seeking your owne glo∣ry, to inthrall them in the bondage of your owne tradi∣tions. This is fully compleated in the Popish Church. Thirdly, if our Sauiour doe by these words, workers of iniquity, comprehend workers of all manner of wicked∣nesse; then let vs aske the great Fauourers, and Pillars of Rome what manner of wickednesse it is which doth not reigne amongst them. Let vs aske Cornelius Mus, Bishop of Bitontum, in his Oration to the Tridentine Fathers: the great Parisian Clerkes, as Clemangis, Genebrard, and Bernardus serm. 33. in Cant. lib. de cōsiderat. sepe Albert in Ioh. 10 Auentine sepis∣sime. lib. 5. & 7. hist. Alij apertis∣sime. How the Popes are (as Simon Magus) chaind in obligatione in∣iquitatu, Mar∣celius 2. Pope pronounceth thus; I see not (saith he) how those who hold this high place can bee saued. Onuph. in vit. Mart. 2. Espensaeus; their Analists, as Baronius, Auentine; their Theologues, as Holcot, Albertus, with diuers others; especially Saint Bernard the (Didimus veridi∣cus) Tell-troth, who so deploreth the most loathsome, and most incurable diseases in the Church, as it will a∣stonish a man to read him. See his Sermon vpon the conuersion of Saint Paul, his protestations and lamentati∣ons in the Councell of Rhemes, especially his 66. Ser∣mon vpon the Canticles: where he delineateth the abo∣minable turpitudes of the Roman See and Clergie; & so cleare it is as nothing can be clearer, that since Bernards time, they haue so profited in peius; that if euer, that of one of theirs were found true, it is now punctually true, to wit, that their Church is come to that perfection of vertue, that it seemeth worthy to be ruled, and gouer∣ned onely by reprobates. Touching the second, our Sauiour in this place, ay∣meth
and pointeth at Antichristian prophets, I proue it thus: First, because without doubt in the 12. and 13. verses (which are so connexed by a continued discourse to the 15. and 16. verses) hee meaneth the same false prophets which he doth in these: now that in these, hee intendeth Antichristian false prophets it is confes∣sed Pontif. paene om∣nes. See Staplet in Promtu. Mo∣ral. & Cathel. by the aduersaries; who are most eager to fasten the same imputation, not vpon any of their owne, but vp∣on such whom they call Heretikes, and whom they make Antichristian, at least as forerunners of Antichrist. Secondly our Sauiour professeth, that he will say vnto them at the day of Iudgement, that he neuer knew them: the which as it is easily vnderstood of Antichristian false prophets, who nether in life, nor in doctrine were euer approued by Christ: So it is hardly to bee applied to such true Prophets which preach his truth sincerely, and confirme the same by miracles, though their life and conuersation be wicked: what? will not Christ? nor ne∣uer did Christ acknowledge his doctrine and miracles in wicked persons? Obserue how hee speaketh of true tea∣chers and wicked liuers. Super Cathedram Moysis, &c. Vpon the chaire of Moses there sate Scribes and Pharisees, doe what they say; but doe not what they doe. Thirdly I suppose, the Papists must needs so interpret this place; for in so long a continuance of their Church (whereof they so greatly glory) I doe not thinke, they will name any one of their Church, who hath done wonders in the name of Christ, and cast out diuels in his name, whom they will professe to be (operarium iniquita∣tis) Matth. 23. 2. a worker of iniquity. No, it is abundantly sufficient in their Church, that their Ioue may canonize any one for a Saint, if it can bee proued that he did wonders, and cast out Diuels in the name of Christ: let them name but one if they can, whom their Pope and his hath neg∣lected to account and esteeme as holy and Saintly, if he haue prophecied in Christs name, done wonders and
cast out diuells in the same, they cannot doe it. Let this therefore remaine, as an vnremoueable cognisance to the Pope and his Prophets, that they are (operarij ini∣quitatis) workers of iniquity: and although they preach Matth. 7. 13. in the pretensed name of Christ, though in the same they cast out diuels, and doe many wonders; yet notwith∣standing their miracles are to be accounted Antichristian, & their casting out of diuels a Satanical conspiracy, And so concluding this discourse, I would God were pleased to giue them grace to apprehend (and by it to amend) that terrible denouncement which is threatned against such as they are, Ecce ego ad prophetas, Behold (saith the Ier. 23. 32. Lord) I am against those prophets, who dreame alye, and shew the same; and haue seduced my people in their lye and in their miracles, when I had not sent them, nor had commanded them, saith the Lord. CHAP. XV. Wherein is examined a second prophesie of S. Paul. THe fourth place is taken out of S. Pauls prophesie to Timothie thus. Now the Spirit speaketh expressely, that in the latter times 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. some shall depart from the faith, giuing heed to seducing spi∣rits, and doctrines of Diuels. Speaking lies in hypocrisie, hauing their consciences seared with a hot iron: Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstaine from meats, which God hath created to be receiued with thankes∣giuing, of them which beleeue and know the truth. This holy prophesie, which is so expresse and so cleere, may thus cleerely bee fastened vpon the Pontifi∣cian Church. The circumstance of time in those words (in the latter times) most euidently thus: for if the Pontificians them∣selues
doe apply this prophesie onely to the Manichees, Encratites, Patritians, who were many hundreds of Remists in 1. Tim. 4. in their Annotat. Ponti∣ficij omnes. yeeres before these times, and of whom there is now hardly any shadow in the Churches; much rather in re∣spect of more laternesse of time, it may bee applied to the Popish Church in Gregory the seuenths time, when marriage in Priests was more strictly forbid then euer before; for the inhibitions made against Priests marriage by Siricius and Calixtus, were but flea-bitings, in compa∣rison of the thundering commands, which Gregory the se∣uenth roared out. I say, that the Pontificians did apply the prophesie onely to the Manichees, Encratites, Tatianites, Patritians, and such like of old; which their application I cannot see how it will iumpe with those, who vnderstand this prophesie of the times of Antichrist, as some doe. Guil∣liaudus maketh the argument to the fourth chapter thus, Guilliaudus in Epist. ad Timoth. in cap. 4. Argu∣mente. (Errores Antichristi predicit the Apostle foretelleth the errours of Antichrist.) Thus hee: how agreeingly to his owne glosse after, I referre to some Burgundian to an∣swer for him; yet doubtlesse his argument is very true; for for howsoeuer the Encratites and Manichees did forbid marriage in some sort, as Antichrist and his do: notwith∣standing there are some circumstances of the text, which cannot so fitly be applied to those ancient Heretikes: as first, the circumstance of time, In the latter times, by which words, the Apostle doubtlesse aimeth at the times 2. Thessal. 2. of the Apostasie and defection, mentioned by himselfe in the second to the Thessalonians. Secondly, the Apostle sayth, that those who shall teach these doctrines, shall therein attend to Seducing Spirits, insinuating thereby, that they shall be led to the same by pretence of visions, miracles and prodigies, done by spirits of errour, the Diuels themselues: which is e∣gregiously acted by the Pontisicians, who do not ground this their inhibition against marriage & eating of meats,
vpon the word of God, but rather vpon such visions, mira∣cles & wonders, as they pretend for the same: we doe not read that the Encratites and Patritians were so attentiue after visions and miracles, or did so glorie in them, as the Pontificians now doe; yea, they are so shamelesse often∣times, as to mooue their pretended possessed persons, or See first chap∣ter aboue. (as they pretend) the Diuels in them, to deride the marriage of Priests. The note of lying hypocrisie, with seared consciences, how∣soeuer it may bee imputed to those ancient Heretickes; yet verily, it cannot be doubted, but that the Pontifician Leaders and Commanders doe heerein surpasse them: what els doth searing of conscience denote and designe, then a most obstinate and obfirmed resolution in their doctrins? which in the Popes & theirs is so past all mea∣sure, as the world can witnesse; that although their own more temperate Professours, Cardinals, Emperours and Caesars, Kings and Potentates, Princes and Magistrates, Prelates and Priests, the Laity of all sorts, doe (conside∣ring the horrible enormities of their votaries) require, that the Law of Celibacie bee remooued, and the vse of marriage bee left indifferent, notwithstanding most of their more peruerse Popes: (yea, all of them at lest, to auoyd scandall, and to preserue the dignity of their Church) are so wedded to the Darling, that the knot is indissoluble; so be their consciences seared with the hot iron of obstinacie and impudencie, that they waigh not, though an infinity of soules perish through their vnneces∣sary law of vowed Celibacy. Neither do they regard what the Christian world inueigheth against them: assuredly, that of Epiphanius is fulfilled, They reiect marriage not lust, Epiphanius ad∣uersus Origenist. heres 42. for sanctitie is not in honor with them, but hypocrisie. Further, what may we more fitly vnderstand by their speaking lies in hypocrisie, then a professed dissembling of greater san∣ctity, both for chastitie and abstinence, then is amongst them, in which sense; good God, how punctually are
the Papist-leaders and Teachers noted by the Apostle? how patly and in euerie respect, doth hee poynt at the Ignatians? who professing greater sanctitie then others, doe farre come behinde all others (at lest in the point of abstinence) in that Church, there being no Order nor Degree of the Romane Church, which keepeth lesse fa∣sting and abstinence then the Ignatians doe, their speci∣all promises are for obedience to their Superiours and Generals, and by them, by a secret vow, to goe whither∣soeuer he shall command, and to do whatsoeuer he shall command: Videant Reges. The Apostle saith, that these false Teachers were to depart from the faith, which as it is fulfilled in the ancient heretikes, so more absolutely in the Romane Popes; whose Clem. Alex. 3. Stromat. Tertul. de monogamia. Athan. Epist. ad Dracont. Chryso. in 1. ad Timoth. hom. 10. Hieron. against Iouinian Con. Aney. an. 9. Gangr. 4. ad Hebr. 1. 3. departure from the faith in this point, appeareth thus: For whereas it is cleere as the very heauens, that in the Apostles time, & for long after, marriage was as a thing good, godly, Christian, allowed and permitted in the Cleargie: so that it was honourable in all, according to the Apostles doctrine; They haue in a pretended shew of more sanctitie (but in truth in very hypocrisie) imposed: First, the Law of Celibacie vpon their Cleargy: Second∣ly, the vow of Celibacie vpon them; as though that mar∣ried Clerkes were vnfit to administer at the Altar, or to preach the word of God, and that marriage in them were not honourable or allowable: the which what is it else, then a meere departure from the faith, first receiued, first established? Let vs aske S. Chrysostome what the ancient Church, nay, what the Apostle thought of marriage in Priests? Cuius rei gratia, &c. For what cause doth the Apo∣stle Chrysostemus in Titum. hom. 2. See him hom. 10. in 1. ad Tim. mention these manner of men? (to wit married) hee doth intend vtterly to stop the mouthes of Heretikes, who condemne marriage shewing the same to be without fault, yea, the same to be so precious a thing, that with it any man may be promoted to the throne of Episcopacie. And in his tenth homilie vpon the first to Timothy, speaking of marriage in Priests, he
hath these expresse words: Licet enim eam rem honeste ac Chrysost. in illa verba; Sed mansuetum &c. licite capere si quis velit. It is lawfull for any man if he will lawfully and honestly to take the same thing: meaning mar∣riage, yea marriage in Bishops: For in the same place he speaketh according to the Apostles intent of Bishops: See him, and the like is to bee obserued in many of the Ancients, declaring the practise of the Church in this kinde: yea their holy Briget taketh and receiueth the Briget. lib. 7. Reuel. cap. 10. circa medium. same as a diuine reuelation from the Virgin Maryes own mouth, part of which reuelation the Reader may finde in the Appendix here following: in the second part of the sixteenth Chapter. It resteth to be shewed and proued, whether the Pa∣pists doe deliuer the same doctrines of Deuills, which the Apostle here condemneth; which that they doe, for the first point I thus make manifest. To insist vpon the A∣postles expresse wordes, he saith onely, that the Here∣tikes should forbid marriage &c. which that the Popes and Papists doe, it is a case as manifest as noone daies: And their euasion of this imputation is not worth a rush. For they answer that the Apostle intendeth onely such Heretikes as doe forbid marriage, because of naturall vn∣cleanesse in the same. Their instance is most vaine; nay rather the Apostle purposely abstaineth from mentio∣ning any such circumstance of the heresie, that so in his prophecie, hee might as well inuolue those Heretikes which would teach marriage to be vncleane to the Vsers and Practisers of it, against pretensed commandes; as also those who would condemn it as vncleane in it selfe. If the Apostle had intended the Manicheyes only, or such like, he might easily haue expressed the circumstance of their heresie; but he did not so; ayming doubtlesse at all those, who should forbid and inhibit marriage in those, and to them, to whom God had commended or allowed it; and therefore he vseth rather the words for∣bid, as if he should say these Heretikes will disaprooue of
marriage in respect of their own commandes in those, and to those, to whom they shall forbid the same. And if the Papists doe seriously bethinke themselues they shall finde, that the ancient Manicheyes doe iumpe with them in this their heresie about marriage in their August. epist. 74 Clergie; for as the Papists doe allow marriage in their Laickes, but vtterly forbid it in their Clerkes; so did the Manicheyes allowe marriage in their ordinarie Professours, whom they did call (Auditores) Hearers, but vtterly forbidde and reprooue the same in their speciall ones, whom they called Electi, their chosen and Elects. So that here we haue the Papists expresly iumping with the Ma∣nicheyes in this point. I note specially, that the Apostle saith they shall for∣bid marriage, by which, he euidently insinuateth, that the holy Spirits intention is, to note and ayme at such Gouernours and Rulers of the Church, who should a∣gainst Genes. 1. 22. the Apostles and Gods ordinance, lay their com∣mand vpon celibacy and single life forbidding marriage. Now this is the very selfe thing, which the Bishops of Rome haue done. For vpon that (concerning which the 1. Cor. 7. Apostle had no precept but onely counsell) they haue laide their imperious commandes in their clergie, forbidding them to marry, yea and against their owne principles, haue laid a precept vpon a Counsell; commanding and requiring most strictly all those, who take orders to vow chastitie; which according to their owne principles God left in counsell and free election, and which the Apostle had onely power to counsell and perswade. Their pretensed ground of this their doing, to wit, because celibacy and single life is in perfection surpas∣sing matrimoniall state, is vaine: for wee are not to consi∣der celibacie and single life & matrimoniall state as they are in speculation; but as they are in action, practise, and vse; and so considered, cleare it is, that celibacy or sin∣gle life is not to be preferred before matrimoniall state in
him or her, who haue not the gift of continencie, nay rather in them it is wicked and damnable, though lauda∣ble and highly to be commended in those, who haue the gift: So that the perfection of either of these two states of life, is from the minde, according to that of most lear∣ned Nazianzene: Mens est &c. It is the mind which giueth Greg. Naz. in Epitaph. Sor. Gorgonia. perfection either to marriage or to virginitie. And so to con∣clude this point, celibacy or single life with continuall burning is a damnable state; marriage with continency is holy and honourable in all: And so it resteth proued concerning the first point (the other part I remit to some other occasion) of these false-prophets doctrine, that e∣uery circumstance and part thereof is very aptly and punctually applied to the Papists and their Popes; wher∣by it also followeth, that if they doe miracles for confir∣mation of the said points, that the same are lying, men∣dacious, Antichristian; which is the proposition I haue endeauored in all this treatise to proue and declare; and haue by Gods Grace brought to this issue; that in the question I haue satisfied my owne iudgement and con∣science; and I doe most heartily pray, that the same may tend to the profit and good of Gods Church; and to the confusion of her Enemies, which are more wise in their ge∣neration then the children of light are in their kinde.
CHAP. XVI. An Appendix touching the vanity of certaine Popish miraculous visions which are usually brought by Papists for de∣fence of their Religion, but being examined are found to be against the same. IT is an old and a true saying, he shall neede a long spoone who must eate with the Deuill, and therfore to greate purpose the Apostle calleth his workings and pra∣ctises with men Astutias, crafts, subtelties, deceits, the 2. Cor. 2. 11. which will more easily appeare if wee doe but obserue what manner of men he hath deceiued, and in what sort he hath deceiued them; to wit, by Fables of visions, fictions of miracles, and strange prodigies; of which their itching eares haue beene ouercredulous, listening and longing after them euen with a kinde of gree∣dinesse. Secondly if we consider in what time, to wit, when the vigilancie of the Pastours beganne to slacke and they be∣gan to slumber, then the Deuill began to sow his cockell and Math. 13. 25. darnell where good wheate had beene sowed before, e∣uen in the Lords fielde, where hee himselfe had cast his seede before. And lest the Pontificians should be thought now of late onely to haue entered into these kindes of courses I will (hauing alreadie spoken sufficiently of miracles) take paines in this place as in an Appendix, to shew in a few examples how their Progenitours haue en∣deuoured to drawe Ancient and venerable men into these Iusts, and to impose Fables of visions vpon them, thereby the more to countenance the bad cause, which they haue vndertaken to maintaine.
First I will beginne with a Fable, which is somewhat corruptly cited out of venerable Bede, and is produced for proofe of their Purgatory flashes, but the Christian Reader will vpon the scanning of it finde it to bee but a fiction, yea and the Pontificians themselues must so ac∣count thereof, vnlesse they will go contrary to their owne religion. I will not afford to set downe with all those so∣lemne words, with which Costerus that famous Ignatian, doth cite out of Bede, in substance it is thus; One Drie∣telmus Coster dominica 5. post pentec. Bed. lib. 5. histo. Aug. cap. 13. Coster hath the very like histo∣ry dom. 3. post. pasca. out of Boniface Arch. mogunt. ep. ad Cadelburg. a married man, sodenly falleth vpon an euening into a traunce (dyed in the euening and was reuiued in the morning, saith Coster) who told afterwards strange things to the standers by: Hee saith that at first he was carried by a beautifull Angell, towards the East; where hee first seeth a place full of many soules, one while tormented with extreame cold, another while plunged into most accensed and kindled fire; thence hee is carried a little further, where hee obserueth many firy bals arising out of a horrible depth, which balls hee interpreted to be soules, tormented by the diuels in hell fire; and whilest hee was beholding these horrors, with great astonish∣ment, his good Angell leaueth him; in whose absence, he obserueth the diuils to laugh, (I neuer reade in true diuinity, that Diuels had leasure in their torments to laugh, but of such stuffe their Legends are full) and to cast soules vp and downe like wilde-fire bals; they ap∣proached also vnto him, but durst not touch him: Then presently like a resplendent starre, appeareth vnto him his good Angell, and carrying him further into the East, sheweth vnto him a place, glorious for light, pleasant for flowers: in which were diuers soules full of ioy, and walking in white garments. Secondly, he sheweth vnto him a place of greater ioy and happinesse, in compari∣son of which, the former seemed but as a sparke: Now Drietelmus hauing seene all that he was to see, and being to returne againe to his body, and to relate vnto others,
what hee had seene, the Angell expoundeth vnto him his vision, which is thus: the first place is purgatory, where all those are punished, which haue not fully satisfied (O vanity of vanities! who can euer fully satisfie Gods iu∣stice, though in Purgatory?) for their sinnes, and these shall be all saued at the day of iudgement. The second place, is hell, out of which no man (the deliuery of Traianes soule by Gregory, was not yet heard of by Bede) can euer be deliuered, which is once cast in∣to it; In the third place (here I will vse Costers words one∣ly) Full of sweet flowers are receiued those soules, who haue liued here well and godly; and are not of this perfection, that Coster. ibidem. they may presently goe vp into the highest heauen, al which also at length, after the last iudgement had by God, shall come to eternall glory: but those who are perfect in all there wordes, thoughts, and workes, (and who are those, holie Coster? are there any of your Ignatians such?) they presently, shall be admitted to that most glorious state of the blessed, so soone as their soule goeth out of their body; and this is the place which thou sawest a farre off, doe thou now goe, and take thy body, and be carefull how thou carriest thy selfe for heereaf∣ter. Thus farre profound Costerus out of Bede; who if he had beene more circumspect, hee would not haue in∣serted (as he doth many like, into his dunsticall Homilies, for most part stolen out of others) this vision so presu∣iudiciall to his own religion. For who is so blockish, that doth not here out obserue foure places? who so blind as not to see here a double heauē of the Papists? a twofold state of their blessed? further who in those wordes (they Cster his foure places for souls departed; & his two heauens. are not yet of that perfection to come into the bighest hea∣uen) doth not obserue that their Saints in the first heauen may merit, and by good worke obtaine greater perfecti∣on? who obserueth not also, that wise Costorus hath a heauen, in which the blessed doe not see God? againe who noteth not, that this vision supposeth, that in this mortall life, men may bee perfect, in all their wordes,
workes and thoughts? and so presently after death, mount vp into the highest heauen? the which position, (with diuers others) as it is contrary to their doctrine, by which they teach, no man to bee void of veniall sins; so it is expresly against Gods word, affirming, that the iust man falleth seuen times a day and riseth againe; it is also Prou. 24. 16. most opposit to that of Saint Iames, who teacheth that wee all doe offend in many things; but these men perfect in Iacob. 3. 2. all their workes, yea thoughts and words, are free from all sinne, and so need not so much, as to aske forgiuenes of their daily trespasses, as they are commanded in our Lords Prayer: much more might bee obserued in this vision contradicting their owne principles both in Phy∣losophy and Diuinitie. But I will adde no more, but on∣ly tell them, that this vision carrieth with it not any whit the more credit, because holy Briget hath the like in her Briget lib. 4. re∣uelat. cap. 7. reuelations; she deliuereth forsooth a double varietie of places for soules damned, and a triple varietie of places for the soules to bee purged: but because her narration is long, and it were too too prolixe, to trouble this short Treatise, with so impertinent and hereticall fables and baubles; I will onely point the Reader to the place, where hee may see them. Notwithstanding I will not omit in this place, to adioyne some of that illuminated Saintesses visions, considering that her reuelations bee of late reprinted at Antwerpe, with Paul the fifthes priuiledge: but hee hath so dealt with Brigett, that she hath not bin priuiledged from false fingers; and therefore in diuers things, she is made to speake diuersly, from what she did in her former Editions; so playeth the illuminate vice-God, with the illuminated spousesse of Christ. Brigett in the fourth Booke of her reuelations telleth vs, how the Virgine Mary appeared to her, declaring Brig. li. 4. c. 139. with how many gracious fauours, she would cherish Gre∣gory Ibidem cap. 139. 140. 141. 142. 143. the eleuenth (a Pope prophane, worldly, impure, disobedient, carnall, if Brigets owne reuelations bee of
credit) and in the vpshot, the Virgine telleth Brigett, that she would pray to her sonne, vt ipse dignetur misereri & vnire spiritum suum sanctum, cum interno sanguine cordis eiusdem Gregorij Papae) that hee would vouchsafe, to haue mercy, and to vnite his holy Spirit with the internall bloud of the heart of the said Gregory Pope: belike heere is some hypostatical vnion thought vpon, betwixt Gregory the Popes bloud and the holy Ghost. For I beseech the Pontificians to tell me, what new vnion could the Virgine pray for, betwixt Gregories bloud, and the holy Ghost, except vnion hypostaticall? ah vaine, and detestable impieties! And heere I cannot omit to set downe what Gallonius recordeth of renowmed Philippe Nerius, the Galloni. in vita ad ann. 1595. founder of the congregation of the Oratory in Rome: This man forsooth, being to bee bowelled after his death, (if hee was a Saint like Sauerius, why might not his guts be kept for relikes, as well as the rest of his bo∣dy?) the Physicians found that two of his brest ribbes the 4. and the fift were broken and yet so reared vp in bending, that in their height, they exceeded the bignesse of a mans fist; a diuine remedy (say these wise Physicians without doubt) Gallon. ibidem. that so, the Holy Fathers heart, might haue roome to leape, and moue vp and downe in the loue of God: heare his words, habuit ea initium, a nimia diuini amoris vi, summoque cordis eius ardore, quo inter contemplandum, vel maxime afficieba∣tur. The same (to wit the breaking of his ribs) tooke begin∣ning from the too too great force of diuine loue, and very great heat of his heart, with which he was specially affected in time of his contemplation. And to make this more credible, This oath of these Physici∣ans is as despe∣rate as that of Baronius, pag. following. and the miracle more wonderfull, he bringeth out cer∣taine Physicians, not only to affirme, but euen by word and writing with sacred oath, to confirme the same, that the breaking of the said Fathers ribbs hapned vnto him diuinitus, diuinely by miracle; and that for diuers causes; (primo, ne contemplationi vacans, ex diuini caloris vi, abun∣dātia{que} repentina morte extingueretur: deinde, vt cor arden∣tissimos
amoris aestus sustinens, angustiorem locum sibi acqui∣reret: tum, vt pulmones, facilius & praeter consuetudinem, dilatarent se: postremo, vt beneficio loci angustioris, tantum noui aeris, pulmones ad cor deferrent, quantum ad illud re∣frigerandum satis esset.) First, lest giuing himselfe to con∣templation, by the force and aboundance of diuine loue, he should by sodaine death be extinguished; (maruaile how The blasphe∣mie of this man is intollerable, as likwise that of Turseline, who saith that when a bro∣ther put his finger into a hole nigh Saue∣rius his heart, there issued out blood and wa∣ter. Tursel. vita Sauer: lib. 6. cap. 4. the Ʋirgin Marie and S. Paul escaped death, if their ribbs were not broken, and raised vp.) secondly, that the heart susteyning the most ardent heats of loue might obteyne a more ample place: thirdly, that the lights, might aboue custome, more dilate themselues: lastly, that by the helpe (how ma∣ny tautologies of miracles bee here?) of a more large place, the lights might bee able to bring so much fresh ayre to the heart, as should bee needefull to refresh the same. What miraculous stuffe haue wee here not onely affir∣med, but by sacred oath confirmed? not by one, but by two Physicians? where was their reuerence of the euer dreadfull name of God, so rashly to prophane it? but they may seeme excusable, because perhaps they were feed, and by fees they liue. But inexcusable needs must purpured Baronius be, who with oath affirmed, Gallon. in vita ann. 1550. that this his Holy Father Philip Nerius vpon a certaine night, as he was walking, and falling into a certaine ditch, was presently caught by the haires of his head by an Angell, and so deliuered. How prodigall was Baronius of his oath, ab∣solutely to sweare a thing to be true, which hee could no otherwise know, but by the telling of his Holy Father Nerius? In like sort wastfull of their oathes were Cardi∣nall Tarrusius, with diuers others, who with sacred oath affirmed, that this holy Father was borne vp on high in the ayre, when he eleuated the hoste; and yet they could haue no other knowledge thereof, then by Philips owne relation, because it so seemed to him. I will not trouble my selfe, to glaunce at any more vanities, so plentifully described in that Booke of Nerius his life. His esteeme
is so little in some popish Countries (the Ignatians secret∣ly opposing against him, with a holy emulation, ad maiorē Ribad. in vita Ignatū. Dei gloriam, and to the greater glory of their Ignatius, who was lifted vp into the ayre; who had the mysterie of the Trinitie reuealed to his vnderstanding (like M. Newton) who had Christ appearing vnto him in the forme of a litle childe, not in, but ouer the hoaste) that I would hold it but lost labour, for any man to trauaile much against his prodigious miracles; who was also so saintly, and so specially eleuated, and abstracted in time of Masse, that he had no helpe to keep himselfe from abstractions and eleuations of his soule; nisi in vnam itiam rem incubuisset, vt animum à diuinis auocaret. Vnlesse he did wholy giue him∣selfe Galonius in vita ann. 1551. to call away his minde from diuine matters? what a ho∣ly man was this? hee must be distracted with sinne, lest he be abstracted by grace. He was another brother Di∣dacus, What a Philip was this, who was able by his sense of smel∣ling, to distin∣guish and dis∣cerne vices and vertues? Galon: in vita. Stapleton. Prō∣piua: of whom Stapleton writeth, that hee could neuer heare God named, but he would presently be abstracted in his soule (I maruell how oft this Didacus thought vpon God; I maruell also, that Gods Spirit should be so confounded by the name of God) and eleuated into some ecstasis of minde; wherefore (saith Stapleton) his brethren durst neuer mention God vnto him, if they minded to haue any conference with him: pittie, for by this meanes they could neuer talke with their Saint of GOD. For another vision of like nature, for their priuate masse, I will looke backe into some corrupt antiquitie, (that the Reader may obserue, how of old the mysterie of iniquitie began to worke) it is cited by noble Harding, Harding artic. 1. in his answere to the challenge of Bishop Iewell; and by him is falsly fathered vpon Amphilochius: it is thus briefely. (intermitting a multitude of Mr. Hardings so∣lemne words) Saint Basill forsooth, (not content, nor fully satisfied with the institution of Christ, nor with the Liturgies of S. Iames or S. Peter) had a pange of deuo∣tion
come vpon him, wherewith he desired, to celebrate the diuine mysteries, proprijs sermouibus, with his owne proper words: for which purpose presently vpon his prayers, that the holy Ghost might better fill him, and fortifie him, hee was for six daies in a Trance (in all which time it is a wonder, that there is no mention of his filling with the Holy Ghost, nor of any Vision he saw) the six daies being ended, and the seuenth come, Basill began to mi∣nister to God, (that was to say Masse, saith Harding) and began to write &c. (what before his Vision?) but on a night, our Lord and his Apostles came in a Vision to Basill, and laid bread vpon the Altar to be consecrated; and stirring vp Basill, said vnto him: secundum postulatio∣nem tuam, repleatur os tuum laude, according to thy desire let thy mouth be filled with praise: Basill is not able to a∣bide the vision, (tell me, wise Mr. Harding how he doth abide it at the Altar?) highes him to the Altar, and there begins his Masse. Repleatur os meaum laude &c. let my mouth be filled with praise &c. & post finem oratio∣num, exaltauit panem, sine intermissione orans, & dicens, re∣spice Domine Iesu, &c. and after the end of prayers, he lifted vp the bread (what Mr. Harding bread after eleuation and consecration?) without intermission, praying and say∣ing, looke downe vpon vs Lord Iesus Christ out of thy holy Ta∣bernacle, and come to sanctifie vs that sittest aboue with thy Father, and art here invisibly present with vs; vouchsafe with thy mighty hand to deliuer vnto vs, and by vs to all thy people, Sancta, sanctis, Holy things, to the Holy; to which the people answered, One holy, One our Lord Iesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, in glory of God the Father, Amen. How many things are here worthy obseruing against the Pontificians, if the Historie were true? As first, that the hoste is called bread after consecration? that it is not adored neither by Basill, nor by the people, and with such other like. Af∣terward, Doctour Harding commeth to speake thus. Now let vs consider what followeth most appertayning to our
purpose (obserue it well courteous Reader) Et diuidens panem in tres partes, vnam quidem communicauit timore multo; alter ā autem reseruanit consepelire secum; tertiam vere, imposuit columbae aureae, quae pependit super altare. And diuiding the bread into three parts, one he receiued with great feare; the second he kept to burie with himselfe; the third he put into the siluer-Doue which hangd ouer the Altar. But what doe we heare? surely enough to euince Mr. Hardings miracle for a fable; or else downe must his Transsubstantiation. For, is it imaginable, that S. Basill, a man of rare wisdome, and singular sanctitie, should be so presumptuously madd, if he did beleeue their Trans∣substantiation, their corporall and carnall presence of Christ in the bread, to offer to burie, (consepelire secum) and to interre together with his owne carkase, so precious a lewell, the glory of heauen, his very God? (although they write in Bennets life, that he doted so much, as to cause such a thing to be done) who (I say) can imagine this, that once thinkes of S. Basills wisdom and pietie? so that we see, that part of the Vision, which the profound Doctour thought made most for himselfe, doth vtterly subuert his Transsubstantiation, and by necessarie conse∣quence his priuare Masse, for which he purposely brin∣geth it, and falsly fathereth it vpon Amphilochius. For Baronius himselfe, with other Pontificians, denie the life to haue bin written by Amphilochius Bishop of Iconiam. Touching the prohibition of mariage in their Priests, I must needs adioyne a Vision out of their illuminated S. Briget; the same is well worthy consideration, it doth so clearely discouer vnto vs, the Papists Manicheisme. Lib. 7. reuelat. cap. 10. circa medium. Virgo Maria sic loquitur &c. The Virgin Marie speaketh thus to Brigett; After Christ instituted this new Sacrament of the Euchrist, and ascended vp into heauen, then that Quod anti∣quissimum &c. That which is most ancient is most true. Tertull: de pre∣script. an∣cient law was yet kept, that Christian Priests did liue in car∣nall matrimonie; and notwithstanding, many of them were the freinds of God, because they did beleeue with simple puri∣tie,
that the same did please God, to wit, that Christian Priests might keepe wiues and liue in matrimonie; as the same in the old time of the Iewes, had pleased him in the Priests of the Iewes: and this was so obserued by Christian Priests for many yeeres: but this ancient custome and obseruation, did seeme very hatefull and abominable to the whole heauenly Court, and to me who did beare his body &c. And therfore God him∣selfe by the infusion of his holy Spirit, into the heart of the Pope, who then ruled the Church, did giue another Law, con∣cerning this, more gratefull and acceptable vnto himselfe, in∣fusing Christ was wise as a little one, the Pope as a perfect one. into the heart of the Pope, that hee should ordaine throughout the vniuersall Church, that Priests who should haue so worthy an office, as to consecrate this precious Sacra∣ment, should by no meanes liue in the contaminous and carnall matrimonial delectatiō, & after it is added, That no Pope may permit Priests to liue in marriage, and great punishment is is threatned against it: & after it is added again thus; that if S. Gregory himself had appointed such a thing, he should neuer Ibidem. haue obtained mercy at Gods hands, vnles before his death, bee should with humility haue reuoked the sentence. What a do we haue in this vision? first, that the ancient Law of marriage, was obserued and kept for many yeeres by such Christian Priests, as pleased God, liuing in it: by which it is euident, that the Christian marrying of Christian Priests, was more ancient then popish continency: Se∣condly I obserue, that this Law of Priests marrying was altered, because the Popes God did infuse into the hearts of The Popes for bidding of marriage the doctrine of di∣uels. 1. Tim. 4. if we beleeue Briget. Popes to change and alter the same: but what was the cause? marry, heare flat Manicheisme; because (saith the vision) Priests should not liue (in matrimonials contaminosa delectatione) in matrimoniall contaminous and polluted dele∣ctation: for which the virgine sayd, that the law of mar∣riage, for Priests, was hatefull, both to her selfe, to her sonne, and to all the heauenly Court; yea so hatefull, that towards the conclusion of the vision thus it follow∣eth, Nullus Papa potest, &c. No Pope may permit mar∣riage
to Priests vnder paine of damnation. What stuffe is heere? Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? I desire the Readers to containe their laughter, the Popes power is curbed and limited, and that from hea∣uen: yea, and Gregory the Saint is so curbed, that if hee should offer to dispense with Priests to bee married, hee should infallibly, (vnlesse he would reuoke his Law) bee damned: away with this doctrine of Diuels, so contrary to the Popes absolute power, which may dispence in vowes, so contradictorious to Brigets owne narration: the Saintesse acknowledgeth, that in the Primitiue Church, Priests liued in marriage, and that liuing in it, they were the friends of God, because they did beleeue with simple purity, that they might so doe: but after∣wards, the case was altered vpon secret reuelation in the Popes heart, (well saith shee, secret reuelation, for the Pope had no such reuelation from the Scriptures nor the ancient Church) who commanded Priests not to marrie, nor liue in marriage: after which Law, it is not, in the holy Fathers power to grant marriage, or the vse of marriage to any Priest, vnlesse hee will bee damned, which may not happen, in the men of sin and children of perdition. Sometimes when I haue thought with my selfe of the strange paradoxes, which are in these reuelations of Bri∣get, I haue wondred how men of iudgement should giue credit to the same, if the strong illusions of Sathan did not powerfully worke in them: foolish is that, where Christ telleth Briget, that hee is Trinus & vnus, Three and one. And little for the Popes credit is that, where Christ himselfe describeth the Pope to bee worse then Lucifer, more vniust then Pilate, more immane then Iu∣das more abominable then the Iewes themselues: how vaine is that, in the title of the first chapter of the booke, of the heauenly Emperour, which hath thus, that God ordai∣ned the world to be ruled with a double power, to wit, Eccle∣fiasticall
and Laicall, which are principally designed in Peter and Paul; but in the chapter it selfe, good God? how fondly is Christ brought thus speaking? Ego autem habui duos optimos famulos, vnus eoxam erat Clericus, alter Lai∣eus, &c. I had two excellent seruants, one of them was a Clerk, the other a Laicke, the first was Peter my Apostle, hauing the office of a Clerke, the second was my Apostle Paul, as a Laick: what an excellent inference may heereout be inferred for the Popes power to gouerne the whole Church as a Clerke? and the whole world as a Laike? For Peter and Paul (say they) both died at Rome, who then shall bee their Successour but the Bishop of Rome? which being so, I maruell why Briget in her extrauagant reuelations, and in her heauenly Emperour, touching a certaine Prince that was to bee deprined of his kingdome, doth not send the admonition to the Pope, but to the Prin∣ces Cap. 80. cap. 61. of the Kingdom, that they should take armes against their Prince and depriue him: why is there no mention made of the Pope, if hee bee cheefe vmpire in all such af∣faires? some will perhaps obiect, that such fooleries as these, either are not in Brigets reuelations, or else that they are not authorized by the Romane Church: but let such vnderstand, that they are both in Briget, and that her booke also is authorized, as a booke of diuine reue∣lations. One thing amongest someothers, the late An∣swer plan Edition hath scraped out: In the fifth of six re∣uelations (which were set before the booke of reuelati∣ons, after the approbatorie Epistle of Cardinall Turre∣cremate, with subsignation of the Scribe and Notary) it was thus written: Sicut Iohannes Euangelista &c. Euen as Iohn the Euangelist wrote those things which before saw were to come from my Spirit, so Matthias thy Father, and Ghostly Father, (whom I haue made a master) from the same Spirit vnderstandeth, and writeth the spirituall truth of sacred Scripture: Againe, presently after the prologue thus it is written. Benedictus Deus aquo hic liber inspiratus est im∣mediatè,
& diuinitus reuelatus. Blessed be God, from whō this booke was immediately inspired, and diuinely reuealed. By which you may see of what authority her reuelations are, when both shee and her master Matthias were both immediately inspired from God himselfe. See Lib. 6. re∣velationum, chap. 89. for the sayd purpose. This which I haue deliuered out of Briget, I haue found written in that Edition of hers, which was printed at Nuremberg the yeere 15 17. by the great care and diligence of the Fathers of her Originall Monasterie in Zuasthenes, in which is added a curse, both at the beginning and en∣ding of the same Edition, against all other reuelations, pretended to be of Briget, and which are not contained in that booke. Further, I will with patience of the Reader, adde yet one other prodigie touching the merits and power of Saints, for the aiding of soules in purgatory, this is, of their prodigious Christine, whose wonderous life whol∣ly to relate, were (oleum & operam perdere) but lost la∣bour. Surius 23. Iunij Thom. Cant. in vita Christina. Carthus. lib. 4. de nouiss. Tilmanus lib. 8. collat. cap. 7 It is at large described, by Surius, by Cantiprat: by Dionyse the Carthusian. Tilman Bredenbach hath as much of it as concerneth our purpose, and yet neither will I trifle the time so much, as to write at large, what Tilman hath; pretermitting therefore the birth of this Cbristine, and the circumstances of her education, she at length became such a delightfull, and so enamoured a Spousesse of Iesus Christ the sonne of God, that Tilman dareth thus to write, that although her vertues were not much knowen, yet Christ tooke great pleasure in her: so that he applieth that of Isay the Prophet to Christ (tou∣ching the knot of loue, betwixt Christine and him. Glori∣atur apud Isaiam Dominus, secretum meum mihi; est enim, verecundus amator Dominus, The Lord doth glory thus by the Prophet Isay, my secret to mee; for the Lord is a bashe∣full Isay 24. 16. or blushing louer (saith superstitious Tilman) De∣murre (courteous Reader) vpon this wise conceit of
Bredenbach, my secret to me, and the Lord is a shamefast, or bashfull Louer; This Christine being by excesse of con∣templation brought to her end, and carried into the Church to be buried, she remained for the space of part of the masse (which was song for her) quiet and at rest: a little after she beginneth to moue in the coffine, and so strongly, that instantly, with a kinde of horrour of all earthly things, she mounteth from vnder the herse where she lay, vp to one of the beames of the Church, where she abideth quiet vntill Masse was done: in the meane while, all who were present (except her Sister) at such an vncouth and horrible sight, were runne away: Masse being done, the Priest commandeth Christine to come downe; shee obeyeth his command, goeth home and eateth with her Sister some meate, by which shee was greatly refreshed; then she reuealeth part of that, which she had seene in her trance; out of which, I partly ob∣serue, how that when she was before God, it was put to her choise, whether shee would stay in glory still with him, or else returne againe into the world (ibi{que} in corpore mortali, absque illius detrimento poenas perferre, ijsque omnes illas animas, quas in locis purgatorijs miserabatur, liberare ac eripere) and there in a mortall body without any detriment of the same, suffer paines, by them to deliuer, and saue all those soules, which she with great pittie, had seene in the paines of purgatorie. And withall, with her good example to moue sinners to amendment of life and repentance. The Sain∣tesse accepteth of the condition to returne to her body, and to become a Satisfactresse and Deliueresse for those Soules, which she saw in Purgatorie: which she perform∣ed so fully, that she would oftentimes, stand naked, in hard frozen waters, she would often torment and afflict her selfe vpon wheeles and gibbets of execution, shee would often cast her selfe into hoate burning fornaces and ouens: and yet neuer in any of these (like the three Dan. 3. 22. children in the Babilonian fornace) sustaine any corpo∣rall
damage: and yet notwithstanding, satisfie for the soules in Purgatory. As for giuing example of good life and repentance, she performed it so well, that shee would often for very horrour of men and the smell of them, flee from their conuersation: shee would often clime vp to the toppes of houses, Churches, and trees, hanging vpon the twigges thereof; and like a bird skip∣ping from one bough to another; in which places, shee would be in such vehement and fiery panges of deuoti∣on, that her whole flesh would melt (maruaile she mel∣ted not away) and soften; and bee so foulded vp toge∣ther, like a soft ball of waxe of around sphericall forme; in which manner of prodigious liuing, shee continued vnto her death, if you please to beleeue Tilman Breden∣bachius, Cantipratensis, Surius the Cart husian, and others. Courteous Reader, what shall I say? or how may I suffi∣ciently declaime against the follies of these men? who will giue credit to such impis and abominations? Fa∣miliar was the Deuill in those Countreyes where the twelue cubited man (as Iacobus à Ʋoragine measureth his length) or the twelue-footed man (as he is measured by Petrude Natalibus) went (as their lying Legend hath) to speake with the Deuill, and to become his ser∣uant: and in the end serued him a long while, vntill Christ in the shape of a childe, appeared vnto him; if it please you to beleeue their Records or our Comedians, who sometimes are pleased, so to act this fable and su∣perstitious Legend. But surely we may thinke, that the Deuill was more familiar amongest them, where Chri∣stine could, and did hoppe vp and downe from twigge to twigge, could, and did, cast her selfe into hoate bur∣ning fornaces, and heated ouens, and yet sustaine no damage; and who are those, who beleeue these things? Papists; and those, who onely (if it may so please the Gods) would be counted Catholike, Orthodoxe, Chri∣stian; but are in truth Cacolike, Pseudodoxe, Antichri∣stian.
And so here I leaue them to their lying Legends; yet before I end, I will take paines out of their own Au∣thours, to adde some few Visions, which are egregiously against themselees; and are most likely to carry truth with them. Certaine visions and predictions against POPERIE. PHilip Commineus a graue Authour, and of worthy credit, shall relate the first; This man writeth how one Hierome Zananorole, a famous Preacher in Florence; did foretell the comming of Charles King of France in∣to Commi. in vita Carol. lib. 8. cap. 25. & 52. Italy; and how he should safely arriue thither, and re∣turne with victory; notwithstanding the small number of his Souldiers, in comparison of the enemies and the infinite opposition which was to be made against him. And withall he foretold, that because he did not reform the Church, according as appertained to his office; that therefore, God would seuerely punish him; which Com∣mineus interpreteth to haue beene fulfilled, in that hee presently lost, by suddaine death, his Heyre apparant, the Dolphine of France; and himselfe also soone after, ended, with a most miserable and wretched death. I be∣ginne with this Vision, because it agreeth with another of Christ himselfe to Briget; commanding her his Lib. 6. reuelat. cap. 26. Spousesse to write to a certaine King to reforme the Church; which saith Christ had so farre gone from him, that except his mother had made intercession for it; there would haue been no hope of mercie: but the king was (as Briget deliuereth Christs commandement) to Ibidem. gather together wise and spirituall men, such as had his spirit; and with them to consult, how the wall of his Church might be reedified: this diuine vision, I relate, that the Pontificians may remember, that the reforma∣tion
of the Church belongeth to the temporall Magi∣strate, hauing wise, and spirituall men, (not onely their Nothing more execrable in the sight of God, nothing more perniti∣ous to religion then impositi∣on of handes vpon the vn∣worthy. Lib. 4. Reuelat. cap. 140. 141. 142. 143. Bishops) associated and ioyned in Councell with him. Great is the charge of Kings to doe this, and great and immense is their danger, if they neglect it; who in no∣thing can neglect it more, then if they suffer liuings or imposition of handes to bee laid vpon the vnwor∣thy. And may wee not thinke, that such a reformation, would haue beene acceptable to Christ, if performed vp∣on Gregory the eleuenth, against whom, Christ reuealed so many dreadfull threatnings to Briget; So, iustly, may we not think that a reformation would now becom the Romane Synagogue; when not onely the Personall sinnes of Popes and Cardinalls, are become most abo∣minable; but the very state, office, and function of that See, (and yet it is not at the highest, vntill shee shall by decree of her Councell haue obtained absolute, direct Monarchie, in all temporalls and spiritualls) is become most execrable: so that, ratione officij, by the reason of their office and Papacy, all Popes are become children of per∣dition and destruction: not onely because destroying others; but also because by reason of their office, they are as men destroyed themselues. And here (to salute Paul the 5. by the way) was there euer any time, in which that See was in worse condition? no surely, neuer worse in respect of pride; which now is so great, and intollera∣ble, in that See, that Paul the fifth is not content, with all other Popes at their first entrance to make vnto him∣selfe a new triple and monarchicall crowne, but hee fur∣ther suffereth and permitteth his Nephew Cardinalls, and other his kinred, to haue engrauen in their vessells of siluer and gold this too too ambicious poesie; Eter∣nitati Burghesianae dicatum; Dedicated, to the Burghesian Eternitie: Hee can also bee content to haue his papall power, called the Pontificious omnipotency; and him∣selfe a most seuere Challenger, and Pursuer of the
same; yea, a (Ʋicedeus) Vice-god. Neuer worse in re∣spect of couetousnesse, with which virtue this most ho∣ly one of Rome, is so ouertaken; that hee is thought not to come behinde Sixtus the 5. nor Iohn the 22. for his a∣uarice. Neuer worse, in respect of those worst sinnes which crie for vengeance from heauen; at which this holy Father can greatly and manifouldly winke, in his purpured Cardinalls: witnesse, that late accident, when no lesse then 15. boyes the purpured brethrens Gany∣medes, were discouered; whereof two were burnt, the rest escaped but the purpured Incubyes were neuer called in question. Neuer worse, in respect of corrupt affecti∣on to his carnall kinred, whereof, hee hath aboue the wont of carnall Popes cardanalized diuers, to the boul∣stering vp of the Burghesian faction, and eternitie. Ne∣uer worse, in respect of presumption of spirit, witnesse that his bold attempt against the Venetians, which in the end, turned to his confusion: witnesse, that his imperi∣ous command, and headlong censure, without any in∣struction at all against the oath of Allegiance, which, if it were to the full looked into, might greatly weaken his power in this Kingdome, otherwise it will infallibly in∣crease it, to the ruine of this Church. Neuer worse, in re∣spect of bloody attempts, against Christian Princes: witnesse, that neuer to be forgotten, neuer to be suffici∣ently deplored and detested powder-treason: (which notwithstanding beyond the seas, I haue heard called and approued, as a Romane zeale, zeale of holy mother the Church) of his speciall Minions, and dearest manci∣ples, with more then hellish fury attempting the same, to the vtter ruine of this Kingdome. And yet, notwith∣standing all these Papall ornaments, of such detestable vices, he forsooth, and he onely must bee the Vicar of Christ, he onely a Vicegod, he only an vnerrable Iudge in all controuersies of faith, and religion. But who n doubt? but that hee is in the same esteeme before hea∣uens
consistorie, as Annas and Caiphas were, after they had reiected, and crucified Christ? as Innocent the 4. was? concerning whom Mathew of Paris writeth a ve∣ry Par. in Henri∣co 3. strange vision, (worthy of the holy Fathers noting) made vnto a certaine Cardinall, whose name that Au∣thour of purpose concealed: In effect it was thus, that Innocent the fourth was presented before the seate of Gods maiesty; and was there accused by a glorious wo∣man, who carried the forme of a temple in her hand, vp∣on which, this word CHVRCH was written: and when Innocent cast himselfe downe prostrate, to begge mercy; the Matrone more instantly vrged against him, and ac∣cused him of three things; Prime cum in terris &c. First Two prodi∣gious visions. whereas God had founded his Church free vpon earth, hee had made her a handmaide. Secondly, the Church was founded to be a saluation for sinners, but this man hath made it a Sanctuarie for Bankers. Thirdly, the Church was founded in firmnesse of Faith, Iustice, and Truth: but this man, hath made Faith and Manners to decay, hath taken away Iustice, and darkened Truth: Giue mee therefore (saith the Matrone) iust iudgement against him. To which things when Innocent was not able to reply, he was taken away: whose end, of what sort afterwardes it was, his desperate life may speake. But more clearely it appeareth in the Vision of the Bishop of Lincolne, who summoned him to iudgement; concerning which, Ralph of Chester writeth, that the very night, in which Innocent died, there was heard a voice in the Popes Court summoning him thus: Veni Miser ad iudicium Dei, Come thou Miser to the iudgement of God: and most fitly did the name Miser agree vnto him, who to his ser∣uants and fauourites, being round about him, and de∣ploring his death spake thus; Why weepe you, you wretches and misers? doe I not leaue you all riche? hat else doe you desire, or require? and so breathed out his corrupt soule.
This vision sheweth how tyrannicallie Popes haue oppressed the Temple of God, in which they sit, exal∣ting themselues, but doubtlesse the patience of God will at last strike home, and then how great the blow shall be against them, let vs heare their Briget (rather then the Prophet and Euangelist) declaring the same. Roma est quasi ager, &c. Rome (saith Christ)  as a field ouergrowne with cockle and darnell; therefore it must first be Lib 4. Reuelat. cap. 57. purged with a sharpe yron, then clensed with fire, and after∣wards ploughed with a yoke of oxen: therefore I will deale with it, as he doth who remoueth plants (how then is Rome the eternall See of the Church?) into another place: for such a punishment is due to that City, as if the Iudge shold say, Flay off the whole skinne, draw all the blood out of the flesh and cut all the flesh into peeces, and so breake the bones, that all the marrow may fall out: thus their Briget, and Spousesse of Christ; how much to their content, let themselues demurre. But we haue a more firme propheticall speech which warranteth vs, that the purpured whore (by which the Romane Church is denoted) which sitteth vpon Apoc. 17. many waters, gouerneth many peoples, shall be desola∣ted and ruinated, by such Princes as had first drunke of the cup of her whoredomes: and this is so cleere a truth touching Romes destruction by such Kings, that the Pontificians themselues cannot deny it; only they would shift it off from themselues and their Popes, and lay it vpon some one singular man, who shall raigne three yeeres and a halfe and then destroy Rome, and with fire consume it: wisely indeede, Antichrist raigning three yeeres and a halfe, shall cause many peoples, Kings, and kingdomes to drinke of the cup of his whoredomes, and yet the same kings and kingdoms within the space of the same three yeeres and a halfe, shall vtterly desolate and ruinate Antichrist and his Antichristian kingdome. Surely the Pontificians thus aduocating for their Po are to be pitied; for if they should not so say, of necessary
it would follow that they were seruants of the man of sinne, and sonne of perdition. The cause which maketh them so eagerly to contend, for this their Romane su∣preme Monarchy, is, because they account the verie pith and marrow of religion, to consist in the continued succession of Bishops in that See: wherein their glorying is but vaine: for I dare binde my selfe to shew, that there is a better and a lesse interrupted succession, in the Chur∣ches of England, then can bee shewed in the Romane Church. Alasse, for them, it is enough if they can shew Church-walls, Idoll-Bishops, & dumbe Ptelates, (& yet for forsaking the cōmuniō of such, they wil condemn vs as hereticks & Schismaticks) This follie the saying of a graue father redargueth, non ille de ecclesia, &c. Hee doth Ambros. lib. 6. in lutam. not seeme to goe out of the Church, who corporally goeth out; but he who leaueth the foundations of Ecclesiasticall truth; we went from them in body, but they from vs in minde, we went from them in place, but they from vs in faith; we left with them the foundations of the walls, they left with vs the foundation of Scriptures. Which agreeth well with that Prophecy which by some is cited as of Hildegard but by others is deliuered out of Hylarie, it is thus. Vnum vos moneo, ca∣nete Orat. contra. Auxent. See another prophecy of Hildegardis related in my motiues out of Theodorick. nieme pag. 49. Antichristum, &c. One thing I admonish you, beware of Antichrist; you are not well affected with the loue of walls, you doe ill worship the Church in couers, and buildings: you doe ill vnder these pretend the name of peace: Is it doubtfull, that Antichrist shall sit in these? Mountaines, and woods, and lakes, and prisons, are more safe to me: for in these Prophets remaining, haue by the spirit of God prophecied. This pro∣phecie seemeth well for the Papists who glorie so much (intemplo Domini) in the Temple of the Lord, the Ro∣mane Church, the externall succession, and yet but rot∣ten, broken, often interrupted by Schismes, as the Pon∣ficians themselues cannot deny. Another prophecie and vision I haue for the Papists Lib. Reuelat. 6. cap. 72. to delight themselues withall, it is taken out of their Bri∣get,
who bringeth Christ speaking thus vnto her. Filius dei loquitur, &c. The sonne of God speaketh to Briget. There are two spottes in my Church, one is that few are absolued without paying of mony, the second is that Parish-Priests dare not absolue sinners from all their secret sinnes, but affirming that themselues cannot absolue them, in certaine cases reser∣ued to Bishops; they doe send such sinners to the Bishops, who are so long in examining and discussing, vntill such secret sinnes come to be made manifest: wherefore those who haue zeale of soules, must wholsomly oppose against such things; least their soules through shame or obduration doe die in mortall sinnes. This vision maketh but little for the Romane abuses in reseruing cases; which is growne so intollerable, especial∣ly since the Tridentine decrees, that it cannot suffici∣ently be detested: the Collegiates and fellowes of Iesus societie haue lost nothing by such reseruations; for ther∣by (hauing greater priuiledges then others haue) they make increment in their wealth, by marchandizing of soules: the which how well they performe, setting aside some other examples, the curteous reader may obserue by two fresh ones. Not long since, the mother of Cardi∣nall A payre of Ignatians de∣luded. Sforsa being like to die, did, through the mediation and intercession of an Ignatian her gostly Father bestow vpon the Ignatians Colledge a 1000 Crownes, and gaue her schedule for the same: the ghostly father hauing gotten the bill, higheth him home, (looking for thanks) sheweth it to his fellow-fathers, who considering the bill, found that it was not specified in the same, what manner of crownes should be paid unto them: they therefore perswade the ghostly marchant to returne vnto the La∣dy, and to intreat that the crownes might be specified to be French crownes, and of gold, but in returning such was the Fathers lucke, that he meeteth with Cardinall Sforsa (his mother through weaknesse being not to be spoken withall) who cunningly insinuateth himselfe into the Fathers businesse, which hearing he seemeth to ap∣plaude
the same, and to like very well of the suite: with which words the good Father was so ulled, that he deli∣uered the former bill to the Cardinall, desiring him to procure his Mother to make of ordinarie Crownes, Crownes of gold: the Cardinall no sooner got the bill, but with an Ignatian tricke of equiuocation hee rent it, and so the Ignatian lost his errand. The like hapned in Naples; there was a Noble Wo∣man of great substance, much addicted to the Ignatians; who vpon speciall intreatie of her Ghostly Father an Ig∣natian, gaue vnto them towards their buildings a 1000 Crownes, with which bill the Ignatian going home, he is commanded by his Superiours, to returne vnto her a∣gaine, and to intreat of her, that shee would make that 1000 Crownes, to be 1500: the good Ladie hearing his request, was somewhat amated therewith; but lothe to offend, telleth the Father, that if he will stay vntill her Steward come home, shee will take care, that hee might haue his desire; wherevpon the good Father deliuereth backe againe vnto her the bill, which shee taketh; but vpon the returne of her man, and some consultation had with him, she altreth her minde, and sendeth the bill of a 1000 Crownes which shee had receiued from the Ig∣natian, vnto a certaine Congregation of Theatines, which was then arising in Naples: and so the good Ignatians nose was wyped of his golde, and the poore Theatines their Antagonists very well contented therewith. Some such other forfeitures vpon their aduentures, might be deliuered; they aduenture so much, that it is no maruell if they often loose their aduentures. Their aduentures in this kinde, are very frequent, and great; as England, Genoua, Rome, Venice, Flanders, very well knowe. But leauing them to their gainefull trade, I will returne to the Vision, which me thinkes clearely checketh the hor∣rible abuses of the Pontifician Bishops, in the reseruati∣ons of their cases: their metaphysicall defences of these
their dealings this place serueth not to handle: onely, agreeing to the instruction of this Vision, there haue not as yet risen vp amongst them any zelous reprouers and reprehenders of these Pontifician abuses; and there∣fore those two spots (which our Sauiour so greatly con∣demned) remaine still in their Church, to the destructi∣on Dist. 40. Cap. Si Papa. and perishing of many soules: but of this no mar∣uaile, for it is agreeing to their Canon, Si Papa. If the Pope should lead innumerable soules to hell, yet no man may iudge his fact, nor condemne his proceedings: which yet was not obserued by the Prelates of the French church, in the time of King Hugh, when as at a Synode gathered Sinod. Rhem. sub Hugone. at Rhemes, they did by the mouth of their famous, elo∣quent, and learned speaker Arnulphus, condemne the Pope in diuers things, and resolutely determine, that the Pope himselfe, if hee would not heare the Church, might be reputed as an Ethnike and Publicane. Daies and yeeres would faile me, if I should stand to recount all visions, which might be produced against themselues out of their owne Authors. I haue heard some learned wish, that a masse of their visions might be published together, to the reprouing of their folly, and reducement of many to the Church of God: I con∣curre, in part only, in iudgement with such. For I thinke that such a course might perhaps be profitable with the iudicious and intelligent Papists, if they would take this as a principle with them, that, that Religion cannot be of God, which needeth to be supported and borne vp with lyes and fictions; which are of such a dange∣rous consequence in matters of religion, that as a holy Father hath said, If but one lye only, could be found in the holy Scriptures, it would be sufficient to discredit the whole. But as for their superstitious Idiots, who are delighted with nothing more, then such vanities, I suppose by tryed experience, that little fruit would be gathered thereby. Such a worke (to publish such a masse
of fooleries) would be exceeding laborious to the Au∣thour; all which may well be supplied, if painefull and zelous Ministers, would with discretion and choice, eft∣soones publish some of their fooleries in Pulpit; I said with choice and discretion; because I would wish that such things should be cited out of their owne Authours, who are full fraught therewith; and not taken out of such trifling Pamphlets, as Plutoes trauailes, and such like. I heartily wish that such Preachers, at least Doctors, who liue amongst Popish or Semipopish people, would be more careful what imputations they lay against them. They are exceedingly scandalized, when any lyes or such doctrine as they teach not, is imputed to them. A famous Predicant of a Funerall erred egregiously in this kinde within this yeere &c. I was ashamed to heare him &c. And here I cannot by the way but maruaile, with what wisdome any man dare presume to licence, vnder the shadow of Maiestie, such stuffe, which although in part true, yet for substance is vaine. But let the cour∣teous and christian Reader be perswaded, that we neede not to deuise any thing in this kinde against our Aduer∣saries, their workes are so replenished with such fooleries, against their owne principles of Religion; that a schol∣ler shall finde it a harder matter to relate them all, then to confute them; the first being impossible, the second most facill and easie. And here concluding, I giue the Reader to vnder∣stand, that although lying signes, wonders, and prodi∣gies in sholes and multitudes, are signes and markes of Antichristianisme, especially in these later timer; neuer∣theles the mighty hand of God doth neuer so forsake his Church, (to leaue altogether the rodds of sinners vpon the shoulders of his seruants) but that sometimes, hee doth with miraculous deliuerances assist them: but this he doth apparantly, openly, clearely, euen in the sights,
and to the confusion of their Aduersaries; whenas all their miracles, prodigies, wonders, are secret, hidden, from a farre of, by heare-say. For how else, but by the mightie hand of God, was the Church of Bohemia, pro∣tected and defended in the time of King Sigismund, and Pope Martin? who laboured and proiected by the vt∣most of their powers, the ruine of that Christian flocke? For my part I dare compare those holy warres, of those Christians, with those of the Machabies: yea, if we had them fully and perfectly recounted vnto vs, wee should finde them to equallize, if not to excell their victories: what can we thinke, but that the right hand of God did powerfully ayde them, when their Iudas Machabeus, renowned Iohannes Trosnoue surnamed Zisca, did eleuen seuerall times, notwithstanding their huge forces, foyle and ouerthrow them? Was it done by meanes of hu∣mane strength? no, no, our Aduersaries will tell vs the contrarie. And to particularize in some, doth not Pope Aeneas Syluius cap. 48. Pius the 2. in his Historie of Bohemia tell vs, that when a threefold potent Armie, was gathered against these poore Christians, (a very handfull of souldiers) one out of all Saxonie, and the Territories thereunto adioyning; the second out of rich and warlike Franconia; the third out of Bauyre, Sueuia, and the Prouinces of the Rheyne, with valiant Captaines appointed ouer them, did in three seuerall parts, with all violence assault those poore Christians, intending their vtter ruine: doth not (I say) Pope Pius the second tell vs, that presently vpon the sight of the Christians, (without doubt Gods terrour being in them) they did flee before them; yea (saith Pius) non visum hostem fugerunt, before they saw the enemy, they fled, and flew so hard, that they ceased not to flee, vntill the Christians ceased to pursue them; by occasion whereof their bag and baggage was left to the Christians, and an happie occasion also giuen them to make spoile of many popish towns, & to impose tributes vpon them.
Thus in effect Pope Pius, who yet relateth vnto, vs a more potent deliuerance of those Christians; for when vpon such a shamefull ouerthrow, the Papists were a∣shamed; the Pope and Emperour together, gathered an∣other greater (the greatnesse whereof you may inferre, because it had foure thousand horse in it) army, and then againe therewith assaulted them; but Iulian the Cardi∣nall, who was generall for the Pope, ouer the whole Ar∣my, had no sooner entred into the limits of those Chri∣stians, but presently (totis castris trepidatum est, & priusquā hostis vllus in conspectu daretur, faeda fuga coepta) There fell a dread and trembling ouer the whole Campe, and before any enemy was to be seene, a filthy flight was begunne. Who did this, but the Lord of hostes? like as of old he did in the Campes of the Madianites, and Amalakites in the be∣halfe Iud. 7. of his people. And this flight (notwithstanding all, that the Cardinall could doe) gaue great spoile, and left infinite riches to the oppressed Christians; and so ill was there successe against that people of God, that cessa∣tum est à bellis, there was a cessation of warre, and by Po∣pish cunning they did afterwards seeke to subuert them. That these things, which I haue written bee true, tou∣ching these Christians deliuerances; inimici nostri sune iudices: Our very enemies are Iudges and witnesses. And may wee not admire the like prouidence of God, towards the Christians in Fraunce, especially at Rochel, when God in his sweete prouidence, caused the Sea to yeeld vnto them, vpon their shores (like as he did Manna in the desert) abundance of fish, when as through extreame want, they were wel nigh the point to haue sur∣rendered? who else but GOD hath discouered and brought to light, diuerse desperate attempts against our late Soueraigne of happy memory? whose finger else, but Gods, did confront against the Spanish ostentation, and Romes curses in 88. Whose prouident arme else, but Gods did bring to naught the powder-vndermining
which was carried so warily and charily; sealed with so many Sacramentall oathes, and protestations; that had not God reuealed it, England had beene blowne vp, in her ruines. But why doe I stand to recount these mira∣culous deliuerances of God? what? to make them neces∣sary arguments of the truth, of our holy religion? No, no: but to confront against the Aduersaries, and to shew vnto them that our deliuerances, haue beene mighty and publike; euen in the sight of the enemy, but their miracles are alwaies in huggermugger, brought from farre off, and beleeued by heare say. There he other more infallible markes of true reli∣gion, propounded in sacred Scripture, the which I dare constantly challenge, as more specially to be found a∣mongst the reformed Churches, then amongst the Po∣pish: as first, a great token of a true Church it is, to haue in it those, who with great zeale and sinceritie, are desi∣rous to heare the word of God; according to that of Christ, Oues meae vocem meam audiunt; My sheape heare Iohn 10. my voyce: Christ saith not, my sheepe haue heard, or shall heare my voyce; but thus, in the present tence: My sheepe heare my voyce, denoting thereby vnto vs; that to heare the word of God, ought to bee the daily, and neuer intermitted worke of Christians: in which, how farre the Popish congregations, are surpassed by the Christian Churches, no man can so well tell, as hee who hath been amongst both: for my part I must needs con∣fesse that the zeale of Christians heerein, is incompara∣bly more, then the deuotion of Papists. Againe, in this saith Christ all men shall know that you are Iohn 13. 35. See Delrius his Pref. in Mag. disquisit. dis∣coursing vpon the hate their order findeth. my Disciples, if you loue one another: How well this precept is obserued amongst the Pontificians, the must bitter oppositions betwixt Scotists and Thomists; the enor∣mous emulations and most horrible detractions in the Court of Rome, betwixt Popes and Cardinalls; the ne∣uer ceasing calumnious contentions betwixt Friars, white
and blacke; betwixt Monkes white and blacke; betwixt all Monkes, Friars, and the Ignatians; betwixt Ignatians, and the Seculars; doe cleerely euince and demonstrate: God is my witnesse that I speake out of my conscience, what I haue obserued; as for mutuall loue and charity, there are more signes to bee found in the Protestants of the reformed Churches, (when I name Protestants, I meane the Zelous-ones not Semi-popish-ones, not Se∣mi-Atheists) then can be shewed amongst the Papists. Againe, patience and meekenesse (if sincere, vnfai∣ned) is an admirable signe of true Christian religion. Now let all the Pontificians & Ignatians lay their heads together, and giue me one instance of such Christian patience practised in their Churches; as I will shew pra∣ctised by this Church, State, and Kingdome of England: I meane that incomparable patience, meekenesse, and spirit of compassion, by which the Papists were tolera∣ted to breathe in this Kingdome, vpon discouery of the Powder-treason: Had the like attempt beene acted in a∣ny of the Popish dominions; fire and reuengeful sword, would haue massacred not onely the Actors and Abbet∣tours, but euen all those, who by suspicion, might haue beene thought to haue had any knowledge, consent, or approuance of the same. And herein I dare speake what I know, that many Papists (though otherwise, I dare say for them, innocent in the fact) did thereupon expect vtter ruine to themselues and their religion: yea did not the Arch Traitour Garnet himselfe presage so much to his order, if the plot should happen to bee discouered. Therefore let it stand proued, that the Church of Eng∣land is guided and directed by the Spirit of God, which could in such a sodaine, shew it selfe so mercifull and meeke, against such who with sangnefreddo cold bloud, as the Italian phrase is, would make bon-fires with vs if wee were in their powers: and yet notwithstanding, great-fauourers and receiuers of Ignatians there are,
where the Foxes lye and lodge (who would haue laugh∣ed if Westminster had beene ouerturned) and who as yet, shadowed vnder pufft wings tiffiny, and fardingals, doe (as may be doubted) plot some like enterprises, to the ruine of this Church and Kingdome; but beware of securitie, O yee Christian Brittans! beware of securitie. Again, humility is laid as a ground-work for Christian religion, to be built vpon; by which, humility, and pouer∣tie of spirit (not outward base garments, coules, weedes, girdles, in not sparing of the flesh) to vse the Apostles phrase, is to be vnderstood: now this pouertie of spirit, Coloss. 2. 23. must be especially regarded towards God; whereof, the Papists are so depriued, that their very doctrine in one respect, leadeth them to that pride, and presumption of spirit, which Christ detested in the Pharisee. Let all their Catechismes be searched, and they will define vnto you, that the sinne of presumption is, when a man looketh for saluation without merits (their owne merits they meane) by which doctrine, it is as cleere as noone dayes, that in respect of saluation, their Popish may, and ought to hope for the same, partly by their owne merits: and what is this else, but a kind of presumption, euen to iustle with God? and with him to remember their me∣rits. But the reformed Churches, are so farre from lea∣ding a man into this presumption of his owne merits; that I may say it and truely saie it, that it is, as it were the summe of our holy Christian, and Catholike doctrine, to bring a man to a perfect apprehension and acknow∣ledgement of his manifolde iniquities and corrupt na∣ture; & by the acknowledging of the same, to bring him to such an humiliation and depression of himselfe, and within himselfe; that for remission of his sinnes, and saluation, he can looke for no other meanes, but the on∣ly, and alone merits of Christs death and passion (And yet this not without store of Christian good workes to admonish the wise, and cauilling Papists by the way) ap∣plied
vnto his soule, by a liuing and sincere faith; in which respect our Christians are, or may bee euer pre∣serued in perfect humiliation of their soules, and pouer∣tie of spirit. As for humilitie towards man, good God, who obser∣ueth not, that the Papists haue lest thereof? to particu∣larize (though in time of persecution as they pretend) do not they in exccesse of apparell surpasse, at least equa∣lize our worst and disorderedst Protestants? I haue of∣ten heard both Ignatian, and Secular Priests affirme, the excesse and curiositie of fashions, to haue beene farre worse amongst Papists then Protestants: and if they did not or would not affirme it, who seeth it not? whence I doe demand of the Papists, haue wee our daily innouati∣ons of fashions? not from out of France? where, as like∣wise in Italy, the vanity and excesse in apparell is too too vnmeasurable; and for brauing ostentation, what people vnder heauen come nigh by many degrees, to the Hes∣perian Nation. But to reflect vpon their first point of doctrine in this consideration, by which they affirme that hee com∣mitteth the sinne of presumption, who hopeth for salua∣tion without merits, it is so far frō assecuring their soules with Christian comfort, that it doeth rather cause vnto them endlesse afflictions, and torment of minde, which I could confirme by many examples out of their owne histories. Neuerthelesse to shew how pernicious this their doctrine is, for a man any whit to rest vpon his owne merits, I will relate (perhaps a fable) onely one story, Coster conc. dom. 10. post pente. which Coster produceth solemnly in his Homilies. Thus it was. A certaine holy Eremite, liuing in a desert, being neere his end; sendeth for a certaine Abbot dwelling neere by, to come vnto him and to housell him: hee commeth, and vpon his comming, by the ringing of a certaine bell, a famous theefe and a notorious malefac∣tour, draweth neere to the doore of this Eremites Sell;
where seeing the Eremite vsing such deuotion, he in his conceit thinking him to be a very holy and blessed man; wished (so loudly, that the Eremite heard him) that hee were like vnto him in holinesse; which wishing of the theefe, when the Eremite heard he contemned him, and said within himselfe, that he had well wished, that he had beene in holinesse like vnto himselfe; and so continuing in such kinde of thoughts of his owne merits, the Ere∣mite dyeth: vpon and for his death, the Monke that came along with the Abbot, greatly lamenteth; and re∣turning together with the Abbot, in the way they finde this theefe (of whom we spake before) sodenly slaine by some wilde beast: at sight of which heauy chance, the companion of the Abbot laugheth; for which, being reprehended by the Abbot, hee thus excuseth himselfe, that God had reuealed vnto him, the different endes of these two; of the Eremite, that he was damned, for plea∣sing and contenting himselfe in his owne iustice; and that was the cause, why he so heauily bewailed his death: of the theefe and malefactour, that he was saued, for that he did with humility acknowledge himselfe a sinner, and for saluation rested and confided onely in the mercies of God; and that was the cause, why hee so greatly reioy∣ced at his death. This story is related by Coster, as many other like ones (to the reproouing of sundry Pontifici∣an positions) though he bringeth them against vs Chri∣stians. How dreadfull is that vision, related in the great glasse of examples? by which it is deliuered: how vpon Speeul. Mag. Exemp. verbo damnatus. exē. 2 that day when Saint Bernard dyed, it was reuealed vnto a certain Eremite, that thirty thousand dyed, whereof one onely with Bernard, went directly to heauen; and three others to purgatory, which vision if it should bee true, what may be thought of those assecurances, which they giue in the Popish Church, to all such as dye in the same, with the copious furniture of their Sacraments and their owne merits?
Againe, workes of charity intended and instituted for the releeuing of the poore, are great tokens of true Christianity, when they are done purely and meerely for the loue of God. The Papists doe bragge much of this, but vainely; for taking quantity of time for quan∣tity, there are who dare vndertake to shew as many workes of piety (especially for hospitals and schooles of learning) done in the reformed Churches, as in any like time of popery: and yet such as were done there with them, were done alwaies with conceit of merit; to cause Friers to pray for themselues, or the souls of their friends departed; or were mixt with some like respect of selfe loue, whereas all like workes done in Reformed Chur∣ches, haue beene done for no other end, but to releeue the poore, further godlinesse, and please God, their do∣ctrine excluding all manner of merit, and hope therein, and all manner of feare of purgatory flashes. Lastly, a signe of true Christianity, (especially to∣wards the end of the world) is frequent and deuout me∣ditation in holy Scriptures, the which is so plentifully performed by zealous Christians, such as are touched with care of saluation, in the Reformed Churches; that there is no comparison to bee made betwixt them and the Laikes of their Churches: who are so farre from daily meditating therein, that they dare not, nor may not, without speciall leaue, read in vulgar tongues, any parts or parcels of the same, which causeth great ignorance of sacred Scriptures in their Laikes: as also, the ignorance of their Clerkes therein is very grosse, as by many parti∣culars might bee shewed one late one I will not heere o∣mit. There was of late (and yet perhaps is) conducted vp and downe London, a Champion of the Papists, by a certaine Knight: this Champion disguised Caui∣liere-like, either by accident or of set purpose, is brought to the house of a certaine Knight, where entring into di∣sputation about the Sacrament, he went rashly so farre,
as to teach that the very flesh of Christ is rent and torne in the Sacrament by the teeth of the receiuers. (Which his manner of speech and defence, did not please the Knight his Guide and Leader, he holding the contrary.) He also so profoundly discoursed vpon the Scriptures, that he would needes defend, that by the word Phase, (which is interpreted, transitus Domini, the passing of the Exod. 12. 11. Lord) was signified, the passing of the children of Israel through the red sea. And is not this a iolly Champion, to be carried vp and downe the City, to encounter either with Protestants or Ministers, indefence of Popish reli∣gion? doubtlesse, they are vnstable in faith, yea, alrea∣dy lost from faith, to vse Tertullians phrase, who are delu∣ded by such; they are ouerladen and ouercome with sinne, which are drawen away by such: but let them still reioyce in such, Ʋt insipientia eorum manifesta fiat, That their folly may bee made manifest: The which God of his 2. Timoth. 3. infinite mercy, vouchsafe to grant and guide the hearts of such as sit at the sterne, carefully and vigilantly (as they doe) to looke after such predicables and transcen∣dents which dare to come, sit, rest, walk & remaine nigh the very predicament of substance it selfe, to the perdi∣tion of diuerse vnstable soules: he also vouch safe to open the eyes of all such, as by Popish illusions and miracles, haue beene drawen to leaue the charity of truth, of him, that is Ʋia, Veritas & Vita, the Way, the Truth and Iohn 14. 6. Life: To whom, with the Father and holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory for euer. Amen.
A second Addition, shewing the vanity of a late pamphlet, in which the life and death of one Edmund Gennings Pseudo-Martyr, is gloriously set downe. COurteous Reader; about the time I had finisht this my discourse, it pleased a very Reuerend Father of this Church, the Right Reuerend Bishop of Bathe and Wels, to shew me a petty transma∣rine pamphlet in print, gloriously be∣deckt with imagery representing vnto the gazing Rea∣der in pictures, the birth, life, attachment, arraignement and execution, of one Edmund Gennings, who together with one Swithune Wels (a merry Cricke, and boun Com∣panion;) was according to the Iustice of the Lawes of this Kingdome, put to death in Grayes-Inne-fields, the yeere of our Lord God 1591. Hauing cursorily runne ouer the pamphlet, I should haue reputed the same, the worke of some childish Punie, orignorant Wilson; but that I obserued cleerely by the two letters prefixed in the Front of the booke, and by some other circumstances, very cleere, that the Authour of the same, was Iohn Gen∣nings, a Reuerend Priest amongst them, and Brother to Saint Edmund their pretensed Martyr. Both these, Iohn and Edmund, were well knowen to me: concerning whom and the pamphlet, (the contents whereof doe so square with the vanitie of Popish miracles I haue heere handled) I thought good to adde these few obseruations. First, that neither Edmund nor Iohn conuersing amon∣gest their fellow Collegiates, were euer reputed to be of any note of Sanctity; what the learning of Iohn is, I can∣not
say; but if a man may take a scantling of his suffici∣ency by this simple work, it must needs be reputed very I take it, that the insufficien∣cy of the book, is the cause why our Pa∣pists do denie any such thing to be in print. slender. The learning of the Pseudo-Martyr was verie small, his short staying in the Colledge, not suffering him to be better furnished; and againe, the weaknesse of his constitution was a great hinderance vnto him in that kinde; who otherwise also was not very capable of lear∣ning. His daily infirmities were a cause that he was made Prefect of the Infirmarie (that is, appointed to bee an Ouerseer of the sicke) whereby hee was freed from cer∣taine scholasticke burdens and duties which were inci∣dent to others: His effeminate constitution and com∣plexion, with carriage incident to the same, made him to be beloued of the bearded Iuuentus, yea and the weak∣nesse of his constitution was a reason, that hee was by dispensation made Priest before hee was 24. yeeres of age; for such is their fashion whom they finde precipitate for Englands mission; though they bee imberbes to ha∣sten them away, by giuing vnto them the dignitie of Priest-hood: and no maruell that the Martyr hasted for England, whose daily sicknesse and continuall infirmi∣ties, hastened him to the graue in a strange Countrey, if he had stayed at Rhemes any longer. This is all in ef∣fect, which can bee said touching his carriage, for that small time he was in the Colledge, and these bee the be∣ginnings of their Martyr, and I thinke that he who shall reade the pamphlet set out by his Brother, (who I doubt not did amplifie what he could, and set all his praises vp∣on the tenter-hookes) may not finde any speciall poynt worth noting, commending either his learning or his Sanctitie. When I obserue, how they haue rashly set him forth for so glorious a Martyr, I cannot but thinke of an other like Saint, who was sent from Rhemes about the same time into England: This was one Waterson, who whilest Gennings was Prefect of the Infirmary, serued vnder one
Master Maior in the Sacristy, hauing charge to keep the same cleane, and to see that Candells, water, wafer-breades, wine, and Masse vestiments should be in readi∣nesse, for those who were to say Masse. This Waterson being of a very rough constitution, fitter to make a Ploughman then a Scholler; ouergrown in yeares; not able to make good construction in Latine; no, nor to expound ordinarie and vulgar Latine; being found not fit for Logicke subtelties, was put to study, their positiue Grosseries, cases of diuinitie I should say: in which kinde of learning, he made such speedie progresse; that vpon a suddaine he was Priested & sent ouer into England; the which was not done without the offence and dislike of diuerse in the Colledge; and others in England also: such was the mans sufficiencie and his conuersation, in good fellowship &c. But obserue what followeth; being come into En∣gland, so inconsiderate and Goodfellowlike was his carri∣age, that he did not long escape the hands of Iustice, & being taken was according to the lawes executed for his demerites; whereupon their notes were so on a suddaine changed, concerning the sanctitie of life, and glorie of the death of this their Martyr, that it was a wonder wor∣thy laughter to heare them. Yea they were not ashamed to giue out diuers rumours of miraculous accidents which happened before, at, and after his death; more then this our Pamphleter can, after so long consideration finde out for his Saint-brother. Which considering I cannot but obserue this point, that it mattereth not with the Pope and his Assecles, of what life and conuersation their Saints be, so it can be prooued that they die stoutly and obstinately, for the testimonie of his vnlimited su∣premacie: and it is worthy noting, that they doe most exalt and extoll those feruent and fiery Spirits, who doe giue to their Romane Ioue absolute power to depose and dethrone Princes; and do speake very coldly, of such
their Martyrs, as die for refusing to take the Oath of Al∣legiance; if being questioned about the Popes power to depose and dethrone Princes, they answere more mo∣derately, and temperately then others doe. And here, I aduise the weake Reader, or any that may be popishly affected; not to prize too highly this promptnesse in popish Priests to suffer death for the glo∣ry of their Vice-Christ. There were of old the Circum∣cellions A Costro verbo Martiriū. Aug. ad Quodunlt. haer: 69. stellae erraticae, wandring starres; nominated of that accursed Planet Donatus, Donatists: these were so eager after the opinion of Martirdome, that if they could not finde Authoritie which would kill them, they would de∣stroy themselues or kill each other. The Deuill hath ne∣uer wanted his Martyrs; yea he hath so preuailed & be∣witched many, that they haue beene cruell Butchers to themselues, out of an apprehension of their own mise∣rable estate, accounting the most terrible of all terribles, death; to be the next way, and best meanes for and to their felicitie. The learned and vnlearned cannot be ignorant, but that many Ancient worthies, Greeke, and Romane, Infidel and faithfull, haue by daily meditation of deaths power and the sting thereof, and by consideration of the benefits, that arise from honorable deaths, so armed their mindes, against the terrours of death, that neither death her selfe, nor the immanitie of most cruell tor∣ments, could euer containe them, from atchiuing, or at∣tempting such honourable enterprises, in which, they saw their glorious memories, should remaine registred for all future posterities. And yet in this they were for the most part led by a humane Spirit: of such efficacie is Sacra fames gloriae. I doe specially note, that the condition of popish Martyrs of these times; was liuely forelineated in the Martirians; who so gloried in the number of their Mar∣tyrs, that for their bragging in this kinde, Antiquitie
worthily termed them Martirians: For as those Here∣tikes Epiphan, haeres. 80. purchased a constancy and fortitude to contemne death by their meditations, and Enthusiasticall exercises; so likewise these of Rome, appeare euidently not to haue this their obstinacie to death from the Spirit of God, but As the Marti∣rians did super∣stitiously bury the bodies of their Martyrs and sing praises to them, so do the Papists the very like. doe purchase the same, by their quotidian and daily ex∣ercises, in their Seminaries and Colledges, appointed spe∣cially and ordinarily for the same purpose. For, as at their entrance and admission into the Colledge; they sweare to come into England whensoeuer they shall bee sent; so for euer after whilest they are in the Colledge they are admonished by their Rulers and Superiours, to arme themselues against death, which the lawes here, haue appointed for such their comming into this Kingdome: so that it is no maruell, if so long and serious fore appre∣hensions and meditations, doe obfirmato and make ob∣stinate their mindes for the constant suffering of death, which is no more then is daily and vsually to bee seene, euen in the prophanest and vilest Malefactours that come to die brauely, (as the phrase is) at Tiburne. And to argue against them more clearely, if contempt of death be to be admired, it is then most highly to bee esteemed in such poore and simple Persons, whom their Such worthy examples are most frequent in Acts and Mouments of simple men & women of all sorts and of all ages since An∣tichrists time. Papall commandes, and most immane inquisitions haue by the cruellest death of fire, taken away in Spaine, Italy, France, England, and where not? For their constancie, as that in popish Priests cannot be attributed to any po∣litike or humane set exercises for such an end: No, no, it must needes bee the spirit of God, which speaketh in them, and enableth them to beare patiently and ioyful∣ly those immane Torments, and deaths most cruell and shamefull, which the Pope your holy Father hath de∣creed against them. This I haue spoken by the way on∣ly as by a touch, lest any weakelings should bee scanda∣lized at their obstinate sufferings. But let such euer car∣ry that of Ciprian in their mindes: Non poena sed causa
facit Martirem, It is neither death nor the manner of death which maketh a Martyr, but the cause. Which cause of death (if euer in any) then in these Pseudomartyrs, is most farre from giuing them the crowne of Martyrdome. For setting aside a million of reasons which might bee produced to shew the iniquitie of their cause, I onely at this present obserue this one; If antiquitie did deserued∣ly hold and decree, that such should not bee reputed Martyrs who moued with a seditious Spirit were killed destroying the Idolls of the Heathen the very obiects of Conc: Elib. can. 60. The fa∣thers adde this reason of their decree that no such thing is written or al∣lowed in the Gospell, no such thing read to haue beene done by the A∣postles. their idolaty, which not God, but the Deuill had raised and erected: yea if they thought him worthy of death, who at Nicomedia, Diocletian, and Maximian being then there) did rent in sunder the cruell Edict which those Emperours had published against the Christians, for the vtter ruine and extirpation of them, of their Temples, and of all diuine worship. If I say, Antiquity reputed such worthy of death, and would not honour them as Martyrs, who so attempted; with what face then, are your Popes Souldiers, to bee accounted Martyrs who seeke the ruine and destruction of their naturall Soue∣raignes, whom the hand of heauen hath set ouer them, and doe endeauour to rent in sunder, not their Edicts, but that knot and band of Allegiance of their Subiects, wherein consisteth their Regall authoritie? For as cleare as the Heauens it is, that if there be no Subiects, there can be no Soueraigne; and Subiects there cannot bee, As all Kings are but as Vice∣roys vnder the great God of heauen, so like∣wise all such as are vnder the Ioue of Rme to be dethroned by him can be no other then his Viceroyes. where full and bound Allegiance is denied, as it is by all those who hold and affirme, that the Pope hath power to dethrone our Gracious Soueraignes: so conse∣quently as cleare as light it selfe it is, that in their opini∣ons Paul the 5. is King of England and our most Graci∣ous Soueraigne (whom God of his mercy protect as the apple of his eye) his Viceroy and Substitute. Touching the Contents of this Pamphlet, there is no∣thing worthy a Schollers view; there are onely some
pretty gazing bookes for their blinde-Obedients; to them we will leaue them: that which I minde to examine are onely some three idle miracles thrust in, for want of bet∣ter matter; I relate not the speciall words of the Pam∣phlet, in respect that I haue not at this present the Pam∣phlet by me. The first is a grand one, at the Martyrs birth, hee was The first mira∣cle of M. Fd: Gennings. forsooth borne with a tooth, with which sucking his Mothers brest, he did so afflict and torment her, putting such fearefull presages in her minde thereby, that shee was inconsolably troubled: But behold, she being thus perplexed, a Romish Doctour, a Prophet entreth in, and perswadeth her to be of good cheere, for without all doubt (said he) this ominous tooth of the childe, doth forebode that he shall trauaile beyond the Seas, and shall returne againe, to your, and all his friends comforts. What a vanitie is this? it were a sinne to loose time in refuting of it: many there haue been borne with a tooth or teeth in their head, and yet no omen made thereof. There was in my Parish of Ebbenye in Kent, a woman borne with two teeth in her mouth, yet shee neuer tra∣uailed beyond one or two Seas, neither fell it out, that shee was any great comfort to her Parents; shee is dead and hath left behinde her, children to her husband, for whose teeth he is put carefully to prouide; and this was the Omen of hir two teeth. And I thinke (if all be true I haue heard) Mr. Gennings mother tooke no comfort but great griefe at her Sonnes returne, though not so great, as the mother of Garnet (the younger executed at Tyburne) did; for shee hearing of her Sonnes death, therevpon came to be distracted in her witts. Such com∣fort receiued Garnetts Mother at his death; but perhaps he was not borne with a tooth in his mouth, as Mr. Gen∣nings was. Here I wish the Reader to weigh, vnto what shifts these auguring Papists are driuen; to mee, it is a most cleare argument of the badnesse of their cause, that
they do so hunt after prodigies and miracles for the stil∣ting vp of the same. The second wonder I obserue in this Pamphlet, is, The Martyrs second miracle another Prodigie, si dijs placet. His belly being ope∣ned, his bowells cut out, and his heart in the Executioners hand, yet the Martyr cryeth out, Sancte Gregori ora pro me. Holy Gregorie pray for me. Surely it had beene a greater prodigie, if his heart had cryed so; or that his tongue being cut out, he had so cryed: but how impious are these men in their prodigies? what? were christians euer taught by the example of Christ, command of Luc. 23. 46. Act. 7. 59. Scriptures, practise of any Orthodoxe seruant of God, at their departure hence, to commend their soules into the hands of any creature? Search the Scriptures, in∣quire of the Ancients, and learne vs out of them such a manner of practise. If euer, surely then, we are to com∣mend our soules into the hands of our Creatour, when by his Summons we are cited hence. Imperet vobis Do∣minus & obstruat ora loquentium iniqua. You haue in your Legendaries, in your vitis Patrum, in your Rosarie beatae Virginis, many most idle tales; how diuers Penitents, by doing some acts of superstition to a Crosse, to an Image; by praying to some Saints, especially the Ʋirgin Marie, haue beene prodigiously and miraculously deliuered: all these things are feigned to bring the worship of the Creature in steed of the Creator. But this which your Gennings did, what was it more or aboue that which is ordinarie with superstitious, languishing, and pan∣ging soules in the agonie of death? what else was this then an argument that life was not quite extingui∣shed, nor his soule departed, when the Executioner had your Martyrs heart in his hand? I hope M. Gennings that your skill is not so slender in Philosophie, as to make the bowells of any man, so absolute and totall a receptacle of the soule, as that it is so most specially resi∣dent in the same, that it may not without a speciall mi∣racle,
for an instant or a short moment, continue in the heart, head, and tongue, at the renting out of the bowells of mans bodie. The summe is, had your Brothers tongue, or heart cryed out, Sancte Gregori ora pro me, af∣ter his soule had been departed, we might haue reputed the same a Prodigie of the Deuill, but not a miracle of God: I say, a prodygie of the Deuill, for I doubt not to call such manner of invocations no other than Satans instigations. What did your Gennings more (nay he did lesse) then that Deuill which being coniured to depart out of a possessed woman, and at his departing to say the Pater Noster, and Aue Maria, he added more and aboue, out of his owne deuotion, thus: Ah Holy Marie, pray Ifingrenius apud Powel: de Ant. nota. 17. for all those that visit this thy Chappell; Ah holy Marie, pray for them. And that yee may be assured that it was the Deuill who so prayed, he made his invocation in Latine, a point aboue the possessed womans reach. And as this Deuill prayed so heartily to the Virgin, for such as should superstitiously visit her Chappell; so I doubt not to in∣terpret, but that the Deuill (whereof Caesarius maketh Cesar: lib. 5. cap. 36. mention) which hauing serued a certaine souldier in the habit of a faire young man, a long time, at his dischar∣ging out of his seruice, required a Bell to be bought with the wages, which hee accepted for his seruice; and the same Bell to be hanged vpon the top of an old Chappell, to call the people together: I doubt not (I say) to in∣terpret, that this Deuill by such his erecting of a Bell, ay∣med at some such superstitious worship, as your Martyrs (Sancte Gregori) was, not at any such worship of God, as the holy Scriptures command and commend vnto vs. The third miracle which I obserue in this martyrs The Pamphlet mentioneth onely these 3. miracles. Legend hapned thus; A certaine namelesse Virgin there was, who longing after some of the martyrs flesh, appro∣ched full of faith vnto the basket into which the martyrs quarters were cast, readie to be carried away and to be set vpon London gates; but not knowing how to obtaine
her desire, she presumeth onlie to lay her fingers vpon one of the Saints consecrated thumbes; whereupon presentlie (obserue the miracle deseruing a Baronius to annalize it) that consecrated thumbe which she touched Baronius fa∣bleth the like of a tooth for the taking of which out of Cesarius his head three kniues were broken, which tooth after prayer came presently out very easily. Baroniu An. 11 38. I am sure that neither my selfe some o∣thers nor Mr. Copley to whom Iohn Gennings was familiarly known euer heard thereof. inuisiblie to all the standers by, did miraculouslie yeeld it selfe into her Virginall hands, with which she ioyfullie departed keeping the Iewell close and secret vnto her selfe, vntill the ariued beyond the seas where and when she made the miracle knowne to Iohn Gennings brother to the said Saint Edmund martyr; thus in effect hapned the prodigie, concerning which and the manner of it, I obserue these points. First I cannot without a kind of detestation thinke of the leuitie and pronenesse which is in Papists, to ad∣mit of a miracle grounded vpon so weake a testimonie of a maid, a simple maid, a namelesse maid, a maid con∣cealing, till she were beyond the seas; and there so couert∣ly setting her miracle to sale, that for ought I could euer heare there were none made acquainted with it vntill now when this idle narration was to be made publicke. Voraginous Iacob relateth in the Legend of S. Austen how a great friend of that Fathers bought of a Monke for a round summe of mony a pretensed finger of the same father, which neuerthelesse was found to be coun∣terfet though wrapped vp neatlie and charily in a faire peece of silke; what? could a Monke for some lucre and gaine deceiue? and might not your virgin-maid haue It cannot but be maruelled at, how the thumbe was neuer missed if the quarters were set vp vpon the gates of London, &c. some sinistrous respect to delude? you know how ordi∣narie a thing it is for poore maids to be put to their shifts beyond the seas, and to make the best vse they can of their wits, and all little enough: I doe assure my selfe that if the virgin-maide had spoke of the miracle before the quarters of their martyr had been either rotten, taken, or consumed away; that the whole narration would haue been found a lewd tale of a lewd lasse: it is wel for the cre∣dit of your narration master Gennings that you now
come out with the thumbe, when the whole arme and hand from which it miraculously came are rotten or consumed, for ought I could euer heare. But to shew further the vanitie of this narration, I ob∣serue secondly that this miracle was not to confirme any point of the Romane faith to the aduersaries, but that it was only a spirituall dallying of God with the virgin-maide, who longed after some of the martyrs flesh: how more glorious had it been for your Church, and more for the confusion of the aduersaries, if the miracle had been done toto inspectante populo, the eyes of all the people beholding it: pitty it is that the claritie of your miracles is not more perspicuous, they are done by your selues, vpon your selues, and your selues alwayes, or for most part witnesses. Yea more, this miracle was not onely not shewed to the people; but it was by miracle, yea by as many miracles, as there were persons there present to behold it, (and yet did not or could not behold it) the same was miraculously hid from them: and for this I note thirdly, that whereas the standers by did not obserue or could not obserue the miraculous parting of the thumbe from the hand, the same is to be imputed to Gods speciall power (or to the diuels ministery by Gods permission) by which their senses were bound; or second∣ly, some mist cast before them; or else thirdly the virgin and the thumbe were made strangely and prodigiouslie inuisible, so that the standers by could not apertis oculis, behold so sensible and apparant an action done before them and in their sight. Oh how deere a Spousesse was this to haue so many prodigies done at one time, and in the same place to satisfie her longing after the martyrs flesh! yea and further, to haue the eyes of her fellow-Catholikes bound vp, that they could not behold the blessing God then bestowed vpon her. I say this, be∣cause I may not doubt but that diuers Papists were then present at the very punctualdoing of the miracle, though
her desire, she presummeth onlie to lay her fingers vpon one of the Saints consecrated thumbes; wherereupon presentlie (obserue the miracle deseruing a Baronius to annalize it) that consecrated thumbe which she touched Baronius fa∣bleth the like of a tooth for the taking of which out of Cesarius his head three kniues were broken, which tooth after prayer came presently out very easily. Baron in An. 1138. I am sure thhat neither my selfe some o∣thers nor Mr. Copley to whom Iohn Gennings was familiarly known euer heard thereof. inuisiblie to all the standers by, did miraculouslie yeeld it selfe into her Virginall hands, with which she ioyfullie departed keeping the Iewell close and secret vnto her selfe, vntill the ariued beyond the seas where and when she made the miracle knowne to Iohn Gennings brother to the said Saint Edmund martyr; thus in effect hapned the prodigie, concerning which and the manner of it, I obserue these points. First I cannot without a kind of detestation thinke of the leuitie and pronenesse which is in Papists, to ad∣mit of a miracle grounded vpon so weake a testimonie of a maid, a simple maid, a namelesse maid, a maid con∣cealing, till she were beyond the seas; and there so couert∣ly setting her miracle to sale, that for ought I could euer heare there were none made acquainted with it vntill now when this idle narration was to he made publicke. Voraginous Iacob relateth in the Legend of S. Austen how a great friend of that Fathers bought of a Monke for a round summe of mony a pretensed finger of the samme father, which neuerthelesse was found to be coun∣terfeit though wrapped vp neatlie and charily in a faire peece of slike; what? could a Monke for some lucre and It cannot but be maruelled at, how the thumbe was neuer missed if the quarters were set vp vpon the gates of London, &c. gaine deceiue? and might not your virgin-maid haue some sinistrous respect to delude? you know how ordi∣narie a thing it is for poore maids to be put to their shifts beyond the seas, and to make the best vse they can of their wits, and all little enough: I doe assure my selfe that if the virgin-maide had spoke of the miracle before the quarters of their martyr had been either rotten, taken, or consumed away; that the whole narration would haue been found a lewd tale of a lewd lasse: it is wel for the cre∣dit of your narration master Gennings that you now
come out with the thumbe, when the whole arme and hand from which it miraculously came are rotten or consumed, for ought I could euer heare. But to shew further the vanitie of this narration, I ob∣serue secondly that this miracle was not to confirme any point of the Romane faith to the aduersaries, but that it was only a spirituall dallying of God with the virgin-maide, who longed after some of the martyrs flesh: how more glorious had it been for your Church, and more for the confusion of the aduersaries, if the miracle had been done toto inspectante populo, the eyes of all the people beholding it: pitty it is that the claritie of your miracles is not more perspicuous, they are done by your selues, vpon your selues, and your selues alwayes, or for most part witnesses. Yea more, this miracle was not onely not shewed to the people; but it was by miracle, yea by as many miracles, as there were persons there present to behold it, (and yet did not or could not behold it) the same was miraculously hid from them: and for this I note thirdly, that whereas the standers by did not obserue or could not obserue the miraculous parting of the thumbe from the hand, the same is to be imputed to Gods speciall power (or to the diuels ministery by Gods permission) by which their senses were bound; or second∣ly, some mist cast before them; or else thirdly the virgin and the thumbe were made strangely and prodigiouslie inuisible, so that the standers by could not apertis oculis, behold so sensible and apparant an action done before them and in their sight. Oh how deere a Spousesse was this to haue so many prodigies done at one time, and in the same place to satisfie her longing after the martyrs flesh! yea and further, to haue the eyes of her fellow-Catholikes bound vp, that they could not behold the blessing God then bestowed vpon her. I say this, be∣cause I may not doubt but that diuers Papists were then present at the very punctual doing of the miracle, though
their blinded eyes saw it not. And so I end to speake any more of this Pamphlets miraculous narrations: yet I desire the Reader to obserue with me how relike for∣gerers haue beene heeretofore found in ancienter times; so that now such kinde of cousenage may not be thought altogether strange. That Rome it selfe hath had counterset relikes, Lauren∣tius Valla. de Emen∣tit. donat. Con∣stant. Greg. l. 3. ep. 30. Ʋalla will confirme vnto vs. That the Church of Constantinople is also deluded by false relikes, I gather thus out of Gregory, who in his Epistle to Constantia An∣gusta writeth constantly, and peremptorily, that the Church of Rome, had not diuided, nor durst neuer di∣uide, or cut the bodies or relikes of the Apostles; how then commeth the Church of Constantinople to haue had Bell. lib. 2. de Sanct. Beatitud. cap. 3. any of Saint Peters relikes, as Bellarmine writeth, and the publike fame goeth. Againe that the Graecian Chur∣ches were ordinarily abused with false relikes; wee may Greg. l. 3. ep. 30. gather out of his said Epistle to Constantia, where here∣lateth how certaine Grecians, being found to digge vp the bones of certaine dead men, answered, that they in∣tended to carry them into their own country for relikes. That France hath beene abused, Turonensis will tell vs, Gregorius Turō. apud Azor. lib. 9 Institut. cap. 8. who relateth that a certaine Impostor came out of Spaine, pretending to bring with him the relikes of Saint Felix, and Ʋincentius. As for Affricke Saint Austen will tell vs (if the Booke be his) how it was abused and deluded by August. de oper. Monach. cap. 28 Monkes, carrying false relikes vp and downe. Further concerning this point, Gregory and Austen will cleerely Greg. lib. 12. ep. 31. Interrogat. 9. Respons. ad August. confirme vnto vs, that a whole Church & Congregation, did worship and honour counterfet relikes; and lastly, Sulpicius in the life of Martin, doeth witnesse, that the bones of a notorious malefactour and theefe, were ho∣noured, as if they had beene of a Saint and Martyr. By this, & more which might be added in this kinde, it doth appeare, how forgery hath beene on foote, and practi∣sed about relikes; and for my part in this speciall narra∣tion
of Master Gennings, I doubt not to affirme, but that his Virgin lasse hath played a tricke of legerdemaine, a∣bout his Brothers thombe; to which his tale I thinke, that as much credit may be giuen, as to the merry Geno∣uyse Priest, who comming out of Greece pretended to haue brought with him Moses hornes, which hee wore when hee descended from Mount Sina: or else, to that merry Frier who proferred to shew in a box, as an admi∣rable relike, one of the holy Ghosts fingers. What then shall we say to this pretensed finger of this Virgin maide, whence had shee it? or what might it bee? may wee say, that because the Lowe-countries was the place, where she first vented her Saints thombe, that per∣haps she might haue lighted there, vpon some one fin∣ger of those, which the mercilesse, inhumane and Bar∣barous Spaniards, were wonted to cut from the hands of those people; for greedinesse to haue their rings? The distance of time, will seeme not to accord with this say∣ing; and yet, why might not some of the Flemings haue reserued carefully some of those thombes or fingers; and so the holy maide hit vpon one of them? Or shall we say, that it might bee a thombe of some one other of their Priests-Martyrs here at Tiburne? or else a thombe taken from some body, appointed for the Anatomists. The truth is a man may hardly diuine whence the forged flesh was taken; assured I am for the reasons I haue already added; and further, because I heare not of any prodigious effects, wrought by the mi∣raculous peece (as the powerfull custome of their Saints relikes is) that it is counterfet and forged: But before I end, I would aduise Master Gennings to make triall by the diuells Oracle, in some of their exorcised Energuminis∣ses (as their wont is) whether it be the thombe of a Iohn or a Ioane, or an Edmund; you may bee well assured Mr. Iohn, if it bee Saint Edmunds, and not a forgery of your namelesse Ioane that it will make (like the relikes of
your Briants and Campians) the great diuell himselfe to cry oh. It would be very fitting that you would be plea∣sed to make triall of it vpon Mr. Bluet, if your many ex∣orcismes vsed vpon, and ouer him, haue not before this time killed both the great Diuel himselfe, and that most wretched creature his miserable habitacle. As for the poore deluded Maide Ʋirgin, if a wicked spirit had got∣ten power ouer her for her wicked forgery, then it will concerne you Master Gennings to cast out the diuell out of her soule, and coniure him at his going out to tell all your blinde-Obedients at Brussels, and Saint Omers (as the diuell cast out at Saint Peters in Rome out of a wench possessed, for disobeying her Father in eating a little Costerus Postil. dom. 3. in Qua∣dragess. milke did there and then) that the maide should passe by Purgatory, and suffer no other Purgatory in the next life. For as the poore wench in Rome deserued to be freed frō Purgatory, she suffered so this in life: so by a double title, your Virgin maide deserues to passe by the fire of Purgatory, and mount vp immediately to heauen. But leauing such phrases, I pray to God to grant you both, and all other seduced, heere in this life, his holy purga∣tory of repentance, and true faith in Iesus Christ. This my discourse concerning the vanity and Anti∣christianisme of Popish miracles, I haue by the assistance of our Lord Iesus, brought to an end: he be plea∣sed to grant it such successe, that it may turne to the glory of his most bles∣sed name, and the benefit of his Church Amen. Deo soli Honor & Gloria.
A note of some of the speciall matters contained in this Treatise. A ANntichrist worketh mi∣racles. pag. 9. 10 Antichrist dissembleth cha¦stity. 17. 18 Austens works doubtfull. 67 He teacheth not adoration of relickes. 68. 69 Athanasius forged. 102 Antichrists miracles in Mr. Floods opinion. 161 to 164 Antichrist fetcheth fire from heauen proued by many ex∣amples. 229. 230. 231 & 163 Antichristian miracles and their properties. 245. to 250 Antichrist weareth the Lambes hornes. 238 The Image of the Beast spea∣keth. 238. 239, 234 Antichrist and his preach Christ to be in penetrals how. 251. to 265 Absolution of a dumbe boy confessing by his mistresse. 264 Attributes of God giuen to the Pope. 273, Antichrist and his doe mira∣cles beseeming God. 157. 158 B Breaden Idoll. 73. 78 Masse Christ burnt. 103 Vomited. ibid. Bellarmine his wilfull lying. 151 Baptisme and the profession of a Popish vow of like ver∣tue against sinne. 206 Two beasts described. 227 236 237. &c. Beasts Image. 238. 239 Bellarmines eighth Sacra∣ment. 107 His contradiction. ibid. Basils feigned Masse. 296 Brigets visions. 297
C True Church worketh not miracles. 8 Christ changeth his heart with Catherine. 13 A cousening tricke of a Frier with an Energuminisse 26 Certainty of Popish miracles 46. 47 Church customes vary. 71 Chrysostome corrupted. 81 Churches particular haue erred 109 110. 116. 117 How Christ conuerseth in closets. 265. 255. mar. Coster his foure places. 291 Christines prodigious reui∣uing. 302 She a redemptresse of Soules out of purgatory. ibid. Conuerts from Rome subiect to calumnies. 51 Et preface.   D Dragons voice. 11 Doctrine of diuels. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25 Deuill delighteth with Po∣pish sacred things. 27 Diuel dissembles with crosses 106. marg. 107 Dispensacion to votaries from Popes. 193 Dispensations what manner giuen by Popes. 202 Dispensation and declaration how they differ. 194 E Equiuocation of an Ignatian. 29. 30 Equiuocation casteth acrow into a feuer, freed by abso∣lution. 231 mar. F Who fly to Rome. 52 Master Fluds flanderous lying. 53. 54 His flattery. 55 His idle diuinity. 60 His lying. 86 His blasphemies. 20. 21 22. 23. 166 His skill in numbring. 153 His lying. 153. Forraine mysterie of the Pope and his confederates. 180 181 Feare of Lipsius. 48 Of Maldonat. 253 A Friers deuise. 112 G Ground of Popish nouelties.  
God tempteth not, 215. 216. Gallonius his blaspemy. 294. 295 Galeatius defended. 132 Gennings his prodigious tooth. 320 The prodigie of his miracu∣lous finger. 331. 332 His prodigious praying at his death. 330. 331 H Hypocrisie of Pope and his. 284 Heauens, two of Coster. 291 I. Ignatians first Librarie in Oxford. 40. Ignatians misterie. 61. Idolatry about Images. 91. 92. 93. True vse of Ima∣ges. 94. 97. Images atti∣red. 98 Image crucified. 103 Iguatians policy. 138. marg. Their manner of restitution. 177 Their austereliues. 189. 190 Indians how conuerted. 178 Ignatius his Hobgoblin. 64 Best defence for Pope Ione. 148 Apaire of Ignatians gulled. 310. 311 K A Papist King consumed with lice. 132. mar. L Lawes of Popes for their Cleargies Celibacy re∣sisted. 197 Lawes ancient cashierd by Popes. 198 Luthers conflict with the di∣uell defended. 212 Laughing toyes diuerse. 222 to 224 Lambe ouercome how. 241 Literall interpretation of the Beasts Image by Papists most fond. 232. 233. 160. 161 Laikes touch not altar cloths 89 M Miracles cease. 11 Maide of Lisbo. 14 Miracles no certaine token of the true Church. 34. 35 &c. 187 Madnesse obiected by Papists 50. 51 Popish miracles. 89. 90
Monkes rosted like geese in Purgotory. 224 Mariage of Priests aposto∣licall. 285 Manichaisme mooued the Pope to forbid mariage in Priests. See Brigets vision. 297. 298 Mystery of Church Papists. See Preface.   Mysterye of the Papist Igna∣tian. 61 Miraculous deliuerauces of the christiane of Bohemia. 314. 315 Martyrians and their super∣stition. 327 Pseudo martyrdome. 328 Mystery of Church Papists and Communion Recusants preface.   N Newtons vision. 175 Nerius his ribs miraculous raised. 293 Nerius by smell distinguisheth vertues and vices. 295 O Opinions touching Antichrist 56 Ordination of Bishops in the Church of England. 133 Oathes desperate of Baroni∣us, &c. 293. 294 P Papists teach doctrines of diuels. 16 Periury of an Ignatian Priest 28 Priests deuise miracles. 33 Popish prodigies like Panyms wonders. 41. 42 Papist Angels their negli∣gence. 83. 84 Strange prodigies. 127 Popish miracles in Master Fluds phrase. 134. 135. 136 Popes forge. 150 Proud. 143 Popes Turbant interpreted. 165 Popes fraud. 173 Popish forgeries. 182 Popes hardly saued. 280 Popish Priests manner of ma∣king their Proselites. 186 Popish prodigies in England. 249. 250 Prophecies of Christ tou∣ching Antichrist. 251. 279 Parsons brag. 25 Popish exorcists, their con∣flicts with ihe diuell. 23. 24
R Romes Ineubies. 18 Her false fingers. 63. 64 Corruptions. 129. 130. 131 170. to 173 Romane Empire taken out of the way. 238. 239 Roberts the Monke his brag 70 Regulus his Asse maketh the signe of the Crosse. 107 mar. 131 Relikes counterfet. 334 S Stapletons error. 38 What is adored at receiuing of the Sacramentes why kneeling. 73. 74. 75. Spanish gallants how they a∣dore the Masse Christ. 79 Sixtus Quintus his end. 131 Satan doth miracles. 157. 815 Spanish souldiers cruelties. 179 Sanctity of Popish Preachers. 183 Sichems Goddesse fell downe and is stolne. 47 Sacrament Christ equiuoca∣teth. 90 Is buried. 297 Clipped. 22 Is consecrated by a possessed woman and is adored. 21 Signes of true Christianity. 319. 320 T A tale of Carmelite Monkes 82 A false tale of a Iew. 88 The tale of Pope Ione exami∣ned. 143. to 148 V Vasquez his idle conceit a∣bout transsubstantiation. 3. Variance in popish Doctours   Vanitie of popish tablets. 112. 113. Virgin Mary to bee blessed. 125. Adored by Papists as a medi∣atresse. 139. 140. 155. 168. Vision of Fryer Leo. 155. mar That votaries may marrie proued clearely out of po∣pish principles. 191 to 211 A votary sinnes in keeping his vow of celibacie. 205. Popish votaries endes of their vowes. 205. Vowes made for an ill end of no force. 207. Ʋotaries vowes idle. 191. to 213 Viegas his blasphemie. 236. Vision of Briget for marriage
of Priests. 287. & Ap∣pend. 297. Visions against Poperie. & seq. 304. Visions prodigious. 307. Visions of Briget against the Church of Rome. 299. 308. W Master Whitaker defen∣ded. 218. The wound of one of the beasts heads cured. 241. Women in the habits of men. 145. Waterson Pseudomartyr. 325. The courteous READER be pleased to mend these errates or the like. PAge 12. vordicus read veridicus. Pag same marg. lib. 2. read lib. 1. Pag. 15. marg. Langius read La∣zius. Pag. 81. honour read horrous. Pag. 101. premacio read supremacie. Pag. same marg. mast. read mart. Pag. 104. with Father read with the Father. Pag. 139. marg. Leo 1. read Leo 10. Pag. 146. breadlesse read beardlesse.
