24928 99854613 20040
FVRTHER OBSERVATIONS OF THE ENGLISH SPA∣NISH PILGRIME, CONCER∣NING SPAINE, Being a second part of his former Booke, and containing these particulars: The description of a famous Monastery, or House of the King of Spaines, called the Escuriall, not the like in the Christian World: A briefe relation of certaine Daemonicall strata∣gems of the Spanish Inquisition exercised on diuers English men of note of late times, and now liuing in England. A relation of the founding of a Military Order in Rome, to wit, of the immaculate Conception of our Lady, the blessed Virgin. Composed by Iames Wadsworth, Gentleman, lately conuerted into his true Mothers bosome, the Church of England, and heretofore Pentioner to the King of Spaine. LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop at S. Austens gate at the signe of the pide Bull. 1630.
TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND HIGHLY HONOVRABLE, HENRY, Earle of Holland, Lord Kensington, High Constable of the Castle of Windsor, Captaine of his Maiesties Guard, Knight of the Noble Or∣der of the Garter, one of his Maiesties most honora∣ble Priuy Councell, and Chancellour of the Vni∣uersity of Cambridge: The Right Honourable, Robert Earle of Warwick: The truly Noble, the Lord Mountioy, Earle of Newport, three most happy Brethren, Iames Wadsworth wisheth daily increase of Ho∣nour and eternall felicity: And to the Right Honourable, Earle of Barke∣sheire; and the truly Noble, Lord Barclay, and the Religious and Vertuous Knight, Sir Henry Pherres, and their religious Ladies. WHen your Lordship was in Spaine in personall atten∣dance on his Maiestie,
where you drew all eyes after you, as you did all wishes heere. When it could neuer bee more truely said, Angli Angelis similes: then were many of these things acted, many oc∣casions offered me of returning to my true Religion, and natiue Coun∣trie. I should haue thought my selfe much happie to haue sailed by the same VVinde with your Honours ship: but fortune would not breathe her assisting assent vpon me. Their cunning suspicions and obseruations of mee, crost my designes, as my first Booke may happly reueale, which I humbly petition to your Ho∣nour to accept. So I humbly take my leaue, kissing your Lordships hands, euen those which haue raysed
mee vp to the preferment of this Ti∣tle, to bee Your Honours most humble ser∣uant in all bounden respectiue seruice to be commanded, Iames Wadsworth.
To his friend Mr. Iames Wadsworth and his Booke. GOe happy off-spring of a pregnant braine, Sins Commetary, a perspectiue for Spaine, Through which her maskt delusions apeare Naked, as if they had bin practis'd here▪ If any Iesuite damne the Authors quill, That writes 'gainst her from whome hee learnt his skill, Or wonder how that Citie odious proues, Which bred him, and his Fathers memory loues: Know this that Asa was not plagu'd, cause he Depriu'd his mother for idolatrie. Good Parents patterns are, if bad forbeare To imitate, and make their faults thy feare. Should I relate the dangers he endur'd After his soule a libertie procur'd; I should but wrong his Booke by making those Which reade such horrid lines afraid of's prose. When th' Ile of Ree, and Martins lucklesse Fort, Our trouble and their triumphs did report▪ Him Callis dungeon kept, as if his fate Should pay the rash inuasion of a State. Yet not their catchpole Popery, nor all Their Macheuils could worke his funerall: That hand which first conuerted him hath brought, Him safe, and their discouered atheisme wrought. T. M. of C. C.
Of his friend M. Iames Wadsworth and his Booke. MAn's borne to Griefe; without their mothers groane None are brought forth; none liue without their owne: We need no proofs; but stand amazd to see In one mans sorrowes short Epitome▪ Well his vnhappy trauailes witnesse may, That true Religion hath a thorny way, He was on Sea by the windes billowes shaken, By theeues was rob'd, and by the Pyrate taken; He was endungeond by the Iesuite, That hopt with him to keepe his faults from light: But he was now freed, the Papists naked showes, Well fitted to receiue the scourges blowes, They with their disciplines haue rac'd his skinne, And he's become the Trumpet of their sinne; Yet wrongs not charity, since 'tis his care To shame the bad, and bid the good beware. Now may he sleepe not fearing Thunders noise, And make post miseries sweeten future ioyes. I. G. Mr. M. V. to the Author. SVppose thee a new Traueller, againe Lanching into the dangers of the maine, What would thy lot of entertainemen be?
Once more the French his Wine would offer thee. A Rope for Cables, somewhat for a Maste With other tacklings, and to make more haste Thy ship should with the Aire of cursings goe, And this the swelling Spaniard should blow The Iesuite should for a Present bring A Knife with which he lately kill'd a King, Or if perhaps it were some meaner sport, (An Earle) the Iesuite would praise him for't, But to apply all this: my friend you see What entertaine the world would tender thee, Yet thou hast learn't that 'tis a noble Fate To gaine thy Countries loue through all their hate. M. V. of C. C. C. I. D. to the Author of this Booke. THat we thy vertues may the better prize, Thy name thy deeds doe anagrammatize. To wade euen through the Romane sea, to bee Amongst the rockes and shelues of papistrie, To lie i'th bosome, yet not to adore The image of the Antichristian whore; Is of such worth, that none would thinke the same, Were not thy deeds, as worthy as thy name. I. D. Col. G. & C.
To his Friend the Author. I That once fear'd the Circe's cup of Rhemes, But now doe drinke Thalia's clearest streames: Vieuing thy Shipwrack't danger thou hast past, To Neptune, a votiue Table, owe to cast. Where an Apelles Art may seeme the more, If that it paint the Babalonish whore. Whose coate became thy cloake for each deceite, That so the whore might haue her Pander straite: Her Rags, thy Veluets were; her triple Crowne, Thy Beauer; Princes with a pinching frowne T' out baffle, or from their Kingdomes depose: If, by them, the Catholike cause did lose. Her Siren tones would make thee soone awake: If not: a clap of Thunder would thee shake. The Holy Crosse to beare, was no labour, And crosse thy selfe, to crosse thy Sauiour. Such was thy hungry zeale the old Saints bones T' adore, thou made no bones of't carued stones Would turne thy bead-deuotion into gold; Which to a made-god (wise man like) thou tould. Thou knew neuer cake could make its baker Yet often the Priests saw cake their maker, Which did vnseale thy eyes cleerely to see All their Religion was but trumperie. They had told thee of a Purgatory: In Spaine thou found'st it thy Book's the Story. Saint Omers, was thy limbus Puerorum, Callis Dungeon, thy limbus Patrum. If one should aske where Hell on earth should be
Thou think'st in Spaine, or Roome, he may it see, What Iesuites are I know thou know'st full well; They were the cause that others did thee sell. Such Locusts, our Land to eate vp still striue, May our Kings Northwinde to Romes sea them driue. For, I dare boldly say, tis Englands doome, That they should liue with vs, who sweare for Roome. We haue their heads, but Serpentine, to bite Rome, has their hearts, and their allegeance quite A Climactericke yeere hang'dBarlow hang'd, draw'd, and quarter'd at Lancaster Anno 1623. one of late, Who sware for Pope against our King and State, His dissect parts might teach them to espie Those parts that liu'd against should by vs die. He many from receiued Truth seduc'd, Who to frequent our Church affore time vs'd. T'was iust then, to hang the body of him, Who t' hang mens soules great merit would it deeme. Now may his holinesse him canonize As good as Becket for Treasons, and lies. He with his associates often went To a wench, which was to confession bent: T'was knowne she was a whore, then well she might Make her confession to a Iesuite. They kept theirSi non caste, tamen cautè. Rule and might then shew their skill, Liue chaste, thou canst not keep a close whore stil. Such hellish firebrands Papists did incense AgainstSee the life & death of Mistris Brettergh  by Mr. Harri∣son, Preacher of Hyton in Lanca∣shire. one, who liued the Truths defence, Whose pretious life because they could not waste, The dumbe cattell their cruelty must taste. And sith they could not take off that one heade, These tales must all off: where a man might reade Their rubrick cruelty on th't earth, and heare
Those dumbe beasts bespeake vengeance in Gods eare. I spake all this for to congratulate Thy ransom'd glory, and most happy fate. Gs oote alone scaped out of their snare, Thy body also, and thy soule most rare. Which soaring vp toward God is fixt aboue Nor Pope nor Spainiard can it moue. Vlisses valour thou dost farre excell, The towring Son of Thetis fame dost quell, They had their Homers to relate their fame: Thou need'st them not: thy workes, can write thy name. Iliads of euill could them outweare Braue Spirit! a world of euills thou didst beare: Nor, beare alone, but breake them through, and showes The Trophees of thy glory from thy foes To be a true Conuert thou art spoken English, Spanish, Pilgrime, is thy token. T. H. A. B. C. C. C. To his friend M. Iames Wadsworth, concerning his booke. GOe stately forward in thy Spanish pace, And boldly stampe defiance in the face Of Romes proud Harlot, let her know she must Lie prostrate now to scorne, not to her lust. She that can make faire statues speake, may looke On her owne image, speaking in thy Booke
Reproach vnto her selfe, that all may see Her vices and her sinnes Anatomy. Tis happy, the beguiled Fathers sonne So wisely should delude delusion. And in such mists of error should descry And tract the footesteps of an Heresie: Which leauing now at length, perchance it shall Be found a Comet, and presage a fall To Romes vpholders, whose chiefe strength doth lie In iugling and in false Diuinitie. But though they stand, thy Booke I take no lesse Than writings to intaile thee, happinesse. I. N. C. C. C. To his experienced good friend Mr. Iames Wadsworth vpon his Booke. THy Booke's a Pilgrime, and 't had need be so If 't meanes to owne thee for its Master; who From Parents, Countrey, and Religion too; Nere stucke to fly, thy Natiue faith to shew: But 't may be styl'd a Diamond, whose rays Affords vs light to view Romes mask't assays; Nor that vnworthyly, for't cost a prize Nere purchast by the coine, but miseries: The Gallies, and the Inquisition Of which thou hast, of which thou mighst made one,
Are now become thy storys: Maist thou liue Till mercy of the times occasion giue, For our oppugnd religion to fight With some Immaculate-new-ordered Knight: But though thou dy'st, yetStories. these shall euer liue, And proue thy fames most true preseruatiue; And in despight of enuy shall become, So many mottoes grau'd vpon thy Tombe. R. G. C. C. C. To his good Friend the Author. SPaine prisoner tooke thy soule, thy body France; This liu'd in Dungeon, that in Ignorance: But England soule and body would haue free, Scorning contention, and foule heresie. Spaine was thy Hell, and France thy Purgatorie, England's thy Heauen on earth: aboue's thy Glorie. Thou sinnes Anatomist canst by thy fate With skill the scarlet whore euiscerate? Her subtile discipline, her sorcerie, Her baits of honor thou dost here discrie. Thus hauing made her whoredome to appeare, To boast of honesty she well may feare. G. B.
To his friend Mr. Wadsworth the Pilgrime. FOrward, braue Pilgrime, let thy trauelling braine Giue birth to more Mineruaes; though to Spaine Imposture pawn'd thy Parents yet is that state Checkt by discouery of thy reaching pate. The speaking Crosse did steale thy Fathers heart, Thou speaking Crosse to his designes dost thwart Delusions credit, and impostures guile Beguilts its posture painting in thy stile. Did Callis dungeon thee obscurely keepe? We know that truth oft times lyes in the deepe; Did the darke dungeon thee bestride with night? Romes proiects and thy clearenesse came to light; Darknesse displai'd, and night being thrust away Thou clear'd, we must confesse th' hast wonne the day. Mans life's a Pilgrimage, cease not to trauell From shore to Sea, from Sea to sand, to grauell Th' antagonists of truth: we know by common-sence, Trauels the high way to experience. E. R. Mag. Coll. Cant.
To the modest and courteous Gen∣tleman the Author of the English Spanish Trauailer. COuld my weake iudgement vpon trust be tooke Or could I adde a lustre to thy booke, Beyond its natiue glory, I would then Striue to exceed my selfe and my owne penne. But nothing can be added to your worth, Onely my wonderment to set it forth. And silence name best showes that: least what I write Should like your glorious fame seeme infinite. To my worthy friend Mr. Iames Wadsworth. ALthough you haue discouered nobly well The Iesuites and sonnes of Machiauell: Yet on this Booke which doth their Arts descry, They practise yet a greater Policie. For Sir I dare not thinke but that you know Who are the Merchants that engrost it so Spies for S. Omers, and the Doway Crew, And such as feare what good thy booke may doe, Intelligencers, Mumblers of the Masse Disguis'd and skin'd in Sattin (as the Asse Was in the Lyons hide) but their long eares
Hang out too farre. Yet where their craft appeares Or where they are discouer'd openly Such bookes as those by the whole sale they buy, And hide them from our view: And this was one Of many reasons caus'd th' impression: To be renewd: That he his booke repaires Comes not from his ambition but theirs. A. B. of C. C. C.
GEntle Reader, I intreate thee before thou reade ouer this Booke, to mend with thy Pen these few faults that alter the sense, being committed in the Authors absence. Pag. 1. lin. 1. for Segoria, r. Segovia. p. 18. l. 5. r. Cheney Roe. p. 20. l. 22. r. he. p. 23. l. 20. r. Venetia. p. 24. l. 9. r. Nunca sino ala conquista de Spana. l. 19. r. Print. p. 26. l. 20. r. Wildford Castle.
FVRTHER OB∣SERVATIONS OF THE ENGLISH SPANISH PIL∣GRIME, CONCERNING SPAINE: BEING A SECOND PART OF HIS FORMER Booke, &c. IN the Countrey of Segoria, vpon the Carpetan bor∣ders, stands a village here∣tofore of small note, but now famous, for the stately monastery called Scorialis, or commonly the Escuriall, from the drosse (as some guesse) which in old time came of the iron about those parts: The former buildings of that village were (till of late) very meane and homely, more for the profit then pleasure of the poore husband∣man: The soyle about it is barren and stony, af∣fording very hard passage for carts and carriages; whereupon there is but little prouision of corne and wine, but good store of cattell, by reason of the good feeding and sweete temper of the ayre,
whereas the more inland parts of the Countrey are somewhat scorched with ouer-much heate, this bloweth many coole blasts from the snowy neighboring mountaines; whence flowes good store of water enriching the ground with grasse, and beautifying the fields with a continuall greennesse. Beyond this village westward about a mile, at the foote of an high hill in an inclosed valley, seuen leagues from Madrid, stands that stately pile dedicated to the honor of St. Laurence, being the labour of foure and twenty yeeres, a building of incredible cost and magnificence, and such, as no former age could paralell; So that it may iustly be accounted one of the greatest won∣ders of this latter world. Besides the charges of rich vestments, massy vessels of gold and siluer, and other pretious furniture, it stood the King of Spaine (according to his booke of accounts) in one thousand two hundred Sesterces, which makes about three millions of money, or (according to others) nine millions of pounds. The whole fabrik is built in a square, except on that side toward the Kings Pallace and on the backside of the Church, looking towards Madrid, which seemes to resem∣ble a cradle or gridiron vpon which St. Laurence was broyled: Euery side but this extending two hundred and twenty paces: Some account the whole length of it (from North to South) no lesse then seuen hundred and twenty feete, and from East to West (according to the common measure) fiue hundred and seuenty. Each corner of the building is garded with a faire tower made more
for neatnesse then strength, and beautified (from the bottome to the top) with many faire win∣dowes. The whole fabricke may be diuided in three parts: On the South side stands the mona∣stery of Monks of St. Hierome, which takes vp al∣most one halfe of it. Toward the Northside stands the Colledge for yonger nouices of the same or∣der, and forreigne children, chosen and maintai∣ned by the King at a common table among them∣selues. Somewhat Eastward stands the Kings owne Pallace, being his Mansion house in the summer time. Before you come to this stately edifice, you may first obserue on the outside lying before it, an open walke, beginning from the westside of the Monastery, and thence compassing all the Northside, being two hundred foote broade on the West part betweene the Monastery, and the partition, and one hundred and forty foote broad on the North, all beautified with a faire pauement of small square stones. In the middest according to the length of the building, on that side where the adioyning mountaine ouer-lookes it: A faire great gate opens it selfe betweene eight huge pillars on both sides of it, one aboue another, vp∣on which are foure other lesser pillars, and in the midst of the front stands a curious statue of S. Lau∣rence. This great gate opens to the Church, the Monastery, and the Colledge. On both sides of it are other lesser gates. That on the right hand affordes a passage to the chops of mechanicall arts for the vse of the Colledge. That on the left
opens a way to the lodgings of the younger Stu∣dents or Nouices. On the same side also is a lesser gate, through which you may passe into the Kings Palace. In a faire front, ouer the entrance to the Church, stand vpon their pillars and bases, the statues of sixe Kings of Israel, each of them eighteene foot high, whose heads and hands are of white Mar∣ble, the rest of a courser stone. Let vs enter now into the interiour parts of this goodly Fabricke; and first when you are vp the staires which leade to the chiefe entrance of the Church, a large open walke offers it selfe vnto your view, separa∣ting the Monastery from the Colledge. In this walke are broad steps all along, which leade to the entrance of the Church, and thence to ano∣ther open Plaine, and so to a narrow Alley, tho∣row which those of the Monastery on the one side, and those of the Colledge on the other, may passe to the Church, and from thence into the lower station of the Quire. Now the place where this Quire stands, is foure-square, hauing three great Alleyes, or Iles, or Cloysters in the square, which are accounted for the Nauis, or body of the Church. Adioyning to this place of the low∣ermost Quire, is an open Court on both sides, from which the lower Quire it selfe, and two Chappels scituated towards those two Courts, receiue their light. Aboue this lower Quire stands the Church it selfe, with its proper Quire also; which Church (besides the vpper and lower stations of the Quire, and the great Chappell) is
fouresquare of it selfe, and is sustained by foure pillars, and other necessary props, and it hath three collaterall Alleys or Cloysters, after the manner of the former. In this Church are two paire of faire Organs, hauing each of them two and thirty registers or keyes. This Church also hath no lesse then sixe and thirty Altars, and a stately dore, by which they goe into a large vault at the time of Supplications and diuine Orisons; This Church is higher then the inferiour Quire by thirty foot, and the Quire of that is so much higher then the Church. The pauement of the Church, as likewise of the vpper and lower Quire, is checquered with white and black Mar∣ble. In the roofe of the Quire are expressed by the Painter the Sunne, Moone and Starres, with all the hoste of Heauen in most glorious manner, and on the walles the portraitures of diuers and sundry vertues, and some histories of S. Laurence and S. Hierome. The seates are all made of preci∣ous wood of diuers kinds and colours in Corin∣thian worke. On the Southside of the Church is a faire Porch, arched and beautified with diuers pictures. In this Porch is a cleare Fountaine, built about with Iasper and Marble, hauing seuen cocks and cisternes, where the Monkes vse to wash their hands, when they goe to celebrate their diuine Seruice. The pauement also of this Porch is chec∣quered with white and blacke Marble. The Vestry is next, a stately place, all arched and paued as the former. The chests, and presses, and other places where they keepe their holy
Vests, and ornaments of the Altars, are all made of precious wood, the walles couered with histo∣ricall pictures. From this Vestry they ascend by many steps vnto the high Altar. The place where this Altar stands is fouresquare, and paued with Iaspar of diuers colours. In the same place are certaine Oratories, built for great Princes to heare Masse, which Oratories are distinguished into foure little Chappels, and adorned both on the walles and pauement with checkered Iaspar. This place where the Altar stands, is ten foot higher then the Church, and they goe downe from hence to the Church by certaine steps be∣fore the great Chappell all of Iaspar. Through this holy place (as they cal it) they go into the Re∣liquary, where are kept diuers precious reliques of the Saints (forsooth) and shut vp in their cofers or boxes. The like Reliquary is on the South∣side also, full of many rare monuments. On the one side of the high Altar is a little house, wherein is distributed the holy Eucharist, a place of great holinesse and deuotion surely, On the walls of this house are curiously painted foure histories out of the old Testament, shadowing out this holy Sacrament; In the roofe is portrayde the Rainebow in the clouds with many Cheru∣bins and Seraphins about it. Betweene this house and the high Altar stands the Sacristia, within which is the Custodia of the holy Eucharist (as they call it) This place is built vpon eight pillars of Iaspar of a yellowish colour, with some veines or streakes of white;
This Iaspar is so hard and excellent that it cannot be polished but with Adamant. The barres and chapiters wrought with flowers, are all made of gilded mettall; On the bases which hang ouer the wreathes stand eight statues of the Apostles, the other foure stand in other hollow places thereabout. Those twelue statues are cut and in∣grauen with admirable Art, and are guilded by fire. The pauement of this Sacristia is layd with diuers kindes of Iaspar, and wrought in gilded mettall with Mesaique worke. The two leaue dores of this holy place, are made of the best rock christall included in guilded mettall, and are so transparent, that the inner Sacristia or Custodia wherein the holy Eucharist is kept, may easily be discerned. This peece by those that haue seene it, and all other rare peeces in the world, is thought to bee the most exquisite and admirable. The maine contriuer of this curious fabricke was that famous Arcitect Iacobus de Frizzo, who spent se∣uen whole yeeres in cutting and polishing those Iaspers. Now are we come to the high Altar it selfe, a worke no lesse noble and artificiall, built all of fine Iasper and marble, whereon are placed many crosses, candlestickes and other pretious orna∣ments. This Altar is beautified with many curi∣ous pictures and foure high places for the said pictures, whereof some are higher then other. In the lowest, betweene two painted tables, is the place where the Custodia stands. On each side of it are two statues, representing the foure Doctors
of the Church, Hierome, Augustine, Gregory, and Ambrose. This Custodia is of pure Iasper, and a∣dorned with flowers ingrauen in Iasper of diuers colours, vpon which as vpon their Bases stand all the other statues and columnes of greene and yeallowish Iasper, with their feete and chapiters of guilded mettall. The square tablets vpon the chapiters, as also the wreathes, and borders, and globes, are made of a more refined and party co∣loured Iasper. What shall I say more? The whole peece is composed of the richest Iasper of seuerall colours, with mettals cast and guilded. Next to the pictures of the second high place or hollow, are two other statues on each side, re∣presenting the foure Euangelists. After the same order on the third high place are placed on each side, two other statues, one of S. Iames the Apostle of Spaine, the other of S. Andrew the tutelary Saint of the house of Burgundy. On the vppermost high place are the images of S. Peter and S. Paul. The innermost Sacristia or Custodia (as they call it) wherein the holy Sacrament or body of Christ (as they say) is preserued, is made wih the grea∣test artifice that could be diuised. It hath foure pillars of the purest Iasper, whose bases and cha∣piters are of pure wrought gold, and so are the tablets, and borders, and wreathes, and flowers, all about the Custodia. Heere and there also are placed many shining Emralds. The feete of those pillars are of the same stone, engraued, and inlaid with gold in diuers places. Three little square pilasters which sustaine the feete of the other pil∣lars,
are of siluer and gilt, the ground-worke or foundation of the whole is composed of the same stone, interlaced with gilded mettall. The tablets and squares of the pillars or pyramids, are of the same materials with the pillars, the champhering whereof is all of wrought gold. The priamids are made of the richest Iasper of a dusky co∣lour. The little speares or bals on the top, are of fine wrought gold. The hinges and borders of the two leaue dores, are siluer, and gilt. The doores themselues are of rocke Christall. That side of it toward the Church hath a large square window of the same. The two other sides are adorned with vari-coloured Iasper, and inlayd with pure gold. With the very same materials and artifice is the inside beautified. In the midst of the roofe hangs a precious Topaze, wherein is layd vp the consecrated body of Christ (as they beleeue) in∣closed in a boxe of pretious Arhate. We haue seene the Church, now followes a description of the Monastery if selfe. In the great walke before the common entrance into the Church, there is a gate opening a passage into the common Porch of this Monastery; passing through this porch, you come to a tower where the bells hang, together with a curious clocke shewing both the naturall and planetary houres; This tower is erected from the very groundwork of the Church toward the Monastery, and is an∣swered by another right opposite, there is a way also from this porch of the Monastery to a faire parlour, for the resort of those that would haue
conference with the Monkes. Next to this, is a most stately and magnificent stairecase with a roofe and couering answerable. Next these staires adioynes a Chappell, where their masse was ce∣lebrated while the Church was building, here is also a closet where the Records and writings of the Monastery are carefully preserued. Through the same great porch you passe into the Court of the Monastery, thence to the vault, and so to another Court where vnder ground, is kept all the raine-water, which gathers together in that place. Betwixt these two, a faire arch is erected, together with a closet of excellent workmanship, where many necessary implements are layd vp. From this porch also, there is a passage to the porch of the refectory, whereto is adioyned a closet, or wardrobe, where their vestments are kept, which closet and porch also, be vaulted and arched with a great deale of art and couriositie. This porch is eight square, hauing eight win∣dowes, by which all the galleries adioyning re∣ceiue their light. In the middest of that porch is a pleasant fountaine, whose conduits and aque∣ducts are of Iasper. The refectory or dining roome of the Monks, is a most magnificent piece. Next to the chamber of the Keeper of the robes, is a way to another chamber, for the entertaine∣ment of strangers: next this the Kitchin, with the porch of it, wherein beside many other commo∣dities, are diuers fountaines of hot and cold wa∣ter. To the refectory is ioyned the Cloyster of the Hospitall wherein are two great cisternes. The
Hospitall it selfe is ioyned to this Cloyster, whose dining roome reaches to the Kitchin Porch. Be∣side these foresaid places, there are three other houses, wherein are made and conserued all those things, which pertaine to the distillation of wa∣ters. That Walke which leades from the Co∣uent to the Hospitall, is for them that are recoue∣red from their diseases, to exercise themselues therein. From that great Porch aforesaid, is another passage to the vault, where daily orizons are said. Here are pourtrayd the Histories of the new Te∣stament, from the Annunacition of the blessed Virgin to the second comming of Christ. In the midst of this fouresquare Vault, or Cloyster, is a pleasant Garden, distinguished into diuers beds and knots most curiously. In the midst of it, is a pretty fabricke of eight corners, representing the forme of a Church, built of a blacke stone, and adorned on the inside with diuers coloured-Iasper. In foure of the corners stand foure great Giants, vomiting water into foure marble ci∣sternes. In the middest of this Arbor lyes the principall path of the Garden. Now from the said Vault you passe to the Chapter-house, and an other house like it. These two roomes, together with their Porch, haue their roofes set forth with most exquisite pictures, and their pauement chec∣quered with white and blacke Marble; round about them are seates for the Monkes, and each hath his sumptuous Altar. The way to the Monks Cells, is from the great Porch also, wherein by
winding staires you ascend to the Priors vpper Cells, and other chambers and cocklofts beside, all couered with Lead. The Priors lower habi∣tation is an excellent building, all vaulted and archt, exhibiting diuers Histories of holy Scrip∣ture, which are included in artificiall Crownes and studds wrought with flowers, the pauement also is checquered with white and black Marble. The Priors vpper Cell is built toward the North West, on both sides of which are the Cells of the other Monkes. The Chamber, or Dormi∣tory where the Nouices lodge, ioynes to the Monkes Cells. The Monkes beds are all in a row ouer the Wardrobe and Refectory. We come now to the Library, which is seated aboue the chiefe entrance to the Monastery. It is one hundred fourescore and fiue foot long, and two and thirty foot broad, in whose arched roofe are the representations of diuers Arts and Histo∣ries; to which place is adioyned another roome for the vse of the Library. The Library it selfe is distinguished into three partitions. In the first and principall are painted and delineated all the Arts and faculties; and at the foot of euery ones picture, all the bookes of that facultie, marshalled in seemely order, all gilt, and of the same binding. Here is to bee seene a great parchment booke, wherein are exactly expressed in their proper co∣lours, all kind of liuing creatures which are knowne to be in the world. The other partition containes nothing but an∣cient Manuscripts of Diuinity, in Latine, Greeke,
and Hebrew, with the pictures of their seuerall Authors set before them. Likewise the third roome is furnished onely with Manuscripts of diuers faculties and languages, the Authors whereof are in like manner expressed to the life. Let vs come in the next place to describe the Colledge, and the Kings Palace. These two take vp the North part of the building. Their Porch or entrance, is an open Gallery which lyes before the Church, right ouer against the great Porch of the Monastery. To this Porch is ioyned another, by which the Youth which apply themselues to learning, passe daily into a little roome to heare Mattens and Vespers. This place is shut vp with three brazen grates. In the great Court separa∣ting the Colledge from the Monastery, is a com∣mon passage to the Schooles, where are taught all Arts, but especially Law, Physick, and Diui∣nity. This place hath its peculiar Courts, and Cloy∣sters, and Galleries, to one of which adioynes the Refectory of the Colledge with its Porch. Neere the Porch stands the Kitchen, betweene its pro∣per Court, & the Court of the common Schoole, to which is ioyned the Childrens Schoole, and their Refectory. On the Northside thorow a narrow gate and entry, is a passage to the Kings Palace. In the Porch or entrance, are three Man∣sions, or Offices with their Courts, built partly for those which ouersee the purueiance of corne and victuals, and partly for the vse of the Kitchin.
These houses are ioyned together for the seruice of diuers tables. By the same Porch is a way to a faire roome, where the Nobles of the Kings bed-chamber, the Captaine of the Guard, with others of Noble ranke and quality dine and sup daily. This way also you may passe to the Galleries, and other of∣fices belonging to diet and workmanship. Those Galleries round about containe other chambers both aboue, and below. On the same side is ano∣ther Portall, by which they passe from the Pa∣lace to the lower Quire, Church, Colledge, and Monastery. Neere this gate is a walke where the Kings Watch, and other officers vse to meete. Toward the Eastside are lodgings for Ambassa∣dors, which reach to the great Porch, and run out as farre as the Palace. In the same Court are o∣ther houses for the Kings owne vse, and from hence by a Gallery thorow a stately Portall you enter into the Kings owne lodgings, built behind the Chappell, where you meet with an open Court, with Porches and Cloysters. On the West side next the high Altar is another Gate, where∣by the King passes to the Monastery, the Col∣ledge, and other offices of the Court. The Kings Porch lookes towards the Northside of the Church. Hereupon the Church wall is curiously painted the famous battell of Higuervela, wherein King Iohn the second ouerthrew the Moores and Saracens of Granado. Which picture represents the story most exactly, and to the life, and shewes both the order and manner of their fight, with
the seuerall habits and weapons both of Horse and Foote which were then in vse. This picture was drawne from the first copy, which was made at the time of the battell in a faire linnen cloth a∣boue one hundred and thirty foote long, and found since by chance in the Tower of Segouia, which History the Kings Maiesty caused to bee painted againe vpon that wall for a perpetuall re∣membrance of so noble a victory. This piece is well worth the sight. In the last place we come vnto the Garden, ly∣ing toward the East and Southpart of the buil∣ding. It reaches one hundred in breadth, and is distinguished into many pretty knots and beds, set with all kind of herbs and flowers, and wate∣red with many pleasant Springs and Fountaines. This Garden is much higher then the Orchard adioyning, and you ascend from hence thither by a walke of many staires, set with trees on both sides. There are accounted to bee aboue forty Foun∣taines of pure water within the walles of the Mo∣nastery. There are so many Closets and Keyes belong∣ing to this Monastery, that there is a speciall Of∣ficer appointed to be Master of the Keyes, which Keyes are kept in a Closet by themselues, and are esteemed to exceed some thousands. The third part of this famous Monastery of Saint Laurence, is possessed by 300. Monkes of the Order of Saint Hierome, whose yeerely Reuenues amount to aboue 35000. Spanish Ducats, and the
rest goes to the King and his family. To conclude, it is furnished with so many Halles, Parlors, Dining-roomes, Chambers, Clo∣sets, Offices, Lodgings, and other necessarie Roomes, that it may well suffice foure Kings at once to keepe their Courts in. There are certaine credible reports of men of credit and vnderstanding, that some yeeres after that King Philip the second had begun this great worke, he comming thither with the Earle of Lemos, and hauing shewed him the plot, and disclosed his purpose in the finishing of so great a work, which would amount to an incredible charge: he deman∣ded the Earle to tell him freely what he thought of the Worke. The Earle stoutly, and with a no∣ble spirit, answered the King, saying; Your Maie∣stie, as you are the greatest Monarch of Christen∣dome, so are you reputed the wisest among Kings: now considering the great charge that your Maiesty is at in your warres in Italy, in France, and the Low-Countries, with the Great Turke, and elsewhere: together with your ordi∣nary and extraordinary expences, and the likeli∣hood of warres with the Queene of England. All these things considered; it would bee a blemish to your wisedome in the World, If your Maie∣stie should goe forward with this Building: and the charges will make you sinke before it bee finished. The King replied notwithstanding all his wars and other charges, Hee would goe on with this; and hoped by the grace of God to see it finished,
to take pleasure and comfort in it in his life, the which hee did, and enioyed it seeuen yeeres, and that after his death it should bee a Receptacle for his bones, and likewise for the Kings that should succeed him; to be for a Court in their liues, and for their Funerall after their deaths. Likewise it is crediblely reported, that when the worke was finished, and the Officers brought the Booke of accounts, the totall of the Charges was twentie seuen Millions of Duckats; which amounteth in our money to Nine Millions of Poundes. The King (hearing the Totall) said, I haue taken great care many yeeres and troubled my Head much heretofore to haue that finished. I will now trouble my head no longer with the Charges wherefore he commanded the Booke of accounts to be cast into the fire.
A BRIEFE RELA∣TION OF CERTAINE DEMONICALL STRATA∣GEMS OF THE SPANISH Inquisition, exercised on diuers En∣glish Gentlemen of late times, now liuing in England in the yeere, 1620. IN the Court of Madrid was ap∣prehended a worthy and dis∣creet Gentlemen, then, and as yet fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, Master Henry Roe, who went ouer with the Lord Ashton, as his seruant in his embassage to Spaine. Who (desirous of the spanish tongue as also to view the vniuersitie of Sallaman∣ca) departed with leaue from the Embassadour, to reside for some space there. But not long after, being importuned by Master Charles Maynard brother to my Lord Maynard, and Master Edward Filmer sonne to Sir Edward Filmer then, at Ma∣drid to suruey other parts of Spaine as Granado, Cordonath and Sciuill. For the effecting of which teadious iourney (some 300. english miles) retur∣ned some insupportable brasse mony by a Iesuite
brother then to the gouernour of Madrid, to re∣ceiue it of him at his arriuall there. Thus depar∣ting from Sallamanca, came to Madrid to my Lord Embassadours house, and some 3. weekes after his comming went at the day appointed to the Go∣uernours house to receiue his money, and because he was not well experienced in the brasse coyne; tooke with him a seruant to on Master Prinn, an English Merchant. Now there stood readie at the Gouernors house a familiar of the Spanish In∣quisition, who saluted Master Roe very courte∣ously, and asked him if he were not the Gentle∣man that was to receiue such a summe of money of his Master; and said that his Master comman∣ded him to attend his comming, and that the mo∣ney was readie some halfe a dozen houses off, If he pleased to take paines to goe thither. Master Roe little fearing any treacherie went with this fellow, who by his apparell seemed Hombre de bien. They come quickly to a faire house; where the familiar carries M. Roe into an vpper roome, where were some sixteene todos vestidos de negro con capas Iespadas. There was only one in a gowne, who seemed to bee the chiefe amongst them; and the Master of the house, he very kindly salutes Master Roe, asked him if he were not such a Gen∣tleman that should receiue such money, and where he lay. Master Roe all this while fearing nothing, pluckes out his bills of Exchange to r∣ceiue his money, and tells him that he lay in the English Embassadours house: hee asketh him a∣gaine and againe of this last point; Master Roe still
answered him as before. Whereupon hee for the present leaues Master Roe, & consults (aside in the same roome) with some of his fellowes, and comes againe to Master Roe, & tels him that he must haue patience, and that he was taken Prisoner by the spanish Inquisition. A second (with a great deale of complementall grauitie) tooke his sword. A third pickt his pockets, emptying him of all his money and papers. A fourth brings a smith vnto him, to fetter his legges with weightie Iuyues. A fift was inquisitiue to know if he had any riding clothes to trauell in: who told him he had at the Embassadours house, which made them shake their heads in token of feare to fetch them thence. Heere they deteined him from two of the Clock in the afternoone, till eleuen (or thereabouts) at night: which time they set him sidewayes (by reason of his fettered legges) on a Mule: attended by a guard of some forty in number, who brought him safe out of the towne on his iourney; and then the greater part of them returned to Ma∣drid. But the first place I rested in was called, Torede Ladronis, in English, the Towre of Theeues (where the Captaine of the Guard comforted him, but withall in delusion, tould him that hee should be eased of his fetters the next day) and from thence they continued their iourney to Vallidolid, where on the way they met with a flemmish Gentleman riding to Madrid, one acquainted with Master Roe; who perceiuing him in this plight, spake to him; but the Guard perhibited Master Roe to haue any conference
with him onely thus much hee spake in Eng∣lish to him, that hee desired him to informe the Embassadour how and in what manner hee met him, so they posted him to Vallidolid, where they brought him to the inquisition house, where he was more fully examined of the Segnior inqui∣sitors of the occasion of his apprehension, for what cause hee was brought thither; laying no∣thing to his charge, neither indeed could they, enioining him to acknowledge the reason where∣of himselfe was ignorant; they bid him examine his conscience, to guesse or thinke what it was might bring him thither, protesting that they were impartiall and vpright Iudges, the protec∣tors and rulers as free from corruption, as prone to equitie; thus with much Grauitie was hee di∣uers times examined: For his lodging it was somewhat homely, his diet bare, his restraint close to the deniall of the sight of any one, but made more miserable by the company of two other prisoners with him, who were sometimes examined by the inquisitors, what they thought their fellow was in for, what his discourse was among them: which Master Roe requited, when the inquisitors demanded him what they discour∣sed of, and for what reason hee thought them there detained: who told them he could not tell. Not long after they enquired of him, If he would haue an Interpreter of the English Colledges to come vnto him to Interpret his intentions, and to conferre with with him in matters of Religion, which hee seriously denied, auerring hee had ra∣ther
commit his life into the hands of Strangers, euen such as they were, then into the hands of English Iesuites, or Fugitiues, who knew them more maliciously addicted to their owne Coun∣trey, then any Forraine person whatsoeuer; not vnlike the runagate Turks, who cannot brooke their owne Nation, by reason they obiect vnto them their owne shame: and the reason of this his detestation of their conference was in that he suspected one Father Foster an English Iesuite, to haue beene the contriuer of his imprisonment, in that hee had discoursed with that Iesuite in the Embassadors house, in matters of Religion. But fearing his violent detention by the inquisition, I will discouer the discouery of it; as also what became of the Merchants Seruant. The flemish Gentleman who met him on his Iourney, inform∣ed my Lord Ashton in what manner hee had seene Master Roe; vpon the which the Embassador went to the Inquisitor Generall to know the reason of his imprisonment; who carried himselfe as one ignorant of the cause or person, but being solici∣ted and importuned, at last confest he was sent to Inquisition to Vallidolid for some hainous matters concerning points of Religion: The Inquisitor Generall vnderstanding that the Embassador knew of Master Roes detention; now caused the Merchants Seruant to be set at liberty, who all this while was kept close in the same house where Master Roe was apprehended, lest that he might disclose the conueiance of this Gentleman. Of these vnlawfull deuises, the Embassador informed
his Soueraigne King Iames of pious memory; who forthwith writ Letters to his Maiesty of Spaine, the subiect whereof was for his deliuery; Trinity Colledge in Cambridge preferred an humble peti∣tion to the King, in testimony of his modest de∣portment, and vpright conuersation amongst them; and partly for this reason, in that certaine of the Spanish crue and faction had suggested to his Maiesty, that he was a turbulent factious Puri∣tane, and therefore rightly punished by God in this imprisonment: thus diswading (as much as in them lay) the King to write any Letters in his behalfe. These petitions were deliuered to his Ma∣iestie, by the Noble Earle of Holland, besides his Mother, Brothers, Kindred, more particularly Sir Thomas Roe, and Sir Henry Mildra were dayly petitioners to his Maiestie. My Lord Ashton, was since suitor to his Maiestie of Spaine, to grant King Iames suite, Henry Wotton then Embassadour importuned the Embassadour for Venenan at Ma∣drid by letters of the same subiect alledging his detention might example to surprize and with∣hold any secretarie of any Embassadour whoso∣euer. The Lord of Bristoll with a passionate zeale aboue all the rest dayly sollicited in the behalfe of his deliuerie, the continuall redeemer of his di∣stressed countrey men, if at any time they stood in neede of him; which feruencie of his proceeded not from any priuate interest, but his inbred affe∣ction to his nation, still profering to be a prop and pillar in the common good of his countrey, then to aduance his particular estate: but to returne to
my inquisition; Master Roe could not haue his li∣berty, till Padre Maestro, came ouer into Spaine, and solicited the businesse, and then he was soone released, as yet ignorant by any information of theirs of the reason of his detention; this Gen∣tleman being demanded of his Ferriman as hee passed the Riuer Eron, trauailing out of Spaine in∣to France; when he intended to returne, answe∣red in the phrase of an English Spirit, Nunce sino a lucōquostu doespana. Not long after was imprisoned one Master Scott, a Yorkshire Gentleman appre∣hended at Madrid and sent to the inquisition of Toledo (as it is coniectured) in that he had disputed with an Irish dominican Frier, Father Thomas in matters of Religion; where his lodging and diet was very hard according to his owne relation to his Maiestie King Iames, but through the interces∣sion of the Lord of Bristoll was deliuered. Master Pryma an English Merchant succeeded him in im∣prisonment at Toledo, vpon no other true occasion but because he endeuored a Monopoly of English Merchandize to the impouerishment of other Spanish Merchants, released also by the Lord of Bristoll, but banished the Countrey. At Siuill they clapt vp one Master Victorine Cheuerill freed by the importunitie of the same Lord: But their happynesse was the match with Spaine was then proceeding and the Lord of Bristoll that Noble Personage Embassador of Spaine, for otherwise they might haue shared in the miseries of these that follow, as Master Gurganey a true and learned Protestant who died vnder the Spanish inquisition
and a Scottish Gentleman, A. who was rackt in in the Inquisition house at Malaga, to the distorti∣on of each particular ioynt now a cripple in Char∣ter house, and Master Mosley of Rome who hath beene detained in that Inquisition house these ten yeeres and like to expire there. And others, as for example, Master H. brother to the Earle of L. who hauing viewed the greater parts of Europe, France, Spaine, Italy, Constantinople, Greece, retur∣ning to Italy, and so for England, was there appre∣hended after this manner. The Gouernor of the first Towne he was to passe through, had a great desire to a Grecian horse of his which he brought from thence; which hee intended to present to his brother the L. in so much he requested it of him, but the Gentleman not so foolishly courte∣ous as to depart from him; by his denyall so in∣censed the Gouernour, that his reuenge laid him close in the Inquisition; for the effecting of which, he subornd his man by bribery to con∣fesse his Masters Religion, of which hee being once assured, hee made his man a cloake for his knauery ensuing. For hereupon hee sent him to Rome prisoner as an hereticke and spie; in the meane time kept his horse, while the poore Gen∣tleman all his iourney had his legges chained to∣gether vnder the horse his belly, and euery night had no other lodging, but a roome vnder some steaming priuie; at which inquisition house they kept him for fiue yeeres vntill they had workt him at last to receiue their own religion and then released him. But notwithstanding as yet ielous
of him kept two yeeres longer at the English Col∣ledge at Rome, to trie if hee were well grounded in his Catholicke Religion; at which time they dismissed him, and restored his horse vnto him who is now in England a strong Catholike; another example of their popish tiranny Father Barnes a Benedictine frier late Chapline to the Prince of Portugall at Paris, who writing a booke against the Popes supremacy, and the allegeance that Subiects vnto their Soueraignes. And making for England to prime it was the night before his intended voiage vpon some notice giuen vnto the Iesuites surprised at the Prince his house by a war∣rant from the chiefe secretary of state, which they procured by corruption and by an Act contrary to the Lawes of France and all Nations; hurried to Cambray in the Archdutches her Dominions, where hee was put into the Castle, against the day of his triall: from thence conueyed to Milford Castle, and afterwards to Rome to the In∣quisition house, it being impossible for any man to know, whether hee, or any that are once there, be aliue or dead. The Prince of Portugall infor∣med the Court of Parliament of France of this act, who wondring at the insolency of the fact, demanded him of the Infanta and the Pope, but to no effect; a plot exercised very lately in the yeere 1627. Spalatta, that turne coat of Religion, puft more with ambition then corpulency, being promised by Gundomar a Cardinals Cap at his ar∣riuall at Rome, and in short succession and progresse of time a tripple Crowne; who instansed in Pope
Marcellinus, who offering sacrifices to the Hea∣then gods, was deposed; yet on his recantation was againe elected, cherished the Bishop not to feare, but hee might come to the like dignities vpon the like submission, especially in that his fault to reuolt from the Vicar of God was not quite so erronious, as to deny God and his Saui∣our. Vpon these and the like gulling perswasions, hauing his pardon sent him into England, went to Rome with two Monkes his Chaplaines to fetch his Cap, where waiting for it the space of a tweluemoneth, to the expence of the incredible masse of money and plate hee conueyed out of England, but missing of it, turned Protestant a∣gaine, or at least pretended one, whetting his tongue and penne against his Holinesse, vpon which reason he was apprehended by the Inqui∣sition, and put into their Denne, where not long after hee was poysoned, which made him swell twise as bigge as he was before. A fit death for such a one; his body was taken from the house of death, and burnt in the fire for an heretike, which being consumed, the ashes thereof were scattered in the aire, as vnworthy that his atomes should defile their Land. At which sight his Chaplens being present, loth to taste of the like sauce, fled to Gundomar to Madrid, claiming his promise concerning their protection, which for a while he performed, allowing them for his credit eight Rialls a day: but this lasted not long, for soone after the Benedictines were neuer seene. The Statesman, Gundomar, was requited in the
like sort, notwithstanding the manifold▪ faithfull seruices he had done for the Church of Rome, as his sollicitations against Sir Water Raleigh, his Ca∣techizing of Spalata, his caetera, for by way of grati∣tude, he had, as it is reported, giuen him a Spanish figge; or else, though euer a merry man, yet at last died for very griefe. To conclude with an example of tyranny more vnnaturall then cruell, one Philip the second, vpon suspition that his on∣ly sonne and heire (by his second wife) was an he∣retike, or had too familiar conference with the Protestant Princes, cast him into the Inquisition house, and being sentenced by the Inquisitors to die, the sentence was confirmed by the bloody fathers hand and seale, hauing no other libertie allowed him, then to chuse either strangling, or bleeding to death by the cutting of his veines; which last he chose, saying not long before his expiring, O vnhappy sonne, but more vnhappy father: this was effected priuately. Thus if the Princes themselues haue vndergone the torture of an Inquisition, nay, death it selfe, we may assure our selues, that no forraine subiect shall be deliue∣red from these Deuils and that Hell, if once ta∣ken, vntill the houre of his vtmost breath.
A RELATION OF THE FOVNDING OF A MILITARY ORDER in Rome, to wit, of the immaculate conception of our Lady, the blessed Virgin, by his Holinesse the Pope our Lord VRBAN the eighth. A Coppy of two Letters written from Rome to two Prebends of the Cathedrall Church at Seuill. Most Holy MARY our Lady conceiued without Originall sinne. WHat I writ you by the last Poste of our expectation, it hath pleased God hath now taken good effect, though it can scarce be beleeued, what op∣position there hath been to hinder the Foundation of this Military Religion, to bee
stiled with the glorious title of Immaculate con∣ception of our Lady. The Duke of Neuers the se∣cond of. Ianuary, 1614. made his solemne vow, and his Holinesse gaue and confirmed vnto him his habillement of his Order, which hereupon many of those Nobles and Gentlemen, who had formerly worne it for deuotion and respect to him, now weare it for Religion. This Order may be as well qualified and approued of, as any of the three in Spaine, Santiago, Alcantara, and Ca∣latraua. The Constitutions and Statutes of the same are now framing by our Lord Vrban the eight, and being finished, must first be presented vnto the view in congregation of eight Lords Cardinals, who are appointed to contriue the af∣faires of this Religious Military Order, and re∣duce them to those of the Order of Saint Francis. There are here present three Generals, or Pro∣uincials of theirs, and it hath been thought fit that assemblies should be held at our Conuent, where the Duke and the said Generals, with another al∣so of Capuchins hath been Brother to the Pope, and for this respect the Duke desired it: and after∣ward it was thought by a more indifferent part to haue the meeting at our Conuent. The Statutes and Constitutions are now vpon framing, to bee presented to the Cardinals at their meeting, and so accordingly to bee confirmed by the Pope. And all this seemes to bee a league which God hath ordained, and made against the enemies of the holy Catholike faith. It will proue the most vniuersall Millitary order of Religion, that hath
euer beene knowne in the World: It sweareth Feallty and obedience to the holy Apostolicall Sea of Rome, the exaltation and aduancement of the holy Cause, the extirpation of Heresies, and all of them take oathes of obedience to their se∣uerall Princes in all that befits royall Subiects to doe: And that they will alwaies indeauour to keepe peace and vnity amongst Christian Prin∣ces. After this, the Pope vpon the eight and twentieth day of the said Saint Agnes, seconded, and new confirmed the Robes, and Habillements of the order of the Duke, the Oath, and form thereof was ministred by the Fryer Father Toro in this manner: Obedience to the Pope and Ma∣ster, that shall be of the Christian warfare of the immaculate conception of our Lady. The Title is this, Militia Christiana immaculatae conceptionis Sanctissimae Virginis Mariae. That is, the Christian warfare of the immaculate conception of our most blessed or holy Lady. Their purpose also is, that the Nobles weare this Habit of the Or∣der, according as those Countreyes which haue the other Military Orders. But that the Staple of the Religion it selfe beplanted in some Iland or place of strength, which they thinke to gaine by landing in some Enemies Countrey: For they are well prouided with Ammunition and Armes, and good tall shiping for the purpose. The Insti∣tutors or Founders of this Religion are three Ca∣tholicke Princes: First the Count Altar, a great man in Germany, and very rich in Estate; The Duke of Mantua, a great Potentate in Italy. In
France the Duke of Neuers, as they say, Lord of two hundred thousand Duckats yeerely Rent, who hath seene the first moouer of this Diuine Machine, and in eight yeeres that hee hath em∣ployed to compasse it, hath spent aboue foure hundred thousand Duckats. Of late yeeres hee hath spent exceedingly in furnishing out Em∣bassadors to most Christian Princes, vpon whose good liking and approbation he hath his founda∣tion. And he shewed Father Toro and me a letter from our deceased King Philip the third. A nota∣ble matter of toyle and trouble, as being Gods Instrument for effecting so great a worke; his Diuine Maiesty worke all for the best, the same preserue you also. I doe assure you for these fif∣teene dayes space, wee haue scarse had leisure for foode or sleepe, for visiting of Great men and Cardinalls, drawing of Petitions, and opposing all Contradictions. God saue all, and preserue you also. Rome the eight of February, 1624. Don Mateo Vazques de Lecca.
The Coppy of the second Letter. THe Knights of this Military Order haue for Badge a blew sattin Crosse, shaped much like the Crosse of Alcantara, though somewhat broder, the middest of it is embroyde∣red with golden rayes, and for the Crosse on the top of it is placed our Lady, set out like the Wo∣man in the Apocalyps, Amicta sole, clad with the Sunne, and crowned with twelue Starres, and trampling on the Moone in a blew Mantle, and about it a Saint Francis his girdle, holding an In∣fant in her armes, with a Scepter in the right hand, and this is entitled, The Christian Warfare, Protectresse of the immaculate Conception of the Virgin our Lady. All Nations come into this Order, and all the World will in time. The Duke of Ne∣uers shall be Master of it, who hath bestowed on the Religion (besides what it was formerly en∣dowed with) thirty thousand Duckats of yeerely reuenew, besides eight Galeons, or tall ships of his, which as at this time haue serued the most Christian King of France before Rochell. And the Catholike King of Spaine our Lord Philip the 4. whom God long prosper, by the ioynt consent and good liking of his Holinesse, and all Christi∣an Princes, is Protector of the Order. The Title of it is, Milita Christiana immaculats conceptionis Virginis Mariae▪ and it is also dedicated for the
chasing of Rouers and Pyrates by Sea, as also for defence of Frontires against Turkes and Moores, and is subordinate in all things to the Holy Apo∣stolicall See, and our Blessed Father Pope Vrbane the eighth hath confirmed it, and will assist with his Gallies to the celestiall enterprize, and con∣quest of Ierusalem, which he hath long aimed at, and all Rome is much cheared and delighted with it. The Order was first set on foot in Ger∣many, in the yeere 1614. at what time wee newly began to defend, and preach this immaculate and soueraigne mystery, without knowing of either of vs, thankes be to God Almighty for the same. Let me onely tell you, that if we had gone from Siuill to Rome, and spent the eight yeeres which we haue done there, for no more thē the effecting of this businesse, it were a Iourney and time well imployed. For you are to know, that although this holy Image, with the sacred ornaments, were all of the Conception, and of no other my∣stery, yet they there demanded no more, then that this Military Religion should be established by the title of Christian Warfare, in protection of our Lady, without further addition. And about the time of confirmation the Arch-Deacon Don-Matheo, and I knew this, for all others were confi∣dent that it was of the Conception, with the a∣foresaid Armes and Ornaments, and wee turmoy∣led vp and downe, and spake with the Duke of Neuers, who acknowledged what wee put to him (as being a most courteous Gentleman, and vsed vs with all Noblenesse, telling vs indeed, that he
had not obserued so much, but that now at last he remembred, that at the first meeting, which was at Vienna in Germany, vpon the erecting of this Or∣der, it fell out to bee vpon the eighth day of De∣cember, which was also the day of the Concepti∣tion, and that now he called it perfectly to mind. This businesse hath once more begun to bee in Treaty, aud wee haue all gone thorow-stitch so well, that the Military Order of the holy Con∣ception is confirmed vnder that Title, and by all the Votes, and Suffrages of great Lords and Car∣dinals, and also of our Lord the Pope his Holi∣nesse. I hope in God we shall send a Bull by the next Poste, that may affoord much comfort to that populous and pious City of Siuill, and all Christendome besides. Let men oppose it, and doe all they can or please, yet God Almighty will doe as hee best pleaseth; he hath made all things both in Heauen and Earth according to his good pleasure. His Diuine Maiesty, as hee is able, and to my desire, haue you in his protection. Salute from me all our Friends in the Lord. The Slaue of the most blessed Virgin, Doctor Bernardo de Toro. Rome Febr. as in the former Letter. 1624. FINIS.
