25337 99846963 11965
An Heptameron of Ciuill Discourses. Containing: The Christmasse Ex∣ercise of sundrie well Courted Gen∣tlemen and Gentlewomen. In whose behauiours, the better sort, may see, a represētation of their own Vertues: And the Inferiour, may learne such Rules of Ciuil Go∣uernmēt, as wil rase out the Blemish of their basenesse: Wherin, is Renowned, the Vertues, of a most Honou∣rable and braue mynded Gentleman. And herein, also, [as it were in a Mirrour] the Vnmaried may see the Defectes whiche Eclipse the Glorie of MARIAGE: And the wel Maried, as in a Table of Housholde Lawes, may cull out needefull Preceptes to establysh their good Fortune. A Worke, intercoursed with Ciuyll Pleasure, to reaue tediousnesse from the Reader: and garnished with Morall Noates to make it profitable, to the Regarder. The Reporte, of George Whetstone. Gent. Formae, nulla fides. AT LONDON. Printed by Richard Iones, at the Signe of the Rose and the Crowne, neare Holburne Bridge. 3. Feb. 1582.
Ad Mecoenatem, in laudem Aucthoris: CARMEN HEROICVM. MEcoenas proceres inter celeberrime nostros, Et Clario dilecte deo, castis{que} Camaenis: Accipe Pierios tibi quos sacrauit honores, Troianouantaei vocalis Musa Georgij. Non Apinas Tricasue canit, sed conscia laudis Musa vacat studijs grauioribus: arcta{que} iunctae Conditione pari commendat foedera vitae; Coniugij{que} refert incommoda disparis Aucthor. Nec solum haec: sed vera ducis praeconia magni Pandit, & Aonio tollit super aethera plectro. Diuisit{que} operis seriem per tempora, miro Ordine, iuditio{que} pari: septem{que} dierum (Iudice me) certant cum Castilione labores. Et quae tam paruo descripsit Nymphia libro, (Crede mihi) tanto non sunt indigna Patrono. IOAN: BOTREVICVS.
To the right Honourable, Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, Captaine of the Queenes Maiesties Garde: Viz∣chamberlaine to her Highnesse, & of her Maiesties moste Honourable Priuie Connsell: GEORGE WHETSTONE, wissheth long continuance of Honor, Health and Happynesse. RIght Honourable, in the In∣terpretatiō of the wise: PARRHA∣SIVS, in painting of INGRATI∣TVDE and ENVIE, like Feends: rather performed a worke of Iudge∣ment, then Arte: for so soyled with infamie are these passions as hell ought to be their harbour, & not the heart of man. All other defeactes of the minde haue their cause of nature, or colour frō reason. PRIDE proceedeth from mans ouerweening, of his owne ex∣cellencie: the Sourse of AMBITION, is the glory and reuerence giuen vnto Aucthoritie. ANGER, and reuenge, groweth from the iniurie of others. But these two yokefellowes INGRATITVDE and ENVIE, doe degenerate from kinde, and maske without visard of excuse. The other pursue their e∣nemies and seeke to breake but the barres of their ad∣uauncemēt: but the one of these woundeth his friend, whom he ought to honour, and the other reprocheth
vertue, whō the wicked reuerence: And least, Time, the true exposer of Secrets, reproche me, as a Fosterer of both these dampnable vices. Of Ingratitude, in not acknowledging, many receiued fauours, of a Right noble Italian Gentleman. Of Enuie, in smouldring his most cleare vertues: who with a zealous affection, oftentimes in my hearing, made his tongue, an hono∣rable Trumpet to sounde the bright renowne of her Maiesties excellencie (as he sayd, and I beleeue vppon earth) the fountaine of grace and goodnes: who vsed her sacred name, with such a reuerent regard, as in his behauiour, I noted the full consideration of a dutifull subiect, denized by the eternall fame, of her Highnes deuine Grace. So that desirous to erect some Memorial Monumēt of his worthines, I haue takē vpō me to be the Secre∣tarie of a few, of many his precious vertues: Which I humbly present vnto your honor, with a hand redy to doe you effectuall seruice: and a tongue confessing, that you shall herein beholde, the least part of those glorious giftes, which eternize your name, and binde the generall multitude, to honour your Counter∣fet, for whose benefite, I haue likewise committed to memorie, the ciuill disputations, and speaches of sun∣dry well Courted Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, his Guestes, during the time of my intertainment, with Segnior Phyloxenus (for so couertly I name him, least in giuing him his true honorable Tytles in England, I should make a passage for Enuie, to iniurie him in Italy) whose exercises, if my penne hath not maimed them in the reporting, may be a president of behaui∣ours to the indifferent well qualited Gentleman and
Gentlewoman: Besides, a true Anatomie of the in∣conueniences, which eclypse, & of the vertues which expresse the glory of Marriage: an estate both hono∣rable and diuine: honorable, in that, she is imbraced of all men: diuine, because in the last yeare of their life she (in dispite of death) maketh men to liue a new terme, in their children and posteritie: not vnlike to a leafe fallen Rose, which in his stalke hath many ten∣der buddes: Which bare report of mine: I reuerently protect vnder the Garde, of your honors regarded vertues: A bare report, I Christen it: for, whatsoeuer is praise worthy in this Booke, belongeth to Segnior Phyloxenus and his Courtly fauourers: and what is worthlesse, is the blame of my imperfect iudgement: So that, besides the protection, I am humbly to craue, that your Honor will receiue whatsome-euer is due to them, with a fauorable countenance, and to par∣don the vnsufficiencie of their Trowchman: with an imagination, that his Present, is the testimonie of a duetiful affection: Who zealously prayeth, that your vertues maye haue as full power ouer Enuie, as they haue Aucthoritie to command the wil∣ling mindes of the best inclined dispositi∣ons: Of which number, it may please you of fauour, though not of merit, to account me. ¶ Your Honors most bounden, GEORGE WHETSTONS.
Vnto the friendly Reader, Wealthe and welfare. FRiendly Reader, I present thee heere (as I thinke) a profitable, vnpolyshed la∣bour: For, he that is the Troucheman of a Straungers Tongue, may well de∣clare his meaning, but yet shall marre the Grace of his Tale: And, therefore, Themistocles, the noble Captayne and Philosopher of A∣thens, compareth suche forced Speaches, to Tapistrie Hangings rowled vp: which, beyng open, appeare beau∣tifull: and fowlded, reserue their Uertue, but lose their showe: But I expect (somwhat) better euent, then may an Interpreter, that is bownd to a present Reporte: for my Respit, hath ben sufficient to cōsider of Segnior Phy∣loxenus, and his honorable companies vertues: and (least by rash acquitall of their fauours, I should do iniurie, to their reputation) I haue, with well aduised Iudgement, bethought mée, of suche memorable Questions and Deui∣ces, as I heard and sawe presented, in this most noble Italian Gentlemans Pallace, the Christmas tweluemo∣neths past: and aunswerable to my weake capassitie, haue exposed yt same, in such sort, as if thou art not too curious, may delight, and content thée: and if not too carelesse, may directe, and benefit thée: And to satisfie thée, wherin: I giue thée friendly knowledge, that Segnior Philoxenus reuerēt regard of the Quéenes Maiesties high Uertues, is a Pre∣sident for thée: with a dutiful, and vnfained heart, to loue, feare, and obay her Highnesse, from whome, next vnder
God, thou receiuest such swéete blessinges: as through the whole world, her excellencie is renowned, and thy pros∣peritie enuied. By this noble Gentlemans ciuill inter∣tainment of strangers, thou mayste perceyue with what Garland, Courtisie, is principally crowned: By the ciuill behauiours, of Soranso, Dondolo, Bergetto, and other Gentlemen herein named, thou haste a President of gouernment, which will commend thée: and by well re∣garding their spéeches, thou shalt finde a discréete methode of talke, méete for a Gentleman. The lyke benefit, shall Gentlewomen receiue, in Imitating, of Madona Aurelia (Quéene of yt Christmas pleasures) Maria Belochi, Lucia Bella, Franceschina Santa, and the rest of the wel qualited Gentlewomen. Besides, a number of other Morall docu∣mentes, néedefull reprehensions, and witty sayinges, to perfect the commendation, both of a Gentleman, and Gen∣tlewomā. (Courteous Reader) thou haste heare, the hono∣rable institution of Marriage, so perfectly Anatomed, as a verye weake Iudgement, may sée the causes, which make Houshould quarrelles, to resemble Hell. Againe, the mā, which is willing to liue happily, may here learne such directions, and lawes, as will chaunge his priuate house, into a Paradice on earth. If ciuill and Morall pleasures, withall these benefites, may make thée intertaine thys booke and report well of the Aucthor. I assure thée thou shalt be pleased, and I satisfied. But if thou makest thy tongue, enemie to thy owne reputation, thou mayest de∣tract, but not reproche the worke: Iniure, but not hurt the writer, for both will liue, and laugh such Callumnia∣tors to scorne, when either are readie to doe the discrete Reader seruice. Some will (perchaunce more of enuie to heare a stranger commended, then of pittie to bemone my hard fortune, or fowle vsage) say, I haue as iust cause to complaine, of iniuries receiued at Roane, Rome, and Na∣ples, as to commend the vertues and good intertainment, of Signior Philoxenus: But to giue such Suggestioners a
double good example, both of patience and thankefulnesse: I heare protest, that as these iniuries begunne, with my hard fortune, so they ended, no wayes in my discredite: And as I forgeue the causes of my mishaps, so scorne I, to recount them, to receiue amendes, in a little pittie. But, for that they, and all such as vew my Report, may learne of me to bee gratefull for receiued benefites: I make it knowen: That this trauell, is Segnior Philoxe∣nus due: And I still his debter, and so shall remayne du∣ring my life: reseruing a good affection, to bestow on such as receiue his Uertues: and my paynes to profite and cō∣mend them selues. And in my opinion, it is iust they doe so: Wherfore, to giue a disgrace to ceremonies, gentle Reader I ende: as I hope to finde thée mine. Thine assured friend, George Whetston.
T. W. Esquier, In the com∣mendation of the Aucthor, and his neede∣full BOOKE. EUen as the fruictfull Bee, doth from a thousand Flowers, Swéet Honie draine, & layes it vp, to make the profit ours So, Morall Whetstone, to his Countrey doth impart, A Worke of worth, culd frō yt wise, wt Iudgemēt, wit & art No Stage Toy, he sets foorth, or thundring of an Hoast, But his rare Muse, a passage makes, twixt burnyng fier & frost Suche Uertues as beséeme, the worthy Gentles breast, In proper colours he doth blaze, by followyng of the best: The Uertue is but rare, and Uice not yet in vse, That modestly he not commends, or mildely shewes th'abuse Such matter in good wordes, these few leaues doo reueale, Unforst, or strainde, as yt it séemes, a naturall common weale. Of forced Marriage, he dooth shew the foule euent, When Parents ioyne, the Childrens hands, before their harts And how these fortunes eke, in wedlock séeldom proue, (consēt Vnequall choice, in birth, in yéeres: and Childrens hasty loue. Yet he with learned prooffes, this sacred state dooth raise, (As it deserues) aboue the Skies, in wordes of modest praise. More, euery Page, héere dooth present, the Readers eyes, With such regardes, as help the weake, & doo confirme ye wise. Which néedelesse were, to blase, in prayses to allure: The holy Bush, may wel be sparde, where as the Wine is pure.
Verses translated out of La¦tine, and deliuered by VRANIE, with a Siluer Pen, to ISMARITO, in a Deuice, contayned in the seuenth daies Exercise: placed in this Forefront, for the excellencie of PANDORA. THe mighty IOVE beholding from aboue, The mistes of sinne. which from the earth arose, In angry moode, sent IRIS downe to mooue, Throughout the worlde, the exercise of foes, With vengeance armde: who poured downe her Ire, And with debates, set Monarchies a fyre. Whole Countries burnde, did dim the Sun with smoke The Cannon noyse, the Ayre with Thunder rent: The wounded men, with shrikes the Heauens shoke; The Temples spoyld: the'Townes to ruine went: Vnwillyng yet, to worke the worlds decay, IOVE, CYLLEN sent, in part his wrath to staye. Who hastes his charge, with winges as swift as winde, But comming to, the Region next the grounde, He could no way, for clowdie darknes finde: And fearing, in the Ocean to be drownde: He houered till, in fine, he did espie, A PHAROS light, which was a PHENIX eye. Led by this Starre, amaine he commeth downe, And footing sets, vppon a fruitfull Ile: Where liu'd a Queene, crownd with the worlds renowne Vpon whose rule, Grace, Peace, and Wealth did smyle. Her Senate, graue, her Citties, Mansions weare, For such as fled, for persecutions feare.
To whom he gaue the tokens that were sent, Faire PALLAS forme, and VENVS louely face: Sweete PITHOS tongue, and DIANS chaste consent: And of these giftes, PANDORA nam'd her Grace: And ioynes with all, IOVES blessings to the same, To make her liue, in euerlasting fame. These monsters fell, which publike order breake, Dissention, Wrath, and Tiranny, he bounde: This office done [he thought as IOVE would leake] To Heauen he hyes, and blessed leaues the grounde: Where this good Queene, and Subiects quiet lyue, When ciuill warres, her neighbor kingdomes greeue. Euen this is she, whose sacred fame is knowne, Through out the worlde, in Enuie, Feare, and Loue, Enui'd, because, she raignes in peace alone: Feared, in that, she shielded, is by IOVE: Lou'd, for desarte, whose vertues shine as bright, As twincking Stars, do in the frome night. This Siluer Pen, meete for a Virgins praise, VRANIE heere, doth ISMARITO giue: With charmed charge, this Queenes renowne to raise: As she in spight of Death, and Time may liue: Which right is hers, the labour is but thine, Then [Iudging] write, as she may seeme deuyne. Vaticinium VRANIES.
A breefe Summarie of the principall Argumentes handled, in these seuen Dayes Pleasures. 1 OF the difference betweene the Married state and the single lyfe. 2 Of the inconueniences of forced Marriages. 3 Of the inconueniences of rash Marriages. 4 Of diuers speciall poyntes concerning Marri∣age, in generall. 5 Of the inconueniences of ouer loftye, and too base Loue, in the choyce, of either Husband or Wyfe. 6 Of the inconueniences of Marriages: where there are inequalytie of yeares. 7 Of the excellencie of Marriage: with manye sounde Lawes and lawdable directions, to continue Loue betweene the Married. All which Principles, are largely intercoursed, with other Mo∣rall Conclusions of necessarie regarde. FINIS.
The first Dayes exercise. Chiefly contayning: A ciuill Contention, why∣ther, the maryed or single lyfe, is the more worthy: And after many good Reasons, alleadged on either parte, Sentence is giuen in the behalfe of Mariage. AT what tyme, the Earth dismantled A description of the dead of Winter. of her braue Attyre, lamented the ab∣sence of Dame aestas company, and that faire Phaebus in his Retrogradatiō, en∣tring the Tropique of Capricorne, and mounting in the Zodiacke, licensed na∣ked Hyemps, to powre down her wrath, vpon the face of the whole worlde: through dread of whose boysterous stormes, euery lyuing creature, by the direction of Na∣ture retired himselfe vnto his safest succour, as the Birde to his Nest, the Beast to his Couert, the Bée to his hyue, the Serpent to his hole: onely Man excepted, who (being Man by reson inlargeth the boundes of Nature, with∣in whose lymites euery other creture lyueth. beautified with a deuine spirite, and armed with reason, farre aboue the reache of Nature) scorneth to be chayned vnto any place, through the violence or iniurie of Tyme: In this dead season, suche were my Affayres, that Ne∣cessytie sent me into a Countrey farre from home, where as I was no lesse vnacquainted wt the people, then igno∣rant of the wayes: And hauing trauayled the great part of a Christmas Eue in a desart Forrest, strayed out of This was the Forrest of Ra∣uenna in Ita∣lye, (for the most part) of pine Apple trees. knowledge, I tooke me to a déepe beaten way, which pro∣mised a likelyhood to finde out some spedie Harbour: And after I had iornyed the space of an hower, in a swéete Groaue of Pyne Apple trées, mine eye fastened vpon a stately Pallace, ye brightnes wherof, glimmered through the Braunches of the younger woodde, not vnlyke the This Pallace was. 10. miles from Rauen∣na towardes the Riuer of Poo. Beames of the Sonne throughe the Crannelles of a walle, assuryng then my selfe, too receyue best Instruc∣tions,
of the better sort of people: such was my haste, as I soone arrtued at this sumptuous place: but according to ye condition of time, in Christmas, sooner to fynde a friende The custome of Christmas. feasting in the Hall, then walkinge in the Féelde: other then a few of ignoraunt peysauntes, I could perceiue no person. The delight I tooke to beholde the scituation, and curious workmanship of this Pallace, made mée so long forget the cause of my arriuall there, as in the ende one of the well qualyted Seruaunts (hauinge knowledge of my being without) in a seruisable order, came and pre∣sented mee with his Lordes curteous welcome, and re∣uerently requested mée to alight, and enter the Pallace: I which imagined this entertainment to be but an Italion curtesie, after thankes geuen, by a modest excuse, refu∣sed so great a fauour, & onely craued, to be directed the re∣diest way to Rauenna: the Seruaunt cunninglye replyed, that I could not bee receiued into the Cittie without his Lordes Bollytyne, and at this time hee sealed no mans BOLLYTINE, a warrant of health with∣out which, no man may trauell in Italy. safecundit, without knowledge, that his affayres requy∣red great haste: in so muche, as one with his importuni∣ties, and ouercome with wearynesse of Trauell, I com∣mytted my Horse, to the orderinge of my man, and ac∣companied this officious Seruant, towardes the Pal∣lace, and by the way, ouer a lardge entraunce into a faire court, I might read these two bréefes in Italion. Pisano é Forresterio. Entrate, e ben venuto. A liberall welcome. Which generall inuyting, imboldned mée so far, as I hardely marched towardes the great Hall, the Skréene wherof, was curiously fronted with clowdy Marble, sup∣ported on euery side the passadges, with stately Pillers of Geate: and ouer the thrée Portalles, stood the Images of Welcom and Bountie, the Porters. two men: the one of Allablaster Marble, bare headed, representing the vertue of welcome: the other of blewe
Marble, attyred lyke a Cooke, and by him were artifyci∣ally painted, Pheasants, Partriges, Capons, & other cost∣ly Cates, as the Figure of Bountie: At the entry of this stately Hall, I was receiued by the Lord of the Pallace, accompanied with diuers Gentlemen of good quallytie, with so ciulll and friendly intertaynment, as his beha∣uiour blazoned the true knowledge of Curtesie: before we past any further, I began to recount the Aduenture which brought me thither, and craued his honourable fa∣uour for my dispatch: Why? then (quoth Segnior Phy∣loxenus) for so (for some cause) I name ye Lord of ye Pal∣lace, I thanke your hard Fortune for arriuyng you here, to do me this honour: No hard, but happy Fortune (quoth I) if I may liue to honouryou with my effectual seruice: Well (quoth he) after your wéerie trauaile, it is more néedeful to prouide for your repose, then for a further Ior∣ney, and so lead me the way into a faire great Chamber, richly hung with Tapistrie: ye Roof wherof, was Allabla∣ster plaister, embost wt many curious deuises in gold, & in sundrie places in proper colours was ingraued his de∣uise, which was A Holly Tree, full of red Beries: & in the same, a sluttering MAVIS fast limed to the bowes, with this posie in french, Qui me nourit, me destruit: And, in verie déed, the beries of the trée féedeth this Bird, and the barke maketh Lime to fetter her. But I after∣wardes learned, Segnior Philoxenus vsed this Ensigne A couert de∣scription of desyre. as a couert description of desire: whose swéete torments nourisheth the minde, but consumeth the bodie to the graue. In this bewtifull place, I imbraced the salutati∣ons of such a braue troupe of Gentlemen, & Gentlewo∣men, as the honour of the householde might well giue en∣uie vnto some Princes Court. And least, at my first cō∣ming, I might be abashed through small acquantance, A ciuill fore∣sight meete for a Gentle∣man, Segnior Philoxenus, emboldened mee with a familiar communication, and in the ende vppon a conuenient occasion, demaunded of me the name of my Countrie?
I aunswered him, I was a Gentleman of England, vo∣luntarily exiled with a burnyng desyre, to sée the Monu∣ments of other Countries, the order of their gouernment, A necessary regard for Trauelers. and manners of the people. And are you of that blessed Ile (quoth he?) where the people liue in peace and prospery∣tie, vnder the rule of a Mayden Quéene, crowned with such deuine vertues, as the whole world may hardly con∣taine The vertues of the Quee∣nes Maiestie, maketh the Iland of Eng lande famous through out the whole Worlde. her fame. Sir (quoth I) your good testimony of her worthynesse, being a Straunger, taketh all occasion from mée (her dutiful subiect) to inlardge her renowne. O (quoth he) if Enuie durst detract her openly, as she secretlye con∣spireth her ouerthrowe, in these partes you should be dri∣uen to stop your eares, or endure a torment (to a faithfull subiect) more violent then Death. But the vertue of her Shielde, I meane her graue Senate, hath returned the Vertue stop∣peth the mou th of Enuye, But fyreth her hart with mallyce, Dartes of Enuy so thick vpon her Souldiers, as she hath no power to eclips her bright renowne, whose vertue shi∣neth in Enuies dispight as a Diamōd in an obscure place, or as the Sunne through smal passadges, into the bowels of the earth: so that happy and thrice happye are you, the Subiectes of the good Quéene of England, whose gratious gouernement, filleth your Coffers with wealth, sealeth your dores with peace, and planteth quietnesse in your Conscience: so that (blessed aboue other Nations) you liue abroad, without suspition of daunger at home: and at home fearelesse of enemies abrode. Wherefore, in honour of your Soueraigne, whose fame armeth al true knights, with an earnest desire to doo her seruice. I am glad of the meane, to bestow on you, or any of hir nation, ye affection of a friend. Sir ({quod} I) the vertue of these honorable thoughts blaseth ye true magnanimity of a noble mind, which, mea∣sureth not your fauour by the desart of others, but wt the ryaltie of your heart, & so binde thousands in recognisance The true Blazon of a noble mynd. of seruice: among which debters I desire to bee inrolled, although I can discharge but litle. After we had bestowed a smal time in these like speches, he cōmanded some of his seruantes to direct me vnto a lodging (if I pleased) to bee
dispoiled of my riding attyre: who straight waies brought mée into a Bed Chamber, so well accommodated with e∣uery necessarie pleasure, as might haue serued for the re∣pose of Cupid and his louer Ciches: hauing a fayre pro∣spect into a goodly Garden, beautified, with such rare de∣uises, as deserued to be compared with the earthly Para∣dice Tiuoly. 12. miles from Rome, where the Cardinall of Esta hath a most rare Garden. of Tiuoly. And to be bréefe, this Pallace, with all her conueiances, as well necessarie, as of pleasure, fully mach∣ed the statelynesse of Cardinall Furnesaes Pallace, buyl∣ded & beautified, with the ruinous Monumentes of Rome, in her pride: so that the curiousnesse there of, was of pow∣er to haue inchaunted my eyes with an immodest gase, had I not remembred, that it belongeth vnto a Gentlemā Cardenal Fur nesaes pallace in Rome. to sée, and not to stare vpon the straungest Nouell that is: for bace is his mynde, whose spirit hourely beholdeth not greater matters then eyther beautie, buylding or braue∣rie. And certertenly, at this instant, I delighted more A necessarie obseruation for a Gentle∣man. to contemplate of Segnior Phyloxenus vertues: then to regarde his sumptuous buyldings, who (as I learned of one of the Seruantes) all the yéere opened his dores to e∣uerie ciuill Gentleman, and at Christmas, inuited all A worthye Custome. commers, as a customarie dutie: so large was the pre∣scription of his curtesie. But, which shined aboue the rest, he was in his youth, brought vp in the French Courte, where, by the grace of God, and labour of some good fréend (as his behauyours could not but winne many) he lear∣ned to serue God, with purenesse of heart, and not with painted ceremonies, as his superstitious Countrie mē do: He was a Pro testant. which was one chief cause, why he spake so reuerently of the Quéenes maiestie, whose vertues make her enemies dumbe, for malice will not let them say well, and shame forbids them to speake amis, of her sacred lyfe: by yt time I had talked awhile, with one of the seruantes, & put my selfe in a more ciuill order, then was necessarie for trauel, Supper was in a redinesse: whiche although it excéeded the common order of fasts, yet it passed not far the bounds of auncient custome: for my place at the Table, I had the
pryueledge of a Stranger, set aboue my degrée, and with the same intertainment, were Frenchmen, Almain, Duch men and other Gentlemen, Straungers, intreated. The Other straun gers arriued by the lyke aduenture. Grand Maister of the feast, in wordes gaue vs one wel∣come for all, but not so few as a thousand in affable coun∣tenaunces. Supper being ended, according to the custome of the place, a Cake was cut in péeces, to the number of the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen present, & if the mar∣ked péece were allotted vnto a man, he should be King, if A custome ge neraly vesd in Fraunce, and in some pla∣ces of Italy. to a woman, she should be Quéene of the Christmas plea∣sures: for it was agréede, there should be but one to com∣maund, and all to obay. Madona Aurelia, Sister to the Lorde of the Pallace, was crowned with the Lot, whose worthynesse was such, as herein it séemed Fortune obay∣ed desert: for there was no Gentlewoman in the trowpe, that Aurelia excelled not in beautie, & singularity of wit, nor no Gentlemā, that her vertues inchaunted not, with more admiraion, then the Sirens swéete songes, the we∣ther weried Sayler, so that of the one shee was crowned with Enuy, and of the other with Honor. But in as much, as this was but the fyrst night of her raigne, she referred the Proclamation of her lawes vntill the next daye, and so dismist the at tendaunce of her subiectes for that night, which (in sooth) lasted me but a sléepe, so sound∣ly after trauell, I imbraced mine ease. The next Day no sooner appeared, but the Trumpets sounded the honour of Christmas vppon which Som∣mons, the Companie rose, and (attired in their most sump tuous wéedes) in the greate Chamber attended their Quéene Aurelia, who about Seruice time, (with the Ma∣iestie of a Goddesse) presented her selfe: on whome, all the Trowpe waighted vnto the Chappell, wheare the Ser∣uice was not so ceremonious, as in other Churches of Italy, and yet more then agréed with Segnior Phyloxe∣nus conscience, onely to geue no offence, to the superstiti∣ous reale of others. The Seruice ended, against the re∣turne of the company, the Tables were couered in a most
stately Order, and with the sownd of Trumpettes, were furnished with so many seuerall daintie Disshes, as the ialtie of the Feaste, might haue pleased Heliogabalus: After Quéene Aurelia was set, the rest tooke their ac∣customed places: but (God knowes) the eyes of the grea∣ter Heliogabalus a most volup tuous Empe∣ror of Rome. parte, were more hungrye, then their stomackes: for their appetites were dulled, with the ouerplentie ea∣tes, and their desires quickened, with the regarde of the faire Gentlewomen. The Dinner & euery solempne seruice ended, Seg. Phy∣loxenus cōmitted the company, to the good intertainment of his Sister Aunelia, and (with a speciall sute) recomen∣ded me vnto her fauour: After ewe was taken of the Attendantes, certaine Gentlemen and Gentlewomen (by the appoinctment of quéene Aurelia) were addopted with the names of their Fortunes, as occasion will manifest hereafter: and for that I was a Traueler, she calde mée Cliero Ismarito, in Englishe, The wanding Knight: whereuppon, Madam (quoth ) ou haue christened ée with the true name of my fortune: for I was but late out of my way, and now am straied out of my self: where are you then quoth Aurelia; at your only direction (quoth I:) well (quoth she) since so cunningly you prefer your selfe, I admitte you my seruant, and as you deserue so will I reward: & Madam quoth I, if I bee not loyall, let me not lyue: well (quoth she) I except the best. The rest of the af∣faires set in good order, the Harold proclaimed the lawes, whereunto the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen were bounde, with the penallties for the breach of them. The Lawes of Queene Aurelia. FIrst, euerie Gentleman, and Gentlewoman, were con∣iured faithfully to execute all the charges, and offices assigned by their Quéene Aurelia, and that they should be attendant of her pleasure.
Item euery Gentleman was bound, to serue some one Misterisse, befor the next day at noone, vppon paine, to bée turned into the great Hall, among the Countrie Trulles ye whole Christmas. And euery Gentlewoman yt had not a Seruant, was iudged vnworthye, to bee courted for one wéeke: for his merrit was holden very small, that coulde bee intertained of none, and her conditions very crooked that was beloued of none. Item euery Gentleman, was bound to geue his owne Mistresse the honour of his seruise, and the chiefe place in his commendations, vppon paine, to lose her seruice, and to bée entertained of no other. For he that was dissoyall to one, coulde not be holden faithfull vnto an other. Item euery Gentlewoman, was bounde to imploye her owne Seruaunt vppon paine to be reputed symple. For she that affyed not in her owne Seruant, had no rea∣son to trust an others. Item euery Gentleman was bound, to defende the ho∣nor of his Misterisse, both with worde and sworde, vppon paine to be reputed a Coward, and not to were her gloue. For he was holden very vnsufficient, that prysed not his Misterisse honor aboue his owne lyfe. Item eurey Gentlewoman was bound, to incouradge her Seruant with Good countenances, and vppon the exe∣cution of any worthy seruice to rewarde him, with the kissing of her hand, vpon paine to be déemèd, vnworthy to be serued. For she of all the world is acounted to rigorous a Dame, that with scorne, receyueth dutifull seruice. Item euery Gentleman was bounde to Court his mi∣sterisse with Ciuill speaches, vpon paine to be forbiddē, to talke of loue for thrée daies. For he was accompted bace mannered, or verie grose witted, that coulde not pleasant∣lye intertaine time with a ciuill discourse. Item euery Gentleman was bound, either by some ex∣ercise of value, or by some shew of excellency of wit, to ap∣proue him selfe worthy of his Mistrisse: vpon paine, to be spoyled of his Armes, and the whole Christmas to attende
with the Pages for he was holden vnworthy the societie of men, or the affection of women, that was neither vali∣ant nor wise. These Lawes proclaimed, Quéene Aurelia appoynted an elderly Courtier named Fabritio, and a well spoken Gentlewoman, called Donna Isabella, to be Iudges of the controuersyes, in disputation: and to attend her in her af∣faires of pleasure, she chused Segnior Soranso, a Gentle∣man Italion, of Wit quick and sharp, and for his deuices, swéete and pleasant: Don Dondolo, a Napolitan, haughtie and proude in his conceits. Monsier Bargetto a French∣man, amourous and light headed. Doctor Mossenigo, a Germaine, so called, for the plaine discouerie of his mind. Segnior Faliero a Scot, subtill and cunnyng in his deuy∣ces: Courtisie vn∣to straungers, is a marke of Gentilytie. and my selfe Caualiero Ismarito, an English man, in whiche name heereafter, I will present those actions that touch my selfe. This wise, choice she made to priueldge the Strangers with the hyest fauour. Of Gentlewomen, she chused Maria Belochy, a Dam∣sell whose eye was able to fire a mountaine of Ice. Lucia Bella, for fairenesse & swéete behauiour an Angel. Hellena Dulce, a louing and affable Gentlewoman. Franceschina sancta, so called for hir modest and lowlye countenance: Katherina Trista, a owre and testy Dame: Aluisa Ve∣chio, who although shee were in the wayne of her yéeres, yet was she in the pride of yong desires. This done, Quéene Aurelia, by consent, deuided the ex∣ercises of euery day, into these times: the forenoone to bée A diuision of their pleasurs bestowed in the seruice of God: after dinner, two houres to be intertained in ciuell discourse, and disputation: the rest till Supper at pleasure: and after supper to spende a time in daunsing, maskinge, or in other like pastimes as occasion presented. The greater part of Christmas day, was spent in esta blishing these orders, the rest was ouercome in solpne Musick, for, among the better forte, that day is honoured, with no light mirth.
THe next daye by nine a Clocke, according to one of the charges in the Proclamation, you might sée the yong Gentlemen & Gentlewomen, coupled together lyke fowles on Saint Valentines day morninge. But Cauiliero Ismarito, hauing the eyes of his hart sette∣led vpon his Mistresse beautie, with carelesse regarde, be∣helde the rest of the company: and leanyng by a dore, tho∣row which she should passe, he awayghted Quéene Aure∣lias comming. Who at her accustomed howre, presented her self with an aduauntage of brauerie, whom the whole trowpe reuerently saluted, and honorably accompanyed vnto the Chappell. After Seruice, Dinner, and all were solempnlye en∣ded: Queene Aurelia with a chosen company, retyred her selfe, into a pleasant drawing Chamber, to execute the re∣ported Musick refre∣sheth the wits ordenaunce. But to quicken the Spirites of the company, before they entred into discourse, she commaun∣ded a faire Eunucke Boy, to singe some one songe, as hée thought good, who obaying her commaundement, with a heauenly note, vnto the Lute sunge this louyng Laye. NO ioy comes neare the heauenly ioy of loue, When we imbrace, the wish of our desyre. All pleasures els, that kinde or Arte may moue, To loue, are lyke, the heate of paynted fyre. Loue is the roote, whereon swete thoughts do grow, Loue is the sowrce, from whence content doth flow. ¶ When I behould my Mistresse in the face, Loue from her eyes, a thousand Graces throwes. But when in armes, Idoe her selfe imbrace. One smyling looke exileth all my woes. Then straight our lippes prepare them selues to fight And on eche kys, Loue seales a new delight. ¶ What would you more? I wish me in my graue, Were but my soule with halfe these pleasures crownde:
And heare on earth to be my Misterisse slaue, I hold me free, and others to be bounde. Wherfore, I sing which I in sollace proue, There is no heauen, to lyfe bestowed in loue. The swéet deliuerie of this sonet, so inchanted ye harts of ye hearers, as for a space, their sences gaue place to the contemplatiō of their soules. In the end, Madona Isabella by this motiō, made ye whole cōpany a passadge for spéech. If Loue be so swéete a passion (quoth she) I muse from what cause procéedeth the complaintes of Louers, who wt showering teares, bedeweth the earth: with misty fights, dimmeth the aire, & wt shril outcries pearceth the heauens The cause quoth Soranso, procéeds of our fleshly imper∣fections, which corruptes ye nature of good things, & not of any defect in loue: for loue is a simple deuine vertue, and hath his being in ye soule, whose motions are heauenly. Loue simplye is good. I haue read ({quod} Isabella) that there be sundry kindes of loue. The vse of loue, are diuers {quod} Soranso, as in zeale towardes God, in duty towardes our Countrie, in obedi∣ence towards our parēts, & in affectiō towards our frends The distinc∣tions of loue. All which motions procéedeth forth of one loue, although som are more vehement then ye other, euen as many Ri∣vers doo run out of one Spring, whereof som haue a more swift course then the other. But of that passion which we ordinarily call loue, the wish either tends to Marriage or wantōnesse. There is matter of disputation in Marriage ({quod} Franceschina,) because yt estate is honorable, & yet sub∣iect to crosse fortunes: But touching your conclusiō of wā∣tōnes, Knowne e∣uils are not to bee defeu∣ded. it deserueth to die in silence, for known euils are to bée chastened, without allowing their defences. Madame ({quod} Faliero) vnlesse you reuoke this sentence, we wil haue you indited at Rome as an heretick, for by the Popes Cā∣nons, Priests may not marry: & they haue a custom among them selues, not to liue chast. Well ({quod} Franceschina, if the Pope for this opinion, burne mée as an heretick, good men will cannonise mée for a vertuous Uirgin.
Thease Digressions (quoth Quéene Aurelia,) are the meanes (rather) to worke a confusion of our memories, A necessarye note. then to conclude any beneficial matter for our instruction And therfore, I hold it to greater purpose (substantially) to handle one Argument, then (sleightly) to ouerrunne many causes, where ye doubts we leaue vnresolued, wyl be more daungerous vnto the hearer, then the Counselles we vse, profitable vnto the follower. Madame, (quoth Fabritio) I hold it good, we obay your direction. And for that Mariage, is the most honourable euent of Loue: and that a Single lyfe, is the greatest testi∣manie of Chastytie: A ciuill Contention, to prooue which A contention whether Ma∣riage or the single lyfe, is the worthyer. is the most worthy of the two, would conclude much con∣tentment: For, as Yron and Flynt, beat together, haue the vertue to smite fire: so, mens wits, encountryng in doutful questiōs, openeth a passage for imprisoned Trueth. Quéene Aurelia, and the rest of the company, lyked ve∣rie Argument decideth doubtes. well of the Subieat: and studing, who weare the fittest to deale in this Controuersie, Aurelia (with a glaunsinge eye) beheld, that her seruant Ifmarito, witsafed no greater Token, that he tooke delight in thease actions then (some∣time) Wise scilence worketh mor regarde then foolish talke. the secrete bestowyng of a modest smile: whervpon she forethought, that as Floods, when they are most hyest, maketh least noise: euen so (perchaunce) his styll tongue, was gouerned by a flowyng wit; and desirous to sounde his sufficiencie, she quickned him with this crosse surmise. Seruant (quoth she) your sober lookes, promiseth a hope that you will vndertake Dianaes quarrell: but (which wil serue in this question) I feare me, you cōnaund Loue, so much, as you contempne Mariage: And the greater is my suspicion, in that you are a Tauayleri ye nature of which A fault in ma∣ny trauellers. sort of people, is to swell, with a  isdayne of Mariage? The reason is (say they) their Affections are poy∣ioned, with the knowledge of womens so haynous euyls, as the dare not venter of that vocation: But my opinion is, they learned so many lties to de  lesse w, as dandled with the ments of sundry
Loues, they forsweare Mariage, who bindes them to one only wyfe: And if you be infected wt the humour of thease sorte of Trauailers, you may wel vndertake this charge: Al vnmarried, pass vnder the name of chast. for Venus, though she loue not Diana, yet is she the sworn enemie of Iuno. And if you be sound from this infirmitie, the little haste you make to marry, witnesseth, you honor Hymen, with no great deuotion, and therfore, I cōmaund you too vse all your possyble proofes, in the Defence of a Single lyfe: and for your Assistaunce, I do appoint you, Lucia Bella, whom, this Charge can not mislyke, because (as I vnderstand) she meanes to be a professed Nun: You are to encounter the opinions of many, and therfore, arme your selues, with as good reasons, as you may. Madame (quoth Ismarito) I am so déepely bound vnto your commaundement, as I am driuen to leaue youre suggestions not answeared, and my owne inneency, vn∣excused, & only attend ye incounter of him, yt wil maintaine Marriage, to be more worthy then a syngle life: which vo∣cation of Marriage, though I reuerently honour, yet I so zealously affect the other, as I hope (where the Iudges are indifferent) to make the glory thereof to shine as the faire white, aboue euery other colour. Syr, quoth Soranso, though white be a fayre colour, yet Defences of Marriage are the choyse of all other colours, more rich and glorious: so, though Virginitie (which is the fayrest flower of a sin∣gle lyfe) be precious, in the sight of God, and in the opini∣on of men, yet is Marriage more precious, in that, it is a sacred institution of God, and more honoured of men: the Marryed are reuerently intertained, when the vnmaryed are but familiarly saluted. The Maried in assemblies, are honoured with the hyghest places, the vnmarryed hum∣ble them selues vnto the lowest. To be short, Virginitie is the handmayde of Marriage. Then, by how much the Master is greater then the seruaunt, by so much Marriage is more worthy then is single lyfe. I confesse quoth Ismarito, Marriage is an honourable Defences of a single lyfe. eate, instituted of God, and embraced of men, but wher∣on
had she her beginning? vpon this cause, to kéepe men from a greater inconuenience: as the Lawe was foun∣ded vppon this reason, to punishe the trespasses of men. But if no offence had ben giuen, the Law had not néeded So if man had lyued within boundes of reason (whiche before any commaundement geuen; was vnto him a Law) Marriage might haue ben spared: and therefore in the hyest degrée, is but a vertue vppon necessitie: where Chastitie, is a deuine vertue, gouerned by the motions of the soule, which is immortall, and perticypating of the same vertue, is alwaies fresh and gréene. The euer∣springing Baye, is the Metamorphos of chast Daphnè, whom Appollo, although he weare a soueraign GOD, could not allure to Mariadge: which prooueth Chastitie, a true spark of Diuinitie, whose twinkling reflexions, so daseleth the eyes of imagined Gods (whose powers must néedes be more great then the greatest of men) as they cannot sée an ende of their incontinent desires: where as the beautie of Marriadge, is many times blasted by for∣tune, or the frailtie of the Married. Therfore (think I) by how much deuyne thinges are of greater emprise then earthlye; by so much the Single lyfe, is more worthy then then▪the maryed. And in aduauntage, [{quod} Lucia Bella] where Soranso sayth, that there is great honour done vnto the married, and to the Single is giuen light regard, I pray you whe∣ther are Baccus minions or the Muses, most reuerensed? Among men, whose places are hyer then the Cleargies? and amonge women, whose greater then the religious Dames? They haue not this preheminence [{quod} Faliero] because Defences of Mariadge. they professe a Single life, but because their function is more sacred then other mens, who if their prayers to GOD bee no more zealous, then their vowes to cha∣stytie The cause why the Clea gie are reue∣ensed. are stedfast, you flye to the authoritie of a company as spotted as Labans Shéepe.
But where Sir Ismarito saith, yt Mariage is but a verfue vpon necessytie, to restrayne man from a greater euyll: I approoue it an estate, set downe by Nature, and that man hath but amplified it, with certain Ceremonies, to make perfect the determination of nature: For we dayly sée, in vnreasonable Creatures, Mariage is (in a sorte) worshyp ped: Fowles of the Ayre (I meane) the he and the she, cupple together, flie together, féede together, and neast to∣gether. The Turtle is neuer merie after the death of her Mate: and in many brute Beastes, the lyke Constancie is fownd: But (generally) there is neuer iarre nor misly∣kyng betwene the Male and Female, of vnpollitique cre∣atures: and among the most barbarous people that euer Vnpollitick creatures re∣uerence ma∣riadge, lyued, by the Impression of Nature, Mariage hath (euer∣more) ben reuerenced and honoured: Muche more, ciuill people, ought to affecte this holy estate: And where Isma∣rito, attributes suche Glorie vnto a Single lyfe, because that Daphne was metamorphosed into a Bay Trée, whose Branches are alwayes gréene: In my opnion, his reason is fayre lyke the Bay Trée: for the Bay Trée is barren of pleasant fruict, & his plesing words of weighty matter. Furthermore, what remembrance is theare of faire Sirinx coynesse, refusing to be God Pans wife? other then that she was metamorphosed into a fewe vnprofitable Réedes: Or of Anaxaretes chaste crueltie towardes Iphis, ouer then that she remaineth an Image of Stone in Samarin. Many other suche lyke naked Monumentes remayne, of nice contempners of Marriage. But in the behalf of Mariage, thousāds haue ben chan∣ged into Olyue, Pomegranate, Mulberie, and other fruict∣full-trées, swéete flowers, Starres, and precious Stones, by whom, the worlde is beautified, directed and noorished. In many well gouerned commen wealths, Sterylitie hath ben reputed so vile, as the Aged was of no man ho∣noured, ye had not childrē of his own, [to do him reuerence.
Then, by how much those thinges, which noorish with increase, are more necessarie then those things, which but simply please the eye: by so muche, the marryed, is more worthy then the single lyfe. Sir, quoth Ismarito, it séemeth that you haue read a Defences of a single lyfe, Leafe more then Sainct Katherynes Nun: for she (simply) tried all thinges, and you (subtilly) vse, but what serueth your owne tourne: you reproach a Single lyfe, with Bar∣rennesse, & commend the fertilytie of Mariage: But had you showen the wéedes with ye Corne, bare pasture wold haue retourned as great a benefit, as your haruest. The Monsters, Serpents, and loathsome Creatures, mentio∣ned by Ouide, in his Metamorphosis, were they not I praye you the fruicts of Marriage? as wel as the blessings, whiche you so affectedlye reported? Oedippus was glad to scratch out his eyes, because he could not indure to behold the vices of his Children. The good Emperour Marcus Aurelius in his aged daies, neuer rose that he sighthed not: neuer dyned that he fretted not: nor neuer went to bedd, that he wéeped not: to heare, sée, and consider, the moun∣strous euylls of his Children. Admit the Married, haue vertuous Children, they may dye when they are yonge, then the goodnesse of their lyues, increaseth sorrowes, by their deathes: and where the comfort is so doubtfull, it is not amisse to refuse the hazard of the gréefe: neither dyeth Vertuous fame, is an o∣ther lyfe. there any of Dianas band, but that their vertues reuiueth them as the ashes of the Phenix, tourneth into an other Phenix. It is for some Phenix sake, quoth Quéene Aurelia, that you thus stoutly defend a Single lyfe. I doo but your commaundement, quoth Ismarito. You (quoth shée) it is at my commaundement, but yet for some others merit. Alvisa vechio, fearing that Marriage wold receiue som disgrace, if that Quéene Aurelia fauoured the Defence The impati∣encie of wo∣men, will not be hidde. of a Single lyfe, could not longer suppresse her affections, but with a womans Impatiencie, blamed the rigour of
Diana, who condēpned Acteon to be deuoured of his own Howndes: who caused swéete▪ Addonis to be slayne by a wylde Boare: with many other cruell partes, vnséemyng the naturall pittie of a woman: but (which might haue sa∣ued a great deale of Argument, or at the least, which wyll now soone ende the Controuersie:) compare [{quod} she] Iuno and Diana together, and by their callings, you may easely iudge who is the worthyer. Diana (poore soule) is but a Goddesse here on earth, and Iuno is Quéene of Heauen: Dianaes force, is in her Bow and Arrowes, Iuno bestow∣eth Thunderbolts, vpon her enemies: Diana, is attyred with gréene leaues, and Iuno with glorious Starres: Di∣ana, féedeth on rawe Fruictes, and drinketh cold water: Iunoes Feastes, are of Manna, and her Bowles are fild with Nectar: Dianes Musick, is no better then the voy∣ces of a fewe Nymphes: Iuno is recreated with the Har∣monie of Angelles: Dianaes pastime, is (a foote) to chace the fearefull Roe, where Iuno (in Phaetons wynged Cha∣riot) pursueth a thousand seueral pleasures: then, by how much the pompe of Iuno, excéedeth the naked Triumphes of Diana: by so much, Mariage must néedes be more wor∣thye then the Single lyfe. Lucia Bella, that shuld haue answered Alvisa Vechio, (not vnlyke the Marygoulde, that cloaseth her Beautie, when Phebus is attyred with his brightest Rayes) so ad∣myred the glory of Iuno, yt, as an inchaunted creature, her Vaine glori∣ous shewes bewicheth women. tongue forgot her naturall office: the reason was, her hart was sodenly surprised with an ambitious desire of honor. Which change, Ismarito perceyued, with the first: and least, her scilence shuld conclude a yealding: Al is not gold Contentmēt neither fol∣loweth the greatest, nor scorneth the meanest. [{quod} he] that glistereth, nor euery thyng counterfet that is not curiously garnished: a smyling countenance is no full testimonie of a merie hart, nor costly Garments, of a rich Purse: And (perchance) the griefe of Iunoes secret discon∣tentmentes, is greatter then the delight of her gloryous pompe: where Diana, who (as a Diamond in the darcke, shineth of her selfe) needeth not the Ornaments of Iuno.
And as shée is (symplye) of a pure substaunce, so her thoughtes, must needes be swéete, and quiet. Sir [{quod} Maria Belochy] our soundest iudgements, are of those things that we our selues sée: therfore, if the ap∣paraunce of Mariage, be worthier then the apparaunce of the single lyfe: if sentence be truely pronounced, it must be in the behalfe of Iuno. Quéene Aurelia perceyuing the increase of Ismaritos aduersaries, (for who can stop a streame? measure the fire? weygh the winde? or hynder Fancyes passage?) and with∣all considering how that the controuercy was sufficiently debated, commaunded the contenders, to kéepe scilence: and referred ye qustiō, to be Iudged by Fabritio, & Isabella. Who hauing aduisedly considered, the reasons on both sydes, agréed that a single chast lyfe pleased God, because, Chastitie is pure: and also delighteth man, because, shée quieteth the mynde: but a chast marryed lyfe, bothe plea∣seth, and honoureth God: because Marriage, howrely, pre∣senteth the world, with the Image of himselfe: pleaseth, and profiteth man, because, she giueth him a companyon, by affection, chaunged into his owne disposition: of whom he hath children, who in dispight of death, preserueth him alyue. And therefore, the sentence of them both, was pro∣nounsed by Fabritio, in the behalfe of Marriage: who with Sentence gy∣uen, in the be halfe of Ma∣riage. all, enlarged her prayses, with the reporte of many swéet Blessinges, whiche shée liberallye bestoweth, vppon her Subiectes. But least the company, should haue ben fyred with too hasty a desyre of Marriage, he cooled theyr affections, with such caueats, as they that had their voyces ready tuned, to synge the prayses of God Himen, were of the sud∣dayne, as mute as a fishe: by reason whereof, Fabritio, had free passage: for his counsellinge reporte: who, after many wordes, to either purpose deliuered, concluded with the opinion of Plato, That Marriage, was a Parradice on earth, if her Lawes be obserued: and a Hell in the House, Platoes opi∣nion of Ma∣riage. where her Satutes are broken.
The Gentlewomen wist not what to say, to Fabririos bitterswéete commendation of Marriage, vntyll Bargetto Pleasant tal is good phy∣sicke for sor∣rowe. quickned their tongues, by this pleasaunt suggestion. If (quoth he) Platoes opinion be lawe, by the same rea∣son, women are either Angells, or Deuills. And why not men, as well as women (quoth Isabella) whose disposition beareth the greatest swaye in this voca∣tion. I will showe you a reason, quoth Doctor Mossenigo, men with a meane, canne temper their passions: when a The extreme passions of  woman. woman hath no measure in her loue, nor mercye in her hate: no rule in her pittie, nor pietie in her reuenge: no Iudgement to speake nor patience to dissemble: and ther∣fore she is lykened vnto the Sea, whych (one whyle) is so A GVNDELO, is a litle Boat like a wherie. mylde, as a small Gundelo indureth her might, and anon, with outrage, she ouer whelmeth the taullest shippe. Ah Master Doctor, quoth Katharina Trista, I feare me you are so learned, as like the Hyen, you change your self HIEN, som∣times a man, and somtimes a woman. sometimes into the shape of a woman: but yet, of this ma∣litious purpose, to learn their dispositions: only to reproch their kinde: but had any of vs the cunning, to become a man but a while, I imagine, we should euer after, loue the better to be a woman. You haue rather cause (quoth Dondolo) to let Mayster Doctor kisse your hand, (for commēding your kynde) then to blame him, by a surmise, of iniurye, offered vnto wo∣men, for if there be a few good, they couer ye faults of a nū∣ber that are euill: as a litle golde, guildeth a great quan∣titie of iron: and for any-thing he sayde, you haue as gene∣rall an interest in vertue, as in vice. Yea, but [{quod} Quéene Aurelia] he is to be blamed for his intent, which was euyll, & deserueth not to be praysed The intent of euyll, is to be punished. for the good which came of it, which was our meryt. Madame ({quod} the Doctor) so much greater is the good, you receiue by my Trespasse, as therby you are honoured with the vertue, to forgiue.
Yea, but (quoth she) remission is to be vsed in ignorant offences, and not in wilfull. Pardon is to be vsed in ig∣noraunce and not in wilfull faultes. My Habit (quoth he) is a testionie that I spake not of mallice. So much [{quod} she] ye greater is your fault, in that it pro∣céeded vpon pleasure: and where you thinke to priuiledge your selfe by: your Habyt: for Example sake, you shall at The punish∣ment of great offenders dooth most good in ex∣ample. (open) Supper, bothe renounce your Heresie and make satisfaction, or abide the Iudgemēt of these Gentlewomē. If there be no remedie [{quod} he] I must obay. The Doctor thus taken tardie, gaue occasion of laugh∣ter vnto the whole company. Which, blowne ouer, [{quod} Soranso] we haue trauailed this day to an vnfortunate ende: for that now, towardes night, we are entred into an open Champion, wheare we finde many broade wayes to Hell, & but one crosse Path to Heauen. Well ({quod} Quéene Aurelia) we wyll take other tymes, to beate out the true passage: And (least we be lated) wée wyll no further too daye. Whervpon, after a Courtly reuerence don: Quéene Aurelia, with her Attendantes, shewed her selfe in ye great Chamber, where she might repose her minde wt the choice of sundrie pleasures: For his, or her disposition was very strange, that in that company, could not finde both a Com¦panion and sport, that pleased his humour. FINIS.
The first Nights Pastime. AMong wise men, these Orders, haue euermore ben obserued, or allowed: In the Church, to be de∣uoute: in place of Iustice, to be graue: at home to be affable, & at meales to be mery: for in the Churche Deuotion. we talke with God, who séeth our hartes and hateth Hy∣pocrysie: in Iustice, we sitt to chasten light demeanours, Grauitie. then, great were the shame, that our countenaunces shuld condempne our selues: At home we rule and commaunde, then were it Ty∣ranny, Affabilitie. to vse seuerytie, there, where, is no resistaunce. At meales to bee merrie, disgesteth meate, and refre∣sheth the witte: then is he an enemy vnto himselfe, that contemneth the rule of health, & the helper of knowledge. Myrthe. Howsoeuer the thrée first preceptes were obserued, Seg∣nior Philoxenus and his honourable guestes duly execu∣ted the last, who in the midst of supper hearinge of Doc∣tor mossenigos pennaunce, hasted the execution. The Doctor séeing there was no remedie, openly con∣fessed that hee had praysed women against his wyll, for which he was condemned to singe Ab re nuntio, and to make satisfaction by some other meanes: And as hee thought the contrarie was the amends of euerie trespas, and therfore, where as he had praysed them against his will, hée was ready to dispraise them with his will. Subtiltie bea teth true mea ning with his owne sword. Quéene Aurelia, woulde haue taken exceptions to these wordes, but that the company cryed, The Doctor speaks Law, which shee coulde not with Iustice violate, whervpon Mossenigo, reported as followeth.
¶DOCTOR MOSSENIGO HIS Satisfaction, for praysing women against his will. IN the famous Citie of Viena, in Austria, somtimes dwelled a simple Sadler, named Borrihauder, who was married to an olde crabbed shrew, called Ophella: the a∣gréement of this couple was so notable, as the Emperour Charles the fift, commaunded his Paynter Parmenio, to draw their counterfeats, as a Monument of fury: Parme∣nio, commyng to doe the Emperours commanndement, found Borrihauder wéeping with the agony of his wiues stripes, and Ophellas chéeks as red as fire with the heate of her tonge: whiche straunge sight, chaunged his deter∣mination, into a pleasaunt conceit, and in place of their Counterfets, in a fayre table, he drew an Element trou∣bled with lightnyng, and vnderwrit Ophella, and in ano∣ther Table fastened to the same, he likewise drew an E∣lement darkned with rayne, and vnder wright, Borihau∣der. Parmenio presented this trauel vnto the Emperour. The Emperour séeing the two names, and not the shape of those, hee commaunded to be drawne, demaunded the Paynters meanyng héerein, who pleasantly aunswered, that he could not take the view of Ophellas face, for feare of being fyered with the lightning of her tonge, and that Borihauder was drowned with teares, which as showers of Raine folowed the thunder claps, of his wiues Fistes: But in good time (had she died) this Demideuill Orphella fel so extremely sick, as in euery mans iudgement, it was néedefull to giue Phisick to her soule, but bootelesse to be∣stow any of her body: Borihauder séeing her, as he thought at a good passe, was so accustomed to sorrow, as hee deter∣mined to toule her passing bel, with this counterfet mone. Ah deare God ({quod} he) how vnhappy am I to lose my louing wife, my good wyfe, my swéet wife? O how happy were I, that as we haue lyued together, that we might nowe dye together. This pittyous sound of her husband, so melted
the dying harte of Ophella, that lyke a Candle consumed, that leaueth a little smoke in the wéeke, she lay both spéech les, & senceles, saue that the panges of death, sometymes threwe a weake breath out of her mouthe: but lyke vnto wilde fire, that burneth in water, the Corsiue, that would haue killed the deuill, in her case, recouered her to health, which was her husband, out of feare of her life, in dispight of the iniurie of time past, fell to kisse and coll his Maide, which watched his gasping wife, before hée tooke order wt the Clarke, to ring her knell: which Ophella, as dim as her sight was, perceiued, & Furie, which was the last mo∣tion, that accōpanied her in life, like a whirl wind, yt with a suddaine violence, draweth things into the ayre, so fired her hart with malice, to sée her husband in this iolity with her maide, as madnes, gaue her the strength to crye. Ah, ah, Traytour, I am not yet dead, ah villain, villaine, I am not yet dead: and through this passion, choller so dryed her Catar, as shortly after, she perfectly receyued her health: and so canuassed her husband Borrihauder, as by the mo∣tions of sorrow, & payne, he hung himselfe in a Crabtrée: O quoth Katherina Trista, it was great dammage that Thymon of Athens was not in the town, to show al mal∣litious men that trée. The deuill might haue put in their myndes, to haue hanged themselues. This suddayne answeare of Katherina Trista, tickled A cunnynge aunswere, ta∣keth away the grace of a shrewd tale. all the companye with a laughter, a good parte whereof, were reddy to scandall women, with a frowarde nature, beyng by this example, more fostered with dyspight, then good vsage: who, nowe for feare of theyr owne reproche, amplyfied not Master Doctors tale, with any other spight∣full authorityes. For the Hystorie of Thymon of Athens dogged na∣ture, was so well knowne to euerie Gentleman, as the THYMON of Athens was the swor enemie of humanitie. remembraunce of his name, assured them, that there ne∣uer lyued woman of so fcowarde a condityon: neyther is it possible, that euer any man agayne, shoulde be so great an enemye to Humanitie.
And there vpon [{quod} Falerio] Thymon of Athens was without heyre or successor, and therefore is no able exam∣ple, to blame vs. Neither had Ophela (for any thinge we heare) either heyre or successor, (quoth Aluisa Vechio:) then, by your owne reason, is of no authoritie to slaunder our sexe. This one quip for an other (although more myldelye handled of the Gentle women side, accordinge to their na∣turall modestie) quieted either parte. In so moch as Doctor Mossenigo humbly desired to to be receiued, into the grace of women againe. Nay, [{quod} Quéene Aurelia] you deserue to bee euer∣euermore banyshed the presences of women. Alas good Madam, (quoth he) I did but your comman∣dement, and therupon I appeale to the report of the com∣pany. Yea, but (quoth she) my meanyng was otherwise. A dutiful sub iect is bound to obay his Princes wor∣des, and not linger vpon the effect. O Madame (quoth he) Subiects, are bounde to execute their Soueraignes woordes, and are not priueledged, to interpret their charge, to their owne fancy. I sée well, [{quod} Quéene Aurelia] that there is no dea∣lyng with a Lawyer, for they can defend their owne tres∣passes, with the same sworde, they punish other mens of∣fences, and therefore better to haue you a fayned friende, (being so daungerous) then an open enemie: wherefore, A fayned friend is bet∣ter then a dan gerous open enimy. we pardon you. By this time, Supper, and euerie seruice of the Ta∣ble ended. Whereuppon, Quéene Aurelia, and the whole company rose, and saluting one an other, with a ciuill re∣uerence. The Musick sommoned the yonge Gentelmen, and Gentlewomen, to daunsinge: for (this night) they ex∣pected no other pastime, vnlesse it were dicing, carding, or such like vnthrifty sports. And therfore as the night grew on, or they waxed wearie, vntill the next mornyng they commytted one an other, a dio. FINIS.
The seconde Dayes EXERCIE. Contayning (with many other necessarie Que∣stions,) a large Discouerie, of the inconueniences of forced Marriadges. AVrora had no sooner forsaken her Husband Tithons bed, but that Phebus A Discription of the Sunne risinge. ashamed of his ouer drowsy sléeping, in the darke Caues of Tartessus: hastely harnesed vp his Horses, and in his fierie Chariot, clymed the Mountaine Oeta, the painefull trauell whereof made brighte, Pyrois and sparklinge Phlegon, breathe flambes lyke the burninge Pyrois and Phlegon fai∣ned to be two of the Sunnes Coche horses Furnace, wherein Vulcan forgeth the Thunderboltes of Iubiter: In so much as Phaebus goldē rayes (which beau∣tifieth the Heauens, and comforteth the earth) pearced through euerie small passadge, into Segnior Philoxenus Pallace▪ and glimmering in the yong Gentlemens faces, wakened them, with an imagination, of their Mistres∣ses The Bed re∣semhleth the Graue. beauties (who scorning their Beds, as Graues which buried the one half of their pleasures, and the Cannapies, as Clowdes, that shadowed the brightnesse of their Loade Starres) now started vp, to honour and salute the Ima∣ges, of their hartes delighte: and to waken the Ladies and Gentlewomen (who of the suddaine, could not be at∣tyred) the tingling of a small Bell, gaue them warning of a Sermon. In so much, as by nine of the Clocke, Quéene Aurelia, and her stately Attendants entered the Chappel, in such Equipage, as I think, the Preacher, Fryer Bugi∣ardo, iagined our Lady was come from Loretto, to honor Segnior Phyloxenus Aultar: and therefore to wel∣come Laureta, com monly called Loreto, the great pilgri∣mage of Italy where is a small Chappell, sometymes made, by the cunning of certaine Fryers, and the consent of some of the Cittizens of RACANATI: only, to bring Trafficke to their Cittie, destroyed by the Goathes, and Vandals: and in the night, stole it out of the Towne: and spread a rumoure, that our Ladye by Aungells, had brought it out of IVRY: the mansion House, wherin she ther liued: whych Fable, an nūber hold for a trueth. her the more, he so extolled our Ladies vertues, and the good and pitifull woorkes of our Cannonyzed Ma∣trons,
and Uirgins: as if the Crown of Heauen, had stode vpon our Ladyes head, and that the earth (chéefely Italy) was blessed for pittyfull womens sakes: of whych, they could haue no greater testimonie, then that our Ladye by myracle, had possessed them, with her earthlye Mansion: which she dayly visiteth, with a thousand blessinges. And therfore, {quod} he, repayre her Churches, cherish her Préestes, praye before her Aulters, and your sinnes, whatsoeuer, shallbe forgeuen: O she is pittifull, as a woman: and can rule her son, as a Mother: and with such lyke owld tales, and Tapers, he lighted the people, as they thought, to He∣uen: but in verye trueth, into blinde Ignoraunce Caue; Ignoraunce Caue, the hye waye to Hell. from whence, the deuill carryed them to Hell. Ismarito smiled, to heare the subtiltie of the Fryer, and sorrowed to sée the simplicitie of the people, in causes that appertayne vnto the soule, who in the affaires of the flesh, are as wylye as Serpents: whose countenaunce, when Italians, a most subtyle kinde of peo∣ple. Philoxenus beheld, he pleasauntly demaunded, how Isma∣rito lyked Fryer Bugiardo his sermon. Ismarito merely aunsweared, it was pittie that Iudas had not harde the lyke, after he had betrayed his Maister Christ: it might haue ben, vppon these large promyses of forgiuenes, he wold not so desperatly haue hanged self. Then quoth Philoxenus, these pleasing sermons be not vnnecessary in this countrie, where sinne is so grose: for were not the people in hope, that our Lady, of pitty, wold Sinne cannot indure to here of Gods Iustice pardon them, a number would followe Iudas in dispaire: with feare, that Gods Iustice would condemne them. It séemeth reason (quoth Ismarito) that the people beléeue what is sayd in the Pulpit: for they vnderstand not what is read in the Church. In this especiall case (quoth Philoxenus) all our crosses, A tiranny ten tymes more Cruell then Dennis Bull. are curses.
So that our first restraint from reading the Scriptures, could not but come from as accursed a spirit as his, that first inuented the Turkes Alcaron, for by the paine of the Alcaron, a Lawe that for byddes the Turks to dis∣pute, of Ma∣homet. A diuine bles singe. one, Mahomets Idolatry, is vnreprehended, and through our ignoraunce in the other, the Popes blaspheamye, is in vs vnespyed, and thereby, both God is dyshonou∣red, and manye a Soull distroyed: so that happye, and thryse happye, are you of Englande, that haue the sa∣cred Byble, and the hard passages of Scrypture, ex∣pounded in vulgar Language: that your common sorte, howesoeuer youre Prealates lyue, vnderstande whea∣ther they erre or no in theyr Doctryne. And synce the Subiectes of the Emperour, Alexander Seuerus, honoured theyr Soueraygnes vertues, wyth these acclamations. NOble Allexaunder, wee praye the Goddes, that A token of louinge Sub∣iectes. they haue no lesse care of youre Maiestye, then you haue of vs: most happye bee wee, that wee haue you among vs. Noble Alexander: The Goddes preserue you, the Goddes defende you: proceede foorth in your purpose: we ought to loue you, as our Father, too honour you as our Lorde, and to admyre you as a God, heare among vs. And thervnto added: Noble Emperour, take what you wyll of our Treasure and substance to ac∣complish your Purpose, (only) for buylding of three Hos∣pitalles, to succour the sicke bodies of the poore: By how much more zeale ought you, the good Quéene of Englandes Subiectes, adde to this Prerogatiue? Do (gratious Queene Elizabeth) what shall seeme to you good: for your most blessed nature cannot erre, or do any thing amis that you purpose, who by diuine inspiration, hath vnlocked the fountaine of grace: so that the thirstye soules both of her rich and poore subiectes, may freelye drinke the water of lyfe. Segnior PHILOXENVS, so affected this spéech, as ISMARITO coulde not, but imagyne, hys heart
adiudged him, a straunger to Grace, and vnworthy lyfe, that was her vassaile and sayd not therevnto, Amen. The end of Fryar Buiardos clawing Sermon, broke off thys Reconcilia∣tiō may take away reuēge, but not grudge from enimies harts priuate talke, and the Gentlewomen, proude of the com∣mendation, of their pytifull sexe, now wisshed, that Doctor Mossenigo had ben vnpardoned his yesternightes tres∣passe towards women: that the holy Frier, might haue ci∣ted him before our Ladie of Loretto: who, the greatter parte of Dinner time, left his victuelles to inlarge his Fe minine prayses. In the ende, tasting ye goodnesse of the meate, he fownd prating verie vnsauerie: and therfore, to recouer his losses, his lippes layde on loade: which Falerio, and some other of the pleasaunt company perceiuing, assayed to reward the Fryar for his good Sermon, with Tantalus dinner, and to that end, busied him with many questions, which he euer aunsweared in a monisillable, so that his tongue hyndred Questions aunswered by Monisillable. not his féeding: As, ({quod} Faleio) a question or two, Master Fryer I pray? saye, quoth he: who strikes wyth the shar∣pest rod? God: of all other, who is must euill? Deuill: in distresse, who deserueth most rueth? Trueth: who is char∣ged with most cryme? Tyme: what houlds the worlde in most imprice? ice: who is the greatest lyer? Fryer: De∣sier: without flame, what maketh the greatest fire? Ire: what sin is most accurst? Lust: what bread is best to eat? Wheat: what drink is worst for the eyne? Wine: When they could deuise no talke, to put lyfe in yt Fryars tongue, doctour Mossenigo demaunded, why he was so bréefe, in his aunsweares? O (quoth he) Pauca sapienti: Then ({quod} the Doctor) it is good taking awaye, this plenty of meat, for cloying Fryar Buiardoes wit. The hole company, hea∣ring the Fryar beaten with hys owne sentence, tourned into a coutrary sence, burst out into suche an immoderate laughter, as choller that rose to the very throat of ye Friar would not suffer him to swallowe, one bitt more of meat: in somuch, as the boord was taken aaye, and the Friar driuen to saye Benedicite, with an emptye stomacke: an inter∣taynment,
as fit for a flatterer, as a reward for a faythful seruant. A good re∣ward for Fla∣terie. The office of courteous reuerence, fully discharged: the company retyred towards the fyre, to pause a little after their dinner, obseruing therein an olde health rule. After dynner, talke a while, After supper, walke a mile. Where the pittifull Gentlewomen, moaned the dys∣grace of their prayse Master, the Fryar, but murmured more that he was crossed (without a blessing) by theyr e∣nemye, the Doctor. And to put them out of this matter, Bargetto sayde merrily, that the Fryar had taught hym such a cunning way to woo, as to melt a womā into pitty, he woulde wish, but the oportunitie of thrée howres: two to loue, and one to prayse the thing they lyke. Yea (quoth Franceschina Santa, his Mistres, since women are so mer∣cyfull, it is necessary to brydle the subtilty of men: and to giue example, I enioyne you, these thrée dayes to speake no more of loue: And questionlesse, thys payne set vppon Bargettos head, was no greater then his ouersight deser∣ued: for in doing of these thrée thinges, is great daunger, and smal discression: to play with fire: to striue with wa∣ter: and to giue a woman knowledge of our power: ther∣fore, A profitable Note. he that will discouer his owne secreat aduauntage, is worthy to haue his heyre cutt wtth Sampson. Quéene Aurelia, by this time was reddy to walke in∣to the drawing chamber, to continue her established exer∣cise: and for the execution thereof, shée called certayne of her chosen Attendāts, (whose appearance being made,) to obserue her former course: for auncient customs profitable, are better then new lawes incertaine, shee commaunded the Eunuk, to set their witts in an order, by the vertue of some swéete harmony, who; taking his Lue, after a duti∣full obaysaunce, played, and sunge, this followinge S∣nnet, in Italon.
TO realish Loue, I taste a sowrie sweete, I finde Repose, in Fancies fetters bounde: Amyd the Skies, my wysh I often meete: And yet I lye, fast staked to the grownde: My eye sees Ioy, my hart is grypde with payne, I know my hurt, and yet my good refrayne. But how thease hang, the faithfull Louer knowes, And yet can geeue, no reason for the cause: The power of Loue, mans reache so farre out goes, As bownd [perfore] he yealdes to Cupids Lawes, And yet we finde, this Libertie in Loue, As bard from Ioye, Hope doth our griefes remooue. Then Loue sitte crownd, as Soueraigne of my thought, And Fancie see, thou other motions chace, To do whose wyll, Desire in me hath wrought, A strength to ronne, in Gyues, sweete Pelops race, And those to charme, that studie me to staye, It may suffise: the wisest paaste my way. The double effectes of this Sonet, made them freshly to remember the doubtes, they left yesterday vnresolued. And to avoyde degression, whiche rayseth many difficul∣ties, and resolueth few: Quéene Aurelia, caused a Repeti∣cion of Platoes opinion of Mariage: which was: She was a Paradice on earth, where her Statutes were kept: and a Hell in the House, where her lawes were broken. Wherevpon ({quod} Dondolo with the libertie of Quéene Aurelias fauour) I demaunde the cause? why that the Male, and Female, of bruite and wilde creatures loue, cherish & take comfort, in one anothers companie, onelie by the Impression of nature: and man and woman, that
are betified both with the vertues of nature and rea∣son, manie times matched together, make a hell, of this hotie institution. By Quéene Aurelias commaūdement, to aunswere. Reason gi∣ueth man so∣uerainty ouer al creatures. Sir ({quod} Faliero) The aduantage of reason, with which you haue preuiledged man and woman, is the onelie cause thereof no man will denie, but that there is a difference of conditions, in creatures of euerie kynde: some horst, There is di∣uersitie of cō dition ineue∣ry kinde. an vnskilfull horseman, can hardly disorder; & some in dis∣spite of his rider will haue a radish tricke. Some Hauke though shée bée euill serued, will not stragle foorth: and some, do the Faulkener what he can, wil continuallie flie at : same hound by no meanes wil be rated from riote, and some will neuer forsake, his vndertaken game: euen so some man will filch if his handes be fast bounde, and some hauing the aduantage of a ootie, will rather stearue, then steale: some woman, with an houres liber∣tie will offende, and tenne yeares louing sute can not o∣uercome Reason fin∣deth out the imperfection of nature. some other. But the vice, & vertue in euery crea∣ture, by the opinions of manie sage Phylosophers, pro∣céedeth from the purenesse, or the imperfection of nature: which is not to be founde, but by reason: and the vse of reason onelie belongeth to man: Now, if by ouersight in Cause of mi∣sliking in manage. Causes of comfort in mariage. choice, the maried, are deuided in desire, differ in life, and delight in neithers loue: Reason that findeth out this con∣trarietie, soweth contention betwéene the unfortunate couple in Matrimonie thus matched. Againe, when be∣twéene the married there is equalitie, of bryth, yeares, and manners, no difference in loue, nor suspition of o∣thers behauiour: Reason that delighteth in itie, ma∣keth the Ioyes of Mariage innumerable. Therefore (thinke I) the opinion of Plato maye bee imbraced as a sounde iudgemente. The whole assemblye, allowed Falierees reason: And Dondolo hymselfe was reasonably well satisfied, But quoth he, since Mariage bringeth wt her vnspeakable
Ioy, or vncurable sorrow: How may a man assure him∣selfe of the one or avoide the  when a womans vn∣searcheable hart, is the only harbour both of her good and euil cōditions: and (once) in appearance, the honourable, and the dishonest, the vertuous, and the vicious: and in briefe, euery sorte of Women, are naturally beautifyed with modestie. If the good repulse dishonest request with chaste disdaine, the badde with counterfet sobrye; will blush at incontinent sutes: If the good vseth ence as a vertue, the bad with well ordered speach, will be as high∣ly estéemed: If the good with the beautie and benefites of Nature, delighte: the bad with the florih of Arte, will no lesse be fantasied. So that, at the first face; the cunningest Clarke niy bee deceiued, in iudgige who best desor∣ueth. The greatest Clarke ({quod} Faliero) proues not alwaies the wisest man, and none more apt to be beguiled then he He valueth all, that glistereth, Golde: he estéemeth fayre wordes, as friendly deeds and thinketh that louely coun∣tenaunces, d spring from a louyng ndition. When ex∣perience Experience is the best Iudge. knowing the contrarie, will trie them all by the test. The corruptest Canker, bloometh lyke the swéetest Eg∣lantine: the bitter Bullice, resembleth the pleasaunt Damson, and the sowre Crab, the sauorie Pippin. Euen so good and bad, faire and fowle, chaste and vnconstaunt, The forme deceiueth, but the qualy¦tie sheweth the creature. Women are made of one moulde, framde of one forme, and naturaly graced, with a shamfast blufhing, but as in smell the Cankar, in tast the Bullice, and the Crab in re∣lysh, bewray their imperfections, euen so with cunning v∣sage, the subtillest woman, will shew her vnnaturall con∣ditions: counterfeits will to linde: Copper holds print, but not touch with Gold: Fire hid in Ashes, will breake footh in heat: water courses stopt, find out new passages: euen so the impatient woman, throwly moued, discloseth her passions: the prowde with sufferaunce, exceedeth in pampe, and the wanton sore charged, will fall to folly.
Well ({quod} Dondolo,) notwithstanding your directions be good, yet the pathe to heauen, is so difficult to fynde, as the ignoraunt passenger without direction, is like to fol∣low the beaten waye to Hell, and the surest guide is Ex∣perience: So that the direction of the Parents, is to be imbra∣ced The fore∣sight of Pa∣rentes. of the Chyldren in this behalfe. Parents with regarde, foresée the euils that negli∣gent Children, féele ere they withstand: Parents prouide liuing, to mainetaine their Childrens looue. Children often times by matching with beggers, dimi∣nish theyr parents inheritaunce. Parents labour for necessaries to support an house∣houlde. Children onely séeke for silken ragges, to vpholde their pride. Parents haue care to matche their Children with those of vertuous condition: and Children lightly regarde no more then their loouers amiable countenaunce. I confesse with you ({quod} Faliero) the ouersights of yonge A reprehen sion of for∣ced Mari∣age. men in their choyce, but I crye out vppon forcement in Marriage, as the extreamest bondage that is: for that the raunsome of libertie is ye death of the one or ye other of the married. The father thinkes he hath a happy purchase, if he get a riche young Warde to match with his daughter: But God he knowes, and the vnfortunate couple often féele, that he byeth sorrow to his Childe, slaunder to him∣selfe, and perchaunce, the ruine of an auncient Gentle∣mans house, by the riot of the sonne in Lawe, not loouing his wife. But admit there be no disagréement betwéene the par∣ties, which is rather fortune then foresight in parentes, who regarde that the landes and goods be great, but smal∣ly waye, whether the beauty and behauiours please or no: yet looue enforste, taketh knowledge neither of fréendes, Loue vvill not be con∣strained. fauour, forme, goods nor good bringing vp. Delicate meate, hardely forceth an appetite vnto the
sycke. Pleasure yieldes no sollace to the sorrowfull, no more can forcement enforce the frée to fancie. The Lyon with gentlenes may be tamed, but with curstnes neuer conquered: much more lordly is Loue, for as Petrarke deuyneth. The Prince, the Peere, the Subiect and the slaue, Loue giues with care, to him they make their mone And if by chaunce, he graunt the grace they craue, It comes of ruthe, by force he yeeldes to none. I could report many examples of large authoritie, to The euil of rediousnes. prooue this inconuenience, but to a néedelesse ende: for te∣diousnes duls the remembraunce of the hearer, and tyres the tongue of the Reporter. In dayly action, you may vew the libertie of Loue, his contempt to be constrained, and the great compassion he vseth when he is with curtesie ac∣quired, which account, inforced Mariage is sildome consi∣dered. There is procurement of fréendes before plightmēt of faith: safety for liuinges before assuraunce of loue, and clapping of handes before knitting of hartes: an occasion that the sorrowfull partyes morne when they are Marri∣ed, and reioyse when by death they are seuered. Dondolo replyed, that when there is no remedy Reason will driue them to Loue. But Faliero maintayned, that Reason and Loue, Reason and Loue, are enemies. are at deadely foode: Reason byds thée looue, but where thou art lyked, and Loue byds thée fancie where thou art hated: Reason directes for thy benefit, and Loue allures to thy detryment: and to conclude, the office of Reason is to appease olde gréefes, and the nature of Loue is to raise new debates. Tush, tush, ({quod} Bargetto,) among the married, quarrels in the day, are qualified with kisses in the night: where∣vpon groweth this Adage.
The iangling wordes, that Louers vse in rage: Giues Loue a grace, when anger dooth asswage. A wytnesse that Vnkindnesse inlargeth Loue, as the wracke of Winter dooth the beautie of Summer: then, although the Parents matche at first, be without the fancie of the Children, a reconciliation (in fine) will dou∣ble their comforte. Sir ({quod} Soranso, fauouring Falieros opinion) you wrest: An other reprehen∣sion of forcement in mariage the Adage is to a cōtrary meaning: for it is to be vsed but where there hath béene sometyme perfect loue, and where a grounded leue is, although the Married menace with their tunges, they malice not with their hartes: on the contrarie parte: looke what rule the Louer vseth in loue, the Enemie obserueth in reuenge. Therefore if the Maried abhorre before Marriage, they may well desemble with their tounges, but wyll neuer bée delighted in their harts: and where there is such a deuisi∣on in the desires of the Married, fayre, fained semblaunce, wil soone turne to flat fowle falling out: their thrift goeth forwarde as the carriage drawen by two Oxen, taile to taile: the Husband wyll haue no delight to get, nor the Wife desyre to saue: Seruauntes with negligence will waste, and hyrelinges, with proloyning, will winne: and (which is worst) the continuaunce of mallice, will custom them with mortall hatred: hatred betwéene the Married, bréedeth cōtencion betwixt the parents, cōtencion betwixt the parēts, raiseth quarrels among the kindred, & quarrels amōg the kindred, occupieth all the neighbours with slaū∣der: so yt for the most part, these forced Mariages, engende∣reth sorrowes for the Married, disquietnesse to both their fréends & kinded: but which still renueth gréefe, the scan∣dall of enemyes, endeth in neyther of theyr wretchednesse. This béeing said, lyttle auayled the further prooffes, of the contrary part, so full was the crie: Fye of forcement in Mariage, so that to paint out, the inconueniences therof in his proper coulours, Quéene Aurelia cōmaunded Faliero,
to confirme his sufficient reasons, with the discourse of some rare Historie. Whose commaundement he willingly satisfied, and reported as followeth. The Historie in the reproche offorced Mariage, reported by Faliero. IN the famous Cittie of Cirene, in Affrick, dwelled sometimes a riche Marchaunt named Tryfo. This Tryfo had a wealthy neighbour called Clearches, who of long time entertained one an other with a neighborly af∣fection Tryfo to inherite all his liuings, had but one onely sonne, named Sicheus: and Clearches one onely Daughter called Elisa. The Parents to establish (as they imagined) an euerlasting amitie, betwéene theyr houses, concluded a Mariage for theyr vnfortunate Children: making no doubt, but that they would as well inherite theyr affecti∣ons, as theyr liuings: of which there was hope enough, if the order had béene as good to establish theyr Loue, as the haste great, to sollemnize the Mariage: for that in theyr persons, appéered no signe of disagréement, nor in theyr abilyties cause of exception: but looue (that behouldeth no more quicknesse in a Dyamond, then in a dim Saphyre) though he take impression by sight, rooteth in contempla∣tion: Looue roo∣teth by Contem∣plation. which deuine exercise of the soule, smally delighteth gréen Youthe, who intertaine their thoughts with a thou∣sand vaine fancies: but to my purpose. The Mariage day drew neare: and as at the very push of Battell, the wise Captaine animateth his Souldiers, with some plausible Oration, euen so the night before the Mariage, Trfo schee∣led his sonne Sicheus, with this following aduertisement. My good sonne quod he, so great are the follyes of men, Aduise to a booteles purpose. and so cunning the deceits of women, as the most (especial∣ly the yonger sorte) wyll credite theyr lookes, without loo∣king into their liues: beléeue their woordes, and lightly re∣gard their workes: delyght to recount, theyr entertaine∣ments, and disdaine to reclion theyr shrewde payments.
For as the sycke pacient, comforted with the Phisitions words, leaues to examine the quallities of his receites: Buē so, the wretched Louer, cured with the yéelding of his Looue yeelds nei∣ther to wyt, strength nor lear∣ning. beautifull Mistrisse, with negligence, bothe ouer lookes his owne benefit, & her behauiour. Salomon was deceyued, Sampson subdued, Aristotle derided, and Hercules murthe∣red, by the illusions of errant honest women. Kinge Demetrius, notwithstanding he was bothe wise An ex∣streame af∣fection. and valiant, was so bewitched with the wyles of the no∣torious strumpet Lamia, as in open Schooles, he raysed disputations, whether the loue he bare Lamia, or the Iew∣els he bestowed vpon her, were the greater: or whether her merrit excéeded them bothe or noe. Yea when she di∣ed he caused her to be Intombed vnder his Bed Chamber windowe, to the ende, that with dayly teares he might worship her engraued bones, who (liuing) was of him in∣tirely belooued. If the wisest, and the worthyest, be thus ouertaken in their affections, what easie baites may beguile thée, who in yeares art young, of substaunce delicate and lustie, and therefore apt to looue: reddy in conceyt, and of considerati∣on vnperfect: whot in desire, and in discretion colde: My sonne, by experience I know, and to preuent thy ouerlike∣ly mischaunce in choyce: I haue chosen thée a wife, fayre to please theae, ritche to continue looue, her Parents my assured fréendes, and she thy affected loouer: loue her well, beare with her in small faultes, as a woman and the wea∣ker, & bridle thy owne euill affections as a man, her head and gouernour: and in thus dooing, God will multiply his blessings vpon you, and make your aged Parents to dye in peace, to sée you liue in prosperitie. Young Sicheus re∣garded his Fathers tale, as Schollers doo their Tutors, who giuing them leaue to playe, admonisheth them with all, to kéepe good rule, which they promise, and performe the contrary. With the like affection, Sicheus embraced Mariage. He was not so soone wearie of dallying with his Wife, as he was ready to entertayne a Harlot:
so that in shorte space, he became a common Louer, and a carelesse Husband: and withall, grew as arrogant in de∣fending his libertie, as dissolute in his actions and beha∣uiour: If his friends did gently aduise him, he was of age The title of Mariage, maketh youthe ar∣rogant. to counsell himselfe: if his Parents did sharply reprehend him, he would impudently aunswer, he was past correcti∣on: if his Wife found her selfe agréeued with his hard v∣sage, she might well complaine, but he would take no time to amend: so that his dayly actions of euill, tooke a∣way all after hope of weldeeing: in so much as he became odious vnto his friends, that beheld his lewde inclination: and a plague vnto his Wife, who was dayly oppressed, with his monstrous vices. So that, the ouercharge of sorrow made her many times passage, for these and such like passions. O vnhappie and ouer hastie Mariage, which in the pride of my youthe, with discontentments, makest me re∣semble a fayre Fig Tree, blasted with the after colde, of an vntimely Spring: but why blame I Mariage, which is Abuse of good things, worke euill effectes. honourable? alas, because the abuse of good things, worke euill effectes: Roses vnaduisedly gathered, pryck our hands: Bees vngently vsed stinge our faces, yet the one pleasaunt, and the other profitable: so that if their come any euil of that which is good, our folly or fortune is cause thereof: Aye me, when I was married, I was to young to be a wife, and therefore haue no reason to exclayme on folly. But Fortune, fowle falle thée, which crossest me with cursses, in possessing me with those things, which o∣thers That which is blessing to one, may be a curse to an other. holde for blessings: Wealth, that bestoweth plea∣sures on many, is the orriginall of my woe. Mariage, which giueth lybertye to many, inlargeth my Fetters, and demaundeth death for my raunsome: Beautie that ad∣uaunseth many, is to me a disgrace: for that, inioying her forme, I am of Sicheus not fantasied, of whom euery foule Carlesnesse of the hus∣band bree∣deth hate in the vvife. and common Trull is belooued: But therein, Fortune, thou doost me no wronge, for my hate towards him ouer∣ayseth his light regarde of me. O but my hart is conti∣nually
afflicted with his euill, and his finger neuer akes with my mallice. Yea: but Forberaunce edgeth the sword Choller, is soone qui∣ted, but Forbe∣raunce in∣creaseth mallice. of Reuenge, when Choller, though it often strikes, it woundes not muche. Raine falleth euery where, yet bea∣teth but the leaues, the thunder Bowlt lighteth in one place, but yet teareth vp the rootes: so though I dissemble tyll oportunitie, Sicheus shall féele my hate to death: and though I endure a space, I will redéeme my dying life: and perseuering in this resolution, Elisaes thoughts, that were lately drowned in sorrow, now flamed with desyre of Reuenge: and the Deuill who is the Executioner of Vengeance, presented her foorthwith this vngratious The Dîucll is the Exe∣cutioner of vengeasice. meane. A Yonge Gentleman, named Chion, among a troupe of other Ladyes and Gentlewomen, beheld fayre Elisae, with such a burning affection, as he foorthwith dispossessed his owne hart, to make his bosome the seate of her imagi∣ned Image: so that his soule, that continually eyed her beautie, and his heart, at the direction of his Mistresse, gaue such a heate to his desire, that had he béene sure to haue receiued Ixions torments, for his ambitious attemp∣ting of Iunoes loue, he could neither haue left to loue, nor An ex∣treame passion of Loue. haue forborne to séeke for grace: so that follow what would, he foorthwith presented his affections, in this en∣suing Letter. ❧Chions Letter to Elisae. FAyre Mistresse, had I vertue to perswade you to ruthe, as you haue power to make me loue: the discouerie of my blasing affections,
would melt you, (were you a Mountaine of Ice) to pitty. But for that Loue is more vehement in the heart, then in the tongue, I appeale to your owne motions for grace, if you haue euer loued: if not, I hope for such iustice at Ve∣nus handes, as you shall loue: and yet thus much I saye, al∣though I affye nothing in my perswations, because they be but wordes. I presume of my indeuours, for that I haue vowed my life, to death, to do you seruice: of which you can haue no better assuraunce, then imployement, nor I a hyer fauor, then to be imployed. Good Madame, martir me not, with ordinary doubts, in that my affections are not ordinary. For as your beau∣tye excelleth all other Dames, as the fayre Rose eache Garden Flower, euen so the full power of loue, hath made me in the estate of flaming flaxe, that is, presently to re∣ceiue grace, or in a moment to perish. Thus longing for your sweete aunswer, I somewhat succour my torments, with the imagination, that I kisse your gratious hand. No more his owne Chion. This Letter sealed, and subscribed, was delyuered to so cunning a Messenger as néeded no instructions in Chi∣ons behalfe. The Letter presented, and aduisedly reade by Elysa, surprised her with an vnmeasurable ioye: not so much for that she had purchased her self a faithfull Loouer, as procured her Husband a mortall enemy: of which Chi∣ons Letter gaue her not so great assuraunce, as the dispo∣sition of his countenaunces, in a former regarde: and ther∣vppon A naturall feare in a vvoman, suppresseth many of their euill affections. pursuing Sicheus with more hate, then minding Chion with affection, she mused vppon an number of mischéefes, inuented by desyre to be reuenged, and sup∣pressed by feare to be defamed.
In fine, remembring, that she had read: Loue quicke∣neth a mans wit, although it burieth Reason: To trie, if he could define, what Seruice she desired: she retourned Chion a Briefe, wherin he had a light to mischiefe, and yet might be read, without bleamysh of her honour: the Effect wherof, was this. Whyle CICHEVS doth lyue: ELISA can not loue. CHION, receyued this Scrowle: But yet before he presumed to reade the Contents, he kissed and rekissed the same: houldyng an opinion, that commyng from his Mistresses handes, it deserued suche honour (althoughe it contayned Sentence of his death: not vnlyke the foolishe An example, for Christian Subiectes. Mahometians: who vpon their Emperours Commaunde∣mentes, are ready Executioners of their owne lyues: But to my purpose: when Chion had throughly per∣vsed this strange Aunswere: weare it Cicheus his heauy Craft hath many times his will, with an opinion of honestie. Destinie, or a iust Scourge, for his fore trespasses: (accur∣sed that he was) he became too iust an Executioner of Elisaes wicked wil: but yet with this interpretation, that the loue she bare her Husband, directed her in this answer. In so much, as, ouercom with a furious hate towards Cicheus, as the Barre of his welfare, lyke a Lyon that bites the Iron grate, which houlds him from his pray: so∣denly with this salutation, he sheathed his Sword in Ci∣cheus intrayles. CICHEVS shall not lyue, To hinder CHIONS loue. The fact, was so fowle, and withall so publique, as the Wilful faults deserue no pardon. Officers of Iustice, immediatly seased vpō Chion: & for yt his bloodie sword, was a witnes of the trespas, there was no Plea to saue him: for wilfull faultes may be pitied, but deserueth no pardon: and to say trueth, neither did he de∣sire to lyue, because ELISA, the vertue of his lyfe, by the charge of Lawe, was bownd to sue him to death: who
followed the processe, with an apparance of sorrow, suche as if her Conscience had bene without scruple of guilti∣nesse, or her harte a thowsande degrées from ioye: when God knowes, she was puffed with the one, and the other, so that the wonder, at her dissimulation, equalled the re∣proche of her notorious hatred. To be shorte, this was the Iudges sentence: Chyon A fauour euil bestowed. should be beheaded, as amends for Cicheus death, and the Widdow should be endowed with his goods, for the dam∣mage done vnto her: but God which knoweth our sea∣cret faultes (when Iudges though they rule as Gods, know, but what they heare and sée as men) not willynge This Iudge is not parciall, for fauor, gain or feare. to hide such an haynous offence: First, amased all the hea∣rers, with an vnknow voice, Elisaes harte, is as Gyltie, as Chions hand: and therewithal, thundred this following vengeance, vppon the cleared malefactor. The Infant in Eysaes wombe, as it were engendred of the Parents ma∣lyce, at the verie instaunt, not obeying the course of Na∣ture, so tyrannised her Intrailes, as with very agony she dyed, and with all remayneth an opinyon, that the Hus∣band, Wife, and Sonne, by the appointment of the Gods, were Metamorphosed into Vipers, whiche venimous Beastes are thrall to these curses. The female after shee hath engēdred, murdreth the Male, because she wil not be The curses geuen vnto a Viper. ruled as an inferiour: and the yong eate themselues, forth of their Dams Intrailes: because they wil not be bound to the obedience of Nature. Well quoth Soranso) though your Metamorphos bee vnlykly, yet is it not vnnecessarilye applyed. For, for the most part, those which are forced to Mariage, agrée little better then Uipers. But it séemeth to mée (Segnior Falie∣ro) you haue too fauourably reported this Historie in Ely∣saes behalfe, considering the mortal venyme she tempered in her harte. Breuitie is best in passio∣nate matters, and effectatiō, in pleasaunt. O (quoth Faliero) longe fowle wayes, both tyreth the Horse, and wearieth his Ryder, where both the one, and the other, ouercommeth the length of fayre passages, with pleasure: Euen so, in a ruthfull Historie, ouer plentie of
wordes, both gréeueth the reporter, and giueth means for a thousande sighes to breake from the hearer, where affec∣ted circumstances giue a grace to a pleasant tale. Sorow Sorrowes  seth scilence. to heare their kinde thus stayned with crueltye, locked vp the tonges of the poore Gentlewomē a pretie while. In the end ({quod} Aluisa Vechio, a dame more olde, & bold then the rest,) meséemeth that Faliero hath but little fauored E∣lysa, We are boūd to showe as∣well the cause as to punnish the euill. for he hath showen her euill, and the scourge of her e∣uill: and in charitie, he was bounde to shewe the cause of her euill: I would quoth (Doctour Mossenigo) that Frier Bugiardo, had hearde this disputation, it might haue ben the breaking downe of the Altar, wherevpon he but lately Good morra∣litie, is better then euil doc∣trine. committed blasphemie, woulde haue more reformed him, then his pleasing Sermon, could haue confirmed vs. These aduantages the Doctor tooke to crosse the Gentlewomen, his late open enemies, and but nowe his fained friendes: There is no trustinge of a reconcyled e∣nemye. not vnlike a sneaking dog, that neuer barkes but bites withall. And to spite them the more, quoth hee, Monsier Bergetto, since your are bound from speaking of loue. you haue both cause and oportunitie to talke of womens hate. The example of a naughtye nature. Pardon me (quoth Bergetto) for this penance was but a due payne for my presumption, which I hope to ouer∣come with patient suffering: and sure in this milde aun∣swere: Bergetto shewed a moral vertue, and Doctor Mos∣senigo, A necessarie note. by his malicious question, a canckred nature: for simplie to offend procéedeth of frailtie, but to perceauer in euill is a noate of wilfull frowardnesse. Well, notwithstanding Bergettos temperaunce, a Ca∣ueler caught hold vppon this question, as a Mastiue vppon an old drye Mariebone, & to proue a womans hatred more A Caueller, hath colours for euerie question. greater then her loue: hée auouched manye cruell autho∣rities. But Faliero, who had donne them some iniurie in reporting the late history made them part of amends, & put their aduersarie to silence in prouing the contrary: his rea∣son was, that their hate, in the extremest degrée, stretched, but to the death of another, and their loue many times; hath done wilful murder vpon them selues.
Then it followeth, by how much we pryse our selues Wemēs loue, is more great thē theyr hate aboue an other, by so muche, theyr loue is greater then theyr hatred. Yea (quoth the Doctor) but their loue and hatred, are Wemē do a∣mis, but men are the cause. both violents: and euery violent is an euill. Yea Master Doctor (quoth Maria Belochy) their euills are the greater for men, for by their flattering enchaunt∣ments, wemen loue immoderately, and stung with mens Beauty ouer∣commeth the wisest. vnsusserable iniuries, they hate mortally. The Doctor replied, there was more power in her lookes, then authoritie in her wordes: but least he should be sub∣dued by the one, he would not contend with the other. Why (quoth Quéene Aurelia) beauty workes no more impression, in a Doctors eye, then doth poyson, in Miner∣uas shéelde, for he by Philosophy can subdue affection. Madame (quoth he) you may well compare beauty and poyson together, for their operations, are a lyke: saue that EVRIPIDES comparison, betweene Beauty and Loue. beauty is the more extreame, in that she infertes with her lookes, and poyson not, vnlesse wée taste it: or when it is most strong, not vnlesse we touch it: yea, Euripides, com∣pareth her inchauntement, with the inticementes of a kingdome, whereas he saith. IN these two thinges, a Kingdome to obtaine, Or else to worke the fayre to their will, (So sweetely tastes the grace of either gayne, As) men ne dread, their friendes with foes to kyll: The reason is, controulment shrinkes the place, Whereas a Kyng, as soueraigne Iudge doth sit, In loue, because that reason lackes his grace, For to restrayne, the selfe conceyghtes of wit, So that God knowes, in daunger standes his lyfe: That is a King, or hath a fayre wife. To deale in Princes affayres, the companye was too gréene: but in Beauties behalfe, there was neither Gen∣tleman, nor Gentlewoman, that was not desirous to boe reuenged of the Doctours detractyon: for hée that hath a
slaunderous tonge iniurieth manie, and is himselfe hated of all men: but for that it was nowe to late, too decide any sclaunder is generally ha∣ted. other great question, Quéene Aurelia adiorned the ending of anie centrouersie, vntill the next day. The Deuice of the second Nights Mask. BY a secreate foreknowledge of a Maske, with which Soranso, Bargetto, Ismarito, and others, purposed to honour Segnior Phyloxenus, and his company Sup∣per, was hastned, & soone ended: and after the one had sa∣luted the other, with an accustomed reuerence: while the rest of the Gentlemen interteined Time, with dauncing, or deuising with their Mistresses, the Maskers withdrew themselues, and about nine of the clocke, in this disguise, presented themselues agayne. A Consort of swéete Musycke, sounded the knowledge of their comming: yt Musitians, in Gyppons and Ve∣netians, of Russet and Blacke Taffata, bended with A Gentleman is not to shoe his passions, by his attyre. Murrey, and thereon imbroadered this Posie. Spero, Ti∣meo, Taceo: expressing thereby, the sundrye passions of Loue: and before them two Torchbearers, apparelled, in Yallowe Taffata Sarcenet: the Generall apparell of the Maskers, was short Millaine Cloaks, Dublet and hose, of Grene Satten: bordered with Siluer: Greene Silcke stockes: White Scarpines: Rapiers and Daggers syluered: Blacke Veluet Cappes, and white Feathers. They agréed to be thus attyred, to showe themselues frée. in the eye of Men in many cases are to be priuileadged, for an others merrite. the world, and couertly bound vnto their Mistresses. Ismarito for courtisy sake, because he was a stranger, and withal, in that his Mistres was the most honourable, had the leading of this Maske, who lighted with a torch, by his Page, apparelled in Blue Carnation, and whyte Ventoie, a Fan. Taffata: the colours of his Mistres: entred with a Ven∣toy in his hand, made like an Ashe-tree: wrethed about with Iuye: expressing this posye: Testantevirebo: with
which, vpon fit oportunitie, he presented Quéene Aurelia, his Mistresse: within which, weare (couertly hid these ver∣ses in English Italion. TWo Soueraigne Dames, Beautie and Honestie, Long mortal foes, accorded are of late. And now the one, dwels in my Mistresse eye, And in her hart the other keepes her state, Where both to show the vertue of this peace, To garnysh her, make riot of their Grace: In her fayre eye, Dame Beautie doth increace, A thousande Gleames, that doo become her face. And with her harte, thus doth the other deale, She lowly seemes, and mountes throw chast disdaine, So that her thrales doo serue with honest zeale, Or fearing blame, doe yeelde vnto their paine. The heauenly soules, enuies the earthes renowne: Such gyftes deuine, in humayne shape to see, And Ioue still moues, a Goddesse her to crowne: Which is decred, when Nature shall agree. Thus happy I [in Fortunes frownes long whyrld] A Goddesse serue, and soueraigne of the world. BARGETTO, lighted by a Page, apparayled in his Mistresse colours, Greene, Carnation and Whyte, fol∣lowed Ismarito, hauing the mouth of his Mask closed with a small Golden Lock, as a witnesse of the true exe∣cution of his Mistresse Commaundement: and vpon hys fist hee caried a Parrate to pratle to his Mistresse, vppon pausing betwéene euery solemne Almayne, and couertlye vnder the Parrats winge, was hidden this passion. HEnce burnyng sighes, which sparckle from desyre, To pitty melt my Mistresse frosen Hart: Her frosen hart, that Fancy cannot fyre, Nor true intent, perswade to rue my smart. Haste, haste, I pray, the Icye passage breake, And pleade for him, that is forbid to speake.
What though at first, you faile to calme her rage, Yet as the Sunne, from earth doth draw the Rayne, Your vertues so, the stormes of scorne may swage, Or feede Desyre, with showers of disdayne. For euen as drink, dooth make the Dropsey drye, So colde disdaine, compels Desyre to frye. Her wyll be done; but I haue sworne to loue, And with this vow, will nourish my delight: Her scorne, my woe, nay, time may not remoue, A faithful zeale out of my troubled spright. Yea more then all, Ile Sacrifice my blood, And fyre my bones, to doe my Mistresse Good. SORANSO, lighted by a Page, in Orange Tawny, Watchod and Greene, was the next that presented him selfe: who vppon his left side, had a Harte, of Crymson Granado Silke, so artificyally made & fastened to his du∣let, as if his body had opened, and his hart appéered, which fell downe at his Mistresse féete, vpon such a Fortune, as she was bounde to take it vp, which opened, she might be∣holde the Picture of her selfe, reading this submission. EVEN as the Hart, a deadly wounde, that hath Retires him selfe, with sighes to solace greefe: And with warme teares, his gored sides doth bath, But finding mone, to render small releefe: Impatient Beast, he giues a heauy Bray, And hasts the Death, that many woulde delay. So I whose Loue, beyond my hap doth mount, Whose thoughts as Thornes, yet prick me with Desire: Whose sute and zeale, return's with no accompt: Whose hope is drye, set in a harte of Fyre: Holde this for ease, foorthwith to spoyle the eye, That lookte and lou'de, then in dispaire to dye.
A happy Doome, if it for Law might stande, But men condemd, them selues may not dispatch. Their lyues and deathes, are in their Soueraignes hand So myne in hers, whose Lookes did me attache: And therfore I, to pardon or to kyll, Must yeald my selfe, the Prysoner of her wyll. L'ENVOY. THen Ladie faire, receiue what longes to thee, A fettred thralle, attyred with disgrace, And at thy feete, his wounded hart here see, And in the same, the Image of thy face? [mone, Whiche bleding fresh, with throbs throwes foorth his Rueth, rueth, deare Dame for that I am your owne. DONDOLO, lighted by his Page, apparayled in Tawnie, Blew and Black Taffata, was the fourth: who vppon his Breast, bare a Myrrour, set the oute∣side inwarde, and yet fastened so slope as it might receiue light, with an Imagination, that he showed his Hart, the Beautie of his Mistresse, & in yt thought, he wrot vpon the out side: Basta che spero: within whiche glasse, this sonet was coningly cōuated: which vpō a fit-oportunitie he pre∣sented vnto his Mistresse, Lucia Bella. FRom shore to sea, from dales to mountaines hie, From meddowes faire, amid the craggie rocke, Loue doth me leade, I know not whether I, But euermore a passage doeth vnlocke. Nowe doe I fight, now weepe, now death I feare, In all these stormes, yet loue the healme doth steare. In desert woods I wander to and fro, Where I wilde beastes, and firie Serpentes meete. Yet safe I passe, Loue doth direct me so. In tempestes rough, my barke doth alwayes fleete, Yea, when Sunne, Moone, and starres forsake the skie, Loue giues me light, from my faire Mistresse eye.
I mount to heauen, I know not with what winges: I sinke to hell, yet drowne not in distresse: Twixt Ice and flame, Loue mee in safetie bringes, But to what end? in sooth I cannot gesse: Yet hap what shall, Loue giueth me this scope, In daungers mouth, to liue alwaies in hope. FALIERO lighted by a Page, attired in Peach colour, yellow, and popeniay greene Taffeta, was the fifte & last that entred: who (as yf she were climynge vp his Arme) caryed a whyght Turtle, so artifyciallye made, as it deceyued, no lesse, then Parrhasius paynted Table Clothe: In whose Beake, were fynely rowled these Uerses. IF on firme Faith, one Hart vncharg'd with frawd, One langour sweete, one wish desire dooth moue: If honest Zeale, a gentle breast doth lawde. If wanderyng long, in the Laborinth of Loue, If wan pale cheekes, are witnesses of woe. If reaking sightes, throwne from a burnyng harte: If all these, and thousand sorrowes moe: May charme Mistrust, and make you rue my smart. Faire Mistresse, looke but in my Meagre face, And you shall reade, that I haue neede of Grace. In this order, and with these deuises, the Maskers en∣tred, and after they had saluted Quéene Aurelia, and the honourable of the company, they placed themselues, some of the one side, of the greate Chamber, and some of the other, obseruynge therein a more discreate order then the ordynary Maskers: who at their first entraunce, either daunce with them selues, or rudelye sease vppon the Gentlewomen: but these Maskers, intertained a smal Tyme, with their Musick, while they had leasure to looke about, and espie who were the worthyest amonge the Ladies.
In the ende, Ismarito kyssing his hand, with a Counte∣naunce abased, humbly desired Quéene Aurelia, to do him the grace, to daun wt him. Next, Bergetto made choice of Franceschina Santa: after him, Soranso, chewsed, Ma∣ria Belochi: Dondolo, raysed Lucia Bella: and last of all, Faliero, tooke his Mistresse Catharina Trista: and thus, they obserued in their choyce, the same course they kepte in their entrance. After this Companie had performed all the ciuill Ser∣uices of Maskers, leauyng behinde them, their Mistresses honoured, and the whole companie much contented: they departed in the good order they entred: sayng that their Mistresses were possessed with their seuerall Deuices. Which done, the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen be∣gan to shrinck out of the great Chamber, as the Starres séeme to shoote the Skie, towardes the Breake of Daye. FINIS.
The thyrd Daies Exercise Contayning: sundrie Morall Preceptes: With a large Discouerie, of the inconveniences of Rash Mariages. THE Aucthorytie, is dayly Experi∣ence, that prooueth, how that the bitterest worldly Sorow, soone endes, eyther by Benefit of Fortune, or violence of death: The vncer∣taintie of∣worldly thin∣ges. neither is the firmest worldly pleasure, ye of more continuance, then an Imagyna∣tion, whiche is straight crost with a contrary Suggestion. What difference was there betwene the Fortunes of Cesar and Pompey, when their endes were both violent? Both POMPEY and CESAR, died violently saue that I hould Cesars to be the harder: for that, he was murthered in the Armes of Prosperytie, and Pompey, at the féete of Disgrace: but being both dead, vnto their Mo∣numentes, Writers adde this Opinion. Cesar, in his lyfe, was more fortunate then Pompey: and Pompey, more honest then Cesar. A proofe, that some Disgrace, is the ground of Good Re∣porte: and some good Fortune, the Trumpe of Infamie: therfore, let no man yeld to Aduersitie, nor affie too much in Pompe and painted Prosperytie: for the one, is but vexation, the other vanitie, and both in short time vanish. A sodayne alteration (as me thought) made me to con∣template of these causes: for that (commynge out of my lodgyng, somwhat tymely) I entred the great Chamber, with as strange a regarde, as he yt cōmeth out of a House full of Torch and Taperlights, into a darke and obscure Corner: knowing that at midnight (aboute whiche tyme, I forsooke my company) I lefte the place, attyred lyke a seconde Paradice: the earthly Goddesses, in brightnesse, resembled Heauenly Creatures, whose Beauties dase∣led mennes eyes more then the Beames of the Sunne:
The swéet Musick recorded the Harmonie of Angels, the straunge and curteus deuices in Maskers, séemed as fygures of deuine Misteries. And to be short, the place was a verie Sympathie, of an imagined Paradice. And in the space of one slumbe∣ring sléepe, to bee left lyke a desert wildernesse, without any creature, saue sundrie sauadge Beastes, portrayed in the Tapestrie hanginges, imprest suche a heauy passion in my minde, as for the time, I fared as one, whose sences had forgot how to doo their bounden offices: In the ende, to recomfort my throbbing hart, I tooke my Citterne, and to a solempne Note, sung this following Sonet, which I a litle before, composed vpon a quiet thought, I possessed after my reading of Boetrus of the consolation of Philoso∣phy, translated into Italion, by Cosimo Bartoli. FArewell, bright Golde, thou glory of the worlde, Faire is thy show, but some thou mak'st the soule: Farewell, prowde Mynde, in thousand Fancies twirld: Thy pompe, is lyke the Stone, that still doth rowle. SISIPHVS. ¶ Farewell, sweete Loue, thou wish of worldly ioy, Thy wanton Cuppes, are spiste with mortal sin: Farewell, dyre Hate, thou doost thy selfe annoy; Therefore my hart, no place to harbour in. ¶ Enuy, farewel, to all the world a foe, Lyke DENNIS BVLL, a torture to thy selfe: Disdayne, farewell, though hye thy thoughts doe flow, Death comes, and throwes, thy Sterne vpon a shelfe. Flatterie, farewell, thy Fortune dooth not last. Thy smoothest tales, concludeth with thy shame: Suspect, farewell, thy thoughts, thy intrayles wast, (blame And fear'st to wounde, the wight thou faine woul'dst
Sclaunder, farewell, which pryest with LYNX his eyes, And canst not see, thy spots, when all are done: Care, Care, farewell, which lyke the Cockatrice: Doest make the Graue, that al men fame would shun. ¶ And farewell world, since naught in thee I finde But vanytie, my soule in Hell to drowne: And welcombe Phylosophy, who the mynde Doest with content, and heauenly knowledge crowne. During the time, that my thoughtes swounded with the charme of my passionate Musick. The Sun decked in his most gorgious Raies, gaue a bon Giorno, to the whole troupe: and so many as were, within the sownde of my Instrument, were drawne, with no lesse vertue, then the Stéele vnto the Addamant. In so much, of the suddaine, to beholde the statelynesse of the presence, I was dryuen foorth of my muse, with a starklyng admyration, not vn∣lyke vnto him, that sléeping ouer a dying brand, is haste∣lye wakened with the lyghtenynge of a thousande spar∣cles. The offices of Curtesie discharged on euery part, Seg∣nior Soranfo fayed: the Poets fayned not without reason, that Amphions Harp gaue fence vnto stone Walles. For A commen∣dation of Mu sick. so deuine (quoth hée) are the operations, and vertues of Musick. As he that shall be bounde, to declare her parti∣culer Graces, shall be no lesse troubled then the Paynter Zeuxes was in the countersettinge of Cupid: Who after much trauell, was driuen to draw him blynde, for otherwise, he had vnder taken Sisiphus taske, because the twinckling reflections of Cupids eies, threw a thousande Beauties vpon his face, and shadowed the worke of the A fayning how CVPID came to be called blinde. Paynter. Thus through Ignoraunce, Cupid hath euer since bin reputed blinde, and for his owne perfection, is honoured with ye title of the God of Loue. The name of Loue gaue
a large occasion of discourse: but for that an other tyme was appoynted for those disputations, and the morninge was wholly dedicated, vnto the seruice of God: the questi∣on drowned in Soransos nggestion, and the whole com∣pany scylent, in such affayres, attended Quéene Aurelias comming: who, in chaunge of gorgious, and rich appar∣rell, kept her accustomed howre, to go vnto the Chappel. By that time seruice was ended, and euery mans deuoti∣on donne, dinner was ready to be set vppon the Tables, with such choyce of delicate Uiandes, as vnto the boun∣tie of the Feast, there might nothing be added. After that Quéene Aurelia and the rest, had taken their ordinarye places, euery one helped the disgestion of their meate, either in inuenting some ciuill merriment, or in hearinge it reported by an other. Bergetto all this while, was neither heard to speake, nor séene to smyle. Which, perceiued by Franceschina Sancta his Mistres, she (moued with the spirit of compassion) studied, howe with Iustice, shée might reuoke her sentence, and vn∣string her seruauntes tougue: and to that ende, shee de∣maunded, how thrée good turnes, might be vnrewardēd, A question to trye a quicke witt. thrée offences pardened, thrée iniuryes leaft vnreuen∣ged, and in euerye of these; Iustice preserued? This questi∣on passed through the table: and retourned without his true resolution. In the end (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) Monsier Ber∣getto, what is your opinion? Sir [{quod} Bergetto) my Mistresse hath locked the tongue, that should pronounce it. Why (quoth Franceschina) these be no questions of loue, and therefore you haue libertie to speake. No Lady (quoth Bergetto) but his vertue may appeare in the aunsweare. Well (quoth his Mystresse) if you canne cleare your trespasse, by one of these questions, I must do no iniurie to Iustice, and therefore, saye your pleasure. Uppon this warrant (quoth Bergetto) to your first
thrée, I aunsweare. A Captayne maye betray his charge, which is a benefit to the enemy: but the betrayer, is not Three good turns, may be receiued, vnre warded. to be receiued as a friende: for he that will sell his coun∣tryman, may not be held assured, to a straunger. Second∣ly, a Théefe that peacheth his fellowes, doeth good to the Common wealth: & yet, deserueth no reward: for he that may preuileadg his own theft, in bewraying other mens, will euermore steale vpon presumptiō. Thirdly, to win a mans money, is a good turne, & yet the loser is not to be recompenced: for his intent, was to winne the winners. Three offen∣ces, may with Iustice be par doned. To your second thrée questions, a man maye offende through ignoraunce, which is excused without a pardon: for ignoraunce, is without intent of euill: therfore to be suffered, though not to be cherished: A man may offend, through necessitie, which commendeth Iustice, with the vertue to forgiue: for necessity, is bound vnto no law, and therefore, deserueth not to be punnished with the rigour of law: To the third, a man may offend through rashnes, & make amends wt repentāce: which Iustice may pardō, wtout preiudice to equity: & herein (faire Mistres) I haue showen my trespas, & the reparation of my trespasse. Three iniu∣ries, may pas vnreuenged. To your third thrée questiōs, a man may hurt his friend against his will, which is an iniurie: yet, ought not to be reuenged: for reuenge, can but afflict ye trespasser, and the misfortune, gréeueth him: Before the husband, a man may kisse the wife, by mistaking: which is an iniury, not to be reuenged: for the wife may wipe away the wrong wt her hand, & the husband by reuēge, may make worke for the Chirurgion: And to ye last, a man must be content to take good wordes of a beggerly debtor: which is an iniury not to be reuenged: for a man can haue of a Cat but her shin, & of a begger, but his scrip: vnles he wil sel ye Appotherm y the greace of ye one, & the dice maker, ye bones of the other. The whole company gaue a verdict, yt Bergetto, had er∣poūded his Mistres doubts Wtout blemish to Iustice: and therfore were ernest suters for his remission. Whom she pardoned, with this prouiso, that he should behaue him∣selfe honourably towardes women heareafter.
For his lybertie, Bargetto reuerently kissed his Mistresses hande, and thus all vnkindnesse pacified. Quéene Aurelia mouyng alitle, raisde the companye, from the Table, who a pretty tyme after dinner, had res∣pyt, to prepare their wits, for the aceustomed exercise. The Clorke had no sooner sounded the disputation howre: But Queene Aurelia, and her Ladies were redy in the drawinge Chamber, and vpon warnyng, the cho∣sen Gentilmen gaue their attendaunce: who hauyng ta∣ken their places. The Eunuck (knowing his charge) vnto the Lute sung this Sonet, TO thee I sende, thou fayrest of the fayre, The Vowes and Rites, of an vnfayned hart: Who with my plaintes, doe pearce the subtil Ayre. That Beautie thou, maist heare and see my smart. Who sues, but that thy Deputie on earthe, May take in gree, my off'ringes of good wyll, And in accompt returne my Loue in worth, With charge thy priestes, my bones to Ashes burne: And with the same, thy Aulters all to meale, That I may make [to serue, eche Louers turne] The peace off'ring, with Sacrisice of zeale. This Sonet in Beauties behalfe, put the whole compa∣nie in remembraunce of Doctor Mossenigoes last nights lavish speach of Beauty, and the scandalous comparyng of her to Poyson, or, which is worse, a more subtil infection: And therefore, to bee resolued of his wronge, or her gyl∣tines, Quéene Aurelia, appointed Monsier Bargetto to be her Champion, and to assist him, (for it was agréed that frée choice of Mariage, shoulde (this daye) bee disputed: whose affection for the most procéedeth from the vertue of Beautie,) she lycensed euery one that fauoured her cause: which done, shewilled ye Doctor and his fauourers to spit their venym.
Maddame ({quod} the Doctor,) it neither beséemeth the stay∣ednes Olde men are bound by their grauitie, to say no more then they vvill stand to. of my yeares, nor agreeth with the grauetie of my profession, in such an assembly, to speake the thing I dare not auouch, & therefore since it cometh to this issue, that I must, hazard vpon a charge, or shrinke away with shame: though my ennemyes be many, my cause is iuste: vppon which warrant I am feareles of my foes, and resolute in myne opinion. Bergetto likewise glad of this fauour, protested before Quéene Aurelia and the whole company, that in the faith∣full execution of his charge, the prodygall spoyle of hys lyfe, should giue contempt to death, The Doctor, that had giuen as many déepe woundes The dashe of a Pen, is more gree∣uous then the coun∣terbuse of a Launce. with his Pen, as euer he had doone with his Launce, shronke no more at these threates, then an Oke at the Helue of an Are, but coldely wylled him, to vse his plea∣sure, he was ready to defend (or to die, in) his oppinion. Wherevpon Bergetto, to strengthen himself the better, made this remembraunce, of the yesterdayes reporte. It is ({quod} he) already approoued, if the married in forced Mariages, could as well finish with the Church, as they Free choise in Mariage defended. can account with their consciences: their ioy to be Marri∣ed was not so colde, as their desire to be deuorsed would be whot: therfore by this awkeward successe in forcement: a frée choise in Mariage, can not choose, but continue (as I thinke) as much loue betweene the Married, as the other sowed debate. Rashnes and constraint ({quod} the Doctor) are bothe vio∣lents Reproofe, &c. and euery violent is a vice, then how can a vicious attempt haue a vertuous successe: Men doo euill ({quod} Ber∣getto) Defence, &c. that good may come of it, and it is allowed. And men doo good ({quod} the Doctor) that euill may come Reproofe, &c. of it, and it is forbidden: for it is the intent bothe in good and euill, that commendeth or condemneth: and what good intent hath the foolishe young man, that by his rashnes in Marriage, robbeth his parentes of their comfort, and him selfe of his credit.
He satisfieth his fancie ({quod} Bergetto) a speciall regarde in Marriage: and where there is a swéete accorde betweene the married, the parents cannot but reioice, and the neigh∣bours are bound to speake well: and beautie in his wiues face, will féede his heart with a thousand delights: so that he shall sustaine want with little gréefe, and labour to get wealth with a great desire: for where vnitie is, small things groweth to great. Such may be the vnitie (quoth the Doctor) as small Reproofe, &c. gréefes may growe to great sorrowes: when the winde is in the neck of a stooping Trée, it falleth downe right: and when the vnthriftines of the Husband, agréeeth with the euill huswiferie of the Wife, Sorrow striueth to be in the married mans bosome, before the maried be in his wiues bead: and what other expectation may there be, either of the one or the other, when he satisfyeth his fancie, before he considereth of the dutyes of Mariage: and she in taking an husband, that is ignoraunt in the affaires of husban∣dry, and in offices of Mariage: It is the office of the mar∣ried, to be aduised ere he loue, and louing to be reposed in Duties before Mariage. his choise: It is the office of the married to prouide for an Household, before he take possession of his hearts delight: and it is the office of the marryed, to examine the condi∣tions of his Mistresse, before he enter into any couenaunt of Mariage. And how can he be aduised, that marrieth without the priuitie of his Parents? and how can he sup∣porte an household, that marryeth with his Parents dis∣pleasure, vpon whose deuotion he liueth? and how can he iudge of his Mistresse conditions, that wanteth discretion to consider of his owne estate? And where you alledge, the beautie of his wiues face, wyll féede the husband with de∣light: his delight will starue his body, without other sup∣plyes: so that when charge shall increase, and his wealth diminish, let the foolish younge marryed man, impose him self vpon this fortune, that he cannot so oft kisse the swéete lippes of his beautifull wife, as he shalbe driuen to fetche bitter sighes, from his sorrowfull hart.
Sir (quoth Soranso, taking Bergettos parte:) of two Defence, &c. euils the least is to be chosen: and it is lesse euill for a man, to lyue a while hardly, and satisfye his owne fan∣cie, then to liue euer discontented and please his fréendes. The good behauiour of the maryed, may winne the Pa∣rents to consent, and amend their exhibition: or death may come, and put them in possession of theyr Parentes ly∣uing. If either of these chaunce, as one is shortely like to happen, the penaunce that they indured, wyll season theyr prosperitie, and counsell the Married to kéepe with∣in their teacher, to leape within their latchet, and lyue within theyr compasse: The louing aduise of the husband, wyll reforme the disposition of euill in the wife. For (as No man nor womā, but in some point de∣serue to be blamed, and in some other to be praised. Plato sayeth,) there is no woman so perfect good, but in some one point may be reprehended: nor no man so fault∣lesse, but that somewhat in him may be amended: so that if the Husband gently reprehend the fault of his Wife, and the Wife patiently suffer the offence of her Husband, the abylytie of theire estate wyll sustaine a househould, and their looue and agréement wilbe an especiall comfort vnto them selues, and a commendable example vnto all the neighbours. The best of bothe your euils (quoth Doctor Mosseni∣go) is starke naught: but our question was not, to chuse Reproofe, &c. the least of euyls, but that which is simply good: notwith∣standing, to aunswer to the sequell of this rashenesse in Mariage, you saye, theyr good behauiours may recouer theyr Parents good wyll, but I Prophesie, that theyr e∣uill demeanures, are more likely to extinguish the affec∣tion of a Father: for necessitie wyll accustome the Husband with dishonest shyftes, and kéepes his fayre Wife from béeing ydle: for want muste be supplyed, what shame so euer ensue. Then is it lykely, that the Parentes which did shutte their Pursses in the be∣ginning, to punishe the contempt of their Chyldren,
wyll now fast locke them, to be reuenged of theyr infa∣mie. And where you gaue them a hope, by their parentes death. I say no man dyneth worse, then hoping Tantalus, nor none are more wetshod, then they which expect deade Their pen∣naunce is great that liue in in∣certaine hope. mens shooes, and when they fall, the soules (perhaps) wilbe worne: I meane the Father in his life tyme, may take order to dye euen with the worlde, or at leaste, leaue his liuing maimed, and the most of his substaunce wasted: for in a tempest at Sea, what Pylote hath any care of goodes, that séeth the ship, at the poynte to syncke: euen so what parents can haue any ioye of worldly wealth (more An vngodly childe ma∣keth an vn∣thriftie Fa∣ther. then to defende necessytye) when he séeth, the heyre bothe of his labour, and lyuing, out of hope of weldooing: so that through this rashnesse many sonnes, during their fathers lyues, with hard shiftes, shift of necessity, and after their deathes liue disinherited: and not altogether▪ so much for their owne contempt, as for their wiues incontinencye: & truely in the fyrst, although the parentes may be thought The seueral paines of offences. cruell, yet are they not to be reputed vnnaturall, for that euery offence hath his proper scourge: restitution is the true payne for robbery: an eye is reuenge for an eye, a hand for a hande, death challengeth death, and disobedi∣ence in the sonne, deserueth disinheritaunce, by the father. Touching the dishonesty of the daughter in lawe (as it is great hazarde but that necessitie, thus bestowed, will bend her a little:) the seueritie is sufferable, if her husbandes Incontinen¦cy slaunde∣reth an ho∣nest mans house. father shut her forth of his doores, for that the honour of a mans house is so delicate, as it can awaie with no staine: and (reseruyng your fauours vertuous dames) where a strumpet entereth, she stuffeth the house with slaunder, as carraine infecteth the ayre with stincke, yea the occasion is iust: if the father spare to gette, and the mother cease to saue, nay if they spend that which they haue, for it weare great pitty, that there should be any thing leafte either of their liuyng or labour, to support a harlots pride. O how innumerable are the inconueniences, of this time∣ritye in Marriage? The wise by coniecture and daylye
experience séeeth, and the foolish (with sorrowe in theyr own entrailes) féeleth: and therfore as a hainous offence: the auncient Philosophers (which without partiallitie, checked Vice and cherrished Vertue) punished this con∣tempt of Chiloren. Plutarke saythe, the sonne that mar∣ryeth Paynes for timerity in Marriage. without his Parents consent, among the Greekes was publikely whipped: among the Lacedemonians dis∣hearited, and among the Theabanes bothe disinhearited, and of his Parents openly accursed. The yonger company, began to feare a restraint of Freeloues libertie, and their Goddesse Beauties disgrace: The Doctor gaue Capitaine Bergetto such crosse blowes, who though he fainted in his opinion, yet (like a Cocke, that hath one of his eyes stricken out, and his head bared to the braines, yet striketh vntill he dyeth) he assayled the Doctor with this one more reason. Maister Doctor ({quod} he) they go farre that neuer returne, Defence, &c. and the battaile is very cruell where none escapes: what although a number speede yll in making of their owne choyce, many haue prospered well. In matches of the best foresight, good Fortune hath not alwayes béene found, and yet foresight is not to be blamed, nor the other aduenture to be dispitefully condemned. Ouid sayeth, that Forma numen habet, then by vertue of her Diuinitie, it is like she will sustaine them in aduersity, that in prosperity became her vowed Seruaunts: neither dooth this stayne of the wiues behauiour often follow, for where Beautie, Loue, & Free choise, maketh the Mariage, they may be crossed by Fortune, and yet continue faithfull. Piramus and Thisbie. Romeus and Iuliet, Arnlt and Amicla, and diuers others at the point to possesse their loues, were dispossest of their liues, but yet vnstained with dishonesty. This want with which you threaten them, what is it in respect of the plea∣sures these Louers possesse? Wealth which is the contra∣rie, A discriptiō of wealth abused. what is it, béeing ill vsed? a beautie in the Chest, a bondage to the minde, and a blot in the soule: but a couple vnited by this affection, for a little Fleabiting of worldly
pennury, suck Nectar betwéene their lippes, Cram Manna The ioye of true loue. into theyr Bowels, and possesse Heauen in their hearts. How farre Maister Doctor argueth from the opinion of auncient Philosophers, and famous Schoolemen, these authorities witnesseth: Ouid, Nigidius, Samocratius, Pe∣trarke, and others in their life time, addored Beautie, with their bookes honoured her, and by their deathes eternized her glorye. But for that her vertues be Diuine, and Maister Doctor is soyled with slaunder, blasphemy and mallice, he is vnworthy to be perfected, with one thought of her excellencie, which ignorance maketh him so ob∣stinate. The yonger company began to take heart, in hearing of this Tale, so that the Gentlewomen streng∣thened Bergetto with good countenaunces, for (for modesties sake) they were silent, and the Gentlemen succoured him with theyr best reasons. But all this hope prooued but a lyghtning ioye: for Doctor Mosenigo, dubble inraged, partly for the check he receyued, partly for the countenaunce the company gaue his aduersarie: but chéefely for to behold a new Dye, set vpon a stayned matter, so sharpely refuted Bergetto, as he had no delyght to reply, nor his supporter desire to succor him. (Quod he) Ouid dreamed of a diuinity in Beautie, but neuer tasted other then a swéete venim, to procéede from her: He loued Iulia, Augustus Daughter, and enioyed her: but with what fortune? marry, he was stript of his liuing, and spoyled of his libertie, for her sake. Nigidius, an auncient Ro∣maine, Sundry famous Philoso∣phers and Poets pu∣nished for their loues. and in great fauour with the people, for this folly, tasted of Ouids fortune, which was, to dye in exile. Samocratius was in youthe, so prodigall of his Loue, as in age hated of his fréendes, he dyed in Prison, with fa∣mine. And as for frantick Petrarke, I feare me Madonna Laura smyled more often in reading of his follyes, then he himselfe did, with the swéete recompences of his fan∣cies. All these were men learned, wise, and in their other actions (for their grauitie) were admyred, and onely for their lightnesse in loue, liue to this day defamed: For your
other authorities, your owne remembraunce of theyr deathes, shew a vengeaunce sufficient, for the contempt of the Childrē. But where you say Beautie, Loue, and Free choyse, lade the Maried with such pleasures, that they endure pouertie, as a Fleabiting. In déede, want wyll so quicken them, as the Husband wyll leape at a Cruste, and the Wife trot for her Dinner. But suppose the best, thus married (whose loues are indifferent) with patience doo indure the afflictions of Fortune: theyr agréement is no generall warrant. The greater number of these Ma∣riages, Cause of rashe Mariages. are not solempnyzed, through equaltye of loue, but through inequaltye of lyuyng. The coueitous Mar∣chaunt, with no more delight héereth the passing bell of his ritch neyghbour, which promyseth hym the first loppe of his sonnes liuyng, then the poore gentleman eyeth the able heyre, with desyre to match him (perhappes) with his fayre proude Daughter. Then as pleasaunt baytes baineth Fyshe, as counterfet Calles beguileth Foules, and as Crocadyles teares, intrappeth Fooles: to lyke destruction, lures are throwne to lime this gallant: freendly vsage shall intye hym, good wordes shall wel∣come hym, curtesy shall chéere hym, Beauty shall be∣witch hym, and fayre promises, shall altogeather beguile hym. Newe Uessels are apt for any licquor, and young heades (empty of experyence) are seduced, with easey sub∣tiltyes, to be shorte, he shalbe betrothed by cunning: hys An vnfor∣tunate Mariage. promyse once past (for that in delaye, is daunger) the Ma∣riage must be in poste haste, and the mislikyng at leasure: but in most of these matches, the sorrowe begynneth, be∣fore the solemnitye of the Marriage endeth. The father hearyng of the indiscression of his sonne, galleth his harte with greefe: the mother, spoyleth her eyes wyth teares, and the freend occupyeth his tounge, in bmoning of hys kynsemans follye. There is yet a further sor∣rowe, bytter to the father and vnbenefyciall to the sonne. The father that thought to bestowe hys daughter wyth the Marryage money of hys sonne, is forced
to diminishe his inheritaunce, for her aduauncement. And by this meanes, the ioye which begunne in the beau∣tie of his Wife, is like to end in the beggery of himselfe: and since these vnsauerie effectes, growe from the vertue of Beauties Diuinitie, let Mounsier Bergetto burne in his Heresie. But Doctor Mossenigo will holde himselfe happie, neuer to be warmed by her fyre. Bergetto had not a worde more to saye, but angerly A Gentle∣man in his reuenge ought not to offend a ciuill company. looked vpon his Sworde, with a countenaunce that pro∣mised vengeance vpon the Doctors blasphemous tongue, had he not béene stayed with a reuerent consideration of the company. In the end, because Maister Doctor should not be too proude of his conquest, nor Bergetto ouermuch appalled with his defeate, {quod} Signior Fabritio, Iudge of the contro∣uersies: in a single controuersie the argument of the one, is to be allowed as truthe, and the cauiling of the other, to be reiected as error: but for that this hath béene a dou∣ble contention, as in defence and reproofe, bothe of Beautie and Free choise of Mariage, Madona Isabella, and I, pro∣nounce sentence with Bergetto, in the behalfe of Beautie, for Beautie is a blessing, and if she worke euill effectes in some, their naughtie disposition, and not Beautie is to be blamed: and with Doctor Mossenigo we like wise giue iudgement in reproofe of rashenesse in Mariage. This iudgement pleased Quéene Aurelia and the whole company, who were glad that they were thus forewarned of the inconueniences of Free choise in Loue, which they a little fauoured, but yet were more glad of the Triumphe of Beautie, whom they all affectedly honoured: and therefore quoth Quéene Aurelia, good Wine néede no Iuie Bushe, fyne Marchaundise are Vertue commen∣deth her selfe. solde without a Signe, and Beautie is sufficiently commended by her owne excellencie, and therefore we wyll spare Bergettos ready seruice, vntill oportunitie, present further imployment.
But for yt your Tryumphe shall haue his full right, we ∣cence you to tel some one Historie to confirme your reasōn The Doctor glad of this lybertie, who (althoughe he had receyued no Disgrace, yet he repined that he had not the whole honour of the Disputation, determyned in his Historie, a litle more to nettle the fauourers of Beautie: with which intent, vpon Quéene Aurelias commaund∣mente, he reported as followeth. The Historie in reproofe of rash Mariages, reported by Doctor Mossenigo. BEsides Capo Verdo, in times past, the capitall Citie, within the kingdome of Naples, sometime dwelled a forward young Gentleman called Marco Malipiero: the sonne and heire of Caualiero Antonio Malipiero, in his youthe renowned, for manie valiant seruices. This young Gentleman in the pride of his youth, became in∣amoured Beautie, hlfe a owrie in a woman. of a most fayre Gentlewoman named Felice, the Daughter of Philippo Prouolo, an auncient Gentle∣man, by harde aduenture decayed. But yet in dispight of fortunes iniurie, who disabled him with many losses, and thereby, of small wealth to aduance his Daughter: Felice her selfe was inriched with suche perfections of of nature, that the friends lamented, but could not blame the affection of young Malipiero: which in verie déede, grewe so great, as it contemned the duetie of a childe, and scorned the aduise of a Father: Felice alone gouerned him, and none but Felice he obeyed. Prouolo intertayned Malipiero, with the curtisie of a friende, as the good partes he possessed: as for the possi∣bilitie The poore eke th to matche with wealthy. of liuing he stoode in, who (striking the yron while it was whote) secreatelie fianced Malipiero to his fayre Daughter. The old Knight stormed at these newes, and not withstanding this knowne contract, if by any perswa∣sions he could haue reuoked his sonnes consent,  would haue caused the Pope to haue dispensed with his consci∣ence:
and to that effect, her caused sundry of his friendes to deale with him in these affayres. And among many an auncient Gentleman, his Gouernour, and somtimes his Schoolemaister (whose granetie, Malipiero reuerensed) in a mylde order commoned with him, and amonge other questions demaunded, with what reason he could iustifye his light affections, and condemne the sounde aduyte of friendes. Malipiero, resolute in his loue, boldly aunswered, that A rash aun∣swer. Felices deuine beauty, was a sufficient warrant for ether. This wise Gouernour would not harden his hart with The wordes sheweth the wit of the e∣porter, but his gesture causeth atten tion in the hearer. obstinacy, in a sharp reprehension of his publike arrogant aunswere, but with an affable countenaunce, coniured hym to lysten vnto his graue sayinges. O (quoth he) is she beautifull? then you haue worke inough to watch her, & mischance sufficient to suspect her. Is she beautifull? then her rashnesse in consent, show∣eth that she is indiseréet: so that the diuersitie of quallities will soone finde out a diuision in your desires. Is she beautifull? then it is lyke (by her quick agrée∣ment) that she is poore, then is her Loue fastened on your riches: so that when you lacke money to maintaine her pompe, she leaues, to make much of your person. Is she beautifull? then she is withall (lightly) proude, and the pride of a woman (saith Perander) is lyke vnto a The nature of Pride. Dropsey: for a drinke encreaseth the drouth of the one, se (sayeth he) Cost enlargeth the expence of the other: then if your Purse be not open to féede her folly, she will pawne her honour to please her fancy. Is she beautifull? then her indiscreation, in this ha∣stinesse, showes her but a slender huswife, so that the charge of your house, shall eate and consume your gaines abe. Is she beautiful? then your dispence, must be in her disposition, or els her lookes will litle repose you: if she der your goodes, her expences will be great, and her ge ges small, your house shall be stored with costlye , & your seruants starued with lack of meate: she will
goe like a Pecock, & you like a meacock: what followeth? in her brauery, she must be séene: if she take the lyberty to walk, shee giueth other occasion to speake, & your selfe to sigh. A faire picture set in the Market place, moueth many to gase: if the counterfet giueth content ment, the crea∣ture must néedes delight: and if any view your wife with vnlawfull affection, his practises wil be many to win his desyre. Take héede, you vndertake an intisinge course, which without good order, will make you breathlesse be∣fore the midst of your race: you enter into great charge, sée meanes to support it. Your Father liues, and must main∣taine his accustomed reputatiō: if he spare to sustaine you, it is much: to defraye the charge, of your Wife and hous∣holde, he cannot: therefore so loue, that this dispence may be shared betwéene you, and your wiues Parents: and as far foorth as I can see, Felices Father hath much adde, to kéepe rayne out of his house top: then if with difficultis he lieth drye in his Bed, it is impossible he should haue a∣nye great cheare at his Boorde: what reckonyng can you make, to be supported by him that hath it not? and howe can you dare presume, to bée supplyed by your owne Fa∣ther? when the timeritie of your marriadge displeaseth him to death. Looke into these mischéeues, before you féele the miseries they presage: looke before you leape, leaste you be wet, before you be a ware: your friendes hath a comfort, but you the benefite of weldooing. The Schoolemaister gaue Malipiero this aduice, with such a temperate gesture: that (although good counsell pre∣uailed not, yet) he reuerently told him, that his experience Loue enioy∣neth vs to: do what we kno is amis. knew more, then his gréene imagination could containe: and therefore, he woulde meditate of his louing admoni∣tion, and procéede no further without his priuitie. But ah, these weare but swéete wordes so betraye himselfe, and to blinde his friende. For vppon the first oportu∣nytie Malipiero spéeds vnto PHILIPPO PROVO∣LO, and recountes the importunyties of hys Fréendes,
with a desire to haue the Mariage preuilie solemnised, since that he could not obtaine the open consent of his pa∣rentes. Prouolo, fearing the daunger of delay, was as ready to satisfy, as Malipiero was earnest to request: insomuch as early in a morning, Marco Malipiero, was set in pos∣session of his hearts delight: and before night, was dis∣possessed Au early ma∣riage, work∣eth a late re∣pentaunce. of his whole bodies welfare: For his sorrowful Father, and heauy friends, hearing of this suddaine Ma∣riage, after they had a while bemoned, the rashnes of Maliperio, with the Affection of Parentes, menaced to punish his ouersight (in not regarding him) as Strāgers. Prouolo, on the other side, to geue knowledge to his Sonne in Lawes frendes, that althoughe Fortune had The rewarde of pryde, is pouertie. crossed him, she had not wholly consumed him: set out his abylytie to the most Aduauntage: much like vnto a Mar∣ket Marchant, that on a Newyears Day mornyng, expo∣seth his painted tokens, to the ritchest show: His Sonne (in lawe) was accomodated with the Attyre and furny∣ture of a Gentleman, and his Wife was set foorth, with the showe, of rich Malipieroes Heires Espouse, and not as poore Prouoloes Daughter: Insomuch, as the common The commō sorte Iudge as they affect. sorte, blinded with showes, iudged after their eyes affec∣tion, and reputed old Malipiero a cruel couetous Charle, for dealing with Prouolo so frowardly, that had intrea∣ted his Son so honorably. But these murmurings, litle moued the good auncient Knight: for well he wist, this brauerie was but a blase, as soone ended as the flame of a drie Faggot. And which should auenge him, this pride promised a change, attyred with as much pennurie as the other with pompe. The following effect, confirmed olde Malipieros opi∣nion: for Prouolo spent so largely at the beginning, in hope with this florishe; to make accorde betwéene the Sonne and the Father: As nowe his Table was furni∣shed with emptie Platters, and his Audit Bagges with The miserye of want. a set of Counters. So that want, that will make a tooth∣lesse
woman to bite at Brasen Walles, entred into Pro∣uolos House, and swore both him and his whole house∣holde vnto the statutes of necessitie: whose lawes were so straite, that although they all had great occasion of so∣rowe, they had no leasure for shifting to supplie their wantes: In so much as in shorte time, there was no neighbour, that Prouolo was not in his debt or daunger, and no good natured youth there aboutes, that Marco Malipiero had not boorded or coosoned. And what shoulde faire Felice doe in this extremitie? liue vpon her husbandes trauel, and be idle her selfe? that were no good Huswiferie: and yet poore Malipiero loued her so dearely, that hee woulde haue ventured vppon a thousande infamies, to maintayne her in the state of an honest Gentlewoman: but although his shiftes helped, they defrayed not her desire to be braue. A Diamond hath not his grace but in golde, nor a fayre Woman, her full commendation but in the ornamentes of brauerie. Braue rye be∣longeth to Beautie. So that attyred to her best aduantage, faire Felice would manie times walke, vnto the Piatso Richio, a place where the brauest Gentlemen assembled, & where the fy∣nest PIATSO, a market place, or a place of, assembly. deuices were sould: she taking this liberty to walke, bound the gallant yong Gentlemen, in curtesie to Court her: curtuous seruice, is to be accepted with thankes: ac∣ceptance of seruice, inlargeth acquaintance acquaintance ingendreth familiarytie: and famyliaie, setteth al Fe∣lies abroach: So that, let other Married men take war∣nyng, A necessarye note. by Malipieroes hard fortune: for, if their wyues loue gadding, lyke faire Felice, & be inconstant, do want, or finde in their Husbands, miscontentment: Twentie to one, they wil pawn their honours, to please their fancies. Well, Felice lost nothyng by these Iorneyes: for some one Gallant, would present her with a Ventoie, to coole her selfe: some other, with a Mirrour, to behould her selfe: and some, with Lawnes, Ruffes, Coyfes, and suche neces∣saries, Courtesy don with an euill intent. to set out her selfe: & yet vpon no dishonorable con∣dition, but (by your leaue) wyth hope of an after fauour.
This trafique, faire Felice vsed, vntill (amonge a num∣ber, that temperately affected her,) Marino Giorgio, the rich Orphant of Capo Verdo immoderately loued her, and withall; the honors of courtisie serued her: But not∣withstanding, his lusty personage, might please: his loue∣ly countenaunce, might intyce: and his rare wit, passing through a swete tongue, might bewitch a woman in loue: for that Malipiero, was inritched with these perfections: Felice, regarded Marino Georgio, but with an ordinary Disdaine haunteth de∣sire. grace: and had it not ben for that Archinchaunter, Golde (perhappes) would neuer haue bene inconstant. This light account of Felice, inlarged the affection of The fyre of Loue. Marino: for as drincke increaseth the dropsies drowth, s disdaine, heapeth coales vppon desire: whereof Marino, (Teste se ipso) hath leaft an infallible aucthoritie: whose torments were so gréeuous, as the fire: which of al flames, burneth most, and appeareth least, burst out of his mouth, the smoake of such surious sighes, that where he was but late, of a pure Sanguine Complection, hee seemed nowe, nothyng, but Choller adust: So that, his friendes mour∣ned, and many moued his strange alteration: who coun∣sayled him to take the Physitions aduire: But neither Galen, Hipocrates, nor their Enemie, Panacelsus, could skyl of his cure: so that he was in daunger to haue consumed to Cinders, had nat Macrello, the Physition of Loue, vn∣dertaken his helth, who comforted him with many swéete wordes of hope: but, Marino, continually afflicted himselfe Phisicke cu∣reth not loue. in recounting an impossibilytie of fauour. Why (quoth Macrello,) is not your parsonage séemely? Yes: but it doth not please. Is not your face louely? Yes: but it doth not allure. Is not your wyt quicke and good? Yes: but it can not perswade. Is not Felice, a woman? Yes: and more, an Angell. Well, then (quoth Macrello,) be of good comfort, An∣gelles be not cruell, nor stéelie harted. O (quoth Marino,) but Felice, is constant, and true to her husband, who to continue her affection, is graced with these and many more perfections.
Yea (quoth Macrello) but hée wanteth one of your théefest beauties. What one is that (quoth Marino) Euen that, that o∣pened the double locked dores of Acrisius brasen Tower, The force of Goulde, and put Iubiter in possession of his daughter Danais loue. And thinke you this Goulden Beautie, will not make a passage ino poore Malipieros Bed Camber? I warrant you yeas: you haue Goulde more at commaundement then I, but I know the vertue better then you. This short tale quickned dying Marrino, as the flashe of Rose water dooth a sullen swounding Childe. Wherupon (quoth he) Macrello, if your Medicine be of no lesse vertue to restore my lyfe, then your wordes to geue me hope: the fortune, shall be your profit, as wel as my pleasure. Well (quoth Macrello) sustaine your selfe with hope, Hope com∣forteth but Loue cureth the Louer. and for that your inuention is delicate, deuise you some curious rich Iuell, and let mée alone (quoth hée) bothe to charme and to present it: and so with a remembraunce in the hande, he lest Marino, to contemplate of his loue, and to consider how to recouer his lyfe: who in the ende, concluded to sende faire Felice, the Image of himselfe in Goulde, inameled blacke, his face meager and pale, and by a deuice, the blacke mantell throwne aside, for to ap∣peare, the bared Carkasse of Death, with the intrayles Marinos Present to his Mistrisse. consumed, and in the seate of his lyfe, to place Felice, attyred with Diamonds, Rubyes, Emrodes, and other precious Stones, looking vppon his smoking harte, wher∣vppon, was written these two bréefes. Loue onely giues mee health, Not Medicine nor wealth. This Image made vnto his fancye, he wrote this sol∣lowing Letter.
Marino Georgios letter, to Felice the fayre. FAyre Mistresse, if I enioyed any health, I would wishe you parte: but what I do possesse, I acknowledge to be yours, and my selfe to be, but your steward. And for this seruice, because it is duty, I craue nothing, but leaue my merrit wholly to your consideration. Yet, least my scylence, shuld rob the glory of your pitty, and my death, reaue you of a faythfull Seruaunt: more of zeale, to do you long seruice: then of any desyre I haue to liue. I heare pre∣sent you my consumed selfe, only kept aliue, by the lyfe of fayre Felice, who sitteth crowned, in the Pallace of my heart: whych bleeding at her feete, showeth the meanes of my cure: which if you witsafe, I liue: if not, you see my death. And thus, doubtfull betweene both, vntill I kisse your sweete aunsweare, I remayne. Vnto my latter Gaspe, Your faythfull MARINO GEORGIO. THis letter Sealed, and Subscribed, To the hands of the most faire Felice: Macrello was sent for: to whom Marino deliuered, both the Iuell, and the letter, with out instructions to do his message: for Protheus could not chainge himselfe into moe shapes then Macrello: as well, to auoide suspition, as to compasse his purpose: who beha∣ued himselfe so cunningly, in Marinoes errande, as (to be shorte, vertuous Dames) after many perswasions, Felice returned him with this Answere. ¶ FELICES Answere, to Marino Georgio. IAm not cruell, althoughe with difficultie, I consent too loue: and for that your passions are so extreame, I kepe your Picture in my Bosome: But, with what thought, I blush to write, though Pitie be my warrant: so that I leaue the euent of our Loue, to your Consideration: and my
yealding, to Macrelloes Reporte: who, in bewraying your passions, lette fall more teares, then I could drie vp with a thousand sighes.: So that ouercom with rueth, to see your Affection so great, and your passion so daungerous, I can not but commyt my loue, my honour, my selfe and all, to the Affection and wise gouernment of Marino Georgio. FELICE. THis Letter, was subscribed: Lyfe, to MARINO GEORGIO: and deliuered to the faithfull Ma∣crello: with charge, that he should make knowen, his great Importunities, before Felice woulde graunt so hye a fauour: which Prouiso, might haue ben spared: for Ma∣crello, (partly for his glorie, but chiefely, for his owne be∣nefite) vpon delyuerie of this Letter, willed Marino, to re∣ceiue it, as a Conquest as hardly gotten, as Hercules la∣bours: and if (quoth he) I had not indured your torments (by Imaginatiō) it had not ben impossible to haue mooued Felice to rueth: Marino, heard these circumstances, with no better remembrance, then if he had ben in an Extasie: The Subscription: Lyfe to Marino: ouercame him with Suddaine ioy or sorrow dul leth our sen∣ses. suche a sodayne passion of Ioye, who read, and a hundred times ouer read this Life letter: and for that it came from Felices swéete hand, he a thousand times kissed the Paper. Which done, by the direction of Macrello, this Conque∣rour Gowlde, made suche a passage, into a reputed honest Cytizens House, as, without suspition, Marino Georgio, and fayre Felice, theare (many tymes) mette, but to what purpose, I leaue to your constructions: and yet, thus much Gold maketh passage into difficulte pla∣ces. I say: this Fortune followed: Marino, in shorte space, re∣couered his former Complection: and it was not long, be∣fore Felice was richer, then either Father or Husband. But, O that Furie Ielousie, enuying this Accord, sent slie Suspition, to infect Malipieroes heart: who pryinge with Lynx his eyes, presented him a thousande causes The vene∣mous nature of Ielosye. of mistrust, which loue straite supprest with as manie
contrarie imaginations of his Wiues good behauiour: in∣so much, that with the sharp incounter of Loue, and my∣strust, poore man, he was continually afflicted. In conclusion, seeing his Wife to excéede in brauerie, A shrewde sus pition. and knowing himselfe, to declyne with pouertie, he resol∣ued vppon this certentie: this cost, coulde not come from the emptie Coffers of her vndone Parentes: and then procéedinge from others, it was impossible to bee the fa∣uours of honest curtesie: so that armed with furie, he de∣ferred reuenge, but to intrap the friende of his wiues fol∣lyes, Suspect is more cun∣nyng, then Argus was, warie. and the enymie both of her honour, and his de∣lyght. In fine, as héedefull, as these Louers were in their dealinges, Ielosye directed suspecte, to Marino Georgio: and moreouer, made him an eye witnesse of the iniuries done vnto Malipiero: which when he assuredly knew, hée Neapolitans, are most se∣ueare in, re∣uenge. studied a while of a torture, equall to this treacherie: for who hath not hard the Neapolitan to bée the seuerest re∣venger of dishonor in the world, To be bréese, his bait was this: he fayned a iournay far from home, and furnis∣hed him selfe, with such an apparance of trueth, as tooke a way all colour of suspition: whiche done, with a dissemb∣ling kysse, hée committed his wife to God, and the charge A Iudas kisse of his house, to her good gouernment: and so set forwarde towards Rome. Malipiero was no sooner a mile on his way, then Ma∣crello certified Marino of this wished oportunitie: and Loue made both him and Felice so boulde, as in his owne house they determyned the followinge night, to exercise vppon Malipiero their wonted iniurie: but about myd∣nyght when mistrust was at repose, Malipiero entred A fit time, to deceaue mis∣trust. the house with such a sodaine violence, as these two vn∣fortunate fréendes, were surprysed amids their imbrace∣mēts, before they had warnyng to shift: I sowrrow to tel the rest, but trueth will haue passage. Malipiero, in his reuenge like a Lyon hungring after
his pray: with his Rapier and these bitter wordes nay∣led Marino vnto the Bed. Death is too easie a scurge, for a disloyal wyfe. Thou Couche [{quod} he] soyled with dishonour, washe out thy staynes, with the Adulterers blood. But holding death too easy a scurge for his wiues trespas, hée condēned her to this torture, more extreme then death: Hee made an Anotomy of her welbeloued Marino, & set him in a fayre Chamber, within whiche, hee inclosed his wyfe, wtout dooing her any bodely iniurie, saue the cutting of her haire: and to say trueth, this beautifull ornament of haire, beséemeth not an Adultresse head. And to punish her the more, Malipiero caused her euerie dinner & supper to take her accustomed place, yt at meales shee might be tor∣mented Haire, the or∣namentes of Chastytie. with the sighte of her lyuinge enemie, and all the daye with the bones, of her martired friende: neither could she quenche her thirst, but out of a Mazar, made of Marrinoes skull. But (to tell her vertue, with her vice) The boundē office of a Writer. hir patience was suche, as shee was neuer harde to com∣plaine of this crueltie: and yet her penitent sorrowe so great, as ye plentie of her teares, somtimes moued her in∣iured Husbande to pittie. But least he should be ouercome with compassion, ma∣nie Iustice, must not yeald to the teares of Trespassers. times from dinner, hee commaunded her to her pry∣son: who after an humble reuerence, went behind the Ta∣pestrie Hanginges, and so vnto her solitarie Chamber, barred from other companye, then the gastly bones of vn∣fortunate Marino: whiche pennaunce shée patientlye indured, vntyll GOD, who saw yt her repentaunce was vnfayned, sent Segnior Cornaro to bée a peace maker God regar∣deth repen∣taunce. betwéene her Husbandes iniurie, and her offence: who (when Supper was sette vppon the Boorde) séeing from behinde the Tapistrie Hanginges, a fayre Gentlewo∣man to appéere, somewhat pale with sorrowe, her head bare, both of attyre and Hayre, apparrelled all in black, and in her hand, her drynking Bowle of Marinoes scul, & saying neuer a word, wt a sober reuerēce sitting down in ye
chéefest place: was stroken with such a maze, as on the suddayne he wist not what to say. Dinner being ended, which was longer, then pleasant, either to husbande, wife, or friende: Felice, as she entered so departed. W, notwithstanding, leaft part of her so∣rowe behinde in Cornaros heart, whose cheareles counte∣nance, when Malipiero perceyued (quoth he) let not the martyrdome of this Woman afflicte you: for her fault de∣serueth this vengeaunce, and so recounted the reported aduenture: And in aduantage, shewed him her prison and the Annotomie of her dishonour? and withall licensed him A honorable fauour. to talke with Felice, to heare what plée shée had for her discharge. Uppon which warrant, quoth Cornaro, Ma∣dame, if your patience be equall with your torment, I holde you the most happie Woman of the worlde. Felice with a countenance abased, and Cheakes dewed with teares tolde him in humble wordes, that her trespasse was tenne times greater, then the torment which the Lorde of the House, whome shée was not worthie to call The true en∣signe of sor∣rowe. husbande, had appoynted her. And therewithall, the so∣row of her hart, tooke away the vse of her tongue. Where∣vppon Malipiero, ledde the Gentleman awaye, who rendred him affected thankes, in that, besides his good in∣tertaynment, he witsafed him the honour to knowe so great a secreasie: withall, moued with compassion, hee ef∣fectually intreated Malipiero, to accept Felices sorrow the true witnes of grace & amendement, as satisfaction of her True repen∣taunce, is to be receued in satisfaction of offences. offence, which procéeded of frayltie, and withall importu∣ned him, with such earnest reasons as Malipiero was content to sende both for her and his owne friendes. To bee partly ruled, and partly aduised by them in her be∣halfe. Perfect loue, cannot be so iniuried, but it will alwais retaine some affection. The parentes and friendes of euerie side séeing the humilitie, sorowe, and patience, of poore Felice, were all earnest sutors for her remission. The roote of auncient loue not altogether dead in Ma∣lipiero, was comforted with their intercessions, & quicke∣ned
with the hope of amendement: in so much, as vppon sollemne promise to be hencefoorth of good behauiour, he re∣ceyued her to grace: and to repayre her crased honour, A reparation of dishonour. with the fauour of both their parentes, hee newe marri∣ed fayre Felice, in which holy estate, they liued, loued, and agréed manie happie yeares afterwarde together: And with the Bones of Marino Georgio buried the remem▪ brance of former iniuries. Maister Doctor, quoth Fabritio, you haue reported a verie necessarie Historie: for it contayneth many héedeful notes, both of Amonition, and aduise. Besides the due punishment of rashnesse in Marriage. For therein wee may see howe hungersterued want, compelleth the best natured man to deceiue his friende, and yelde vnto his owne slaunder. Againe, how that monster, Golde, con∣quereth the honour of the fayrest. Yea, quoth Isabella, and corrupteth the conscience of the wisest: so that this is no example of any honour to you men, because Golde inti∣sed Felice, to be disloyall to her Husbande, for it draweth manie of you, both from the feare and loue of God. Well, quoth Soranso, let it passe, Felice in her repen∣taunce, hath made a large amendes of her trespasse, and I feare me, if euery lyke offence were so sharpely punni∣shed, we should haue Mazers of mens Sculles, more ordi∣narye then Siluer Boules, and powled Women more common then baulde men. Not so, quoth Quéene Aurelia: for a fewe of these exam∣ples Feare of cor∣rection, bride leth the affex cions of the e uill. woulde bridle the incontinent affections both of man and woman, if not for the loue of vertue, for the feare of correction. After these and a fewe other Morrall notes were culled out of Doctor Mossenigos Historie. Maddam, quoth Don Dolo, if we continue this course, What hurteth one, instu∣eth the other. it will be a good while, before, we doe finde out the Parra∣dice, Plato speaketh of. Be it so, quoth Quéene Aurelia, but if we still conti∣nue the way to his House Hel, our errour will instructe others: and since we haue yet long respyte, it shall not
be amisse euerie day to take a sundrie hie way, vntill wée finde out the true passage: And for that our Question is concluded, and our Howre Glasse ronne: we will (for this Daye, make here an ende. ¶ The Question that arose, by behouldyng, the MOWNTIBANKES, in the thirde Nightes Pastime. AT the accustomed Houre, Supper was ser∣ued in with manie daintye Dishes: whiche were saused, with sundrie shorte ciuill, and pleasaunt euentes of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomens wittes: For he, or shée, was helde of weake capacitie, that either of forestuddie, or, vpon offered occasion, coulde say nothing of good regarde. In the ende, when Supper was done, and Quéene AVRELIA, and the most Honourable of the compa∣nie had taken their places vppon a Scaffolde made for Breuitie, is best, for Ta∣ble talke. the nonce, there mounted, a Mountebanke, his necke be∣chayned with liue Adders, Snakes▪ Eau'ts, and twentie sundrie kinde of venemous vermines, whose mortall Mountibāks of Italie, are in a maner, as Englysh Pedlers. stinges were taken away by Arte, & with him a Zanni, and other Actors of pleasure: who presented themselues onelie with a single desire, to recreate Segnior Philoxe∣nus, and his worthie companie: and not with the intent of common Mountebanckers, to deceyne the people with some vnprofitable Marchandize. In the middest of this pastime, an auncient Gentle∣man (of the generall Societie) séeinge these Uiperous Beastes, by cunninge vsage, to be made so Domesticke and affable, whether it were vppon an impression of his owne greife or of the experience he had of an other mans Plague, I know not; but sure I am, he burst into these passions.
O GOD, (quoth hee) of what mettell is a Womans tongue, which correction cannot chastise, nor lenitie quiet, The strange nature of a Womans tongue. when these dumbe Serpentes, by the one or the other are tamed? Marie (quoth a pleasant Companion) it is made of the same mettle, that Virgils Brasen Flayle was off, which strooke both his friendes and foes. But (quoth the Gentleman) Virgyll knew, & taught others howe to pacifie this engine. It is (true quoth the other:) but in teaching the secrete vnto his Seruant, coste him his owne life. So a wo∣man knowes howe to holde her Tongue, by hauinge of her will, but if a man thinke to stay it, he must beate her to death. A young Youth named Phrisio, thinking to winne the Spurres, by building a Fortresse for women, who haue Defences, for a chidynge wyfe. no weapons but their tongues, to defend, and offend, tooke vppon him, to prooue a chiding wife, though shee bee a little vnpleasaunt, both profitable and necessarie: his rea∣sons were these. Unsauerie receytes tourne to holsome effectes: The strongest Poyson is pleasaunt in taste, and the remedie for the poysoned, offendeth the mouthe with tartnesse: Nettles that stinges the Hande, maketh Pottage to comforte the heart: the bloude of the Scorpion cureth the biting of the Uiper. If poysoned, vnpleasant, and bitter thinges retaynd a vertue for the benefite of man: in my imagination (quoth hée) an vnquiete wife is not vnpro∣fitable though shée bee a little vnpleasaunt: Her anger kéepeth Seruauntes in awe, and her quick∣nesse ouerseeth their negligence: If her tongue runne at ryot, where shée huntes, there is store of abuse, which must be chased either with blowes or wordes: If the furye of her speache offende her Husbande, it is lyke, that) her outrage, groweth from his faulte: And where an iniurie is offered, it is sufferable, yf the wronge bee blamed:
but which maketh a full amendes, for her furious moode: as the clowdy and raynie daie, lightly cleareth towardes night: euen so, though she bitterly scowld at boorde, shée will be sure, to kisse swéetely a bedde. The auncient Gentlemen, commending the quick wit In blaming, mildnes is to be vsed. of this yong Gentleman, vsed thys circumstaunce before he refelled his error. Ah (quoth he) if witt were as aduised in Iudgement, as he is ready in censeight: his imaginations, would turne to wonderfull effectes: but as fairest colours soonest staine, as swéetest flowers are blasted with a breath: as beauty∣ful creatures, are blemished with a little care, as ye brigh∣test Sunne threateneth suddaine raine: yea, as euerye mortall thing hath his imperfection: euen so, witt beinge Wit simply is imperfect. mortall, and assigned by Nature, to make man glorious, aboue other creatures, by rashnes, corrupts the ripenes of his conseightes: and to good purpose, his pryde is thus abated: for otherwise, man which enioyeth witt, to wor∣shippe his Creator, and to lyue content, with the liberties of the sea, and to kéepe him with in the limits of the earth, woulde search the secreats of heauen: and I thinke, dis∣possesse Pluto of hell. Yong Gentleman (quoth he) I vse not this ceremony to represse your libertie of speache: for the error of youre rashnes, I will refell with reason and experience: but least heareafter you should be as arrogant in opinion, as you are ripe in conseight: I haue thought good, friendlye, and bréefelye to signifie your imperfection: and nowe to aun∣swere your late suggestion. I affirme that Nature hath created nothing to a néed∣lesse purpose: but notwithstanding, our abuse, or mischance, changeth hurtefull thinges, into occasions of our healpe: Surfit, and Sicknes only, cōmendeth Medicine: and as you affirme, the bloud of a Scorpion, cureth the biting of the Viper. But take away the cause, which procéedeth from our gréefe, and you shall finde medicine, an enemye to health:
and the stinge of a Scorpion, no better then death: and trust me, he is to be reckened a foole, and his misfortune to passe vnreléeued, that wilfully indammageth his health in hope of remedy. In like sorte let him liue vnpittyed, to ouersée the slacknesse of his seruaunts, who wyll marry a wife, whose tongue shall ouer-rule himselfe. But more perticularly to discribe the properties of an vnquiet wife, and more largely to discourse the displeasures of her vn∣fortunate husband: I will approoue her lowringe, as vn∣profitable, as his life is vnpleasaunt: you say her quick∣nesse ouerséeth the negligence of seruaunts: but I affirme, that her curstnesse maketh them as swift to runne away, as they were slowe to serue her: and common vse avowes, that often shyfte is neyther beneficyall for Mayster nor Shift, is vn∣profitable, for Maister and Ser∣uaunt. Seruaunt: for proofe, as the rowling Stone gathereth no Mosse, and want of vse canckereth Iron, in likewise thrifte flyeth the fléeting Seruaunt, and idlenesse consu∣meth his abylytie of seruice. Now touching the euill rec∣kening of those which are serued: their wanderyng ser∣uantes not onely charge their common accountes, with double wages, but with secret pylferyng, they sette theyr Maisters in more déepe arrerages. The Gretians that in tymes paste neither vsed medicyne for sycknesse, nor pa∣tience in aduersitye, but vppon euery great veration, poi∣soned them selues with venemous Cienta. In their Histo∣ries Cienta, a venomous Herbe, one sort wherof is supposed to be Hem∣locke. remember more, that haue voluntarily died, through the violence of theyr Wyfes tounges, then of any other calamitye. Diogenes béeyng demaunded the diuersitye in euill, betwéene a Scoulde and a Harlot? aunswered: They differ as the Uiper dooth from the rockaril: for the Scoulde, sayeth he, with outrage destroyeth her Husband, and the other with dissemblyng loue, consumeth hym to death. And so concluded them bothe ennemyes to lyfe, and quiet lyuing of man. Phrisio, beeing bothe modestly war∣ned, A needefull regarde for yonge Gentlemē. and throughly aunsweared, with a shefull grace re∣plyed: that the grauetye of hys person, and the sounde rea∣son in his wordes, had taken from hym, all occasion of fur∣ther
Question, vnlesse that Women were his Iudges. This wittie shift mooued such as were within the hea∣ring An ill cause asketh a partiall Iudge. to smyle, for where the cause is ill, it is necessarie to séelte a Iudge that is partiall, and which commended Phrisios gouernment, vppon a small check he left to con∣tend, with this auncient Gentleman: for yonge men, al∣though theyr wittes be good, are not Priuiledged to Dis∣pute with the grauer sort, without lycence, intreatie, or great reuerence. By this time the Mountibanck, with discribing the quallities of his ermin, and the Zanni in showing the tsh conditions of his Maister, had wasted a good part of the night, and wearyed the moste part of the company, so that desyre of repose, sommoned them vnto their lodge∣ings. FINIS.
The fourth Daies exercise: Containing: varietie of necessarie Discourse, and yet withall, the greater part ap∣pertaining to the generall argument of Marriage. SO deepe are the impressions of Sor∣row, The great impression. as the ayning of Poets, may be held for Morrall truthes, where as they affirme, that the bytter mone of Orphe∣us tongue, together, with the passionate sound of his Instrument, mooued suche  in infernall creatures, as while he was a futer to Pluto, for the restitution of his Wife Euridice, his plaints so Charmed the torments of Hell, as for the time, the Gripe forbare to teare vpon Titius growing hart. Tanta∣lus indeuoured not to drinke: Danaes Daughters, lefte filling of theyr bryncklesse Tub: toyling Sisiphus, sate and eased himselfe vpon his rowling Stone: yea and Pluto ouercharged with pittie, made restitution of Euridice. This sorrow to heare, that Quéene Aurelia by some dis∣temperature, was ick, and kept her Chamber, wrought such gréefes in the heartes of the whole company, that they hounge theyr heads in disgrace, like Garden Flowers: which (séeming as teares) are eloyed with she dewe of a fowle missing daye, Among the rest Isinatito, although he True sor∣rovve is novvsne rather by sighes then vvords. vsed not so many words of lament, as some other did, yet, with the teares of his heart, he solemnized the true ites of a Mourner: and to saye truthe, where the tongue hath frée passage to talke, the heart is occuped with no great gréefe.
Segnior Phyloxenus, séeing Ismarito in this passion, and that occasion entertayned him with no other businesse: while the rest of the company were hearing of a lyttle su∣perstitious seruice, lead him into a very beautifull Galle∣rie, where the Mappes of the worlde were so artificially set foorth in Painting, as I doubt the Popes Microcosmos The Pope hath begun, and not yet finished a moste rare Gallerie. Beautifull attires for a Gallerie. at Latteran, which hath béene this sixtéene yeares a ma∣king, wylbe ended with no more perfection. In this Gal∣lerie were the Pictures of all Christian Princes: and in an other place by themselues, the Pictures of certaine Heathen Rulers: and in an other rancke, the Pictures of so many learned men and graue Magistrates, as he could through fréendship or rewarde obtaine. After much discourse of the especiall Monuments, wherewith this pleasaunt Gallerie was attyred, Segnior Phyloxenus brought Ismarito  fayre booke, wherin were diuers rare deuises, and (directing him to Pensils, Co∣lers An espetiall Booke of deuises. and other necessaries of Hrowldry) requested that he would helpe to beautify the sayd Booke, with some in∣genious remembraunce. Sir ({quod} Ismarito) I haue already recorded your good fauours in the Table of my heart: and I beséeche you that this fayre Booke may not be blemished by me, or remaine a wytnesse to you of my indiscression. This nicenesse ({quod} Philoxenus) professeth more then ordinarie knowledge, and therefore I coniure you, by the affection you beare me, to satisfye my request. Ismarito vpon this importunitie, because he would not leaue a suspition, that his curiositie grew rather of sim∣plicitie then discression: and missing among the Moderne Ismaritos deuise, Pharos, a Lanterne or light, de∣uised by King Prolo∣me, surna∣med Phila∣delphus, for the benefit of Nauiga∣tion in those parts, which cost 800. Tal∣lents. Monuments, their Pictures, the vertues of whose Fame, are blazed in the Capitols of the whole world: he tooke a Pensill, and with the same drew an Ileland, and ouer the middest thereof, made a Pharos, which shyned lyke the Sunne, and therein a Phenix, bathing of her selfe, whose gleaming reflexions, shined ouer all Loegria, Cambria, and the greatest part of Albania, and extended vnto a great
parte of the Continent, espetially vnto that parte that lay betwéene the Occean, the Mediterrane, and the great Sea called Euxinus Pontus, and vnderneath writ. Pharos Europae, non Africae. Phyloxenus aduisedly regarded this deuise, before he would either require Ismaritos intent, or giue his owne iudgement. In the end, deuining what should be the secret meaning of this Simbole or Ensigne: quoth he, Segnior Ismarito, this Cognizance of your quicke wit, pleaseth me much, and withall remembreth me of a neglected curtesie, which (I thinke) will showe you the Image of your Phe∣nix, and blason the secresie of your whole deuise: and thereuppon he lead Ismarito into a moste curious priuie Gallerie, where (drawing a faire Curtaine, and reuerent∣ly kissing his hand) he shewed Ismarito the Picture of a An honou∣rable fauor. Royall Princesse, moste ritchly and liuely set foorth, with which a Marchaunt of Venice, who traffiqued toward the Westerne Islands, presented him: which Ismarito beheld, with a regarde so duetifull, as their néeded no glose, to ex∣pound the zealous affection of his heart. And by her was stalled a goodly Gentleman, Crowned with a Scepter, whom Ismarito knew not, other wise thē by imagination, in beholding his Armes, who bare Gu. an Eagle displaied Crowned Ar. And ({quod} Phyloxenus,) when I followed the Frenche Court, I admyred a young Prince of rare towardlinesse, whose counterfeit at my departure I brought with me, and there withall shewed Ismarito a Picture, which he ve∣rye well knew, and in it were written in Charracters, these thrée woordes: Hercules Franciscus valesius. And by this Prince stoode an other counterfeit, whose Armes Ismarito forgot, but well he remembred his Posie was, Ie le meintiendray. The counterfeits of other Potentates there were, which Philoxenus placed in the ranck of these Princes, for some regarded vertues, knowne vnto him∣selfe. And by his owne testimonie, he prised these coun∣feits,
abooue all the Monuments (auncient or Moderne) which beautified his Pallace. Upon which warrant, Sir, {quod} Ismarito, the Honourable A regard in straun∣gers, to teache Subiectes their dutie. regarde that you haue of these Princes shaddowes, bée∣ing a strainger, prescribeth rules of dutie, vnto theyr Subiectes, humbly to reuerence their sacred Persons. In de quoth he, it is but iust, their tongues crie, God saue their Highnesse, and theyr hearts aunswer, So be it. After Segnior Philoxenus and Ismarito had had some conference, as well touching the meaning of this Pharos, as of some other deuises figured in Philoxenus Booke: the Trumpets sound, gaue knowledge of Dinner: so that this priuate conference was adiorned, till Segnior Philoxenus pleasure should renue it. When Ismarito entered into the great Chamber, and among so many fayre Flowers, missing the glorious Rose, his countenaunce well showed, The Rose is the most glorious of Flovvers. that his mornings sorrowe had béene but a sléepe, which new awakened, streaked with the increase of passion, yea such was the pensiuenesse of the whole company, as the fyrst seruice, represented rather a Funerall Dinner, then a Christmas feaste. But in the mydest of a storme, as Phe∣bus An vnex∣pected good nevves, is double vvelcome. sometymes behouldeth the Earth, with a cheerefull countenaunce, so in the deapth of this heauines, there was newes brought of Queene Aurelias amendment, who commaunded the chosen company, after Dinner, to attend her comming, in the chamber of pleasure. This knowledg so quickned the duiled spyrytes of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, as they agréed, for one day (if Queene Au∣relia pleased) to alter the sollemne course in theyr ordena∣rie exercyse: for where the malladie is not mortall, mirth Myrthe cureth as much as Medicine, vvhere the malladie is not mor∣tall. cureth as much as medicine, and boulding this determy∣nacion, they, the rest of Dinner, in actions of pleasure, ful∣lie auenged themselues of the iniurie of former sorrowe. After Dinner was ended, and the company had a while pawsed, to set themselues in good order: vpon a new som∣mons, the appointed number, martched into this Cham∣ber of Pleasures, which was hanged with a ritche Ta∣pistrie
of voluntarie deuise, euery Trée, Flower, Byrde, A sumptu∣ous Ta∣pistrie. Beaste, or what someuer was therein resembled, in his proper coloures of Silke, was portrayed. The Shéeue with theyr Fléeces fryzeled, the Beastes curiously raysed with rawe Silke, like vnto theyr naturall heayre, the Trées beautified with proper leaues and fruite, the Rose with his Buds, Sprigs, and other attyre: and to be bréefe, euery other Flower was counterfaited with such Arte, as they séemed to be naturall. Yea a man might haue Men may be decei∣ued vvith out the slaunder of simply∣citie. béene indifferently wise enough, in other ordinarie mat∣ter, and yet haue aduentured to haue gathered a Flower, or haue plucked an Apple, in these hangings, and who so was best acquainted, could not wearie his eyes in the be∣holding of them: so that the very attyre of this Chamber walles, had an intertaining vertue, were there no other Curious sights, please more then vnciuill people. creature in the place. Quéene Aurelia attended with the Ladyes and Gen∣tlewomen, presented her selfe, before the younge Gentle∣men had halfe gazed theyr will. The company saluted theyr Soueraigne with a reuerent curtesie, whose chéekes, some what more bleake then ordinary, with this A lyttle sicknesse maketh an alteration in beautie. distemperature, resembled in colloure the perfect white Gilliflowre, a little streaked with Carnation. After some priuate talke betwéene her, and one or two of her fauoured Seruaunts, she tooke her place where she pleased, and the rest as they were accustomed, which doone, the Eunick with a well tuned voyce, vnto the Lute, Songe this following, Care away. CAre, Care, goe pack, thou art no mate for me, thy thornie thoughts, the heart to death doth woūd Thou makest the fayre, seeme like a blasted Tree, by thee greene yeares with hoarie heares are grownd. Which makes me singe, to solace mine annoy: Care, Care, adewe, my hart doth hope for ioye.
Care, Care, adewe, thou riuall of delight, returne into, the Caue of deepe Dispayre: Thou art no Gueste, to harbour neere my spright, whose poisoned syghtes, infect the very Ayre. Wherefore I singe, to sollace myne annoye: Care, Care, adewe, my hart doth hop for ioye. Care, Care, adewe, and welcome pleasure now, thou wishe of ioye, and ease of sorowe bothe: To weare thy weede, I make a sollemne vowe, let Tyme, or Chaunce, be pleased, or be wrothe. And therefore singe, to sollace myne annoy: Care, Care, a dewe, my heart doth hop for ioye. The note of this Songe, was farre better then the Dit∣ty, but for that it aunswered the determination of the com∣pany, it passed for currant: whereupon, Maddame (quoth Fabritio) if it be your pleasure, we wyll this day varrie from our wonted course, and according to our Theame, begin with some myrthe, to sharpen our wittes: for gra∣uer discourses, we haue time inough besides, to beate out One square breaketh no custome. the passage to Platoes Paradise. Use your discressions quoth Quéene Aurelia, and by her commaundement Bergetto was appointed to begin the exercise, who obaying, reported this following aduen∣ture, of Fryer Inganno. ¶ The aduenture of Fryer Inganno, reported by Mounsier Bergetto. IN a little Village among the Appenine Mountaynes not far frō the place, where S. Fraunces lyeth inombed, There sometymes dwelled a fayre younge countery wo∣man named Farina: and for that her house was in the hye waie, to S. Fraunces holy relykes, she was many tymes visyted with Friers of his order, who were intertayned.
rather for their habyt, then their honestie: for the poore ig∣norant people, reuerenced Sainct Fraunces, as a seconde Christe, for whose sake, they hould his Disciples, not in∣feriour to Saincts: amonge manye that visited Farinas house, Fryer Inganno, a smugge Chapleine, euer sealed his blessings, vppon his dames lippes, and yet, without suspicion of the husband, or▪ dishonest intent of the wife: It is saide, S. Frances sub∣dued inconti∣nent desires, by tumbling naked in frost and Snowe. for such gréeting was euer taken for a holly fauour. Uppon a time, after Fryer Inganno, had wel beaked himselfe, with a warme fire, and a good breakefast, the spirit that saint Fraunces, was driuen to coniure downe, by tumbling naked in the frost and snowe, tempted his Disciple with suche swéete motions, as he was mynded willfully to abiure heauen, rather then to deale so rough∣ly A premidita∣ted sinne. with the deuill. And taking aduantage, of the good o∣pinion, the ignoraunt, heald of his holynes: and was so bould, with saicte Fraunces (his Maister) as to make a The tricke of a knauish Ser∣uaunt. wanton match in his name: so that after he had a while considered, of his perswasion, vppon a quiet oportunitie: Blessed art thou ({quod} he) among the Appenine countrey∣wemen, for Sainct Fraunces, from Heauen, hath behelde A gentle per∣swasion. thy charitable vsage of his Disciples, and the last Night after, I had prayed with great deuotion, before his I∣mage, I behelde him in the Maiestie of an Angell, fayre yonge, lustie, and in euery proportion like my selfe, and nothyng at all, like his meagre Cripple Image: So that I was in doubt, of beynge transfourmed out of my selfe, tyll with a méeke voice, he sayd: Be not dismayde, I am thy Maister, Inganno, and am come, to bestow my bles∣singes vpon the good Appenine dames, that for my sake cherish you, my Disciples: But with an especiall Affec∣tion, I wil visite the good Dame Farina: And for that, her Feminine weakenes, can not indure my Heauenly pre∣sence, I wyll many times borrowe thy earthly shape: and in my name, go salute Farina, and showe her, that this night, in that her Husbande is from home, I meane to visite her: wyll her to leaue open the Doores, because
I purpose to come as Fryer Inganno, and not as Saint Fraunces. This is his message, therfore, as I began, I end: bles∣sed Ignoaunce heareth euery tale as trueth. art thou among the Appenine countrie Dames: The poore woman, as apparant as this trecherie was, had not the power to mistrust, but gaue the Fryer a good almes Flatterie ea∣teth the bread of the Iust. for his newes, and saide she would attende Saint Fraun∣ces blessed will. Away goeth the Fryer, with a light hart and a heauy Cowle: but God, to punish his lewde intent, & to preserue her from sinnyng through ignoraunce, so tyckled her hart with ioy, of this blessinge at hande, as to welcome Saint A note of li∣tle secreacy in a woman. Fraunces shée must néedes haue the Belles roonge: The Prieste of the Parrishe hearing the cause, smelt out the Fryers counning, and was glad to take one of those Beg∣gers in a Pitfall that with glorious lyes, had robbed him Enuy setteth hatred be∣tweene fel∣lowes of eue∣ry vocation. of his Parishioners deuotions, and withall, perswaded her with suche reasons, as shee was fully resolued of the Fryers deceite: And to bée adnenged, by the Parsons di∣rection, shée caused Leayda to lye in her Bed, a Mayde so ougly, sluttish and deformed, as thorough the Parish, shée was called, the Furie of Lothsomnesse. Aboute ten of the Clocke, findynge the Doores open, Frier Inganno mountes into Farinas Chamber, and without light or leaue, leaps into her bed: but hée had not blessed Leaydaes lyppes, before the Priest, Farina, and others, entred with An vnwel∣come saluta∣tion. Taper and Torchlighte, singing Salue Saincte Francisce: And knéeling about his Bed sides, sung, Sancte Francisce, ora pro nobis. The poore Fryer, lyke a For in a grin, being both in∣trapt, and imbraste by a Hag of Hel, cryed from his hart: Pleasure in o thers increa∣seth sorrow in the afflic∣ted. A dolore inferni, libera me Dominè. After the Prieste and the rest of the companye, were wearye of laughinge: and the Fryer almost dead with wéeping: It is an office of Charitie (quoth the Priest) to put Saint Frances againe in his Tumbe: for it is so long
since hée was in the Worlde, that he hath forgot the way Enuy, and rude people, are not passi∣fyed with praiers of the afflicted. backe, into Heauen. The Fryer learing lyke the Théefe, that honge on the left side of Christe, tooke all with patience: for well hee wyst, Prayer booted not. Well, for that night, they bounde and stript him, lyke a dead Coarse: and in stead of swéete Flowers, laid him Rude people extreame re∣vengers. in a bundell of Nettles. The next mornyng, the rude Countrie people (who in reuenge are without ciuyllytie or order) cruelly scourged the poore Fryer. And (setting hym the forenoone naked in the Sunne) annoynted his bodie with Honey: so that the Hornets, Waspes and Flyes, tormented him with the paynes of Hell. In the afternoone, with a hundred Torches, Tapers, and other waxen lyghtes: this rustick multitude, caryed seconde Saint Fraunces vnto his Tumbe: and had not other Fryers vsed mylde & plawsible requests, in his be∣half, The best way to win the commu∣naltie. they would surely haue buried him aliue: for threat∣ning, increaseth a tumult: when faire wordes, may per∣aduenture staye it. The poore Fryer discharged from the handes of these vngentle people, learned afterwardes to be more warie: but for all this punishment, was nothinge the honester. For amonge men of his Habit, remayneth an opynion, that the faultes, whiche the Worlde séeeth not, GOD punnisheth not. After the Company had wel laughed at Fryer Ingan∣noes, pennaunce, Quéene Aurelia axed maister Doctor, the Archedetracter of Women, how many suche stories he had read of the religious Dames? None (quoth hée) that hath beene so sorely punished, but of an number that haue as hyghly trespassed. What (quoth Helena Dulce) by suche subtyll prac∣tises? Men offende subtilly, and women sim∣ply, No ({quod} the Doctor) but through simple affection.
Well (quoth Aluisa Vechio, their euyls are written in their foreheades, that slaunderous mens tongues may Ws euyls are wyt in their forheds. reade and inlarge them. And your great euils are bu∣ried in the bottome of your hartes that vnlesse the Deuill meane to shame you, the worlde knoweth not how to Mens faultes, lye hydde in their hartes. blame you. This was the Gentlewomens day, wherefore the ci∣uill Gentlemen, would not offer to crosse them much: so that following their aduantage, Madam (quoth Isabella,) with your fauour and patience, I will reporte an Histo∣rie, that shall open suche a haynous trecherie done by a A ciuill cur∣tesie in a Gen telman. man, as shall take away all possibilytie from a woman to commit so impious an Act. Quéene Aurelia, willed her to procéede, and the whole company séemed to be attentiue: whereupon Isabella re∣ported as followeth. The rare Historie of Promos and Cassandra, reported by Madam ISABELLA. AT what time CORVINVS the scourge of This Historie for rarenes therof, is liue∣ly set out in a Cōmedie, by the Reporter of the whole worke, but yet neuer presen∣ted vpō stage. the Turkes, rayned as Kinge of Bohemia: for to well gouerne the frée Cities of his ealme, hée sent diuers worthy Maiestrates. Among the rest, he gaue the Lorde Promos the auntship of : who in the begin∣ning of his gouernment, purged the Cittie of many an∣cient vices, and seuerely punished new offenders. In this Cittie, there was an olde custome (by the suf∣fering of some Maiestrates, growne out of vse) that what man so euer cōmitted e, should lose his head: And ye woman offender should euer after be infamously noted, by the wearing of some disguised apparrell: For the man was helde to bee the greatest offender, and therefore had A hard Lawe fornconti∣nent persons. the seuerest punishment. Lorde Promos, with a rough execution, reuiued this Statute, and in the hyess degrée of iniurie, brake it hym∣selfe,
as shall appeare by the sequell of Andrugioes ad∣uentures. This Andrugio by the yéelding fauour of fayre Po∣lina, trespassed against this ordinaunce, who through en∣uie, was accused, and by Lorde Promos condemned, to suffer execution. The wofull Cassandra, Andrugioes Sister, prostrates her selfe at Lorde Promos Féete, and with more teares then wordes, thus pleaded for her Brothers lyse. Most noble Lorde, and worthy Iudge, voutchsafe, mée the fauour to speake, whose case is so desperate, as vnlesse you beholde mée with the eyes of mercie, the frayle tres∣passe, of condemned Andrugio my Brother, will bée the death of sorrowfull Cassandra, his innocent Sister. I wil not presume, to excuse his offence, or reproche the Lawe of rigor: for in the generall construction, hee hath done most euill, & the Law hath iudged but what is right: But (reuerent Iudge, pardon yt necessitie maketh mée here tel, Lawe adiud∣geth, by the generall of∣fence. that your wisdome already knoweth.) The most Soue∣raigne Iustice, is crowned with Laurell, although shée bée gyrt with a Sword: And this priueledge shée giueth vnto her Administrators: that they shall mitigate the se∣ueretie of the Law according to ye quallyty of the offence. Iustice, ismos renowned by lenytie, then seueritie. Then, that Iustice bée not robbed of her gratious pitty, listen Good Lorde Promos, to the nature of my Brothers offence, and his able meanes to repayre the iniurie. Hée hath defyled, no Nuptiall Bed, the stayne wherof disho∣noureth the guylesse Husband: Hée hath committed no violent Rape. In which Act the iniuried Mayde can haue no amends. But with yéelding consent of his Mistresse, Andrugio hath onlye sinned through Loue, and neuer ment but with Marriage to make amendes. I humbly beséeche you to accept his satisfaction, and A good cause to mooue pytie. by this Example, you shall be as much beloued for your clemencye, as feared for your seueritie. Andrugio shalbe well warned, and hée with his Sister wofull Cassandra, shall euer remayne, your Lordships true Seruantes.
Promos eares were not so attentiue, to heare Cassan∣dras ruethful tale, as his eyes were settled to regarde her excellent Beautie. And Loue, that was the appoincted Loue, fauou∣reth no degre Headsman of Andrugio, became now the Soueraigne of his Iudges thought. But because he would séeme to bri∣dle his passions, he aunswered: fayre Damsell, haue pa∣tience, you importune me with an impossybylytie: he is condempned by Lawe, then without iniurie to Lawe, he can not be saued. Princes Pre∣rogatiue, are aboue Lawe. Princes and their Deputies Prerogatiues (quoth she) are aboue ye Lawe, Besides, Lawe, truelie construed, is but the amends of Iniurie: and where, the faulte may bee The true in∣tent of the Lawe. valued, and amendes had, the Breache of Lawe is suffi∣ciently repayred. uoth Lorde Promos, your passions mooueth more then your proofes: and for your sake, I wyll repriue An∣drugio, A good turne vpon an euyl cause. and studie how to do you ease, without apparant breache of Lawe. Cassandra, recomforted, with humble thankes recey∣ued his fauoure, and in great haste goeth too participate Aucthorytie, in euyll Ma∣iestrates, is a Scourge vnto the good. this hope, with her dying Brother: But oh, that Auctho∣rytie, should haue power, to make the vertuous to  a∣misse, as well, as throughe Correction, to enforce the vici∣ous to fall vnto goodnesse. Promos, is a witnes of this Priuiledge: who not able to subdue his incontinent loue, and (withal) resolued, that Cassandra would neuer be ouer come, with fayre wordes, large promises, or riche rewardes: demaunded the spoyle A monstrous request. of her Uirginitie, for raunsome of her Brothers lybertie. Cassandra, ymagyned at the first, that Lorde Promos, vsed this speache, but to trie her behauiour: Aunswered hym so wisely, as if he had not ben the Ryuall of Uertue, Vlesse they be reprobate, good Exam∣ples, may re∣fourme the wicked. he could not but haue suppressed his lewve Affection, and haue subscribed to her iust petition: But to leaue circum∣staunces, Promos was fiered with a vicious desyre, which must be quenched with Cassandraes yeldyng loue, or Andrugio must dye. Cassandra, mooued with a chaste disdayne, departed,
with the resolution, rather to dye her selfe, then to stayne her honour: And with this heauie newes, gréeted her con∣demned Brother: poore man, alas, what should he do? Life was swéete: but to be redéemed with his Sisters Infa∣mie, could not, but be alwayes vnsauerie. To perswade her to consente, was vnnaturall: too yealde to Death, was more gréenous. To choose the leaste of these euylles, was difficult: to A hard choice of two euyls. studie long was daungerous. Fayne would he lyue, but Shame cloased his mouth, when he attempted to perswade his Sister. But Necessytie, that maistereth both Shame & feare, brake a passadge for his imprysoned intent. Swéete Cassandra, (quoth he) that men loue, is vsuall, but to subdue Affection, is impossyble: and so thornie are the motions of incontinent Desire, as to finde ease, the The force of Necessytie. tongue is only occupied to perswade. The Purse, is euer open to entice, and wheare neither words nor Giftes can corrupt (with the mightie) force shall constrayne, or dis∣pight, The force of Loue. auenge. That Promos do loue, is but iust, thy Be∣autie commaundes hym. That Promos be refused, is more iust, because Consent is thy Shame. Thou maiste refuse and lyue: but he beynge reiected, I die: For wantyng his wyll in thée, he wyll wreake his téene on mée. This is my hard estate: My lyfe, lieth in thy Infamie, and thy honour in my death. Which of these euylles be leaste, I leaue for thée to iudge. The wofull Cassandra, answered: that Death, was A hard For∣tune, the leaste: whose Darte, we can not shunne: when Ho∣nour, in Deathes dispight, outlyueth tyme. It is true (quoth Andrugio,) but thy Trespasse, wyll be in the leaste degrée of blame: For, in forced Faultes, Death is to be preferred, be∣fore dishon∣rable lyfe. Iustice sayth, there is no intent of euyll. Oh Andrugio, (quoth she) Intent, is now adayes, ly∣tle considred: thou art not cōdemned by the intent, but by
the strickt worde of the Law: so shall my crime bée repro∣ched, and the forced cause passe vnexcused: and such is yt ve∣nome The vene∣mous nature of Enuy. of Enuye, one euill déede shall disgrace ten good turnes: and in this yéelding, so shall I be valued: Enuye, Disdaine, Spight, Mallice, Sclaunder, and many moe fu∣ries The vertuous are assured of many ene∣mies, and in∣certaine of a∣ny friendes. will endeuour to shame mée, and the meanest vertue, uyll blush to help to support my honour: so that I sée no lybertie for thée but Drath, nor no ease for mée but to ha∣sten my ende. O yes (quoth Andrugio, for if this offence be known, thy fame will bée enlarged, because it will lykewise bée knowne, that thou receauedst dishonor to giue thy Bro∣ther A cause that may excuse the breach of honour. lyfe: If it be secreat, thy Conscience wyl be without scruple of guiltinesse. Thus, knowne, or vnknowne, thou shalt be deflowred, but not dishonested, and for amends wée both shall lyue. This further hope remaineth, that as the Gilliflower, both pleaseth the eye and feedeth the sence: euen so the vertue of thy chast behauiour may so grace thy bewty, as Promos silthie lust, may bee turned into faithfull loue: A faint hope. and so moue him, to salue thy honour in making thée hys wife. Or for conscience, forbeare to doe so heynous an in∣iurie. Soueraigne Maddame, and you faire Gentlewomen, (quoth Isabella) I intreate you in Cassandras behalfe, these reasons well wayed, to iudge her yéelding a con∣strainte, and no consent: who werie of her owne life, and tender ouer her brothers, with the teares of her loue∣ly eyes, bathed his Chéekes, with this comfortable sen∣tence. Lyue Andrugio, and make much of this kisse, which breatheth my honour into thy bowels: and draweth the infamie of thy first trespasse into my bosome. A louyng kys The sharpe incounters betwéene life and death, so oc∣cupied Andrugio sences, that his tongue had not the ver∣tue, to bid her fare well. To greeue you with the hearing of Cassandras secreate plaints, were an iniurie: vertuous
Ladies, for they concluded with their good fortune, and e∣uerlasting fame: But for that her offence grew neyther of frayltie, frée wyl, or any motion of a Woman, but by ye A good con∣sideration in Cassandra. méere inforcement of a man, because she would not staine the modest wéedes of her kynde, shee attired her selfe in the habit of a Page, and with the bashfull grace of a pure Virgin, shee presented wicked. Promos, Andrugioes pre∣cious ransome. This Deuill, in humaine shape, more vicious then Hyliogabalus of Rome: and withall, as cruell as Denis A damnabl offence. of Sicyll: receaued this Iuell with a thousande protesta∣tions of fauour. But what should I say? In the begin∣nyng of his loue, Promos was metamorphosed into Pri∣apus: and of a Féende what may we expect? but venge∣aunce heaped vpon villany. And therefore, let it not séeme straunge, that after this Helhound, had dishonoured Cas∣sandra, hée sent his warrant, to the Gayler pryuely, to ex∣ecute Andrugio, and with his head crowned with these two Bréefes, in Promos name, to present Cassandra: A villanous Ingratitude. Fayre Cassandra, as Promos promist thee: From Pryson loe, he sendes thy Brother free. This was his Charge, whose cursed wyll had ben ex∣ecuted, had not God by an especiall prouidence, at the howre of his Death, possessed Andrugio with the vertues An especiall prouidence of God. of the two braue Romanes, Marcus Crassus, and Mari∣us, the one of whiche, by the force of his tongue, and the other by the motions of his eyes, caused the Axe to fall out of the Headsmans hand, and mollyfyed his cruell mynde. With lyke compassion, the Gayler (in hearinge An∣drugios hard aduenture) left his resolution: And vppon a solempne othe, to liue vnknowne, yea to his deare Sister, he gaue him life, and in the dead of the night, betooke him to God, and to good fortune: which done this good Gayler A signe of an honest nature tooke the head of a yonge man newe executed, who some∣what resembled Andrugio: and according to lewde Pro∣mos commaundement made a present thereof to Cassan∣dra.
How vnwelcome this Present was, the testimonie of her former sorowes somewhat discouer: but to giue her present passion a true grace, were the taske of Pro∣metheus, An vnwel∣come present or such a one as hath had experience of the an∣guishes of hell. O quoth shée, swéete Andrugio, whether shall I firste lament thy death? exclaime of Promos iniurie? or be∣mone my owne estate, depriued of honour? and which is worse, cannot die, but by the violence of my owne hands. Alas, the least of these gréefes, are to heauie a burden for a man, then all ioyned in one poore womans hearte, can not be eased but by death: and to be auenged of iniuri∣ous Fortune, I wil forthwith cut my Fillet of life. But so shall Promos lewdnesse escape vnpunished: what re∣medie? I am not of power to reuenge: to complayne, I expresse my owne infamie, but withal, proclaime his vi∣lanie: and to heare his lewdnes reproued, woulde take away the bitternesse of my death. I will goe vnto the King, who is iust and mercifull, hée shall heare the ruth∣full euents of Promos Tyrrannie: and to giue him exam∣ple of vengeaunce, I will seale my complaintes with my dearest bloode. Continuing this determination, Cassandra buried her imagined brothers heade, and with spéed iornyed vn∣to King Coruinus Court: Before whose presence when shée arriued, her mourninge Attyre, but especially her modest countenaunce moued him to beholde her with an especiall regarde. Cassandra (vppon the graunt of audience) with her eyes ouercharged with teares, reported, the alreadie dis∣coursed A mischiefe well preuen∣ted. Accidentes, with suche an apparaunce of gréefe, as the King and his Attendants were astonied to heare her: and sure had shée not béen happily preuented, shée had concluded her determination, with chast Lucretias desti∣ny. The King comforted her with many gratious words & promised to take such order, yt (although he could not A noble ffa∣uour. be reuiued) her brothers death should fully be reuenged,
and her crased honour, repayred, withoute blemysh of her former reputation. Cassandra, vpon these comfortable wordes, a lytell succoured her afflicted hart, and with patience, attended the Iustice of ye King: who with a chosen companie, made a Progresse to Iulio, and entred the Town, with a sem∣blaunce A necessarie pollye of great fauour towardes Promos: by that co∣lour, to learne what other corrupte Maiestrates, ruled in the Cittie: for well he knewe, that Byrdes of a feather, would flie together, and wicked men would ioyne in Af∣fection to boulster each others euil. After this gratious King, had by heedfull intelligence vnderstoode the factions of the people, vnlooked for of the Magisrates, he caused a proclamation to be published: in which was a clause, that if anie person coulde charge a∣nie Magistrate or Officer, with anie notable or haynous offence, Treason, Murder, Rape, Sedition, or with any A Ryal grace such notorious Crime: where they were the Iudges of the multitude, hee woulde himselfe bee the Iudge of them, and doe iustice vnto the meanest. Uppon this Proclamation it was a hell to heare, the exclamations of the poore, and the festered consciences of The clamors of the poore, and the con∣sciences of the rich, like Hell. the rich, appeared as lothsome, as the Riuer of Stix. Among manie that complayned, and receiued iudge∣mēt of comfort, Cassandras Processe was presented, who lead betwéene sorrow and shame, accused Promos to his face. The euidence was so playne, as the horrour of a guil∣tie conscience reaued Promos of all motions of excuse: so Sorrowe and Shame, the Attendantes of Cassandra. that holding vp his hande, among the worst degrée of théeues, the litle hope that was least, moued him to con∣fesse the crime, and with repentance so sue for mercy. O (quoth the King) such espetial mercy were tyrannie An vnusual place for a Iudge. to a common wealth. No Promos no, Hoc facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri: You shall be measured with the grace you bestowed on Andrugio.
O God (quoth hée) if men durst bark as Dogges, ma∣nie a Iudge in the world would be bewrayed for a théefe: A necessarie regarde in a Prince, It behoueth a Prince to know to whom hee committeth Authoritie, least the Sword of Iustice, appointed to cha∣sten the lewde, wound the good: & where good subiects are Princes beres the blamr or euyll Officsrr extortion. wronged, euill Officers receaue the benefit, and their Soueraignes beareth the blame. Well, wicked Promos, to scourge thy impious offen∣ces, I héere giue sentence, that thou foorthwith marry Cas sandra, to repayre her honour by thée violated', & that the next day thou lose thy head, to make satisfaction for her A iust Iudge∣ment. Brothers death. This iust Iudgement of the good Kinge, in the first point, was foorthwith executed: But sacred is the Autho∣ritie, that the vertues of the good, are a Shéelde vnto the The good pro∣tect the lewde lewde: So swéete Cassandra, who (simply) by vertue ouer∣came the spight of Fortune: In this marriadge was char∣ged with a new assault of sorrow: and preferring the du∣tie of a wife, before the naturall zeale of a Sister, where The duetie of a wyfe, truely showen. she before prosecuted, the reuenge of her Brothers death, shée now was an humble suter to the Kinge for her Hus∣bands lyfe. The gracious Kinge, sought to appease her with good words, but hée could not do her this priuate fauour, with∣out The comon weale, is to be regarded be∣fore priuate a our. iniurie vnto the publyke weale: for though (quoth he) your sute be iust, and the bounden dutie of a wife, yet I in fulfillyng the same should do iniustly, & (generally) iniure my Subiects: and therfore, good Gentlewoman, haue pati∣ence, and no doubt vertue in the ende will giue you pow∣er ouer all your afflictions. There was no remedie, Cassandra must departe, out of hope, to obtayne her sute. But as the experience, is in dayly vse, the dooinges of Princes post through the world Siue bonum, fiue malum, Fama est. on PEGASVS backe: And as theyr actions are good or badde, so is their fame. With the lyke spéede, the Kynges Iustice, and PROMOS execution was spred abroad: and by the songe of a Clowne, was blowen into
Andrugioes eates, who tyll then lyued lyke an Outlawe in the Desart wooddes. But vpon these Newes, couertly, in the Habyt of an Good moti∣ons, pro fi the  and eu the flesh. Hermyt, by the Diuine motion of the sowle, who directes vs in thinges that be good, and the Flesshe in Actions of euyll, Andrugio, goes to sée the Death of his Capitall enemie: But on the other parte, regardyng the sorrow of his Sister, he wisshed him lyfe, as a friende. To conclude, as well to geue terrour to the lewde, as comfort to his good Subiectes, the kyng (personallie) came to sée the execution of Promos,: who, garded with Offi∣cers, and strengthened with the comfortable perswasions of his Ghostly Fathers: Among whom, Andrugio was, méekely offered his lyfe, as a satisfaction for his offences, which were many more, then the Lawe tooke knowledge A gratefull parte. of: And yet, to say the trueth, suche was his Repentance, as the multitude did both forgeue and pittie him: yea, the King wondred that his lyfe was gouerned with no more vertue, consideryng the grace he showed at his death. Andrugio, behouldyng this ruethfull Spectackle, was so ouercome with loue towardes his Sister, as to giue her comfort, he franckly consented anew to emperill his own life: And followinge this Resolution, in his Hermyts wéede, vpon his knées, he humblye desired the Kinge too giue hym leaue to speake. The Kyng (gratiously) graun∣ted hym Audience. Whervpon (quoth he) regarded So∣ueraigne, if Lawe may (possibly be satisfied: Promos true Repentance, meritteth pardon. Good Father (quoth the King) he can not liue, and the Lawe satisfied, vnlesse (by Miracle) Andrugio be reuined. Murther as∣keth death, and no other Satisfaction. Then (quoth the Hermyt, if Andrugio lyue, the Law is satisfied, and Promos discharged. I (quoth the King,) if your Praier can reuiue the one, my mercie shall acquite the other. I humbly thanke your Maiestie (quoth Andrugio) and discoueryng himselfe, shewed the Prouidence of God and the meane of his escape: and tendrynge his Sisters
comfort, aboue his owne safetie, hee prostrated him selfe at his Maiesties Féete: humblye to obay the sen∣tence of his pleasure. The Kinge vppon the reporte of this straunge Aduenture: after good deliberation, pardoned Promos, to kéepe his worde, and withall, houl∣dyng Princes are bounde to their word. an opinyon, that it was more benefitiall for the Ci∣tezens, to be ruled by their olde euell gouernour, new re∣fourmed, then to aduenture vppon an newe, whose beha∣uiours were vnknowne: And to perfect Cassandras ioye, O two, the least euill is least daun∣gerous. he pardoned her Brother Andrugio, with condition, that he should marrie Polina. Thus, from betwéene ye téethe of daunger, euerypartie was preserued, and in the ende esta∣blyshed in their hartes dessre. Madam (quoth Soranso) your good conclusion, hath like∣wise Ruthfull tales, raiseth remorce in the hearers. preserued vs from a great daunger: for had you en∣ded with the sorrow you began, wee had béene all like to haue bene drowned in teares. Indéede (quoth Katharina Trista) you men had, had cause sufficient of sorrowe, by hearing your kynde repro∣ched with such monstrous euils: and we women frée pas∣sage to lament, in behoulding none but crosse fortunes to By example of euill, the euill are fea∣red. succéede the good indeuours of a vertuous Ladie. It is true (quoth Fabritio) but to participate of their ioye, wee men haue learned out of Promos example of e∣uil, By example of the good, the good are strengthned. for feare of his likelie punishment of euil, to doo well: and you Women, by example of Polinas vice, and Cas∣sandras vertue, are both warned and incouraged to wel∣dooing. Indéede (quoth Quéene Aurelia, there are many Mo∣rall precepts in either Historie, to be considered: whiche I Good order is to bee kept among such as aue bene lae sick. hope the company haue so regarded, as there néedeth no repetition. And further, because I will not be to bould of the victorie, ouer my late distemperature: we will heare ende: And therwith she rose, & retired into her Chamber: with charge that the company should attende her, in the same place, vntil Supper, who obaying, intertained time, euery one with their speciall fancy.
The Question that arose at Supper vpon the fourth Dayes exercise. MAny prettie nyps, passed (betweene the retyred Companye) this Night at Supper, as  Gentlewomens parte, as of the Gentlemens.  as presumyng vpon this Daies honour (when the  was readie to be taken away.) Aluisa vechio, tooke vpon her, to mayntaine a woman, to be a creature euery way, as execellent and perfe  Man. For naturall shape (quoth she) they are more  tifull, of a better temperature, and complection then  In valiaunt exploytes, what difference was there  twéene Semiramis and her Husbande Ninus? betw the Amazon women and Alexender. For constantnesse of mind, did not Loadice imbrace deathe, with lesse feare,  men. then Mithridates her Husband, Asdruballes Wife, then Asdrubal himselfe. And what man hath kept a constant resolution of death, so long as Lucretia. In Morall ver∣tues, you men that reade Histories and Cronicles of all ages, shall finde Women, renowmed for learnyng, Go∣uernment, and pollycie. In Mecanycall Artes, there are Women, lykewise experienced. In the vertue of Deui∣ning, what man hath come neare the Sibels? To bee shorte, what Man hath bene so perfect in any ver∣tue: but Histories make mention of a woman as perfect? Yea (quoth Dondolo) but there be so few of these wo∣men, as an easy wit may remember them. Cauclers ne∣uer answere directly. But it will cumber your Tong to report them (quoth Katharina Trista. The other Gentlemen although they were willlinge to giue place vnto the Gentlewomē in small matters, yet A disgrace in honour, a Gentleman may not beare with. this comparison of equal soueraignty, netteled them a ly∣til. In as much, as Soranso aunswered. Madam Aluisa, you haue made a bould comparison, and but a bare proofe: Where you vaunte, to be more excellent in shape, and more delicate in substaunce then men.
It is an ouer ruled question, that Women receiue per∣fection by men, & men imperfection by Women: then by how much the vertue is of more emprise, that is simplye Aristotles pro bleames. of it selfe, then that which is compounde of an other: by so farre wée exceede you in this perfection. Your honour of valyantnes, died with your examples, and although there hath bene Women learned, and expe∣rienced in Mecanicall craftes, yet to heare a Woman Extraordina∣rie thinges, are not to be cōpared with ordinarie. plead at the Barre, preache in a Pulpit, or to sée her build a House, is a wonder and no example in vse. How shorte your deuinyng Sybels, come of the credit, of the Prophets in the olde Testament, is no question disputable: For your constancie at deathe, you knowe not how precious Life is preti∣ous. lyfe is, which maketh you rash and not constant: and in trueth, what you haue frowardely determined, you will not bee forbidden. As shée that had her Tongue cut, for callyng of her Hus∣band Théefe, woulde yet notwithstandinge, make the signe of the Gallowse. Well sir (quoth Quéene Aurelia) Epicarias oynary, Epicaria, in the trembling passage of death, was con stant. who endured to bée rent in péeces, before shée woulde confesse the conspyracie agaynst NERO, would haue ben holdē for a Uertue of staiednesse in a man. And what say you of Leena, that byt off her tonge, and spit it in the Tirant Hippias face, because she would not PLIN. lib. 34 Cap, 2. bewraye a conspiracy against him. Madame (with your fauour, quoth the Doctor) had she not had this foresight, it had ben lyke the Athenians shuld haue bene driuen to haue made a brasen Bell, as a Monu∣ment of her talke: rather then a tongueles Lionnesse, as n enuious Suggestion. they did in honour of her silence, for had she not mistrusted her imperfection, she would neuer haue committed that ti∣rannie vpon her selfe. Had her tongue béene venomed with your mallice, it is like (quoth Quéene Aurelia) that the Athenians had
veryfied your slaunderous opinion: here with she looked a skause, vpon her fauoured seruaunts, as who would saye. I check the omission of your dutie, in not defending of my right. Upon which warning, and espetially, for the excel∣lencie A man may praise a Woman without reproching a man. of this sexe, quoth Ismarito, a man may doo iustice vnto an other, without iniurie to himselfe: and sure with∣out the reproche of men, a man may commend the excel∣lencie of Women: in whose behalfe (although I wyll not condemne Sir Soransos reasons, yet in my opinion, he er∣red in the first Article, where he toucheth the perfection of Men, and the imperfection of Women: for neither of them∣selues are perfect, nor may haue essentiall substaūce with∣out the other: But to dispute of this secret in nature at Chaste talk, ought es∣petially to be vsed in the pre∣sence of VVomen. Aris. Prob. large, were vnpleasing to their chaste eares, and too bréefe∣ly to misticall, for theyr vnderstandings. But who so is so curious in searche, let him reade the Philosophers Pro∣bleames, with an vnpartiall indgement, and he shall finde them in substaunce euery way as perfect as man. And in the opinion of the eye, of all the sences, who is the moste perfect Iudge, they farre excell man in purenes of com∣plection: Where exception is taken to the few in number, of singulerly well qualyfed Women, I affirme that it is The qualli∣ty and not the quanti∣ty com∣mends. not the quantity, but the quallity that commends: a little Salte, relisheth more then a great deale of Sugar. Iudeth with her owne hands, atchieued a more honourable con∣quest, then all the Cilisions besides. Alexandra, the wife of Alexander, King of the Iewes, (when the vnciuill multitude, were ready for his tiranie) to make the intrailes of Dogges, a Sepulture for his dead body: yea and to be further auenged, to murther his two Sonnes: by her swéete behauiour, so mollified theyr cruell hearts, as losing theyr resolutions, they gaue her hus∣band an honourable buriall, and prostrated themselues, at her Childrens féete: which pacification, the strength nor wisdom of her counsel could not obtaine. By what instru∣ment did God first showe the vigor of his vengeaunce? by Eaue. a Woman. And by what instrument did he showe the
vertue of his mercie by a Woman. Soueraigne Vertue is Feminine, and (I sh to ll it,) Y some Vice is Our Lady. Masculine The Ladies ed out ight, to eer  s differenco. But Soranso fe angrie, aunswered, that if Ismaritos countrimen, were of his minde, they might be ashamed that they were so effeminate. Pardon me; quoth Ismarito, it is theyr commendation to  to Women and to cor Men▪ Where an iniurie in words, may be reuen∣ged in words, a Gentleman is not boūd, to his sword Tu  (quoth ergetto) to ni himself by the nose▪ Ismarito is to be pardoned: for his ine S. George▪ is shackl in a Womans It is true (quoth Ismarito) but thus fettered, he hath many times chased S. Michael to his Mounte. Fabritio, fearing that these crosses would turne to the Deuils blessing studyed how to accorde this contention, and with that intent, quoth he, Ismarito, you haue well Discreete standers by pacifieth contenti∣ons. deserued to kisse these Ladyes handes, for your honoura∣ble commendation of theyr sexe: But where you say Ver∣tue is the Feminine, and Vice the Masculine, bothe Men and Women, are vnderstood in either. The old Diuines, tooke Vertue to be God, and Vice the Diuill, and either to Vertue and vice, bothe Feminine, and Mas∣culine. be bothe Feminine and Masculine. Orpheus sayde, that Iupiter and Pluto, were bothe Male and Female. It is also read in Scripture: That God fashioned bothe Man and Woman to his owne likenesse. Moreouer this worde Homo, signifieth bothe kindes: so that since Man and Woman, are not simply of themselues, but compounded one of an other, I blame this vnnaturall contention, for excellencie, for neither can obtaine Soueraigne victorie, without dooing iniurie vnto themselues: The head among some is taken for the Man, and the heart for the woman, Note. (for bothe are of an indifferent gender) and all the other members indifferently at their commaundement. Quéene Aurelia, with a smiling countenaunce, aun∣swered, that she was content, that a Man should gouerne as the head, & women direct as the heart, and because we will not doo iniurie, vnto our naturall vertue of Modesty,
we wil giue place to you, i contention for Soueraine∣tyes, Modesty an naturall vertue in a Wo∣man. and binde you to srue vs for our es and there∣withall in rising, she broke of this controuersie. After Supper, there was a little time bestowed in the hearing of swéete Musique, but for that Quéene Aurelias late distemprature, grew of ouer watching: the company this night, went vnto their lodging in a good howre. FINIS.
The fift Daies Exercise: Containing a breefe discourse, touching the excellen∣cie of Man: and a large discouerie of the inconue∣niences of ouer lofty, and too base Loue: with other Morall notes, needefull to be regarded. THE last nights good howre of repose, was the cause of the companies this daies early rising: who by nine of the Clock, en∣tered the great Chamber, armed for any lawdable exercise. And after an accusto∣med duty of salutation discharged, euery man be thought himselfe of some pleasing matter, to en∣tertaine the present time. Soranso and Ismarito were se∣uered from the rest of the company, vpon priuate discourse: which béeing ended, Soranso, casting his eye aside, beheld in the hangings, the picture of Ixion, heardled to his tor∣menting Whéele. Sée yonder, quoth he, the worthy scourge The Fable of Ixion. of Ambition, and withall reported the Fable, of his pre∣sumptuous making of loue to Iuno. Naye quoth Ismarito, Ixion is rather the example of Vaine Glorie punished: for Iupiter, so well allowed of Ixions hie minde (in that he represented his Image) as he To be proude in vertues, is commen∣dable. raysed him from Earthe to Heauen, and because he should not perish in his affection, he satisfied his desire with the embracement of a counterfeit Iuno, and so sent him backe vnto the Earth: where vaine glorious Ixion Proclaymed, that he was the Minion of Iuno, and had Acteoned Iupiter: The scorge of vaine glory. for which arrogancie, Iupiter threw him to Hell, with this pictured vengeaunce. Questionlesse, quoth Soranso, this imagination of the Heathen Poet, could not but be the trauell of a Diuine spirit, it exposeth such néedefull matter, for Christians to contemplate of.
You néede not doubt of your opinion, quoth Ismarito, The soule traueleth to bring forth Diuine monuments in the hea∣then. for after God had created Adam after his owne Image, he scattered the séede of Adam vppon the face of the whole world, and where some euer the essentiall forme of Adam was, there was also the Image of God, which in the moste barberous and Heathen creature, laboureth to bring out, hye and excellent things. I beséeche you, quoth Soranso, to inlarge this discourse. I am not so simple to beléeue, that we are like the Image of God, in our outwarde shape: yet my knowledge is not per∣fect, in what vertues we resemble the Image of God. Referring you, for your better knowledge, to grauer A discreete exordium, for yong men that argue. iudgements (quoth Ismarito) I wyll onely to satisfye your request, say what I haue reade, and what in my oppynyon, standeth with reason. In our exterior body, to say we resemble God, were a grose ignoraunce: but in that our soule is closed within our The excel∣lencie of mā through the vertue of the soule. body, and giueth life, and mouing, to the whole body: it is no obsurdity to conclude the lesse within the greater, to showe how the soule resembleth God: who consisteth in a Trinity. Notwithstanding she is but one, yet she comprehendeth in her thrée dignities, to wit, Intendment, Wit, and Memorie. Three dig∣nities of the soule. And as the sonne, is ingendered of the Father, and the holy Ghost procéedeth from bothe: euen so Will is engendred of Intendment, and Memorie procéedeth from both: and as the three persons of the Trinitie, are but one God, so the three powers of the soule, are but one soule: and in that man is created in this sorte, according to the image of God, because he should resemble his creator in excellencie, he is formed straight and not curbed: to behould the earth, not thereby to Man is for∣med straight, because he should be∣hold heauen, and cōtemplate one great matters. shewe a dyfference betwéene him and other brute Beastes, but only because he should raise his spirite, and heaue hys eyes to heauen, his originall, to contemplate of diuine and dureable thynges, and not of earthly and such as peryshe. And sure the monuments, that to this day renowne heathē Alexander, Iulius Cesar, Scipio, Haniball, and manye other stoute warriors, Plato, Pithagoras, Socrates, Solon, and ma∣ny
thousand graue Philosophers weare the  of the soule, who in her function is alwaies occupied, to make  shine like Angels. And doubtles, the exploits of man, would be wonderful, & glorious, were not the passages of the thrée powers of the soule, Intendment, Will, & Memory stopped, Three e∣uils or de∣fects of the body. with these thrée euils or defects of ye body. Ignorance of that which is good, Couetousnes, of that which is euill, and the Infirmitie, and langor of the body. These be the euilles, that eclipseth the excellencie of many who otherwise would appeare more glorious then the Sonne, Moone, Starres, and Chrstall Firmament, into whose motions, reuolu∣tions, and influences, his knowledge foreséeth: or the earth with all her faire furniture which he gouerneth, and ther∣fore he is called Microcosmos, for that in excellencie, he e∣galleth the beautie of the whole worlde. Sir quoth Soranso, you haue inchauhted my Eares with such a pleasing regarde, as if you were as tedious in dis∣course, as I would be attentiue in hearing, we should bothe lose our dinner, without any great repining: but in ad∣uauntage I beseeth you, what may be the remedy of these thrée euils, which thus obscure the excellencie of man. Thrée soueraigne remedyes quoth Ismarito, to witte Wisdome, Vertue, and Necessitie, which to chase the other Three re∣medies against the three euils of the body thrée euils, are thus ordered: Wisdome against Ignoraunce: Vertue against Vice, and Necessitie against Infirmitie. Wisdome is to be vnderstoode according to the condition of the things, wherein we be ignorant. Vertue is an habit of the soule, which without great difficultie cannot be shaken out of his place and subiect: By Necessitie, absolutely is in∣tended, a supply against those wants, with which Infirmitie The origi∣nall of all Artes and Sciences. hath charged vs, as if we be lame, to haue Horse to ride: if we be sycke to haue medicine: if our bodyes be weake,  haue nourishing meates, &c. And by these thrée redyes, all Artes and Disciplines haue béene muented, to acquine Wisdome: Theorique, which is centemplatiue and consists Theorique. in these thrée parts, Theologie, Phisick, and Mathematique, was found, for Vertue. Practise, which is actiue, and deui∣ded, Practise.
into Solitarie Priuate and Publike, was put in vse. And for Necessitie, all Menicall craftes were inuented. These Mecanicall craftes. three vertues if we imbrace them, will chase the other thrée euilles bothe out of our body, soule, and remembrance. You haue giuen me a short sweete reason quoth Soranso. And a longe remembrance of my weake vnderstanding quoth Is∣marito: but for that I haue made this Sermon, vppon your importunity, your curtesy I hope will pardon me, as well as your wisdome will correct my errours. I had thought Ceremonies had béene in disgrace, among Curtesie is commen∣dable, but super fluous sauours of flatterrie. you Englishmen, quoth Soranso, but I finde you superstiti∣ous in curtesie, and therefore will take no example by you: but let it suffise, I am your fréend, and wyll deserue this fauour, in any resonable seruice. By this time, Dinner was ready to be set vpon the boarde, and Quéene Aurelia came againe vnto the open viewe, whose presence was as welcome vnto the generall company, as the cleare Sunne (after roughe stormes) to the wether weried Sayler: Aften she had acquited the cour∣teous salutations of the whole troupe she yrste take her plate, and then the rest as they pleased, or were accustomed. At this Dinner there passed much pleasaunt Table talke, impertinent for this report: which béeing doone, at the ac∣customed howre. Quéee Aurelia sent for the chosen com∣pany, who placed in the  Chamber, the Eunuck  his charge, tuned his Lute, and songe this fol∣lowing S. WHo prickels feares, to pluck the louely Rose, By my consent, shall to a Nettle smell: Or though fainte heart, who dooth a Ladie lose, A droyle I wishe, or to leade Apes in Hell. On Thornes, no Grapes, but sowre Slowes do growe: So from base loue, a base delight dooth flowe.
Then minde crowne thou, my thoughts aboue the skie, For easie gaynde, the Conquest is not sweete: My fancie swift, with Icarus wings dooth flye. Yet fastined so, as fyre and Froste may meete. For pleas'd am I, if hope returne but this: Grace is obtaynde, thy Mistrisse hand to kisse. A Grace indeede, far passing all the ioye, Of egall loue, that offereth wish in wyll: For though her scorne, and light regard annoy, Dispaire of grace, my fancie can not kill. For why this ioye, all passions sets in rest: I dayly see, my Mistresse in my breast. Who so inuented this sonet {quod} Quéene Aurelia, deserueth to be well fauoured of his Mistresse, in that he kept her so carefully in his bosome. Nay {quod} Dondolo, if his eyes were so subtyll, as absent, he could see her behauior, his affection were more daungerous then his seruice necessarie. We geue you to know ({quod} Isabella) that we waye not though our husbandes, a hundred myles of, knowe our be∣hauiours at home. I thinke so quoth the plaine Doctor, for so farre off they may (sighe at their one mischaūce, but) not chastē your amisse. Perchaunce they should not be charged with such iniurie, as this company should be (quoth Maria Belochy) if wee would offer to aunswer your enuious sugiestions. Laides I speake not with intent ({quod} Soranso) to make a question of your behauiors, but admit you of all creatures the most perfect: yet for that you haue motions, as well bad, as good, you maye many tymes make showe of euill, and yet not doo amysse, which if your husbandes be so quicke sighted, as to perceiue, they will iudge by their owne eyes, and not by your hartes, and so from shaddowes may growe euill effectes. If there sight be so quick, {quod} Franceschina Santa, then
If their sight be so quick (quoth Franceschina Sancta) then, though by a negligent trespasse, their wiues some∣time giue them cause to sigh, with a number of louing v∣sadges, they will giue them daylye occasion of reioy∣singe. I graunt as muche (quoth Soranso) but this will fol∣low, The euyll of Ielousie. the Husband will turne his owne mistruste, to hys Wiues sorrow, and receaue her good vsage to his owne pryuate comfort. Indeede (quoth Aluisa Vechio) the loue of a ielous husband, is sawced with such frowarde motions, as I had rather be matched with him, that regardeth mée not at al, then with him that loueth mée too muche: for of the one, though I am not beloued, yet I shall not be much crossed: of the other, I being too much beloued, I shall neuer be in quiet. I am not of your mynde (quoth Helena Dulce) I had Harde is the difference, be tweene a care lesse and a ielous Hus∣bande. rather haue my Husbande ielous, then carelesse: for being carelesse, no good vsage will reconcile him: and being Ie∣lous, the Wife may studie out how to please him. Yea, but (quoth Katharina Trista) Men are so easye conceited, that if they perceiue a woman studdieth how to please them, they straight waies, imagine, she will lyke∣wise studdie how to deceiue them: and therefore, God shéelde mée from a Ielous Housbande. I haue heard, the whightstreaked Carnation Giliflower, was the Meta∣morphos of a Faire Gentlewoman, beheaded by her hus∣band, vpon this Ielous thought, that his wife beinge so faire, could not but be beloued of the Gods, although hée Ouid. Meta. lib. 10. had no cause to suspect men. And where haue yée a larger Example of Loue, then the Aduenture of Orpheus, who by extreame sorrow and sute, recouered his Wife out of Eurydice. Hell, and by ouer Ielous Loue sent her thither againe. Doctor Mossenigo was smyling out a scoffe, vpon this Preuent a Scoffer, and he becōmeth a Sotte. tale, which Quéene Aurelia intercepted, by ending of the Gentlewomens contention. By your talke of Hell (quoth she) I sée we are out of the way to Platoes Parradice: and
therfore, good, we tourne backe agayne. In déede Madame (quoth Fabritio,) if we trauell styll, to choose the leaste of Euylles, it wyll be longe before we come to the Fountayne of Goodnesse. Me thinkes (quoth Isabella,) the Sonet, which mooued the late Question, directes a fayre way to happinesse in Mariage: for it commendeth loftie Loue: And if, accor∣dyng to the oulde Prouerbe: The best, is best cheape: this Aduenture, geueth Hope, and promiseth good Fortune. A Commen∣datiō of lofty Loue. It is true (quoth Soranso,) & I dare vndertake to ap∣prooue it, the happiest estate in Mariage. Dondolo, because he would not be disgraced, by ma∣riyng a Burgoys fayre Daughter of Rauenna, offered to prooue the contrarie. Quéene Aurelia, licensed them to shew their reasons. Whervpon, quoth Soranso: to geue great Ladies and Gentlewomen of calling, their true right and honor, who lightly, marry not their Inferiours in reputation, but for some especiall Uertue, that doth commende their choice, and cleareth the Bleamish of their Husbandes basenes? I must confesse, that he which rayseth his thought so hye, vndertaketh (no doubt) a tedious sute: his delayes wyll be gréeuons, and his Solliciters wyll be well rewarded, in what sort so euer he be regarded. But what of this? Quo quid difficilius, eo pulchrius: Perryll maketh honor perfect: the styngyng of the Bée, mendes the swéetenes of Honie: Roses best refresheth our Sences, when we prick our handes to reache them: He that crackes the Nut, thinkes the Kernell swéetest. The reason is, not for that the goodnesse of a thing, is the better, for the euil thervnto The euyll of a thyng, com mendeth the goodnesse, belonging: but, for that the remēbrance of yt euyl, maketh vs holde the good in more reputation: especially, in loue. The Affection, whiche is forced with teares, wonne with sighes, gaind with expence, and compassed with sorow, is held most pleasant, most perfect & of longest continuance. Againe, easie gotten good wyll, becōmeth in a while loth∣some: the cause is, as I cōceiue, for yt the pleasure was ne∣uer
seasoned wt paine. Once, a man, in louing his better, to encrease his passion, shal lack no occasion, both to séeke, sue, sigh & serue: & yet, to féede his hope, he shal want, ney∣ther faire lookes, good wordes, nor possybilytie of fauour. For, for to obtain a great Ladie, acquireth many circum∣staunces, not for that shee is precise to loue, but for that shee is wise, (or woulde bee so thought) in herprocée∣dinges. But whether she loue or no: Ouid saith, there is no woman, but wil indure the demaund: she is conten∣ted with seruice to be courted: & in recōpence, rewardeth with good countenance. But, which most sustaineth hope, Loue spareth no degre▪ the exāple is in cōtinual vse: that loue spareth no degrée, transgresseth euery law, & bringeth yt mightiest in bōdage to the meanest. King Cofetua, the Affrican, became ena∣moured of a Begger: faire Venus, espoused yll fauoured Vulcan: Pigmalion doted vpon an Image: Narcissus was drowned in imbrasing his owne shadow: & mightie Ioue, many times, cast aside his diuinitie, to dallie with simple country trulles: then, why shuld the affected (how bace so euer his estate be) dispaire to attempt a great Ladie, whē his warrant is signed with so large Aucthoryties? But whether he spéede or faile: be accepted or reiected: well en∣tertained, or yll intreated: the ymagination, that time wil inuest his desire wt delight, is to the Affected, a Paradice, Hope to com passe great matters com forteth more then the po∣ssession of tryfles. farre exellyug the possession of equall loue: But if in the end, her affection, or his good fortune, concludeth his wish in desire: her loue, whiche can not choose but be great: in that she marieth beneth her callyng: And her Abylytie, which allured at the first, with his inhabylytie: to realysh both, can not but make the Husbande fortunate, and the Wife well pleased: for that in recompence of this aduan∣cement, she may presume, somwhat, to rule her Heade: but, which most contents, she shal haue the satisfaction of Reproofe of loftie Loue her fancie a bed. If a House, were as soone bilded, as the Plot is drawn (quoth Dondolo) Shepherds wold disdaine to liue in Co, rages: euē so, if euery mā could as soone cōpasse a Lady for
himselfe, as he can report the fortune of other: there must be an Act to make Ladies, or Lords must be glad of mean Women. But admit, by the example of other mens Ad∣uauncements, that the meanest may be raised, by the yeel∣ding fancye of the mightie: I prophesie that such an vp∣starte, had more néede of ten Eyes, to warde the mallice of his Wiues kindred, then one tongue to moue her to kindnesse. A woman cannot myslike affectionated pro∣fers, because they procéede of loue: But her kindred disdai∣neth his attempte, for that the conclusion, tendeth both to their and her dishonour: A woman séeing her seruaunts passions, cannot but sustaine him with pittie, her Kin∣dred One kinsman hath an Inte∣rest in an o∣thers honor. séeinge him in good way to bee beloued, will lye in waite for his lyfe: For though she may dispose of her af∣fection, her kindred hath an interrest in her honour, which if she consent to staine, or deminishe, shee dooth iniurie to her whole house. The Cardinal of Aragon, aduenged the base choice of An inhumain parte. his Sister, the Duchesse of Malfy, with the death of her selfe, her Children, and her Husband: and alleadged in de∣fence, that he had done no iniurie to Nature, but purged his House of dishonour: for Nature (quoth he) is perfect, and who blemisheth her is a monster in Nature, whose head, without wrong to Nature may be cut off. Yea (quoth Soranso) but, this Cardinall, for all his ha∣bit, and glose of Iustice, is for this Act, so often regestred Defence. &c. for a Tirant, as I feare mée he will neuer come among ye nūber of Saints, But the example of these Mariages are vsuall, and such ensuing vengeaunce is ut rare, and be∣sides her espetiall contentment, a woman looseth none of Reproofe. &c. her general titles of dignitie by matching wt her inferior. In déede (quoth Dondolo) in common curtesie she en∣ioyeth A womā that abaseth her selfe in Ma∣riage, in Law loseth her re∣putation, but not in curte∣sie. them, but in the strickt construction of the Law, she is degraded. And by this meane is bounde to intertaine the meaner, with familyaritie, least, they (being prowde, or reputing her scornfully) doo crosse her ouer the thumbes with ye follyes of her fancy. But admit ye meane seruant,
marrie his Mistresse, and escapeth the mallice of her friendes: which successe, one amonge tenne suche Suters hardly attaineth. Let him yéelde to pay this rent for his good fortune: To suffer his Wife, to rule, to direct, and to The naturall desires of a woman. commaunde his owne determynations. And where shee ordereth: The vncontrouled Wife, de∣sireth to be serued with pompe, and to be set foorth with pride: whiche the ruling Husband would represse, as wel for sauing his wiues honour, as for sparing his owne pursse. The vncontrouled wife desireth to walke at lybertie, and to be visited of many: of which the ruling Husbande, woulde barre her: as well to preserue his mynde from mistruste, as to kéepe his Chimney from being fyred. The vncontrouled wife disdayneth the Countrie and desireth the Citie: which the rulyng Husband would mis∣lyke, for that in the Countrie, the exercise of huswiuerie inlargeth his Wiues estimation, and in the Cittie, Idle∣nesse hazardeth her reputation. The vncontrouled Wife, desireth without checke to pratle, and without discreation to gouerne: which the ru∣lyng Husbande in no wise would allowe, for that manye wordes is a bleamish to his wiues modestie, and the rule of his Wife, is warrant sufficient, for the wise to ouer rule him for a Woodcocke. Many other vanities, follow the desires of Women: which a man thus aduaunst, must forbeare to chasten, least hée expose himselfe to a thousande daungers: for the wife taking pepper in the nose, will suffer him, (yea per∣chaunce, agrée to make him) a pray, to the displeasure of his enemies: I meane her able Friendes and kindred: which bondage is not within the Paradice, Plato spea∣keth off: For according to the opinion of sundrie Philoso∣phers, as Nature will not be controuled, for that she crea∣teth: as Fortune is won with no praiers, because hee is blinde, and shooteth at aduenture: no more dooth Marriage alow of inequallitie, because her will is to deuide her be∣nyfites,
and blessing among the married with indifferen∣cie. To this ende Marriage is lykened to Sienes grafted in a stocke of contrarie qualitie: for as by groweth and good order, they both become of one nature, euen so, man and woman vnited in this honourable estate, with good Iudgement in repoof∣of lofty loue. vsage, become of one disposition. Againe, as Sienes thus grafted without speciall Husbandrie, while they bee ten∣der, come to no proofe: euen so man and woman, thus ioy∣ned in Matrimonie: vnlesse in the prime of their Mari∣age, with equall care, they loue and cherrish one an other, in the waine of their yeares, the swéete Fruites of wed∣locke, will be blasted with repentaunce. Segnior Fabritio, to conclude Don Dolos opinion, with his owne Iudgement, saide in trueth, that Marriage coulde not away with such seruitude: as the Husband, who is wise and the chéefe, shoulde obay the wife, who in common construction, is simple, weake and the inferiour. And where a Rich woman (as Don Dolo hath said) Ma∣rieth her poore Seruant, because she is the cause of his ad∣uancement, she will looke to gouerne: which if she doo, her indiscression, will moue others to speake, and her Husband to sorrow: and if he challenge the preuiledge of a husband to direct, hee shall bée bounde to a lyfe more bitter then Death. Not, but yt in respect of his former estate, he may endure these crossinges of his wife, but because, as hee is growne in estimation: so is hée growne in hautinesse of mynd, and can now wurse brooke an vnkinde word, then in times past, an iniurious déede. And therefore in Don Dolos behalfe, I doo iudge Soranso to be in an errour. I wil not dispute, against the Authoritie of your iudg∣mēt ({quod} Soranso) but at aduenture if yonger Brethrē er in Men must haue regarde how they blame, least they byte themselues. Mariage, God send thē to stumble vpō no worser fortune. Quéene Aurelia, who regarded, that Dondolo was somewhat to lauish, in painting out, of the natural dessires of a woman, knew as well, how to set foorth his follyes and ouersight: and therefore to take a modest reuenge ({quod}
shée.) I happinesse in Marige consisteth so much in the Lordly rule of the Husbande, then where a man mary∣eth his inferriour in reputation, there is a lykelyhood of good agreement: Wherfore Segnior Dondolo, because I think you married your wife, with the same Iudgement, with which you manyfested the inconueniences of loftye Loue: I beseeche you, show vs the blessinges of this infe∣riour choyce. Soranso, and the rest began to smyle, to heare this com maundement: for well they knew Dondolo, was intrapt with a slaūder of his owne reputatitō: but Dondolo, al∣though, he were a litle gauled, set a reasonable florish, vpō his bace fancie: and therefore ({quod} he) as it is alreadie ad∣iudged, if a man marrie aboue his callyng, he must beare with his Wife in folly, as much as shee was blynded in Defence of bace loue. fancying of him: which bondage, Mariage can hardly en∣dure: Then if hée matche with his inferiour, if contraries haue contrarie qualyties, per consequence: she will be as lowly, as the other is loftie: as patient, as the other is prowde: & as dutiful, as yt other is disdainfull: if the other prodigally spend, because her portion is large, shewil with huswiuerie spare, because her substaūce was small: If the other presume, because of her Gentrie, shée will seeke re∣putation, with her good cōditions: And if the other bolster her faults, with the countenaunce of her able Friendes, she dooing amisse, will crie her Husbande mercie, because A riche Dow∣rie with a woman. she lackes succourers, to sustaine her euill: a course, as Plato sayeth, that maketh the dowrie of the poore virgin of greater vallue then the possessions of a riche Ladie. You are nothing deceiued in the course (quoth Falie∣ro) Reproofe. &c but much mistaken in the creature. As touching your Contraries, I mislike your Consequent: For Fyre and Water haue contrarye woorkynge, and vnorderlye vsed, both hurtfull, Prodigallytie, and Coueitusnesse, are contraries, & neither necessarie: euen so, ye courtly dame, &
the Countrey Droyle, as they contrary, in callyng, so are they contrary in conditions: and so they may be matched, neither profitable. A Diamond is blemisht, by the settyng in Brasse, and a Flynt, not the beautyfuller, for beynge garnishte with Gold: euen so, the honour of a woman, is Eclipst, in mat∣chyng with her Seruaunt, her slaue, or her Inferiour: for that Straungers wyll valewe her by her Fortune, al∣though her haughtie nature, wyll not lose the name of her reputation: Neither is the estimation of a Kitchynstuffe inlarged, by marriyng with a Courtier: for that the Best wyll disdayne her Basenes, not so much for her byrth, as her bryngynge vp: Yet, presumyng on her Husbandes callyng: in Pryde, she wyll pearch with the hyest: whiche Soueraigntie, in the one, & saucines in the other, separats Kytte wyll to kynde. pleasantnesse from their Husbandes, and quietnesse, both from themselues and their Houshouldes: where, as if the Gentlewoman, marrie with a Gentleman, and a Kitchin stuffe with a Cooke: the one with duetifull regarde of her Husband, may hold her reputation, and the other shal not be driuen, to dissemble with their kinde. Well, let this suffice, to refell their Suggestions, that thinke pleasantly to spende their dayes, by marrying ey∣ther their better or inferiour. Now, touchynge the generall disposition, of suche we∣men, as from the Cart, are raysed vnto this account: they will vse the better sorte with straingenesse, because they lacke the order of honest curtesie to entertain thē, & with the basest wyl be famyliar, because the rudenes of the one answereth the ignorance of the other: So that, it is more requisite for him that is thus married, to watche his wy∣ues goyng into the Stable, for feare of his Horsekéeper, then in her Parlour, to eye her behauiour, in entertay∣ning the Gallant. Examine Kyng Astolphus, what constancie he found in his thrée halpenie Iuell, whome he had tourned out of Shéepes, Russet, into Cloth of Siluer: In such honours,
had no otherwise altered her manners, but that she thou∣ght the Lyppes of a Captaine was as swéete as a Kings, and therfore in all her brauerie, she fell to her kinde. The fall of Maria Bianca is written by the Aucthor in his Booke, intituld, The Rocke of R garde. If this suffice not, heare the vsage of Bianca Maria, Daughter and onely Heire of Giaccomo Scapardon, a no table Userer of Baetta, Biancas beautie, made her suffici∣ently knowne, but her Fathers Bagges, made her won∣derfully desiered: so that both ioyned together, aduaunst her, from a Shop Maide, firste, to be the wife of Vicount Hermes: after whose death, clyming vp to further honor, and declyning in honestie, she espoused the Counte of Ze∣lande. Long after the seconde Mariage, shee dallyed not with her dispositiō, which was rather in an open Shop, to bée courted with men, then in a secreat Chamber to be ac∣companied with wayting women: so that following her vnmodest fancy, with a few Prentices, she fled from her Husband to Padua, where she set vp for her selfe: and thus she vnworthely raised to bée a Countesse, wickedly, and wilfully fel to be a Courtisan. Andrea Zeno, a Gentleman of Vennice, was as slutish∣ly serued with via a Cookes Daughter, who vpon her Ma riadge day, made an easye way for her Husband, with no better man, then a Carpenter. If you coueit more Authorities, to approue so common a mischiefe, read Ouid Metamorphosis in Latine, Segni∣or Lodouicus Regester, in Italian. Amadis de Gaule, in French, and the Pallace of pleasure, in English, where you Aucthoryties for amorous Histories. shall finde store of Histories to the like purpose. Sir (quoth Dondolo) without offence, either to your person or your proofes (for that the one I loue, and the o∣ther I allowe) to confirme my oppinion I can likewise, Defence▪ summon women as base as these in birthe, and as hie as these in fortune, which with their good behauiours, gaue a grace to their reputacion, Chaste Epethia, the welbeloued wife of Hanno Prince of Carthage, was a Sailers daugh ter. The vertuous Virginia, espoused to Sextillius a wor∣thie Senator of Rome, was a Laundresse. Both these
were beautified with such singuler vertues, as while they lyued, their honest lyues instructed the greatest Lady, in poincts of honor: & being ded, the remēbrance of their wor¦thinesse is a special cōmēdation to ye whole sexe of wemē. Sir (quoth Faliero) as the Prouerb goeth: One or two Swallowes, prooues not Sūmer: two or thrée, may thriue Reproofe. &c by Dice, yet is dicyng yl Husbandrie: because for the inri∣chyng of a few, it beggereth many: so, though two or thrée worthy Parsonages were wel wiued out of worthles pa∣rentages: a thousand, following the same course, haue had a contrary fortune: & wher the knowledge of euil, is more then the possibility of good: vertue, warrants not the ven∣ter: In warre, the miraculous escape of two or thrée rash persons, is no safecundit, for euery mā to ron vpō ye pikes: yet I graunt yt in war, desperate men are nedeful, for the safetie of the discreate, & so are homely women, necessarie for their seruice: but if you will vse either to your benefit, incourage ye one with gret pay, & the other wt good wages: for if you commit a charge to a harebraine Souldior his timeritie in one houre, wil hinder more, thē his yeres ha∣zard did further. And as I haue said, if you make of your Kitchen maid, a companion, her pride in one dayes liber∣tie wil anoy more, then her seauen yeres loue wil cōfort Séeing the company begin to smyle, I am satisfied quoth Doudolo. But how? quoth Aluisa Vechio? doe you repent you of of your bargaine, or disalow of Falieros proofes? Neither {quod} Dondolo: For in general choice, this course is out of the way, to Platos Paradice: but for that my es∣pecial Fortune is good, I am pleased. Yea, {quod} Soranso, or if ye contrary had happened, this might haue comforted you, yt your wife should not haue been ye A confession is a prety Iudgement. only blamed womā in the Parish, nor you ye sole vnfortu∣nate man. Wel, {quod} Fabritio, and Isabella: There néedes no fur∣ther iudgement in this Question, then Dondolos confes∣sion and his yealding, to Falieros proofes.
We haue in this exercise taken thrée sundrie wayes, (quoth Queene Aurelia) and yet neuer a one the right way to our Paradice: and nowe it is too late to traiuel a∣ny further. Therefore we will: refreash our spirites with a little Musicke, and so adiourne our further controuer∣uersies vntill too Morowe: but as the Eunuke was a tu∣ning his voyce, to haue fulfilled his Ladies commaunde∣ment, Knowledge was giuen of certaine honourable Personages ariual: by occasion wherof, the company left their determination to furnish the great Chamber. The wittie deuice of Segnior Philoxenus, to giue certayne Comedians a Theame, to present some pastime in action, the fift night, after Supper. BY that time, Supper was done, certayne Comedi∣ans of Rauenna, presented their seruice to Segnior Philoxenus, & his honourable companie, who are not tide to a written deuice, as our English Players are, but hauing certayne groundes or principles of their owne, will, Extempore, make a pleasannt showe of other mens fantasies: So that to try the quicknes of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomens wittes, to giue the Comedians a Theame, Segnior Philoxenus, demaunded the meaning of certaine Questions. Segnior Soranso, quoth he: What passion is that, that tormenteth a man most, & hath least power to ouercome? 1. Inconstan∣cie. To thinke of a Womans Inconstancie, {quod} Soranso: which gréeueth euery man, and cannot be subdued by wo men themselues. Madame Aurelia, ({quod} Philoxenus:) What thing is that, which most delighteth, and most deceiueth a Womē? A mans dissimulation. ({quod} Queene Aurelia:) Which 2. Dissimula∣tion. hath such a swéete passage, through his Tongue, as it de∣lighteth like the Sirens Songes, and yet turneth to as de∣ceitefull a conclusion, as the Crocadiles Teares.
This yet, was but quid pro quo: so that neither one parte, nor the other was displeased. The modest laughter being ceased, Segnior Philoxe∣nus demaunded of Ismarito, what was the cause of most Deuotion? and yet the greatest replenisher of Hell. Ignoraunce [{quod} Soranso] whiche causeth men to wor∣ship Stones, and dishonour God. 3. Ignorance. Madam Maria, what is that (quoth Segnior Philoxe∣nus) yt of men is least estéemed, and of God most regarded? Chastitie [{quod} Maria Belochy] whiche is precious be∣fore God, and a laughing stock among men. 4. Chastytie. Doctor Mossenigo [{quod} Segnior Philoxenus] amonge men who is the most cruell? A Dycer [{quod} the Doctor] for he teareth God in péeces. 5. A Dicer. This answer, was both true, and moued newe laughter: Although it were propounded to discouer the nature of the Enuious, who murthereth the lyuing, and the fame of 6. Enuie. the dead. Madam Lucia [{quod} Segnior Philoxenus] wherein doth a man please a woman best, and displease himselfe most? The modest Gentlewoman began to blush, and with great difficultie resolued this Question. In the end, by the tongue of Alvisa Vechio (quoth she) In giuing of her, her Wyll. 7. Will. It is true (quoth the Doctor) for her delight is to go∣uerne, wherin her discretion, giueth others cause to laugh, and her Husband to hang the Lyp. Segnior Dondolo [{quod} Segnior Philoxenus] what is the greatest fréende to men at libertie, and the most enimie to such as are condemned? Hope [{quod} Don dolo,] whiche incourageth men at ly∣bertie, to attempt great matters, and maketh such as are 8. Hope. condemned, vnprepared for death. Madam Helena [{quod} Segnior Philoxenus] what is that which woundeth the hart, & yet is worshipped of the eye? Beautie (quoth Helena Dulce) for it pleaseth a mans eye, and pearceth his hart. 9. Beautie.
Segnior Bergetto, ({quod} Segnior Philoxenus) What is that which oweth most and payeth least, and of all euils is the worst. Ingratitude: (quoth Bargetto:) For that Monster re∣ceiueth 10. Ingrati∣tude. good turnes, and payeth vengeance. Madame Franceschina, (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus:) What is that, whiche in louynge too muche, baneth with Hate? Ielousie: [{quod} Franceschina Sancta:] whiche, by ouer∣muche louyng, raiseth Suspition: Suspition mooueth Con 11. Ielosie. tention, and Contention tourneth to mortall hatred. Segnior Faliero: I demaunde [{quod} Phyloxenus:] who he is, that profiteth his frendes, but by Death? is a Ste∣warde, for other men: & maketh his Account (only) with God? A Coueitous man [{quod} Faliero:] who, whyle he ly∣ueth, is enemie vnto hymself, and therfore. vnlykely, to be 12. Couotous∣nesse. friende to others: also is but a Stewarde of the goods hee gathereth, for he spareth for others, and spendeth little or nothing vppon himselfe: and at the iudgement day, before God, must make account of all his deceit. Madam Katherina, quoth Segnior Philoxenus: what is that, which is couldest clad in Friese, and warmest at∣tyred in pretious Stones? Pride, quoth Katherina Trista, which hath no grace, 13. Pride. but in brauerie. Louely Guestes, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, you haue so liuely deuined my meaning in your sharpe answeres: as I expecte wonders, of your dayly disputation. Sir, quoth Fabritio, we hitherto, haue but exposed, and refelled errours. If you haue done so muche ({quod} Philox.) you haue made a fayre passage for the glorie of Trueth, which by the re∣felling of Error, you shall finde: for euerie vertue is com∣mended Vertue is cō∣mended by vice. by his contrarie. A Diamond seemeth the fairer, for his foyle. Blacke best setteth foorth White: Good is most praysed in the reprehension of Euill: and Trueth is
the hyest degrée is renowned by the refelling of errour: and therfore follow your purpose, the conclusion, cannot, but bée profitable. Héere Segnior Philoxenus stopped his digression, and commaunded the Comedians, to bethinke themselues of some action, that should lyuelie expresse the nature of In∣constancie, Dissimulation, Ignoraunce, and the rest of the passions, before named: Which charge being giuen, while the Actors, were attiring themselues, for the stage, Quéene Aurelia, and her Attendaunts, tooke their places, with such aduauntage, as euery Gentleman, had lyberty, to deuise with his Mistresse. After the Comedians had put themselues in order, they patched a Comedie together, and vnder the resited names, showed some matter of Morallytie, but a greate deale of mirth: who with their pastime, kept the compa∣nie vp so long, as drowsie sléepe, which delighteth in no∣thing but scilence, arrested ye greater part of them, and ca∣ried them close prisoners, vnto their Chambers. FINIS.
The syxt Dayes Exercise, Contayninge: Many needefull regardes, for a Gentleman: with a Discouerie of the inconueniences of Mar∣riages, where there are great inequalitie of yeares. THe chearefull Sunne, which comfor∣teth euerie earthlye Creature, as the Lanterne of broade day, so lightened e∣uery Chamber of Segnior Phyloxenus Pallace: as ye Gentlemen and Gentle∣women, to bee auenged of the iniurie of Night, (who being the Mother of confusion, had seperated them, from their companions of pleasure) hastely rose and attired themselues: and (like vnto Partryges, that how so euer they are seauered, know (and retire vnto) their mee∣tyng places) presented them selues, in the great Cham∣ber. The office of ciuill courtesie discharged, such as were coupled, intertained Time, with ye deuice of their especial fancyes: others, contemplated of their priuate affaires: & Ismarito amonge the rest, in a quiet place, was reading in Peter Mesiere his Cronicle of Memorable things: The Tamberlaine the Great, in the beginnīg a Pesaunt. rare Historie of Tamberlaine the Great, surnamed Fla∣gellum Dei, where he much admired, the vertues of the man, who of a laboring Pesaunt, or (in the best degrée) of á poore Souldier, by his vertues & Inuincible valure, be∣came a great Monarch: Yea, and while Tamberlayne li∣liued, was as much feared as Alexander. But Ismarito, more lamented, that so mightie a Monarchie, erected by the Father, should end, by the enuy, and ciuill dissention of the Children. Segnior Philoxenus (after he had giuen a Bon giorno, to the companie, seing Ismarito, not chained to a company on, determined to geue his solytarinesse, a disgrace, by con uersing with him, in some Gentlemanly Discourse: but He is not a∣lone that hath good Bookes. finding him accompanied wt so swéet a companiō, as Me∣sires Cronicles, Seg. Ismarito, ({quod} hée) you haue deceiued my imagination, which perswaded mée yt you were solita rye, and therefore, bounde mée (in courtesye) to visite you.
But, séeing the great personages, with whom you deuise, A Gentleman tooke aduan∣tage of a worde to praise the good, as to check the euyll. I enuie your happy contemplation. But your Enuie (quoth Ismarito) is lyke that of Mu∣tius Seauola, desirous to excell the better sort in vertue, as you excéede the rascall multitude in curtesie. This encounter, and a litle other pryuate talke en∣ded: Segnior Philoxenus, lead Ismarito, into a fayre Ly∣brarie, beautified with such a number of goodly Bookes, of all Sciences, Lawes, Customes, Gouernmentes, and A most fa∣mous librarie in the Dukes Pallace at Florence lest by Cosmos de Medicis. memorial Monumēts, as wel auncient as Modern, as it came very neare in excellencie, to ye famous Lybrarie of Cosmos de Medicis in Florence: who imitated in his Mo∣nument, Ptolomey, surnamed Philodelphus: who had yt seuentie Interpreters of the Iewes, to translate the Sa∣cred Bible, into the Egiptian Language: and with great dyllygence, soughte to haue the seuerall Coppyes of all Bookes. After Ismarito had well regarded, the orderly sortinge of these (Bookes, and how, by a shorte Kallender, a Man without greate paine, mighte turne vnto anye harde Question, in any Science, and haue large resolutions) and had taken a note of the title of certayne Bookes that hee had not séene, and yet necessarie to be read. Segnior Philoxenus ledde him into his owne priuate It belongeth to a Gentle∣man to be sene in many things. studie which was furnished with Summaries, or Abrid∣gementes of all Sciences, which he studied, with such a iudgement, as there was no Arte, wherein he had not a speciall knowledge, whiche in argument, he exposed, with so good a wit & memorieas, manie times, he groun∣ded Masters in that science. And for that in al his actions he was ye true patterne for a Gentleman to imitate. In honour of his worthines and for the benefite of such Gen∣tlemen, as will folow his example, in Uertue, I am bounde to set briefely downe, the chiefest course of his Studie. First and principally, for the comfort both of his bo∣die Diuinitie. and soule. In Theologie, he reade those bookes, that
cleared the mistes of Ignoraunce, and vnmasked the de∣ceiptes of the superstitious Monkes, Friers. &c. And con∣templated in the swéete comfort of those Aucthors, that ex∣pounded the hard passages of the Scripture. And for that Health, is the most precious Iuell of the Phisyck. worlde, knowyng the Constitution of his owne bodie, he studied so muche in Phisicke, as without the direction of Doctors, hee knewe, what meate and Medicine, agréede with his nature. To minister Iustice, vnto the Ignorant multitude, and to kéepe hymselfe out of the Forfaites of Lawe, he Lawe▪ studied the ciuill Law, and specially, the Statutes of his Countrey: And (questionlesse) the Gentleman, that is ig∣noraunt in the Lawes of his Countrey, is an enemye to hymselfe, and a Cipher in the comon weale. In Militarie Knowledge, he was experienced, as wel, by seruice in the Field, as in readyng Vegetius and other Art Militarie Aucthors in his Studie. And some trauell in this Arte, is néedefull, as well as comendable for a Gentleman: for it is not ynough for hym, to be Togatus, as a Romayne Dratour, nor Paliatus, as a Gretian Phylosopher: in that he must as well in the field, looke his enemie in the face, as imbrace his frend in the house: and therfore, though he bare a Pen in his eare, to write his owne Commenta∣ries) hee is bounde to weare a Sword by his side, to doo his Countrie seruice. For Gouernment, and Ciuil behauiours, he read Plu∣tarches Moralles: Gueuaraes Dial of Princes: the Cour∣tier of Count Baldazar, Castillio: and others. And (in Moralitie. trueth,) it is not so necessarie, to be well borne, as to be well quallyted and of good behauiour: wherfore, the stu∣die of Morallytie, is verie néedefull for a Gentleman. He (likewise) studied Cosmographie, and had therin cōmendable knowledge: which studie, can not, but much please and commende a braue minded Gentleman: For Cosmogra∣phie. by the vertue therof, he shalbe, in his Studie, able to sur∣aye
the whole worlde: and with an agreable Discourse, shall bound out a Stranger his owne Countrey. He was a good Hystorigrapher, and had read manie rare Chronicles. How pleasing this studie is to a Gentle∣man, is liuely expressed in his owne nature, greedy of Hystoriogra∣fie. newes. And where may hée haue better intilligence, then Cronicles? in which, quietly in his owne Study, he may receiue knowledge, of Actes done throughout the whole worlde. He was a good Harrolde, and had read much in Anno∣rie: An Arte most néedefull, for a Gentleman, in that it is Armorie. the Cognisaunce of himselfe. And in my opinion, he that is not able to blason his owne Armes, is not worthie to beare them. These Gentlemanly studies he vsed, intermedled with others of more pleasure, whiche I had not leasure to re∣garde, nor memorie to beare away: but in all his actions, and behauiours, he exposed a Gentleman so perfect, as in Segnior Phi∣loxenus a perfect Cour . regarding of hym, but one halfe yeare, a man might haue noted downe a Courtier, not inferriour to that of Count Baldezar. By that time Segnior Philoxenus had sufficiently fed Ismaritos eyes, with this honourable fauour: the sounde of the Trumpet, gaue knowledge of dinner, so that Ismari∣to, was driuen to leaue, that earthly Paradice, to attende honourable Philoxenus, into the great Chamber: against whose comming, the Table stoode furnished with manye daintie Dishes. And Duéene Aurelia, and the rest of the Companie, were readie to salute him: whiche curtesye perfourmed, she tooke her appointed place and the rest, as they pleased. Towardes the latter ende of this dinner, a meane fel∣low, garded betwéen, two Furies of the Kitchen, was bro∣ught coram nobis: for some pettie piylfering in the Scul∣lerie. Segnior Philoxenus, referred his paine to the Iudge∣ment, of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen there present.
Some of the Gentlemen, appointed him some pleasaunt paine, in the office, where hée dyd the trespasse: some other of the Gentlewomē ouercome, wt a natural pitty, accepted his teares in satisfaction, and so discharged him: But the Doctor more rougher then the rest, tooke him vp so short, as the poore fellow was driuen to say, Sir, where you may Ween are to pitifull to be Iudges. help, hurt not: The Doctor, to satisfie his request, and to kéepe his first determination, aunswered, to help hange a Theefe, is no hurte, to the common weale, your petition shalbe signed. The rascall Théefe, hearing this seuere Iudgement (as the Italians are naturally quicke witted) replyed: If chéefe Maiestrates shoulde set their handes to A scoffer is many times smiten with his owne  pon. this Iustice, There would bee more Lawyers hanged, for stealing of Houses, then Roges for robbinge of Headges. The aunswere of the Doctor, and the replye of the poore Fellow, made yt company so merrie, that for the pastime, the trespasser had made them, they remitted the punish∣ment of his offence. The laughter quieted: in the commendation of his Coun∣triemans capassitie (quoth Soranso) Master Doctor, this poore Snake, spake true Italian. Yea (quoth the Doctor, but he lackes the vertues of the auncient Romaines: couertly expressing thereby, yt their Italions are wise, but eui condicioned. wits were good, but their conditions were euill. Bargetto enuying the fauours, Ismarito receaued, and for some pryuate grudge, about crossing in Argument) sought by some pleasant scoffe, to raise an vnkinde quarel: And with that intent (quoth he) Segnior Ismarito, I drink vnto you, with a better affection, than I bare you in my sléepe, for I dreamed, with my Rapire drawne, I chased Enuy euer∣more quarre leth, with those that are fauoured. you, to your Chamber. Ismarito, quickly aunswered, I pleadge you (Segnior Bergetto) but with lesse feare then you supposed to bée in mée, when you were asléepe: for men after they are awake, expounde dreames by contraries. Quarrelers seeke their owne mis∣chiefe. Bergetto, deceaued of his expectation, was dryuen by patience, to salue the wounde, he had giuen hymselfe.
But Segnior Philoxenus: to take away the cause of af∣ter vnkindnesse, reaued the companie, of leasure, to iudge of Bergettos quarrilynge dreame, or of Ismaritoes crosse A wise fore∣sight in a Gentleman. exposition, by kéeping of them exercised with a newe de∣uice. In déede (quoth hée) Dreames are incertaine, and ther∣fore, not to be regarded, but there is a true kinde of diui∣nation, Palmestrie a pretye idle quallitie, for a Gentleman in Palmestrie, and so in looking in Maria Belochi's hand, hée vsed certaine names of Arte, and gaue a volun∣tarie pleasing Iudgement: which fired all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, with an earnest desire, to know their for∣tune: and by this meanes, the remembrannce, of former questions was taken away. Wherein Segnior Philoxe∣nus wisdome, may be a president, for other Gentlemen, that heare quarrels a bréedinge, to smoulder them in the A necessarie note for a Gentleman, shell: for men that bée angrie, are bounde to their passi∣on, when such as are not moued, haue libertie, to pacifye, with discreation. Thus, with their spirites well pleased, Quéene Au∣relia, and the reste of the companie, rose from the table, and after ordenarie curtesie ended, they paused a time by the Fire, to put their witts in order, for the following dis∣putation: who at the ordinarie howre, entred the draw∣ing Chamber, where the Eunuke readie to discharge his dutie, vnto the Lute sung this following Sonet. REgarde my loue, but not my frostie haires, Although faire Dame, the least may moue content: For Loue, Faith, Zeale, standes firme in aged yeares, When light greene youth, is fickle in intent. The aged knowes, the leaues and fruite of youth, The leaues they leaue, and with the fruite doe loue: The sayinges of olde Age, are iudged trueth. Let loue and trueth, mislyking then remoue.
What though my chin, be clothed all in white, Whight in your cheekes, the chiefest coulour is: Which fayre dye, doth make you seeme so bright, As men holde you, the source of beauties blisse. Sweete Mistresse then, of all the fayre, the Flower, Let not condemne, what doth your selfe comend: Ruthe seemes your face, let rigor not deuour, His loue, and lyfe, that liues and dies your friende. This Sonet, mooued ye company to smile, not because the inuention was vnwittie, but in that, it was the fruites of Doctor Mossenigoes Muse, who to reuenge vppon him∣selfe all the iniurie, which he had done to the sexe of Wo∣men, became inamoured of Katharina Trista, the waspis∣sest Damosel, among the whole troupe of Gentlewomen: But knowing the Doctors Phylosophie, could not so sub∣due his affection: but that time would make them all sporte and him smarte, they dissembled their knowledge of his folly, as déepely as hée couered the passions of hys fancy: notwithstanding to raise some speach, and to set the Doctor a work with hope. [Quoth Aluisa Vechio] this Sonet prophesieth a ha∣pie lyfe to a young woman, and much comfort to an olde man if their fortunes be so good, as to be marted together. And if I had as good a passage, for my opinyon, as I haue Reason to mayntayne the same: I woulde thinke to prooue this couple, worthye of a place in PLATOES Paradice. Among so manie good Drators [quoth Quéene Aure∣lia] you cannot want an Aduocate. Whereupon Katharina Trista, with a false eye, coniu∣red the Doctor, in this question, to maintaine his Loue: who thus inioyned, tooke vpon him to maintaine Aluisa Vechioes opinion. Quéene Aurelia licensed him, and no aduersary appea∣red
to discourage him: wherevpon (quoth he) where an old man marieth a yonge woman, the contentment séemes too be muche, and the comfort more: my reason is, the oulde Defences where an old man marri∣eth a yonge woman. man hath not onlye chosen a Wyfe, to recreate him as a companyon, but a Cooke to prepare chosen meates for his impayred appetite, and a Staffe to sustaine his Age. The yonge wife also may hold her selfe happie in this fortune: for she hathchosen one, whom she may not onely rule, but commaund: and for a litle paynes, who will leaue her pos∣sest of a great deale of lyuyng. And this is most certain, that cruel and wilde Creatures do most hurt, where their wyll is moste resisted: and hau great compassion, where they finde no proffer of repulse: The Lyon in his greatest hunger, hurts not yt wounded shéepe: yt Crocadile wt teares wassheth the blood from a murthred man, and the raging Sea refressheth the yealding Réede: much more, a woman (that by nature is beautified with pittie) if she rule with∣out checke, wyll glorie in the good vsage of her Husbande: and this is in dayly vse, that the olde man, in assemblies, findes his yonge wife, modest in her speache, basshefull in her lookes, and nice, in occasion of suspition: and whyther this behauiour procéedes of desire to be praysed, or of feare to be blamed, I conclude the cause with her cōmendation: for that to do well in hope of praise, cōmes of the incoura∣gement of vertue: and to do well for feare of reprehensiō, is the signe of a good inclination. By Sainet Anne Sir (quoth Soranso,) you well de∣serue a Fée, (especiallie, of the yonge wyfe) in that you so connyngly haue coloured her ouersight, and so Clarckely Reproofe. &c haue commended her good vsage of her olde Husband: but your Suggestion tends to as small effect, as the Fortune is euyl, of a couple thus vnequallie matched: for that com∣mon reason wil refute your weake opinion, and dayly ex∣perience recordes the miseries of the other. What likelyhood of continuance, hath the House, whose grounde worke is rotten, although the prospect be beauti∣full and stronge, God, wotte the féeblenesse of the Foun∣dation,
wyll ouerthrow the firmenesse of the vpperframe. Compare this vneqaull estate in Marriage, with this ouersight in building, and you shall finde the discorde as great betwene the one, as the ruyne and decay, spéedie in the other. The good and able Gouernment of the Hus∣bande, is the foundation and grounde worke of Mariage: and the Beautie of the Wife, the blessynge in hauynge of Children: and the benefite of possessyng lyuinges, are the outwarde buyldinges of Mariage: And as they are plea∣sant in the eye of the worlde, euen so, they greatly please the mindes of the maryed, & geue a singuler Grace to this honourable vocation. But, if the Gouernment of the Hus∣bande, be inabled, with Age: (as in trueth) Olde Age is no other then a seconde Infancie. In whose desire, direction, discrescion and delight, there, are imperfections. The Beautie of the wyfe, wyll be bla∣sted with sorrowe: for the insufficiencte of her Husbande: euyll Education wyll accurse their blessyng in hauyng of Chyldren, and negligence wyll waste their benefites of li∣uyng. (You hould a yonge wife, a Companion to recreate an olde man, but he shal finde her a Corsiue that wyl con∣sume him to death. A yong man concludeth, the swéetest sollace in loue with sighes: it is then, lyke, an olde man endes it with teares: And God, he knowes, he often wée∣peth, more of desire, to please his wyfe, then of any Deuo∣tion he hath to wantōnesse: yet is al his paynes to a fruit∣lesse purpose, for that the Game finissheth in his griefe, & neither began nor endes in his wyues contentment. You are too quicke, in Aduauntage, Segnior Soranso, (quoth the Doctor) Oulde Wine, thoughe it be dead in the Defence. &c. mouthe, yet is it warme in the Stomacks, when the Newe, fumes in the Heade, but comforteth not the heart. Dry woodde, maketh a bright Fyre, where gréene Bowes consume halfe awaye in Fume and Somake. The Sonne riseth watrishlye, and is longe before it
geueth heate, where, in the After noone, it scorcheth the face: So, a Yonge man deuideth his Loue, into a hun∣dreth Affections, and euery fancie pleased, there wyll but a little fall to his wyues share: where an Olde mans Loue is settled, and his fancie is fixed vpon one: And as the resighted Examples, in Age, are in best hart: so to proue an olde mans sufficiencie, there is a common Pro∣uerbe: Gray Haires are nourished, with greene thoughts. Now, to cōtent his yong wyfe, she shal haue no cause to suspect his Affection abroade, and shall not lacke to bée belooued at home. Moreouer, whiche delighteth a yong woman, (who naturallye, is Ambitious) shée shall take her place, accor∣dyng to the grauitie of her Husband, and not as her yong yeares requyreth. And to conclude, to giue her an honourable name, the most precious Iuell, with which, a woman may be beau∣tified, she shall receyue graue Directions from her Hus∣bande: and through the swéete delight, she taketh in hea∣ryng her good Gouernment cōmended, she wyll put them in Execution. Doctor Mossenigo, replied not with this vehemencie, for any delight he had to commende this vnequall estate in Mariage, but to flatter Katharina Trista, with an Am∣bitious Hope, of great Reputation, in matchyng with his aged self: but she (that knew a leg of a Larke, was better then the whole Carkasse of a Kyte) woulde none God thank him. And to make him horne wood (if hée perseuered in his opi∣nion,) in Soransoes behalfe (quoth Bergetto his auncient crosser:) Maister Doctor, theare is more pryde in your wordes, then Substance in your proofes: your hartie olde Wine, must be drawen out, when it is broached: your drie woodde is but a blaze, and your hot Sunne, doth but sweate, for sorow, that he is goyng to cowche in the dark Caues of Tartessus. But as touching Old men, they may Reproofe, &c well be sufficient in gréene thoughts, as you terme them,
but I am assured, that in déedes, they are weake, and wy∣thered: And therefore, a man cannot speake too muche e∣uill, of this excesse in dotage: withered Flowers, are more fit for a Dunghill, then méete to deck a house: olde rotten Trées, are néedefull for the fyre, but vnnecessarie to stande in an Orchad: euen so, olde decaied creatures, are comely in the Church, but vnséemely by a yong womans side. The olde man, which marrieth a yonge Wyfe, is sure The mis∣chaunces of an oulde man yongly ma∣ryed. of this sowre sauce, to rellish his swéete Imaginations: his beloued wife (how so euer she dissembleth) disdayneth hym: his neighbors al to be flouteth him, and soothing Pa∣risites, beguileth him: common opinion will counterfeit him lyke Acteon, not so much for the ficklenesse, they sée in his wife, as for the infirmities, they know in himselfe. And bréefely, to conclude his ioye: hée may (perchaunce) A yong wyfe is death. to an old . lyue two yeares, with his faire wife: but the mischaunce of his Children, will remember his infamie, for euer: Gréene Iuy, which catcheth an olde Trée, maketh quicke worke for the fire: and the imbracements of a faire Wo∣man, hastneth an olde man to his Graue. And although it be a haynous wronge, causelesse to condemne the Wyfe: An honest wo∣man is light∣ly slauudered, by the imper∣fections of her Husband. yet this will be the opinyon, shée killed her Husband with thought, to heare and sée, how she trespassed, both against, his and her owne honour. Foule fall, suche a Marriadge (quoth Maria Belochy) where the vertuous Wife, shal be slaundered, through the imperfections of her Husbande. It is some wrong ({quod} Fabritio) but she might haue fore∣séene Repentan to late. the mischiefe, while she was frée. Well (quoth Quéene Aurelia) vpon this knowledge of michaunce, our companie, are sufficiently warned. Pro∣céede The wife are warned by the mischaun ces of other. in Iudgement, as you allow eithers opinion. Whereupon, Fabritio with Isabella, with one accord, gaue sentence, against Dctor Mossenigo, in these words. An olde man amourous, of a yong Woman, is an enemie, both to his health and reputation, for the causes aforesaid.
The rest of the companie, smyled to héere this iudge∣ment: but the Doctor, brake foorth many a secret sigh, not for the disgace he tooke in his pleading (for he defended an yll matter, with colour sufficient) but in that he knew this verdict would alwaies be a barre in his sute. While the Doctor and Soranso argued: Quéene Aure∣lia, espyed in the Cloath of Arras: a Beast fourmed like an Unicorne, saue that he bare his Horne in his nose: whiche beast, sléeping, laide his murthering Horne in a yong Mai∣dens A Rhinocerot lap: and after the question was decided, shee de∣maunded, what that Beast was? and what the misterie signyfyed: but the meaning was as strannge, as the sight, to most of the companie. The Meta∣morphose of Rinautus, a Gentleman of Naples. In the ende (quoth Ismarito) Madam, I haue read of a gallant yong Gentleman of Naples named Rinautus, that was Metamorphosed into such a Beast, by this aduēture: passing through the Iland Circeū [that Homer speaketh off] which is now annexed vnto the Continent: he was espied of Circes, who inhabited that Ilande. This wrin∣cled, yll fauoured Witch, at the first sight, was surprised in Loue, with the goodly shape and beautie of this seemely Gentleman: but for al her charmes, and Inchauntments, her Arte failed, either to force him to Loue, or to frée her selfe from louing: for, notwithstandinge, shee was a God∣desse, he disdained her ouer worne, soule and wythered vi∣sage: and shee presumyng of her Sorcerie, powred fresh Coales, vppon her kyndled desyre, in hope that necessi∣tie would force him to consent, to the requeste, fréewill contemned: but Cupid (to whom such power onely belon∣geth) to scourge her presumption, in suche sorte hardened Rinautus harte, that all Circes Sute and Sorceries ten∣ded vnto a fruitlesse successe. In so much, as in her rage she turned him into a Rhinocerot, a Beast of vnconquerable force, who in his nose, beareth a borne, much like to the U∣nicorne: But notwithstanding hee was thus transfour∣med (as King Nahucadonizer, in the fourme of an Oxe, re∣tained the spirit of a man) so hée in his altered shape, nou∣rished
his auncient disdaine of yll fauoured Circes: and so bee fully auenged, with all hys force, pursueth olde Crea∣tures: and such as hée ouertaketh, hée goreth to death: yet is he by this polycie subdued: Place a faire. Maide, in his walke, and foorth with hee will with a louinge counte∣naunce, repaire vnto her, and in her bosome, gently bestow his murthering Horne: and sodainlye, (as one rauished with contentment) hée fauleth a sléepe, by which meanes he is slaine before he recouereth the vse of his force. The Companie laughed well, to heare this straunge Metamorphosis. In the end ({quod} Quéene Aurelia) I would Maister Doc∣tor had hard this Hystorie, when hée so inuayed against Beautie, perhaps, he would haue bene affraide of her ven∣geaunce, seeing her power able to conquere sauage & wilde Beastes. But the Doctor, glad of this aduantage, not vnlyke the Euyll men care not for the consci∣ence, so they haue a colour for their of∣fences. tūning Lawier, that buyeth Robin hoodes penniworthes, & yet with some nice forfaitures, threatneth the seller, with continuall bondage: & many times, bringeth backe his mo∣ney, and kéepeth his bargen: not caring for his Concience, so that hée haue a colour for his offence: or as the wysest sorte of Atheistes, that (liue as though, they hoped neyther after heauen, nor feared Hel) yet confesse God with their mouth, hecause the contrarie woulde make them hated of men: so he by this tale, found out both a warrant, to main∣tayne his former Blasphemie, and to excuse his present Follie in Loue: And to Aucthorize either: Madame (quoth he,) the inchaunted Beaste, approoueth myne opinion of Beauties power, and his Death is a greater witnesse of her crueltie, then is Doctor Mossenigo, who confesseth that The force of Beautie. men, in vayne prescribe Remedies for the Affected, or Receites, to preserue men from the Infections of Beautie. You are welcome vnder our Lée [{quod} Aluisa Vechio.] But, to take awaye all hope of good intertaynment: (quoth Katharina Trista) no, no, Maister Doctor, you No Afflicti∣on, but hath his remedie. deceyue your selfe: Beautie, neyther retaineth the power,
nor poyson, which you speake of, and with you, Ouid and all the amorous Poets are mistaken: who say, Affection, riseth from Beautie, and not of the frée wyll of man: But say yon all what you please: good foresight wyll contrary your opinions. There is no sore, but hath his salue: no griefe, but hath his remedie: nor no daunger, but may be forstoode, eyther by prayer or good indeuoure. In déede (quoth Faliero) Socrates altred his inclina∣tion, by the Studie of Phylosophie: The Nyniuites pre∣serued Examples to be regarded. their Cittie by prayer: and Virbius dubled his life, by mastering of his disposission. Floradin, bewitched with the loue of faire Persida, his Idlenes oo∣risheth and exercise re∣medieth loue deare friend Pericles Wife, wrote in a table Booke: fye Floradin, fye, shée is thy friend Pericles Wife: and so of∣ten as idlenes presented him with thys passyon, he read his written remembraunce: and by some honest exercise, remooued his imagination. This is not your day Maister Doctor (quoth Soranso) I beléeue, there is some vnkindnes betwéene Saturne and Venus, by the enuious aspeckt of some other Plannet this howre. It maye be (quoth the Doctor) by the flatterie of Mer∣curie, Flatterie, the enemies of prueth. who is euermore enemie to the plainnes of trueth. Well (quoth Quéene Aurelia) let vs leaue this bye matter, and consider better of Ismaritos Metamorphosis: me thinks it prophesieth muche mischaunce to an Dulde Wydowe, whiche marteth a Yonge man, and no greate pleasure to the yonge maried Bacheler. O good Madam, say not so (quoth Soranso) for in this Mariage com mended be∣twene an olde woman and a yong man. Reproofe. &c fortune, lyeth a yonger Brothers welfare: and the cause that maketh happinesse accompanie olde wemen to their Graue. It may well be to their Graue (quoth the Doctor) but it bryngeth sorow into their House, and maketh their life more vnpleasant then death: and if Soranso followe this Course, perhappes his day wyll be no better then Doctor Mossenigos.
Quéene Aurelia smilinge, saide, shee feared this cntention woulde bring the companie to hell gates. Yet quoth she, In that I imagine the way will be pleasaunt, I licence you to perseuer in your purpose. Uppon which warrant (quoth Soranso) to maintaine Defence. &c. that to be true, which I haue alreadie alleadged in the commendation of this estate in marriage. This further reason (in my conceite) you will neither disalowe, nor the married couple shall haue cause to mislike: which is where a fresh young Gentleman, either of small liuing, or farre spent with lustinesse, lights of a rich olde widow, for that both their desires in this fortune shall bee satisfi∣ed. A good ex∣chan of Marchandice. He shall haue plentie of Coyne, the onelie Grace hee lacked, and she the possession of a goodlie Parsonage, the chéefest Iewel she loueth: which exchaunge of Marchan∣dise can not chuse, but continue their liking and raise much coutentment. Cleane contrarie ({quod} the Doctor) for ye follies of a yong mā is sufficiently punished, by marrying an olde womā:  ye sins of an olde widdow, ar fully plagued, in matching wt a yong man: for that (contrarie to your suggestion) neither can inioye, the cause of their Mariage, without annoyance to their mindes: for his lyking, is fastned on her riches, which she will not, but by necessitie leaue: & her loue is set∣led on his person, which for her pleasure, he disdaineth to The euylles in an olde wydowe. punish. The vnfortunate yongman, knowes not what gréefe hée ioynes to his gaine, in matchinge with an olde widdow, till that experience breakes them forth in sighes: If his wife be ritche, shee will looke to gouerne, if shee bée poore, he is plagued, both with beggery, and bondage: If she be proude, she will hide her abylytie, to maintaine her pompe: If she be testie, he is forst to patience: If she bee Ielous, hée canne hardlye indure her rages. And to con∣clude, if the olde doting widdow be frée from one of thse faults, she is tied to forty euils of lesse sufce: for if her▪ Husbande commaunde her will, shee straight waies sayeth her other Husband was more kinde: If hée chance
to dine from home, she wyls him to up with his harlots: if he spend beyond her allowance, thus she reuiles hym: A Begger I fownd thee, and so thou wylt leaue mee. To chastice her talke, setteth an edge of her tongue: to suffer her in her rage, maketh her raylynges irreuocable. By your wordes, Maister Doctor [{quod} Lucia Bella,] the wife is the greatest cause of this contention, and yet in common opinion, the Husband is most blamed. Madame, you are too hastie in an aduauntage, I ment no such parciallytie (quoth the Doctor. Yea Madame, (quoth Bargetto) M. Doctor is now so conquered, as his tong is the Trumpet of your pleasure. It is so (quoth the Doctor) to sound out those thinges which are true: and in trueth, the yonge Husbande often tymes, maketh the euilles, good in déedes, which the olde PLATOES Hell in Ma∣riage. wyfe vseth but in wordes: for no lenger then she féedeth him with Coyne, shall she enioy his companie: If she rob not her Children to inrich him, she shall lack no froward lookes, nor fowle vsage: If she put him in possession of her lyuing, he straight wayes dispossesseth her of his loue: for hauing, what he sought, he wyl els where be enamoured. And, vprightly to speake, she lacketh neither occasion too lament, nor cause to be inraged: for who is so patient, as can dissemble her vnsufferable passions? both, to be spoy∣led of her lyuing, and to be exyled from that she loueth: And, in verie trueth, so egall are their euilles, as it were a harde matter to iudge, who deserueth leaste blame, or most excuse: She reproacheth him, of Beggerie, Hoore∣dome, Unthriftinesse, yll vsage: and of the ruine, both of her selfe and her Children. He blameth her of Olde Age, Ielousie, curstnesse, scowldyng: & for hidyng of her goods, which he hath bought, with doyng Iniurie vnto his per∣son. If she be determined to be merie, he (scornfully) tel∣leth her, that it is as sightly, for a toothelesse Mare to eate Marchpane, as for suche a wrinckled Mumpes to fawle a bylling. If he come in wel disposed, & affably intreateth her, she calleth him dissembling Hipocrite, & saith, he salu∣teth
her wt his tong, but his hart imagineth of his mini∣ons abroade: she runneth to ye neighbors to cōplaine: In the meane while he sendeth her corne to the Market, and her cattel to the Faire. If the frends, of good wil, or neigh∣bours, of charytie, labour to accord their cōtention (as she imagineth to shame him) she thundreth out a thousād In∣iuries that he doth her: for her owne praise, she saith, that of pure loue she maried him with nothing: and to reproch him, she sweares, he hath spent her substance, & hateth her person: To show her owne good▪ Huswiferie, she tels that she worketh al day at her Distaffe: & to blase his vnthrif∣tinesse, she showeth how he plaieth away her gaines at Dice: She crieth out, that (perfore) he taketh what he o∣penly findeth, & priuylie stealeth, what she secretly hideth These, & many moe complaints, she preferreth against her Husband, wt the vehemencie of a womans passion. Her Husband, yt knoweth how to be reuēged in déedes, (for his own credit) is more milde in words: he layeth al these blames vpō her own crooked dispositiō: who though she be so olde, as a man can hardly loue her, yet wt a can∣kred ielous froward nature, she wold force a man to hate her: But what remedie, since his fortune was so hard? he wold starue her wt patience: and only adde this Suffrage to his Letanie: A praua muliere, good Lord, deliuer mée. These drie scoffes, sets her hart in a light fire, and (saue that she hath not so many colours like) vnto Iris, thūdreth out the venome of her cankred Spirit in reuylings, and raylyngs against her Husbande: And (to say trueth) her case is to be pittied, as much as her tong is to be blamed: for Iniurie is not so greuous vnto a man, as to sée his Aduersarie soothe his trespasse with an honest shoe. But, to my purpose, her Husband crosseth her with a quiet Aunswere: yon may sée friendes, sayth he, wyld fire A great cause of Impatiēce. wyl burne in water, Drinke wil make the Dropsie dry, and mildnesin mée, mooueth madnesse in my wife: by her example here, you sée my lyfe at home, as tedious as Hel: then (perhaps) som flowting Marchāt, sayth: lyke ynuffe, and the shée Deuill weareth the hornes.
Thus with their own michéefes, they greue their friends, delight their foes, and wearie their Neighbors, in accor∣ding their debates: and if they be in the morning quieted, and go home in peace, at Noone like enemies they ar redy to throwe the house out at the window: a slut like the fu∣rie of lothsomenes, shall bring in dinner, because the Ie∣lious wife, dare not trust her husbande with any maide that is hansome: the husbande offended, throweth the Platters at her head, and axeth if she meane to poyson him: the Wife taketh pepper in the nose, and sayth, if hee had not married her, he woulde haue beene glade of the worst morsell there. The Husband replieth that if he had not béene so mad, the diuell would not haue married her. Then beginneth the old Musik, tuned perchance with a rap or two of the lippes, and when they haue brawled their fill, shee runneth and bemoneth her selfe at her neighbors, and he goeth and maketh himselfe merie with his Mistrisses. In sooth, maister Doctor, it séemeth to mée (quoth Sir Soranso) that you haue verie substancially proued my opi∣nion: Defence. &c. for Marriage equallye deuideth her blessings, and mischaunces, betwéene the married: and as farre as I can sée, neither of these knoweth, who hath the better or worser bargen: there is raylinges and vnquietnesse of both sides: but what of that, pleasure is best seasoned with paine: and though they sometimes iarre at home, they a∣grée wel whē they are seperated among their neighbours. And although you haue streatched their debates, vpon the rack of vengeaunce: yet at aduenture, I wish my selfe no worse bestowed, then marrie an to old welthy Widdow. I doo not thinke, but by good vsage, to continue her first affec∣tion géeuen, euen vnto hir verie Graue. You will kill her with kindnesse, (quoth Maria Be∣lochye. Yea, Madam, ({quod} Soranso) if her nature be so froward, as to die with good vsage.
In déede Ladyes quoth the Doctor, there are some men, that entertaine their olde wiues, with such a fayre showe of flattering looue, as they bewitche them euen to theyr latter gaspe. But at what rate dooth she purchase this kindenesse? O euen with the vndooing of her selfe and Children: yea, and which is worse, it is the pollicie A most wicked pol∣lysie. of Father in lawes, to dandle the infancie of theyr wiues Children, in the lap of Ignorance, to this ende, that bée∣ing of lawfull age, they may with lesse fetches beguyle them of theyr liuing: so that the vnfortunate childe, knowes not whether he may more bemone his losse of liuing, or lacke of good bringing vp: and in my iudge∣ment, Senecas o∣pinion that Children were better to be dead borne then ignoraunt of good letters. of bothe the euils: want of education is the grea∣test: for learning and vertue purchaseth liuing, and ly∣uing corrupteth, but coyneth not good conditions: and as Seneca sayeth, libertie without learning is a bondage to the minde: and further, the Childe were better to be dead borne, then barren of good Letters, for that Ignoraunce is a graue which buryeth life. Maister Doctor (quoth Quéene Aurelia) me thinketh your wordes doo too much wrong to the wife, though they cannot sufficiently blame the husband. I graunt that fa∣ther in lawes, estéeme their owne profiets, before theyr wiues Chyldrens preferments: but yet (I suppose) Na∣ture dooth direct the naturall Mother, to eye theyr good bringing vp, who with muche sorrowe brought them foorthe: For (as the Prouerbe goeth) things that are Thinges that are beast esteemed. dearely bought, are of vs intirely belooued, and nothing is more dearely purchased, then what is  the hazarde of life, which venter the Mother  she is assured of her Childe: then this cru  her Children, to satisfye the wyll of her se , wyll make indifferent men holde her an vn ∣ther, whether her husband estéeme her a due e or no. Oh good Madame quoth the Doctor, how  the Reproofe, &c.
Hen succour her Chickens, when she her selfe is at the merey of the ite? how can the Conny preserue her Ra∣bets, when the Ferret is in possession of her Burrowe? and how may the vnfortunate Mother, Foster her shift∣lesse Children, either as she should or would, when her fancie or folly hath enthralled her to a second Husband, whose power is to direct, and displeased, to check? This se∣ueritie of Father in lawes, hath bred much diuision in Marriage: but still the quarrels are concluded, with the detryment of the Children: for the vnhappie wife, is bound to one of these two euils, either to agrée to the ty∣rannizing of her entrayles, or to yéelde to her owne A hard ex∣tremitie. continuall sorrow and vnquietnesse: And where the case is so desperate, it may be lamented, but not wondred at, that necessitie breake the boundes of nature. To staye this mischéefe (quoth Helena Dulce) Honou∣rable is the custome of Spaine, where the vertuous An honora∣ble custome of Spaine. Dame holdeth the second Mariage, a retrograding of her reputation, and a wrong to her deceased husband: for by this stayednesse, she is in possession of her libertie, and hath the disposing of her liuing. I holde this precise custome (quoth Dondolo) more profitable then necessarie: for the penaunce were to harde, yea, vnpossible to be indured, that the lusty young Wid∣dowe should be constrayned to a Uirgins chastytie, for as Ouid deuineth. I that some times of Nuptiall rites, Haue taste the pleasant toyes: Now cannot chuse, but call to minde, Dame Venus sugred ioyes. But if the aged widdow, could liue within this lawe, it would bring honour to her yeares, and happinesse to
the ende of her life. What better husbands may she haue, then her owne Children, whom shee may bothe com∣maund Meete hus∣bandes for aged wid∣dowes. and controule, whose dutyes are to labour in her causes, and to vnburden her heart of cares? and when she departeth this life, where may she better dispose her li∣uing, then vpon her own Children, whom to reléeue, she is coniured by nature, and to bring vp in good nurture, bound in conscience: But from the beginning so rife hath béene the dotage of Widdowes, that when their feeble legges, faintely supporteth their consumed bodyes, when at hie noone, their mistie eyes hardly discerneth the hye way, and when (forste) thorough lack of téethe, they swal∣lowe theyr meate, theyr lippes notwithstanding, take de∣light in kisses, and their mindes thirst after wantonnesse. Mens follyes are as great as Womens simplicities, in this ouersight in dotage (quoth Quéene Aurelia) but I thinke it necessarie, that héere we staye our iorney, least we enter into Hell, before we be aware: and therefore Segnior Fabritio, I pray you let vs haue your sentence, to ouer rule this question. Madam (quoth Fabritio) the euill of this inequallitie Experience is a iudge ment it selfe. in Mariage, is bothe so auncient and so common in vse, as there néedeth no other iudgement, then experience of our neighbours mischaunces, but to succour the iniured children, I would that one of Laertius lawes, were com∣mon to ye whole world: which is, wher the Tennaūt sued his A worthie lawe, made by Laertius. Lorde, the Seruaunt his Maister, or the Childe his Parents, that Iudges themselues, should foorthwith looke into the Processe, and determine the same, for it is vehemently to be supposed, that these sutes are foreced vpon vehement iniuries, otherwise the Seruaunt would feare to sue his Maister, who hath power moderately to chasten him: the Tennant would quake to vnquiet his Lord, who hath many meanes to crosse him, and without whose grace he may neuer liue in peace. Shame and dutie (in any sufferable matter) would make the childe forbeare to molest his Parēts, for (but where his cause is known)
Reporte like a two edged Knife, would (besides his iniu∣rie) wound him with blame, and omission of dutie. Ther∣fore, where the least of two daungerous euils, foreceth the aboue sayd to sue, it is much to be lamented, that de∣laye, countenaunce of fréends, corruption with bribes, and other supporters, which the riche hath, should tor∣ment the poore complaynant, more then his originall iniurie. Your reason is but iust, quoth Quéene Aurelia, and the rest of the company: who wearie with the multitude of the resited mischaunces, heere broke of the Disputa∣tion, and went and reposed themselues in the great Chamber. The speeche which passed the sixt night at Supper, betweene Segnior Phyloxenus, and his Honourable Guestes. ACcording to the order of Merchaunts, who at the latter ende of the yeare, suruey theyr accounts, to sée what fortune and mischaunce they haue receyued thorough the whole yeare past. Segnior Philoxenus (towards the latter end of Supper) smilelingly, demaun∣ded an account of the benefit of the chosen companies sixe dayes Disputation. Sir (quoth Soranso, with a modest merry counte∣naunce) we are like to present you a Eanckrupts recko∣ning, who the longer he occupieth, the worse he thriueth: It is no stiung a∣gainst the streame. so we these sixe dayes, haue trauailed to finde out a way, to the Parradise in Mariage, and euery day we haue béen further and further off, of our determination, one day we thought that the wealthy matches of Parentes, would haue spéeded our iorney, but there, lack of loue in the Children, cast vs behinde hand: an other day, we imagi∣ned that frée choise in the Children, would haue directed
vs to happinesse in Marriage: but want of  and frowardnes in the parentes, marred this marth. In lofty loue we found dainger: in base loue sothesomesse and inconstancy: and where there is inequality of yeares, fume and smoke of Hell: so that now wee shall be dryuen to renounce our profession: and runne awaye with the Banckowt, least (if he staye, as he is chopped vp in pry∣son so) we, if wee procéede any further be drowned in the ryuer Stix. If you trauaile with as much pleasure, as you report your aduentures with ease, quoth Signior Philoxenus, I wonder but a little though errour carryed you to Hell gates: but to incourage you to perseuer in your fyrst pur∣pose, let this comfort you: that thinges when they are at the worst, begin again to amend. The Feauer giueth place to health, when he hath brought the pacyent to deathes doore. The Bée, when he hath lefte his stinge in your hand without dainger may playe with your eye lidde: so, when all the inconueniences of Marriage, are in your eares, you may very well receiue her into your heart: and to conclude your benifytte with your owne example, there The thri∣uing vn∣thrift proues the the best husband. is no such husband as the vnthrifte, when he fasteneth vppon e worlde: for in spending of other mennes goodes he learned howe to spare his owne, when he gettes them: so in the pleasaunt beating out of these inconueniences, you knowe what maketh Marriage bitter, and the gréefe knowen, the remedye is easie. With your fauour, Sir, quoth Dondolo, to be sicke is common to all men, but to restore to health, vnder God, is the offyce of the Phisition: so we all knowe by our owne trauaile, the infirmities of Marriage, but to fynde out the blessinges, muste procéede from your sound directions which fauour to obtaine we are all earnest suters. Your request is so iuste quoth Segnior Philoxenus, that if I were able (as I am not) to better your ige∣mentes, I would not be daintye in this pleasure: but for that the more the opinions are, in the end, the more pro∣found
the sentence is: I wyll too morrowe (in part, to sa∣tisfie your demaund) ioyne with you in your ordinarie swéete exercise. Perchaunce you haue ended all the in∣conueniences in the olde yeare, and I may begin the New yeare, in helping to bloome the blessings of Mar∣riage. Quéene Aurelia and the rest of the company, affectio∣nately thanked Signior Philoxenus for this hye fauour: and so rose from the Table, who after a little pawsing, daunsing and deuising: at theyr pleasures, went vnto theyr lodginges. FINIS.
The. vii. Dayes Exercise: Containing: a Discourse of the excellencie of Mar∣riage: with many sound Lawes and directions, to continue loue betweene the married: with the rare Historie of Pyrigeus and Pieria, reported by Segnior Phyloxenus: And other good notes of regarde. LIke as when the royall Armie, lies in∣camped before a Towne of warre, the sound of Trumpets, noyse of Drums, and neying of Horses, dooth awake the Souldiors and Cittizens, before Aurora be willing to leaue the swéete embrace∣ments of her husband Tithon: so, euen with the departure of the day Star, in honour of the New yeare, the Trum∣pets, Drūmes and Flutes, sounded through euery small passage, into the lodgings of Segnior Philoxenus Pal∣lace, such shrill salutations, as the company enuying the confusion of night: broade waking, attended the Mor∣nings light, to apparell themselues: who in theyr moste braue and sumptuous araye, by nine of the clock, made the great Chamber resemble a fayre Garden in Maye. In the imbroderies of whose Garments, Flowers and fan∣cies, were so naturally and artificially wrought: some of Pearle, some of golde, some of Bugle, euery one according to their one humour: More ouer, euery Gentlemans head was armed with his Mistrisses fauor, and euery Gentle∣womans hart, was warmed with her seruaunts affectiō. In the most soueraigne place of the great Chamber. Ianus, God of Time (as the Poets faine) was hung vp, in the likenes of a Serpent, winding his body into a cir∣ckle and holding his taile in his mouth, expressing vnder
this figure his reuolution, who through his continuall The yeare endeth and beginneth in it selfe. motions enuoning and compasing the world, retour∣neth into himselfe, and endeth and beginneth in himselfe: and in ioyfull token of the newe yeare, he was garnished with many sweete flowers, garlandes, and deuices: some artificiall liuelely counterfeited. Segnior Philoxenus al∣though he hated superstitious Ceremonies, and shund Ancient customs are to be kepte. them, yet he honored auncient lawdable customes, and kept them: who according to the custome of the countrey, presented euery one of his guests, with a riche new years gifte, which explayned some morrall vertue. Among the The vertues of the minde are more glori∣ous then any out∣ward gar∣ment. Custome in Italye in giuing of new yeares giftes, con∣trarie to the custome of England. The origi∣nall of nevv yeares giftes. reste he gaue his sister Quéene Aurelia, a fayre plaine ta∣blet, which opened, represented the picture of a faire Lady garnished with many precious stones: couertly, expressing thereby, that gorgeous apparell was but base and counterfeit, in respect of the braue vertues of the mynde. This order the Italians vse, the best giueth newe yeares giftes to his inferior freendes, and in England cleane contrarie. The Tennaunt giueth his Lord: the meane Gentlemen, to Knightes: Knightes to Barrons: Bar∣rons to Earles: Earles, Marquises: and Dukes, to their soueraigne Prince: but it séemeth the Englishmen, ob∣serue this custome more neere the originall then the Ita∣lians: for the foūders therof were the aūcient Romaines, who bounde theyr Knights, the first day of Ianuarie, in the Capitole, to present theyr Newyeares giftes, to Caesar Augustus, were he absent, or present: but so many Countryes, so many customes. And (to my purpose) Seg∣nior Philoxenus, thus bountifully solemnized the vse of his owne Countrey. This memorable curtesie perfour∣med, Segnior Phyloxenus, with some of the grauer com∣pany, went before vnto the Chappell, and Quéene Aure∣lia and her attendantes, followed with such a glyttering show, as the Préests needed no other Tapers to sée to say seruice by, then the  ons of the Gentle∣womens eyes, and the  nes they wore in theyr Iewels; and in my  God was better plea∣sed,
and more honoured, with the Brauerie of the compa∣nie, then with the babling and Ceremonies of the Priest: who in the honour of the New yeare, sets forth his relikes to the best showe: By that time Seruice was ended, and the companie retourned: the Tables were furnished with many daintie Disshes: to wreake her hunger of some few wherof, Quéene Aurelia, tooke her Royall place, and the rest of the companie, as they pleased. This Dinner was spent in Discourse of certain Ceremonies and olde Rites vsed in times past, in the celebrating of God Ianus Feast, too tedious, and (withall impertinent for this Discourse. When Dinner, and a little other pausyng talke was en∣ded, the companie arose: and Quéene Aurelia. with the re∣uerent Salutations of the whole troupe, retyred into her owne Chamber, tyll the howre of Disputation sownded: About which time, she, with Segnior Phyloxenus, and the rest of her Attendauntes, entred into a moste delycate Banquetinge House, where, vppon the Walles, in so good order, and representation of Nature: were pain∣ted, Segnior Phi∣loxenus ban queting hous all mane of Fruies, Flowers, Uines, Aors, and causes of Pleasure, either in Drhaed or Garden: as a mā (without blushing) might haue aduētured, to gather vpon the bare Walles, a Pomegranate, a Cluster of Grapes, a Gyllyflower, or suche lyke: had not the dead of Winter, reaued the likelyhoode, that they should be pfect. After Quéene Aurelia, & the rest of the companie, had taken their places, in this earthly Paradic: Segnior Phy loxenus (secretly) wylled ye Eunuke, to chaunt out the pray ses of Hymen: who obaying this Charge, tuned his Lue, and to a swéete Noate, sung this following net. EVen as the Vine, that clasps the tender Elme, (beare Amonge greene leaues, his purpled Grapes doth When [wanting props] himself doth onerwhelme, And for the fire his Braunches doth prepare.
So in one, with Hymens tes fast bound, Of their sweete loue, liue alwayes in the seede: When Death, or time, the single doth confounde: Which ruine of fame, the barren thought doth breede Sweete Hymen then, thy Godhead Indore, And  my selfe, by thee to be controlde: In foulded Armes, my Spouse my eyes before: Yeelds more content, then Dymonds, Pearle, & Gold In quiet home, vncheckt, to rule, and e, What lyfe  sweete? what hartes ase like to this? Or through e; my mind when are doth greene What Medicine, is better then kysse? At s en by ouyng wife, O none, nor state, lyke to the married lyfe. This  ended, and well considered: Sir (quoth Queene Aurelia to Snion xenus) to be reuenged of the iniuri, of our  tions who haue pain∣ted Among the iust, promise is kept. Marriage wi nd inueniences, I beséeche you, and binde you, by your promise, to blazon the bles∣singes and excellencie of this ed Institution: that she who is  may e her  ayses, and we that are ignot, may knowe how to  her benefites, and with the same to honour her. To praise, or blame, is qua litie of wit, but to direct is a worke of iudgement. Madame, (quoth Seg Philoxenus) you charge me, beyonde my promise, and de mée to an impossibilitie: I promist but to ioyne with this quick witted Company in opinion, which I  to accomplish. To blaze the excellencie of Marriage, is a worke of no great diffcultie, because her vertues illustreth the same through the whole worlde, but to direct the maried, is a laor of Ar, wit, and expérience▪ in the fyrst, wherof, I am ignoraunt, in the second vnperfect, and to the thirde a Strainger: so that, as I am sorry to iniurie your expec∣tation, so am I loth to expose my insufficient iudgement.
Sir (quoth Quéene Aurelia) if wée were not assured of a lyberal contentment, in contēplating of your waigh∣tie We haue in∣terest in an other mans vertues. Censure, we would receiue your modest refusall, for iust excuse. But for that we haue all an intrest in your vertues, & you should be enemie, to your owne honorable cōmendation, in kéeping of them close prisoners in your Princes com∣mandements must be obay ed. brt (although you be Lord of the Pallace) yet I, as oue raigne of the Ciuill Pleasures, commaund you to giue Cerimonies a disgrace, and sincerely to obay my will. Madam (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) so stricht is your charge, as I must aduenture, of this waighty labour, ho∣ping, that as by authoritie you commaund my opinion, Of the exe∣lencie of ma∣riage. so by ye motion, of some one of your vertues, you wil par∣don my errours. Upon which incouragement, to obay your wyll, I say, and approoue, by sacred Authoritie, that this holy Institu∣tion Mariage in∣stituted be∣fore the fall of Adam, by God in the earthly Para∣dice. of Marriage, was erected by God, in the earthly, Pa∣radice, before the transgression of Adam, when he ioyned him to Eue, with these wordes of blessing, Increase mul∣tiply, and replenish the earth. Againe, after Adams fall, and the deluge: to strengthen his fyrst institution, God commaunded, the good Patriarcke Noe, to encrease and multiply the earth a new. Moreouer, God would haue no more women, then men, in his Ark, to show there shoulde A confirma∣tion of the fyrst institu∣tion by God. be a Sympathie in number, as well as agréement in loue betwene man, and wife: for if the one might lawfullye haue many Wiues, and the other, many Husbandes: how should this expresse Commaundement of God be vnuio∣lated? You shall be two bodies in one flesh, and no more. Man and wife are two bodies and but one flesh. Compare the Ioye, honour and reuerence, geuen vnto Mariage, by the delight, that procéedeth from any other cause, and you shal sée her gleame, lyke a blasyng Comet, and the other, but twinckle as an ordinarie Starre. The ioye of of marriage shineth a∣boue al other delightes. Gorgeous and rich Apparayle, delighteth the Gasers eye: and (perhaps) offendeth the wearers hart: where Maryage, in homely Attyre, is euery where honored, and reaueth vnquiet wandring thoughts, from the Maried to
abounde in riches, is a glorious fortune, but they charge men with a dubble care, extreame in the getting, and Children are the most rich Iuelles in the worlde. fearefull in the kéeping: the married, hath as great, or greater ritches, in their children. When the stately Dames of Rome, bragged of theyr Iuelles, Cornelia boasted that hers, excelled them all. A Ladye of the company, séeing her, set forth with none, that was precious, demaunded where her Iuelles were? Yon∣der quoth Cornelia, and poynted to her children. When certaine most rare, and precious Iuelles, of King Darius, and his wiues, were presented to Olympia, This Iuell, was her sonne Alexander. Mother of Alexander the great, she bestowed them vpon her Ladyes, as to lowe prised for her wearing, who was continually, adorned with a Iuell, in value, as riche as Asia, Affrica, and Europa. And sure Quéene Olympia, and Ladye Cornelia, gloried not in their Iuelles, with∣out The blessing of Children, is a duble life reason: for golde, and precious stones, set but a glose, vppon beautie, when vertuous children, geueth a newe lyfe vnto their parentes. The administration of Iustice, and aucthoritie, in a Offices of Ius tice apartaine to the maried common weale, are the proper offices of the married: for that the care of wife, & children, presupposeth them to be setled: when the vnmarried, though their wittes be good, rayseth a suspition in the wise, that their thoughtes, are The sweete Sympathie be tweene the married. vagrant. The vnmaried, hath no agreable Compani∣on, to participate of his pleasure; or to lessen his sorrowe. The Maried, hath a Companion of his owne flesh, of his owne wyll, and of his owne Spyryt, so wrought to his Loue to our Parents, ue rent. owne Affection: that betwéene them, there is séene two bo∣dies, & but one thought, perceiued: The Maried ioy alike, sorrow alike: are of one substāce, one concord, one wealth, Loue to our Bretheren, naturall. one pouertie, Companions at one Boorde & in one Bed. The loue we beare vnto our Parents, is (or ought to be) reuerent and duetifull, because, they gaue vs lyfe: Unto our Bréetherne, naturall, because of the priuitie in blood: Loue to our Friendes, af∣fectionated. To our frendes, affectionate, by certaine Motions & con∣sents of the minde: Notwithstanding, that these Loues be
thus greate, yet are there diuers causes too lessen them. But betwéene the married, no mischaunce, or infirme Fortune, is cause sufficient of hatred: for none, gouerned Loue betwen the married irreuocable. by reason, is so inhumaine, as to mallice his owne fleshe: Compare their seuerall affections, by sorrow, and you shal sée the weakenes of the one, in regarde of the strength of the other. The greatest mone we make, for the death of our Father, Brother, or friend, appeareth in sighes, or A good mean to trye the loue of the married. (most vehement) in teares: whereas if wée our selues, are but a little wounded, we crye outright: so that by howe much we excéede, in sorrowing our owne mischaunces, a∣boue another mans: by the same reason, so much we loue our selues, more then another. The Rynge that is geuen The rynge, a triall of the loue betwene the married. by the Husbande, and put on the Wiues finger, ought to be of Gould, to witnes, that as gould is the most precious of Mettalles, so the loue of the married, excéedeth all other loues. To which effecte, Propertius sayth, Omnis amor mag∣nus, sed aperto in coniugè maior: moreouer, the close Ioy∣ning An other sy∣gure of the rynge. of the ringe, is a figure of true vnitie of the married: betwéene whom, there should be no diuision in desire, no difference in behauiour. To honour this holy institution Christ was borne of a married wo∣man. of God, God would haue his onely begotten sonne, to be borne of a Wife, perfectly married, saue that shée was not Carnally soyled. Licurgus, the good King of the Lacedemonians, so reue∣renced this sacred estate, as he made a Lawe, that what Licurgus law for the vnma∣ried. Lacedemonian soeuer were vnmarried, after the age, of thyrtie and eyght yeares, should be chased and hissed out of all publique playes, and assemblies, as one, vnworthy to be séene: & that, in the cold winter, he shuld (naked) indure the reproches of the people: and withall, was bounde to confesse, how he iustly suffred yt punishment, as a Mis∣priser of Religion, a contemner of Lawes, and an enemie to nature. The Romaines were not so seuere: but yet the The Lawe of the Romains, for the vnmar ried. Aged, vnmaried, were condempned (accordyng to their a∣bylytie (to pay vnto the Treasurer, for publique vse, a good Sūme of Money.
Plato, in his Lawes, enacted: that the Unmaried, shuld execute, no honourable Office, Estate, nor dignytie, in the Platos lawes for the vnma ried. Common wealth? The good Emperour, Alexander Seuerus, although he maryed, rather, to geue ende to his Mother, Mammeas, Importunyties: then (as he thought) to begin a more hap∣pie lyfe: yet fayre Memmia, his wyfe, so naturally ac∣corded with his disposition, as when she died, he would of∣ten renewe his Sorowe, and remember her Uertues, in these wordes. So great a Treasure, as I haue lost, a man seldome findeth: Death were gentle, if he tooke nothyng Alexander Seuerus loue to Memmia his wife. but that whiche offendeth: but, oh, he hath reaued the better parte of my selfe. How wonderfullie, was the Loue of Paulina, sage Se∣necaes Wife, who opened her Uaines, not onely, with an Paulinas rare loue, to her Husbande Seneca. intent to accompanie him to death, but also, with a desire to féele her Husbandes maner of deathe. Quintus Curtius, resiteth, that Kyng Darius, with an vnapauled Spirit, tooke his Ouerthrowes, by Alexander the Great, the ruine of his kingdome, and the daunger The precious loue of king Darius to his wife. of his royall parson: But hauing knowledge of his wiues death, he wept bitterly, shewing by this sorrow, that he l his Quéene, farre abone his Crowne. King Admetus, being sore sicke, receiued this answer from the Oracle: that if he liued, his best friend must dye: The deuine loue of king Admetus. Wife. which when the good Quéene heard, shee presently slewe her selfe, and in the trembling passage of Death, constant∣ly saide: To giue King Admetus lyfe, his Queene and dearest friende dooth die. The excee∣ding loue of Tiberius Graccus, to∣wards his wife. Tiberius Graccus, finding two Serpents, in his cham∣ber, went to the Angurers, to know what they deuyned: who answered, that he was bound to kill the one of these two Serpents, if hée slew the Male, he should die himselfe: if hée killed the Female, he should lose his wife: who (mur∣therer of himselfe) slew the Male, and saued his wife: and so by his rare loue, raised a question, whether his Wyfe were more fortunate in hauinge suche a Husbande, or vnhap∣pye
in loosing of him. One of the seuen wonders of the worlde, is an eternall testimonie of the loue whiche The wonder full loue, of Queene Arti mesia, towards her husbande Mausolus. Quéene Artemesia bare to her Husbande Mausolus, who for to engraue his dead coarse, erected a Sepulchre, so oy all and sumptuous, as tooke away the glorie of all prince∣ly Tumbes, before her time, and lefte no possibilitie, for any (in time to come) to excel the same: but holding this too bace a Mansion, for his Kingly hart, she dried the same One of the seuen won∣ders of the worlde. to powder, & spising her wine there with, she buryed it in her owne bowels: and to crowne his fame, with an euer∣lasting memorie, for that the ruine of his Sepulcher was subiect to the iniurie of time, with great rewardes she in∣couraged Theopompus, Teodectes, Naucrites, & Isocrates foure of the most famous Orators of Greece, to renowne his vertues. Al. Gel. in lib de nocti▪ atti. Amonge whom, Theopompus (as we read) receiued the triumph of victorie, in that learned skirmish. I coulde reporte manye other Authoryties, of vnsepe∣rable Loue betwéene the Married: the least of a hundred whereof, would equall, the friendshippes of TITVS and GISIPPVS: Or of DAMON and PITHI∣AS, the two woonders of mens affections. But for that I know, the able wittes héere present, can cloth my naked prooffes, of the excellencie of Marriage, and of the deuyne Loue, betwéene the Marryed, with manye other sounde reasons, I wil giue place Madam, that you, and the rest of your Ingenious Companie, may doo better seruice to the one, and Iustice to the other, desiring that, that which to saide, may discharge my premisse, though not sattisfy your expectation. Sir (quoth Quéene Aurelia) if you giue vs good lawes to preserue Loue amonge the married as you haue with precious authorities set forth the excellencie of Mariage, & the deuine operations of her blessings, wt a ful performāce
of your promisse, you shal binde vs al to be your Debters. Madame (quoth Phyloxenus) you set me to a verie hard taske: the Rose, is Hostesse, as well for the Butterflie as the Bée: the Sunne shineth, both vpon the good and bad: yea, Christe him selfe, was (aswell) Maister to a Théefe, as to a true Disciple: Euen so, diuine Mariage, can not haue, but some Deuillysh Subiectes, whome Examples wil not feare: much lesse, may Lawes, kéepe in vnitie. I graunt (quoth Quéene Aurelia:) the euyll are feare∣lesse of the Lawe, vntyll they be scourged with the venge∣aunce The Lawe is a scourge to the euill, and comforte to the good. therof: but the good embrace Lawes, as their Di∣rectors in Uertue, & Defenders from daunger: for whose Benefite, I intreate you now, with as large a power, as I lately commaunded you: that (in this behalfe) you wyl commyt, some counsaylyng Lawes, to our attentiue Me∣mories. Madame (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus,) to showe that your Uertues, haue as great power to commaund me, as your Aucthorytie to enioyne mée: I wyll set downe my owne Imagynations, to preserue (and multiplye) Loue, peace, wealthe, and Ioye, among the Maried: leauyng the same to be pefected, by the hearers better Iudgementes. Householde Lawes, to keepe the Maryed, in Loue, Peace, and Amy∣tie: Reported, by Segnior Phyloxenus. THE Satisfaction of Fancie, is the Sowrce of Ioye in Maryage: But, there be many meanes too damne vp the Course of Delight, betwéene the Maried, if the Match be not made, aswell, by foresight, as frée choyce: The Office of Foresight, is to preuent, folowyng Mis∣chaunces: Marriage con sistes as well in foresight, as free choyce and (aduisedly to consider, if present Abylytie, wyll support an Househoulde, and (according to their cal∣lyng) leaue a Portion, to their Posterytie.
In this point, the experyence of the Parents, is to be pre∣fered  the rashe imaginations of the sonne: for the aged Married, by proofe know, that in time many acci∣dents of mischaunce, will hinder the indeuours of the best husbands. The office of foresight, is likewise to consider, of the e∣quallitie Equallity in yeares. in yeares, least the one growing, and the other declining in perfection, after a while, repent, when reme∣die comes too late: the Rose full blowne, séemeth fayre for a time, but withereth much sooner then the tender Bud. It is the office of foresight, to consider of the equallitie Equallity in manners. of bringing vp, least a diuersity in manners, betwéene the married, make a deuision of desires: for Spannyels and Curres, hardly liue together without snarling. And it is the office of foresight, to sée that there be a Consent in religion. consent in Religion, betwéene the marryed, for if theyr loue be not grafted in theyr soules, it is like theyr Marri∣age will be infyrmed, with the defects of the body. The office of Free choise, is the roote or foundation of Free choise in satisfacti∣on of Fancie. Marriage, which consisteth onely in the satisfaction of fancie: for where the fancie is not pleased, all the perfecti∣ons of the world, cannot force looue, and where the fancie delighteth, many defects are perfected, or tollerated a∣mong the Marryed. When Marriage is solemnized, there are many things to be obserued one the parte bothe of the husband and the Wife. The Husband is to consider, his house is a petty Com∣mon A mans house is a pettie com∣mon weale. wealth, whereof himselfe is chéefe, and his Ser∣uaunts Subiects: therefore, for the welfare bothe of him∣selfe and householde, it is néedefull, that he set downe such rders, as God may be gloryfied, himselfe profitably ser∣ued, the good seruaunt well rewarded, the euill chastened, and the neighbour pleased: And as it is the Husbands office, to set downe these orders, so it is the Wiues dutie The office of the Wife. to sée them executed.
The charge of the Husband, is to get abroade for the The hus∣bandes care apperrai∣neth to thinges abroade. prouision of his householde: and the Wife is bounde to spare at home, towards the maintenance of her children. The office of the Husband, is to sée his ground Tilled, his Cattell cherished, his fences sound, his labourers worke, and their wages paide. The dutie of the wife is to sée her Garden wéeded, her The wiues chatge is huswiuery within doore. Uines cut, and in her Orcharde her fruite Trées pruned: within doores her house well ordered, her Maidens busi∣ed, her Children instructed, the fréend intertained, and the Tables well furnished. And in this Oeconmie, many women haue so excelled, as Socrates affirmeth: that he Morall Phi∣losophit to be learned by women. learned of Women more Morrall Philosophie, then na∣turall reason of Anaxagoras and Archelaus: wherein So∣crates testifyeth no more then theyr woorthy sexe deser∣ueth: for many Women gouerne theyr Families with such Prudence, Temperance, Pietie, and other commen∣dable vertues, as may well instruct the wisest. The Husband ought to beware, that in the presence Laciuious talke to be shunned of the husband of his wife, he vseth no filthie lasciuious talke: for besides the witnesse of his owne indiscression, he maketh her a passage for many an vnhappy thought. The Wife ought to be nice, in occasion of suspition, for The wife ought to be nice in cause of suspition. her husband that sée'th open cause of mistrust, cannot but feare, that in secret, he receiueth iniurie: and Ielowsie though she procéedes from excéeding loue, yet is she the greatest enemie of the Married. The Husband is bound to kéepe his wife in ciuill and comely apparell, as well to make her éeme beautifull Comelye apparell the husband should giue his wife. vnto himselfe, as to preuent the reproche of the neigh∣bour: for this hath béene an auncient custome among the Romaines, and it is to be feared, that if the Husband breake, it to spare his Purse, the Wife will repayre it, though she gage her person. The Wife that will please her Husband, and make a Cleane lynnen commenda∣ble in a vvife. great showe of a little, though her Gownes be plaine, in her lynnen she must be curtous and fine: for otherwise,
were she attyred all in Silke: if her sléeues, Partlet and other Linnen be coorse, torne, or sluttishly washed, she shall neither be praysed of straungers, nor delight her Husband. The Husband, after householde iarres, if the Wife The husbād must bevvare of sollomnes. séeme to be sorie, he ought not to be sullen: for if shée per∣ceiue him of a frowarde nature, it is like in other suche squares, she wilbe negligent to please him. The Wife, if she offend her husband, by some igno∣raunt The vvife must be amyable tovvardes her husband trespasse, she must please him with a louing coun∣tenaunce: least if he finde her of a crooked condition, he will take delight to crosse her with continuall foule v∣sage. The olde Husband, is to accompany his young Wife A lavve for a younge vvomans olde husband. with graue Matrons, and to set her foorth with costly ci∣uill attyre, that séeing the reuerence and honour that is giuen her for her Husbandes grauitie, she will studdie how to please him, though she displease her owne dis∣position. The younge Wife that hath an olde Husband, is A regarde for an olde mans young vvyfe. bound to make much of him at home: for the reputation she receaueth in his life, and for the wealth she is like to haue by his deathe: and abroade must be sober in her be∣hauiours, discréete in her talke, and no harkener to young mens tales, least her owne lightnesse, make her openly infamed, where her Husbands imperfections, could cause her but to be secreatly suspected. The young Husband is too beare with his olde Wife, A regarde for an olde vvomans younge husband. in her will, as well for the reuerence due to her yeares, as for the aduauncement, the loue bringeth to himselfe: least the neighbours terme his Wife an vnfortunate old Woman, and himselfe, a naughtie, frowarde, vile natu∣red young man. Theolde Wife, to giue excuse to her dotage, must A regard for a young mans olde vvife. in open assemblies, commend her young Husband of mo∣dest and staied gouernement: and secreatly, to be louingly vsed, must kisse him: with Midas lippes for, if she fyll not
his Purse by fayre meanes, with foule intreatie he will be his owne Caruer: if she complayne, she ioyneth but scorne to her owne mischaunce. Generally, the Husband ought not to forbid his Wife, Modest fa∣miliaritie not to be forbidden the Wife. in assemblyes modestlie, to intertaine time, in deuising with the better sorte: for in such ielous restraint, he shall leaue a suspition, that he inioyneth her this open pen∣naunce, for some secret trespasse, and so bothe slaunder himselfe, and iniurie his wife. The Wife should haue an especiall care, to shun the Light com∣pany to be shunned of the Wife. company of light Women: for the multitude, though they can charge her with no misdemeanour, yet they well con∣demne her honor, by the known euils of her companions. Many other néedefull directions, may be giuen to pre∣serue vnitie in Mariage (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus) too cumbersome for me to reporte, and too tedious for this honorable company to héere, whose patience I haue alrea∣dy iniured too much: but finding my error, I end my tale, & remaine ready to make satisfactiō in some other seruice. Sir (quoth Fabritio) the end of your Tale, puts vs in remembraunce of our duetie and your right, which is for this honourable fauour, to remaine your indebted Ser∣uaunts, to embrace your counsels, and to commend (and submit our reasons, to) your learned Censure. It is your fauour and not my merit (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus.) Sir, (quoth Quéene Aurelia) I will beare the blame of this dayes importuning of you, and you alone shall haue the honour, in graunting of my requests, who to the former ioyneth this one more fauour, which is, that you conclude this your worthy exercise, with some rare Hi∣storie at large. Madam (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) this is the least of your commaundements, considering that Histories make mention of thousands, who in their vnseperable looues, haue sounded the excellencie of Mariage, wherefore I o∣ey your pleasure.
❧The woorthy Historie of Phrigius and Pieria. Reported by Segnior Phyloxenus. IN the Register of Fame, wherein the Monuments of the vertuous are Cronicled, as presedents for theyr posteritie, I reade, that in the famous Cittie of Mile∣tum in Ionia, as soueraigne Prince and gouernour, there raigned a worthy Duke, called Nebeus, who to comfort and supporte his aged yeares, had to his sonne and onely heayre, Phrigius, a young Gentleman of such rare to∣wardlines, as it may be a question, whether he weare more beholding to Nature for the perfections of his body, to Vertue for the qualities of his minde, or to Fortune in suffering him to be so nobly borne. In Myos, a neighbour Cittie to Miletum, there was also a Prince of much renowne, named Pythes, whose Daughter and heyre, was fayre Pieria, by whose vertues all Ionia was renowned. The auncient enuie betwéene the Cittizens of Miletum and Myos, was tourned into amitie: and the open warre betwéene Duke Nebeus and the noble Pithes, was peaceably and honourably ended: All such happie euents, succéeded this following aduen∣ture. Upon the Feastiuall day of Diana, the Cittizens of Myos, with out the iniurie of Souldiers, might law∣fully repayre to Miletum, to sacrifice to Diana, vpon which safe conduct, with many other Ladyes and Gentle∣women of Myos, fayre Pieria waighted on her Mother to Dianas Temple, whose rare beauty was such, as dazeled the eies of the behoulders, like the reflections of a Myrror, placed against the Sunne. Among many that looued, and few or none that saw pos∣sibility of grace, such was the renowne of her chasse dis∣daine, young Phrigius beheld Pieria with such a setled eye,
as Dianas Temple sheelded him not against the Arrowes of Looue: but as a wounded Stag, at the first séemeth lit∣tle dismayde: so Phrigius with an vnappalled chéere, returned to the Dukes Pallace, and as pledge of truce, he sent his heart to Myos. The Ceremonies and Sacri∣fices of Diana ended, the Warres renued, the wonted Massacres, Murthers, Rapines, and outragious cruelties practised by the Souldiours of either part: in so much as Lawe gaue place to Armes, equitie to violence, and all publique order was peruerted, and vpon the point to be destroyed. The Captaines of Myos encouraged theyr Souldiours of yt one part: but yt Souldiours of Miletum, were driuen to comfort theyr Captaine wt a threatening of disgrace. But ah poore Phrigius, what aunswer shouldst thou make? To see thy Souldiours slaine, and thy Cit∣ties spoyled, without proffers of rescue were dishonou∣rable: to bend thy forces against thy owne heart, were vnnaturall: to make the best choyse of these two euilles, required leasure: and iudgement. And therefore aduisedly to consider of his estate, at this time Phrigius satisfied his Souldiours with hope of some spéedy venturous ex∣ployte, and daungered not his enemies, with the proffer of any violence: so that either power kept their trenches peaceably, but yet with this indifferent perryll, that they attended oportunitie, to make the one Conquerors, and the other Captiues: for the long Ciuill contention, had now made the estate of either as desperate, as the for∣tunes of two that haue their substaunce vpon the chaunce of Dice, the one to haue all, the other to be vndoone. When Phrigius had with slender hope thus quieted the acclamations of the people, he retyred himselfe into a solitary Chamber, to be the sole companion of his outra∣gious passions, with whom he thus deuised. Ah trayterous eyes, betrayers of my whole body, the scourge of Miletum, and enymies of my honour: the vengeaunce of Oedippus is too gentle for your iniuries: what doost thou say? oh blasphemous tongue, riuall of
humanitie, callumner of Beautie, and hinderer of thy countryes peace: thou reprocher of vertue, and Phrigius welfare: know to thy shame, the perfection of my eyes haue constantly behelde Pieria, whose deuine beauties, emblemed in humaine shape, dazeleth the youngest sight in Ionia: Then to reuile them thus, thou tyrannisiest na∣ture: to demaunde why I loue and serue Beautie, thy question is blinde, and deserueth a double aunswer: But aye me, though my eyes, and Loue, haue doone but what is iust, Fortune hath dealt too rigourously with me, to render my heart Captiue to his Daughter, who is the ri∣uall of my father: what hope may I giue to my afflicti∣ons? when possibility of comfort is taken away: the Pa∣rents are ready to sheath their Swords in one an others entrayles: is it then like, the Children shall imbrace a mutuall affection? O no: for though mylde Venus consent that they loue, wrathfull Mars wyll seuer theyr affec∣tion. O cruell Warre, thou art not vnproperly called The venge∣aunce of Warre. the scourge of God, for in thée is contayned a greater vengeaunce then might be imagined by man: thou ar∣mest the Sonne against the Father, the Uncle against the Nephew, the Subiect against his Soueraigne: Thy Drinke is blood, thy foode the flesh of men: thy Fiers are flaming Citties: thy pleasures, spoyling of Widdowes, rauishment of Uirgins, subuertion of Lawes and pub∣lique benefit: thy Iudges, Tyrannie and Iniustice: and where thou remaynest, her knowen enemy is not so daungerous, as the fayned fréend. But why exclaime I of Warre, who double Crowned Alexander with the ritches of Asia and Affrica? who ho∣noured Caesar, with imperiall triumphes? and rewarded Hanniball, for the trauailes of his life, with renowne af∣ter death? by whom Millions of men, are regystred in the life Booke of Fame: and thorough whom, Phrigius giueth expectation of benefit vnto his Countrey, comfort to his aged Father, and honour to his posteritie. I receyued my wounde in the tyme of peace, nay in the Temple of Diana: shall I then exclayme of
Peace, and vpbrayde Chastitie: fowle fall the heart that should mooue, and shame worme the tongue that pro∣nounceth such blasphemie: O blessed Peace, thou fast chai∣nest Treason, Tirannie, Murther, Theft, and Wrathe, with all disturbers of common tranquillitie, and in the hyest dignities, placest Iustice, Pietie, Temperaunce, Con∣corde and Loue, with many other Morrall vertues, by The bles∣sings of peace. whom the lewde are chastened, the good are cherished, and Common weales prosper and florish. O Chastitie, thy diuine vertues deserue a better Trumpet, then my iniurious tongue: thy excellencie is written in the browe of Pieria. And is Pieria the Deputie of Diana? O yes: and Phrigius the seruaunt of Venus? too true: it is then impossible they should agrée in affection? yea sure. O vnfortunate Phrigius, through Peace, which receiuedst thy wound, before Dianas Aulter, and by cruell Warre art seperated from the Surgion that should cure thée. These sundrye conflictes Phrigius had with his bitter passions, which pursued theyr aduantage, with such thor∣ny feares, as if he had not béene suddenly succoured, by the aduise and comfort of Lorde Miletus, a fauoured Counsel∣ler to Duke Nebeus, & an assured fréend to his sonne Phri∣gius, he had béene like to haue yéelded to Dispaire. Miletus was glad to sée him thus affected, and sorry to behold him so daungerouslie afflicted: for in this looe he foresawe an end, of the auncient enuie and enmitie, betwéene the Cit∣tizens of Miletum, and Myos: whose ciuill Fraies, had buried more young men in the Fieldes, then aged in the Churches and Churchyardes. Therefore to confirme his affection, and to comfort him with hope: Lord Phrigius quoth he, to blame your affection were cruelty & no sound counsell: for you loue Pieria, the Parragon of the worlde, to discomfort you with an impossibilitie of her fauour, were cleane against the possibilitie of your fortune: for besides that, your person alluringly pleaseth, your autho∣rities commaund: yea Piches cannot but reioyce, Pieria consent, and all Myos desire is to solemnize this Mariage.
My selfe, and the grauer sort of the counsell, will mo∣tion the matter to the Duke your father, who I trust wil holde the affection of his sonne, rather to procéede from the iustice of Diana, then the iniurie of Cupid. Who re∣garding the zelous offeringes of Pieria, agreed that you shoulde be wounded, that Pieria might haue the honour to cure you, in whose vertues, all Ionia hopeth to be bles∣sed. Therefore, to make your affection knowen, in some pleasing Letter, to Pieria commend your seruice, and to deale with both your fathers, refer the care to mee: How swéete the smallest hope of grace is to a condemned man? or the leaste woorde of comfort, from the Phisition, to the infirmed patient: the soden chaunge of Phrigius mone, truely manifesteth: who nowe began to looke cheerefully, and with hope appeased his passions: so that imbrasing Miletus, he committed his life to the fortune of his discre∣sion: and while his passion was quicke, hee presented both loue and seruice to Pieria, in this following letter. Phrigius Letter to Pieria. FAire PIERIA, sith it is a cōmon thing to loue: and a miracle to subdue affection, let it not seeme strange, that I am slaue to your bewtie, nor wounder though I sue for grace. The wounded Lion, prostrateth him∣selfe at the feete of a man: the sicke, complayneth, to the Phisition: and (charged with more tormentes) the louer, is inforced to seeke comfort of his Mistresse. To proue that I loue, needeth no other testimony, thē the witnes of your rare perfectiōs, & to giue me life is the only work of your pittie. Wherfore [Madame] since the Vertue of your eye, hath drawen away my heart, as the Adamant doeth the steele, I beseech you that my hartlesse bodie may so liue by your ruth, as I may haue strength (as well as wil) to do you seruice: & let it suffice for more honor of your tryumph, that by the power of beutie, your vertues haue achiued, a more glorious conquest, then might the whole strength of MYOS, and whiche is more, of a puissant
enemie, you haue made so perfect a friende, as Phrygius, shal hold him self in no fortune, so happie, as to encounter with the oportunytie, to do Pieria, and her fauourers ser∣uice, or their enemies damage: If which amendes, may re∣payre all Iniuries past, I shall hould, the Safecundict bles∣sed, that licensed you to enter Myletum: If greater ransom be demaūded, it must be my life: which [if it be your wyl] shall foorth with be sacrificed, notwithstandinge, in such crueltie. Dianas Temple shalbe prophaned, before whose Aulter, I receiued my wound from the eyes of fayre Pi∣eria: but houldynge it vnpossible, that a stonie harte, may bee enemie to so manye Graces as liue in your face: I Balme my woundes, with hope that I kisse your gra∣cious hand: and that your Aunswere wyll returne an ac∣ceptaunce of seruice. He, whose hart waighteth on your beautie. PHRIOIVS. THis Letter sealed & subscribed: To fayre Pieria, Try∣umph after victorie: was deliuered vnto a trustie Mes senger: who (hauing Safecunduict, to passe through both the Armies) in good houre, arriued at Prince Pythes, Pallace: and in the presence of her Mother & other friends reuerently kissyng the same, deliuered Pieria, wt Phrygius louyng commendations, his letter. Who so in ye Spryng∣time, in one Momēt had séene rayne and Sunshine, might againe beholde the lyke chaunge in Pierias troubled coun∣tenaunce: who found no lesse Ioye in reading the Letter, then cause of wonder, in beholding the superscriptiō, who (by the consent of Diana, to bring peace into Myletū) was by loue, with the selfe same Arrowe, & at one instant woū∣ded in as déepe Affection, as Phrygius: notwithstandynge, bounde to no desire so muche, as to the Direction of her Parentes, she shewed them this Letter: who wéerie of the warres: and embracynge this meane of peace. After they had aduisedly considered the Contentes: to comforte Phrygius, without iniurie to Pieriaes chaste behauiour in her name, they returned this Aunswere.
PIERIAS Answer to PHRIGIVS Letter. SIR PHRIGIVS, I receiued your Letter, and as I con fesse, that your prayses, so far passe my meryt, as I wun der at the errour of your Iudgement: so, I doubt whither so honourable a personage, as your Lordship, can yeelde your seruice, to so meane a Lady: or if loue were of that power, whether you woulde obay, to bee Seruante to her, whose Fathers ryuall, your parentes, and you are: but on the other part: I entertayne a faint hope, that you are not so much enemie to your honor, as to leaue in your Aduersaries possession, a Monument of Dissimulation: Vpon which warant, and your free offer of seruice: I bind you, by a curtuousrequest, to indeuour to conclude a spee∣die peace: that I may without danger of Hostliyty repaire to Dianas Temple: In cōpassyng of which gratious Lea∣gue, you shal receiue great glory: the countreymuch quiet, and I, whom you wysh such welfare, shalbe bownd to do you any honourable fauour. PIERIA of MYOS. This aunswer sealed, and subscribed, To my Lorde Phrygius: delyuered by the handes, and blessed with the louing countenaunce of Pieria, was returned to Phrigi∣us, by his owne messenger: who, after hée had read and reread this Letter (not for that, the Contents, gaue him any assuraunce of Loue: but for because, they com∣maunded an imployment of Seruice) hée comforted his Spirit, with hope, that his indeuour in this charge, shoulde, both reaue all doubte, of dissimulation, by hym, and smoothe Pierias Browe, of Chaste disdayne: and to further a happy ende of the Countries calamitie. In the beginnyng of Phrigius contentment, Lorde Mile∣tus had so dealt in these affaires, as in shorte time Duke Nebeus, and Prince Pythes came to parle of peace: and while the Counsels of either parte, considered vppon the Articles of agréement: Safecundit of Trafick, was ge∣uen to the Inhabitants of either Citie. How swéete the friendly incounters, of these aunciente enemies were: is the office of him, that hath béene scour∣ged
with warres: who, though they were but in the e∣state of repriued men, yet the hope of assured peace light∣ned their hartes of former sorrowe, and replenished the The vertue of Peace. place with gladnesse. Faire Pieria, nowe safely repaired to the Aulters of Diana: and Phrygius, more of desire, to salute his Mistris, then of zeale to sacrifice, to Chastetie: fayned many De∣uotions, to visit her Temple: where these Louers, for the reuerence they bare to the place, forbare to encounter in any spéeche of Loue: Yet if Diana, wolde haue publyshed their thoughts, shee shoulde haue confessed, that the most deuotionate of them both, in their hartes, honoured Iuno, in the eye of her owne Image and Aulters. But Dia∣na, though shée be the Soueraigne of single Nimphes: yet is she friende to Iuno, and ye Chast Married: and only enemie, to Venus and the wanton sort: so that shee tooke in worth, this light trespasse: yea, held her self honoured, that her sacred Temple, should bee the originall cause of Myletum and Myos, peace and amytie: and the ende of their auncient enuy, and enmitie. Wherfore, to conclude, the begun agreement, she sent Concorde and Charitie, to chayne vp Grudge, and Dissention. Duke Nebeus and Prince Pythes, fréed from the vex∣ation of these furies, with affable and friendly intertain∣ment, reasoned of their affayres: and while the Parents parled of their common profit: the Children, vppon law∣full oportunities, deuysed of their pryuate Loues: but yet with suche a dutifull regarde, of their friendes consent, that although their hartes were lynked together, by frée choyce, the clapping of hands was referred to the forsight of Parentes: who burying former iniuries, in the Caue of Obliuion, made an Edict of Amyty, sealed, & strengthned, with the Marriage of Phrygius and Pieria, Heires of ei∣thers renowne and dignytie. Beholde héere the worke of The power of vertuous Loue. Loue, grafted in the honorable hartes of the vertuous. The wrath and stormes of war, is turned to calm & tem∣porate peace: yt blossoms of enmytie are altered into fruts of amyty: and the roote of mallice, grown to ye trée of pitie.
The Nobles in honour of this Mariage, lauisht out their treasure, in all their triumphes and showes to be in good equipage. The meaner Gentlemen, by excéeding cost, lear ned by experience, how afterwarde to spare. The Citi∣zens with giftes of great Emprice, presented their duti∣ful affections. The learned eternised this marriage peace, in Tables of Memorie. The Cleargy song Himnes of ioy, The common people ronge the Belles, and euerie sorte showed some token of delight. So that Phrigius and Pre∣ria, after the deathes of their aged fathers, were crow∣ned with the dignities of Myletum and Myos, and all their happie life, were honoured with these acclamati∣ons of their subiectes. Liue, blessed Princes: the appea∣sers of Iupiters wrathe, by whome War, the Monster of humanitie, is fast chayned: And peace the soueraigne of morall vertues, Triumpheth in the Capitals of IONIA Liue blessed princes, and long enioye the heartes of your subiectes. In your vertues who haue multiplied wealth: and to doe you seruice are readie to spende their liues. This zeale and reuerence of their subiectes, Phrigius and Pieria, manie yeares possessed, betwéene whome there was such equallitie in disposition, as fortune knew not, by anie accident of ioye, or mischance, howe to seuer their desires. And when the time came, that the heauens (enuying the glorie of the earth, in possessing this diuine cupple charged nature, to render their right. Who obay∣ing the will of Ioue, sent sickenes to summon both Phri∣gius, and Pieria, and licensed death to doe his worst. And (as there yet remaineth an opinion in Miletum) as their loues began in one houre, is their liues ended in one mo∣mente: whose spirites Metamorphosed, into white Turtles, tooke their flight, towardes that heauenly Para dise. Where I wish all faithfull louers, and this louely companie, abiding places. Segnior Philoxenus, by the vertue of this dayes ex∣ercise, the onely trauell of his learned wit, so raysed the heartes of the companie, with the desire of Mariage, that Lucia Bella, who, in the beginning of Christmasse, was
determyned to haue béene a vestall Nunne, now confessed that they were enemies to Nature, & not worthy the so∣ciety of men, which scandylised, or scorned this sacred In∣stitution. The rest of this honorable company, by plaw∣sible spéeches, confirmed Lucia Bellas opinion, or by silence shewed a willyng consent. And to conclude the exercise, ({quod} Quéene Aurelia,) Segnior Philoxenus, your swéet ver∣tues, haue described so deuyne a Paradice, as our soules cannot, but long, after this holy Institution, & our hartes honour your perfections, by whose bountie this company is not onely highly intertained, but by your most preci∣ous treasures richly inriched. Madam ({quod} hée) yt vertue you speake of, belongeth to Mariage: yt benifit to this gra∣cious assembly: & the bare words, to Phyloxenus. Such bare wordes ({quod} Fabritio) deserue to be registred amonge the lyfe déeds of Memorie. Upon this Iudgment, Quéene Aurelia, arose, & the company performyng the office of re∣uerent curtesy, returned into the great Chamber to salute some other of the New yéeres Pleasures. ¶ The Deuice of a Stately Show, and Mask, the se∣uenth Nyghte, by Segnior PHILOXENVS, to honoure Queene AVRELIA, & the other Ladies and Gentlewomen. VPpon Newe yéeres daye at Night, about nine of the Clocke, in an inclosed place in the great Hall: after Quéene Aurelia, & her chosen attendants, had daun∣ced certein solemne Almaynes, appeared a hye Mountain, the Farestery wherof, was of faire Bay Trees, Pomgra∣nate, Lymons, Orenges, Date Trees, and other fruites of most pleasure: among the Mossy Rocks appeared Snailes, Lysards, Moles, Frogs, Greshoppers, & such lyke vnueny∣mus vermin, and by the fountaines, which run aslant the side of ye Mountain, Lions, Vnicorns, Elephāts, Cameliōs, Camels & other beasts of honor: as if they were appointed by Nature, to garde those sacred streames, frō being trou∣bled wt the raskall multitude of Cattel, which domesticall desart, was perfected wt such art, as nature cōfessed her ex
cellent cūning, to be vanquished by mans industrie. This Mauntaine which resembled, some wildernes in Arabia, dewed wt yt pleasant springes of Africa, by a still motion, remoued towards yt vpper end of ye hall, into yt ful presence of Quéene Aurelia, & the most statly company. In ye mydst of this Mountaine was an Arbor of sweete Eglentine, in∣tercoursed wt Roses, and fully shadowed wt the spreadinge Branches, of ye purpled Vine: in which, vpō a statly throne sate Diana attired all in whyte, and at her féete weare the nyne Muses, clothed in seuerall colours, according to their seueral qualyties, sounding heauenly harmony, both with voice & instrument: out of this arbor sprang a Bay Tree, in which was the Hyen, which at pleasure being both Male & Female, expressed ye ful power of vertue: who though shée hath yt forme & habit of a woman, yet is her essentiall sub∣stance compounded of both kindes: At the foote of this Hil, was ye Monster Enuy armed wt fire & sword, to hinder their passage, which aduētred to clime yt Mount: a forest Nimph clad all in flowers, in a short spéech, declared, yt Diana, & ye Muses, who in the golden age, had their Pallaces, in the Forrests, Mountaines, & riuers of pleasure, through out yt whole world: now by ye iniury of time, were driuē to their sanctuary of Parnassus: at yt foote wherof the Monster Enuy kept, to hinder yt passages of such as attempted wt their re∣nown, to set those Ladies at lyberty: who hering by fame, ye glory of this honorable company, were ariued by hope, yt ye vertu of some of ye troupe, should redéeme thē from capti∣uytie, & therfore, she sūmoned ye Knightes present, to make tryall of their vallors, & ye Ladies of their vertues: whiche saide, she retired back into ye Mountaine: The Gentlemen & Ladies, hauing a cūning foreknowlege of ye intēt of this show aruied themselues, wt sundry attempts to ouercome this Monster. Soranso, Dondolo, Ismarito, & Faliero, drew their rapiers, & assailed Enuy, but dry blowes auailed not: so yt they were conquered, & cōmitted to ye gayle of Tedius∣nesse. Maria Belochy, Franceschina Sancta, Lucia Bella, Helena Dulce, and other Ladies, and Damosels, indeuo∣red to charme hym, wt the swéete sounds, and Heauenlye
impressions of Musick. But Enuy more warie then Ar∣gus, and lesse: pitifull then ye Tormenters of Hell: the first whereof, was ouercome with Inachus Oten Pipe: the o∣ther moued to ruthe with Orpheus passionate Musick (to show himselfe composed of all the vennom of Hell) coulde not hée conquered, by the sharp swords of the Knightes, nor would not be intreated with the sugred Harmonie of the faier Ladies: But amidst this Monsters Triumphes, there was a voyce heard in the Mowntayne: Non vi, sed virtute: Whervpon, Quéene Aurelia, with a Myrrour, deuised by Segnior Philoxenus, peaceably, made towards Enuie: whiche Monster, presumyng of his force, lifted his Club against this vertuous Dame: who, by the reflec∣tions of the Concaue Superficies, of this Myrrour, daun∣ted with the feare of his own weapon, imagining that he stroke him selfe, recoyled backe with such haste, as he fell downe: Whervpon, Segnior Phyloxenus, seasyng on his Club, and laying him on, therwith, said: As Phallaris, dyd Enuy is mur∣dered with his owne we∣pon. to Perillus: die with the weapon, thou preparst for other. In Trumph of this glorious Uictorie, Diana sent down the Nymphe Chlora, to salute Quéene Aurelia, with this Present: which was a Shield, wherin was quartred, four seuerall Honours. The first. VERT: A lookyng Glasse of Christall. The second. AZVRE: a payre of Ballance, Argent. The thyrd. OR: a Pyller of Porphier. The fourth. Argent: a standing Cup of Ruby Rock. The Muses them selues, came also downe, and crowned her with a Garland of Roses, parted, perpale, ARGENT, and GVLIS: and e∣lecting her for their Soueraign, to comfort the fiue Knights that were discōforted by ENVY, two & two leading a Knight, between thē, daun ced a statly Almain, of XV. which ended: thei bestowed a fauor, & cer∣tain Latin verses, vpō euery one of the Knights: & returned vnto their Mount. The Siluer Pen, & Verses deliuered by VRANIE to ISMARITO, stand in the forefrunt of this Booke: the rest, for that they were pro∣per vnto them selues, & impertinent for this matter, I omit: By this time, the Cock was ready to sing his midnight song: & the company (fully satisfied with pleasure) departed vnto their lodgings, to spende the rest of the night in Contemplation and sleepe. FINIS.
