4878 99847832 12894
(I) 14. Ayres in Tabletorie to the Lute expressed with two voyces and the base Violl or the voice & Lute only. 6. more to 4. voyces and in Tabletorie. And 8. MADRIGALLES to 5. Voyces. By MICHAELL CAVENDISH Gentleman. AT LONDON Printed by Peter Short, on bredstreethill at the signe of the Starre: 1598.
TO THE HONOVRABLE protection of the Ladie Arbella. NOtwithstanding your rare perfections in so many knowledges, which haue adorned you and you them, let not, worthie Lady, one sole qualitie of mine seeme the rather insufficiency to your iudgement, or breed lesse acceptance for being offered alone. It commeth out of a profession worthie some grace, and hath in it humors variable for delights sake. I offer them as that wher∣by I can best expresse my seruice to you, and you may (if it please you) make vse of them at your idlest houres. Manie causes I haue to imbolden mine attempts of dutie to you, and your fauours stande in the top of them: others there are more secrete, and lie in the nature of your owne ap∣prehension. And howsoeuer the policie of times may hold it vnfit to raise men hum∣bled with aduersities to titles of dearnesse, whether to shunne charge, or expresse pride, I rather know not, yet you I hope out of the honour of your nature, will vouch∣safe your fauours to a forward seruant, so neerely tied to a dutifull deuotion. In what ranke you please to place me, I will not change mine order. It shal be promotion to me that you account of me in any place, and all the commendations I seeke to my labors in this woorke, if you will be pleased to heare it at some times, and protect it at all times. Thus your ladiship hauing heard what I cā say in this first leafe, you may (if it please you to vouchsafe acceptance) heare what I haue song in the rest that follow. And so I rest: Yours humbly to be commaunded: MICHAELL CAVENDISH. From Cauendish this 24 of Iuly.
BASSVS. STay stay stay Glicia stay, & cary not my hart away and carry &c. I will not leaue ye Iewell to one vnkind vn-kind and cruell. But if therto thou haue a mind buy it of mee, buy it of mee, buy it of mee by beeing kind. CANTVS. STay ij.ii. Glicia stay. And cary not my hart away: I wil not leaue ye Iewell, to one vn- kind, vnkind & cruell. But if thereto thou haue a mind, by it of mee, buy it of me by be- ing kind.
BASSVS. WHy should my muse, why should my muse thus restles in her woes, Summon records, summon records of neuer dyeng feares, And still reuiue fresh springing in my thoughts, The true memoriall the true memoriall of my sad dispaires, Who forst to loue to those faire eyes am thrall, Where eyes not thoughts graunt one re- spect at all. CANTVS WHy should my muse thus restles in her woes sum- mon records of ne- uer dy- ing feares, and still re- uiue fresh springing in my thoughts the true me- moriall the true me- moriall of my sad dispaires, who forst to loue to those faire eyes am thrall, where eyes nor thoughts grant one respect at all.
BASVS MOurne Marcus, mourn, & mourning wish to dye, & wish to dye, & mourning wish, & mourning wish to dye, since she is gone, since she is gone, on whom thy hopes re- lye. Sith Marcus faith deser- ued with the best, yet of her loue, yet of her loue, yet of her loue an other is possest. Who doth forbid faire Cleo- pa- tra smiling, forbid Cleopatra smiling on his poore soule, on his poore soule for her sweete sake still dyeng ij. for ij. still dyeng. CANTVS MOurne, mourne, mourne, Marcus mourne, and mourning wish to die, since she is gone on whom my hopes rel- yes: though Mar- cus faith de- ser- ued with the best, yet of hir loue an other is pos- sest who doth for- bid faire
BASSVS HAue I vow'd and must not breake it, fondly vow'd is wisely broken, do I loue and dare not speake it, si- lence doth no loue betoken: thus I bind in this in this my breaking and I am, and I and I am in silence speaking. thus I CANTVS HAue I vow'd & must not breake it, fondly wo'd is wisely broken, do I loue and dare not speake it, silence doth no loue be- token thus I bind in this my breaking, and I am in si- lence speaking. Cleo- pa- tra smyling, on his poore soule, on his poore soule for  stil dying, for her sweet sake still dying
BASSVS. FInetta faire & feate star of our towne a, Her beautie bright as Iette, Her beauty bright as Iette, Makes me sing downe, downe, downe a, Her beauty bright as Iette, Makes me sing downe a, downe a ij. ddddda dd dd ij. ij. ij. d a. Greefe & I both are one, greefe & I both are one, Loue puls me downe a, loue puls me downe, downe, downe a. CANTVS. FInetta, Fi- net- ta, faire an feat, star of our towne, a her bewty bright as Iet, her beau-ty bright as Iet, makes me sing down a down, down, down, down, ij. ij. ij. ij.  griefe & I both are one, loue puls me down a
BASSVS. LOue is not blind but I my selfe am so, with free consent blindfould did by desire that guides my will a long the pathes of woe, To seeke re- fresh- ing, refreshing for a needles fire CANTVS LOue is not blind, but I my selfe am so with free con-sent blind- foulded by de- sire, that guides my will along the paths of woe to seeke refreshing for a needelesse fire. loue puls me down a.
BASSVS. LOue the delight of all well thinking, minds well thinking mindes, Delight the fruite of vertue dearly lou'd, Vertue the heighest good that reason findes, that reason findes. Reason the foarge on which mens thoughts are prooued. Are from the world by natures poure, by natures poure berest, And in one creature for her glory left. CANTVS FOue the delight of all well thinking. Minds de-light ye fruit of ver- tue dearely lou'd, Vertue the hiest good that reason finds, Reason the foarge on which mens thoughts are prou'd, are from the world by na- tures prouerb rest, And in one creature for her glo- rie left.
BASSVS. THe hart to rue, the hart to rue, the pleasure of the eye, the eye. The eye to woūd the hert with his delight, What may be said that owe, that owe them both hereby, But both to serue vnto his owne despite. O saue & winne them both by one desert, Please still the eye, but pittie on the hart, O CANTVS. THe hart to rue the pleasure of the eye, The eie to wound the hart with his de- light, What may be said yt owe thē both hereby, But both two serue vn- to his own de- spite, O saue and win them both by one de- sert please stil the eye, but pitty on the hart.
BASSVS. SSiluia, Siluia is faire yet scorning loue, Yet scorning loue vnseemely, Plaguing my soule, plaguing my soule with torments, my soule with torments to vntimely, Siluia natures perfection bids me, loue her. But for loues mirrit she forbids me mooue her, Sweet Siluia, Sweet Siluia, sweet Siluia. Yet comandris of my thought, reward me so I may not loue for nought, sweet. CANTVS. SIl-uia, Sil- uia is faire, yet scorning loue vn- seemly, plaging my soule, plaging my soule with torments to vn- timely Siluia natures perfection, bids me loue her, but for loues merrit she for- bids me moue her, sweet Sil-uia, sweet Sil- uia yet com- mandris of my thought, reward me so I may not loue for nought, sweet.
BASSVS. CVrst be the time, curst be, curst be the time when first mine eyes beheld those rare, those rare perfections al mens thoughts admire. And iustly may a sheepherds swain bewaile, a sheepherds swain, bewaile those fatal howers, those fatal howrs which causd him first desire loues sweete consent, loues sweet consent, loues sweet consent, ij. Loues sweete consent yt makes so deepe impression as hart & soule, (O) as hart and soule will witnes, as hart & soule will witnes in confession. CANTVS. CVrst be the time when first mine eyes be- held, those rare per-fections all mens thoughts admires, And iust- ly may a shepheards swain bewaile those fatall houres which caus'd him first de- sire, Loúes, loues, loues sweet cōsent that makes so deep impression as hart and soule, as hart & soule wil wit- nes in con fession
BASSVS. FAire are those eyes whose shine must giue me life, whose shine must giue me life. Sweet is that grace commandes my hart to loue, heauens her thoughts if they once yeeld, if they once yeeld consent to that reward affectioons truth doth moue. But if my faith cannot his mer- rit gain: Weepe eyes, weepe eyes, weepe eyes breake hart, breake hart & end, and end this restles paine, this restles paine. CANTVS. FAire are those eies whose shine must giue me life Sweet is that grace cōmands my hart to loue, heauēs her thoughts if they once yeeld cōsent to that reward affections truth doth moue. But if my faith can not his merit gaine, Weep eies, weep eies, breake hart, break, breake, break, heart and ende this restles paine, this restles paine.
BASVS. NO comfort haue I nor yet assurance. No comfort haue I nor yet assurance desolute of ioye, disolate of ioye, disolate of ioy, disolate of ioy. Repleat with sadnes, with sadnes wherefore I may say O deus deus, non est dolor ficut dolor me- us non est dolor sicut dolor me- us meus. CANTVS WAndring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wilder-nes, as in a wil- der- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet as- su- rance, wandring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wilder-nes, as in a wil- der- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet as- su- rance, Desolate of ioy, ij. ij. ij. re-pleat with sadnesse wherfore I may say, O deus, de- us, non est dolor, sci-cut dolor meus, non est dolor, si- cut dolor non est dolor, si- cut dolor me- us.
BASSVS. EVery bush now springing, e- uery bird now singing. Chaunting tro-li-lo lo li- lo Tel, &c. On whom his hope relide, downe a ij. d with a frowne she puld him down a down d d downe. CANTVS EVerie bush new springing Eue- ry bird now sing- ing, Merily sate poore Ni- o chanting tro li lo lo li lo li lo,This fift rule is Gamut. Til her he had es-pide, on whō his hope relide, Down a down a down, d, with a frown oh she puld him down. Down a d, d a, down, down, down, Til
BASSVS. DOwne in a valley, downe in a valley shady vales are pleasant ports, For merie, merie, mery lads meet resorts, Such was our hap to catch a swaine, Oh happie the valley with flowers to sprinkle Floraes traine, nor did resorts, of them wee made a garland greene, Oh green was the valley to crowne faire Lelia shepherds queene faire as wee dallie his flowers wee tooke all dyed in graine Oh dyde was the valley. Shadie vales are pleasant ports, a lillie (shee) sit- ting in a shade vnseene Oh sha- die the valley. Shadie vales are pleasant ports, For merie, merie, merie lads meete resorts. CANTVS. DOwn in a valley, down in a valley, sha-dy vales are plea-sant ports, for mery, mery, mery merie, merie lads meet re- sorts, Such was our hap to catch a swain (Oh) hap- py the valley (Oh) hap- py the merie, merie lads meet re- sorts, Of them we made a gar- land green (Oh) green was the valley (Oh) green was the val- ley with flowrs to spangle Flo- raes traine, Nor did we dalley, his flowrs we tooke all dyde in graine val- ley to crown faire Le- lia shepheards queen, Faire as a Lilly, she, sit- ting in a shade vn- seene (Oh) dyde was the valley, Sha-dy vales are pleasant ports for mery, mery, mery, mery, mery lads meet re-sorts. (Oh) sha- die the valley, Sha-dy vales are pleasant ports for mery, mery, mery, mery, mery lads meet re-sorts.
CANTVS. WAnton, wanton, wanton come hither, wanton, wanton, wanton wanton wanton wanton come hither, come hither, come wanton wanton, come hither. O stay why do you flie me? why do you flie me my sute though you de- ny me, yet let vs walke to- ge- ther, sweet nymph such hast, such hast such haste, why make vvhy make you, vvel could I ouer- take you, But since vvords vvil not moue thee, farevvel, farevvell, farvvell I did but this to proue thee, With yt the nymph she staide, & deepely sigh-ing, said svveet shepheard hovv I loue thee, svveet shepheard hovv I loue thee, svveet shepheard hovv I loue I loue I loue I loue thee.
TENOR. WVanton ij. ij. Come hether wanton ij. ij. come hether wanton ij. come hether wanton, wanton, ij. ij. come hither, Oh stay why do you fly me, why do you flie me, my sute though you deny me ij. Yet let vs walke togither sweet Nimph such hast why make you sweet Nimph such hast ij. ij. why make you, well could I ouertake you But since words will not mooue thee, farewell ij, ij. I did but this to prooue thee, With that the Nimph she staid & deeply sighing said sweet shepherd how I loue I loue thee ij. thee, sweet shepherd how I loue thee ij. Oh how I loue thee BASSVS. WAnton, O stay why do you fly me, why do you fly me. My sute though you deny me, yet let vs walke to- gither, sweet Nimph such hast, sweet nimph such hast why make you, why make you, Well could I ouertake you, But since wordes will not mooue thee, farewell ii. fare- well I did but this to prooue thee, with that the Nimph she stayd & deeply sighing said, sweet sheepherd how I loue thee sweet sheepherd how I loue, sweet sheepherd how I loue sweet shee- pherd how I loue, I loue thee, with, ALTVS. WAnton, wanton, come wanton, come hether, come wanton ii. come hether wanton ii. ii. come hether wanton ii. come hether wāton, ii. cō hether. O stay why do you fly me, why do you fly me, My sute though you deny me, my ii. Yet let vs walke togither, sweete Nimph, sweet Nimph, Such hast, such hast why make you sweet ii. Wel could I ouertake you, But since wordes will not moue thee, farewell, farewell, ii. I did but this to prooue thee. With that the Nimph she staid and deepely sighing said, sweet sheepherd how I loue thee, sweet sheepherd how I loue (Oh) how I loue, sweet sheepherd how I loue, I loue, I loue thee with.
CANTVS. SAy shepherds say, where is your iol- ly swain? Or what hath bred, or what hath bred his anguish, on i-dle banke he restles doth remaine, remain, (O) for loue, for loue doth make him languish, I- dle lad, his wit is bad, there a lone, there alone to make such mone, there alone to make such mone to the weeping fountains, whilst she plaies sweet roun- delayes, vp & down, vp and down, vp and down vp & down the mountains.
TENOR. SAy shepherds say where is your Iollie, swaine, or what hath bred, or what hath bred his anguish one idle banke he restles doth remaine, for loue doth make him languish, Idle lad his wit is bad there a lone to make such mone, there alone to make such mone, there alone to make such mone to the wee- ping fountains, whilst she plaies sweet roundelaies roundelaies, vp and down, vp and down, O vp and down, vp and down, vp and down the mountaines BASSVS. SAy shep, On Idle banke he rest- les doth remain for loue doth make him languish. Idle lad his wit is bad there alone, there alone to make such mone, there alone, there a- lone to make such mone to the weeping fountaines whilst she plaies sweet roundelayes vp & downe, vp and downe ij. vp and downe, vp and downe the mountaynes. ALTVS. SAy Shepherds say, where is your Iollie swain, or what hath bred, or what hath bred hath bred ij. on Idle banke he rest- les doth remaine, for loue, for loue doth make him languish Idle lad his witte is bad there alone, there alone to make such mone ij. ij. (O) to the weeping, to the weeping fountains, whilst she plays sweet roundelays roūdelays vp & down ij. ij. (O) vp and downe ye mountaine.
CANTVS. FAire are those eies whose shine must giue me light, Sweet is that grace cōmands my hart to loue. Heau'ns her thoughts if they once yeeld consent, to that reward affections truth doth moue, But if my faith cannot his me-rit gain, Weep eies weep eies, break hart, break break, break hart and ende this restles paine, this rest- les pain. But
TENOR. FAire are those eies whose shine must giue me light, faire are those eies whose shine must giue me light, must giue me light, Sweet is that grace cōmands my hart to loue, Heau'ns her thoughts if they once yeeld, if they once yeeld consent, to that reward affections truth doth moue, But if my faith cannot his me- rit gaine: Weep eies, weepe eies, break hart and end, break hart, and end this restles paine this rest-les paine, this restles paine. But BASSVS. FAire are those eies whose shine must giue me light, whose shine must giue me light sweet is that grace commands my hart to loue, Heau'ns her thoughts if they once yeeld, if they once yeeld consent, to that reward affections truth doth moue. But if my faith cannot his me- rit gain, Weep eyes, weep eies, weep eies, break hart, break hart, & end, and end this restles paine, this restles paine. But ALTVS. FAire are those eies, faire are those eies, whose shine must giue me light, whose shine must giue, must giue me light, Sweet is that grace cōmands my hart to loue, Heau'ns her thoughts if they once yeeld consent, To that reward affections truth doth moue, But if my faith cannot his merit gaine weepe eies weepe eies, break hart, break hart, & end this restles pain, break hart & end this restles pain, this restles pain. But
CANTVS. FArewel, farewell, dis-paire sith loue hath reconcil'd, Those strange delaies fond mode- sty commanded, And banisht now those i- dle superstitions, Feare of of- fence caus'd her to be enstranged, Prescribing time this priuiledge affords, Sweet trespasses sweet trespas-ses loue pardons not vaine words.
TENOR. FArewell, farewel dispaire, sith loue hath reconcil'd those strange delaies (that) fond modesty com- mands, and banisht now those i- dle su- perstitiōs, feare of offence caus'd her to be caus'd her to be en- stranged, Prescribing time this priuiledge affords, Sweet trespasses loue pardons, sweet trespasses loue pardons not vaine words. BASSVS. FArewell, farewel dispaire, sith loue hath re- concil'd, those strange delaies fond modesty commands and banisht now those i-dle superstitions, feare of offēce caus'd her to be enstranged, to be enstranged, Prescribing time this priuiledge affords, Sweet trespasses, sweet trespasses loue pardons not vaine words. ALTVS. FArewell, farewell dispaire, sith loue hath re- concil'd, those strange delaies fond modesty, fond modesty commands, and banisht now, & banisht now those idle superstitions, those supersti- tions, Feare of of- fence caus'd her to be enstran-ged, caus'd her to be enstranged, Prescribing time this priuiledge af- fords, Sweet trespass-es, sweet trespasses loue pardons not vaine words.
CANTVS. SLie theefe if so you wil beleeue, it nought or little, it nought or little did me grieue, that my true hart you had bereft, that my true hath, yt my ij. you had bereft, til yt vnkindly you it left til yt vnkindly you, til that vnkindly, til that vn- kindly you it left, leauing you lose losing you kil yt which I may ij. forgo so ill, ij. that which I may forgo so ill.
TENOR. SLy theefe if so you will beleeue it nought or little did me greeue, did me greeue that my true hart you had bereft, O that my true hart you had bereft, my hart you had bereft, till that vnkindly you it left till that vnkindly, till that, till that vnkindly, till that vnkindly you it left, Leauing you lose, losing you kill you, kill that which I may, that which I may forgo, that which I may for-go so ill, yt which I may forgo so ill. BASSVS. SLy theefe if so you will beleeue it, nought or little did me greeue, that my true hart you had bereft, that my true hart you had bereft, tell yt vnkindly, tell that vnkindly tell that vnkindly you it left, Leauing you lose, losing you kill that which I may, that which I may forgo, that which I may forgo so ill. ALTVS. SLy theefe if so you will beleeue, It nought or little did me greeue, It nought or little did me greeue that my true hart you had be reft. (O) yt my true hart you had bereft, my hart you had bereft. Tell yt vnkind, tell yt vnkindly you it left, till that vnkindly, till that vnkind, vnkindly you it left, Leauing you lose, losing you kill that which I may forgo ij. that which I may forgo so ill, that which I may forgo so ill.
CANTVS. WHat thing more cruell can you do, then rob a man & kil him to? wherfore of loue, wherfore of loue I aske this meed, to bring you where you did the deed. That there you may for your amisses, be dāmadg'd in a thousand kisses, that there you may for your amisses, be dāmadg'd in a thousand kisses.
TENOR. WHat thing more cruell can you do, then rob a man and kill and kill him too? Wherfore of loue, of loue I aske this meed, to bring you where you did the deed, That there you may for your amisses be dāmadg'd in a thousand kiss-es, that there you may for your amisses be dāmadg'd in a thousand kisses. BASSVS. WHat thing more cruell can you do, then rob a man and kill him too. Wherfore of loue of loue I aske this meed, to bring you where you did the deed, That there you may for your amisses, be dāmadg'd in a thousand kisses that there you may for your amisses, be dammadg'd in a thousand kisses. ALTVS. WHat thing more cruell can you do, then rob a man and kill and kill him too? Wherfore of loue wherfore of loue I aske this meed, to bring you where you did the deed, That there you may for your amisses be dāmadg'd in a thousand kisses, yt there you may for your amisses be dāmadg'd in a thous kisses.
CANTVS. IN flower of April springing, when pleasant birds to sport them among the woods a among the woods among the woods consort them, warbling with cheerful notes, warbling with cheerfull notes and sweetly singing, and sweetly singing, and sweetly singing, and sweet, & sweetly singing, for ioy that Clore the faire hir song was chaunting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, of her and her Elpin, the sweet loues vaun- ting, ij. the sweet loues vāunting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, vaunting. QVINTVS. IN flowre of Aprill springing, when plea- sant birds to sport them among the woods, among the woods, among the woods consort them warbling, with warbling, with cheerful notes and sweetly singing, and sweetly singing, ij. ij. and sweet, and sweetly singing, for ioy that Clore, the faire her song was chaunting, for ioy that Clore the faire her her song, her song was chaunting the sweet loues vaun- ting Of her and her Elpin, of her and her Elpin, the sweet loues vaunting, the sweet the sweet loues vaunting, the sweet loues vaunting.
TENOR. WArbling with cheerefull notes, warbling with cheerful notes, and sweetly singing, & sweetly singing, ij and sweet and sweetly singing, for ioy yt Clore the faire her song her song was chaūting, ij. (then) her song was chaunting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, ye sweet loues vaunting, of her & her Elpin, ij. the sweet loues vaun- ting, ij. the sweet the sweet loues vaunting, (O) the sweet loues vaun- ting. BASSVS. IN flowre, &c. warbling, with cheerful notes warbling with cheerfull notes and sweetly singing, & sweetly singing & sweet, and sweetly singing, for ioy that Clore the faire her song was chaunting, the sweet loues vaunting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, of her and her Elpin of her and her Elpin, the sweet loues vaunting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, loues vaunting. ALTVS. IN flowre of April springing, when pleasant birds to sport them, among the woods, among the woods among the woods consort thē, warbling with cheerful notes, with cheerful notes, warbling with cheerful notes & sweetly singing, ij. and sweet, & sweetly singing, for ioy that Clore the faire her song was chaūting, ij. was chaūting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, ij. of her & her Elpin, ij. the sweet loues vaun- ting, the sweet loues vaun- ting, the sweet the ij. O the sweet loues vaun- ting.
QVINTVS. ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings the time yt senteth, with flowres & hearbs & winters frosts ex- ileth, Zephirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, with flowres & hearbs & winters frosts exi- leth, Progne, now chirpeth, and Philomell, and Philomel lamenteth, and Philomel, and Philomel la- men- teth, lamenteth, Flora the garlands white and red compileth, fields do reioice the frowning sky re-len- teth, ij. loue to be- hold his deerest daughter smileth, the ayre, ye water, the earth to ioy consenteth, to ioy cōsenteth, cōsenteth each creature now to loue, iij. each creature now to loue, ij. him reconcileth, him reconcileth, him reconcileth. CANTVS. ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth that sweetly sents, that sweetly senteth with flowres and hearbs and winters frosts exileth, and winters frosts exileth, Zephirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, that sweetly sents yt swetly senteth, with flowres and hearbs and winters frost exileth, Progne chirpeth, now Progne chir- peth and Philomel la- menteth, and Philomell la- menteth, Flora the garlands white and red, compileth fields do reioice the frowning skie relenteth fields do reioice the frowning skie relenteth re- lenteth, re- lenteth, Ioue to behold his deerest daughter smileth, Ioue to behold his deerest daughter smileth the ayre, the water, the earth to ioy, consenteth the earth to ioy, consenteth, con- senteth each creature now to loue, ij. him reconcileth each creature now to loue, him reconcil-eth, each creature now to loue, ij. him reconcileth each creature now to loue, him reconci- leth, him reconcileth.
TENOR. ZEphirus brings the time yt sweet- ly senteth, ij. with flowres & hearbs & winters frost, & winters frost exi- leth, Zephirus brings the time yt sweet- ly senteth, ij. with flowres & hearbs & winters frost exileth, Prog- ne now chirpeth, now ij. Prog- ne chirpeth, & Philomell, ij. lamenteth, Flora ye garlāds white & red compileth, fields do reioice the frowning skie relenteth, ij. the ij. relen- teth, Ioue to behold his dearest daughter smileth his ij. the ayre the water the earth to ioy cōsen- teth, ij. consen- teth, to ij. each creture now to loue, ij. him recōcileth each creture now to loue ij. ij. ij. him recōcileth each ij. reconci- leth BASSVS. ZEphirus, &c. with flowres & hearbs, with flowres and hearbs & winters frost exileth, with flowres and hearbs & winters frost exileth, Progne now chirpeth, now chirpeth, and Philomel lamen- teth, ij. Flora the garlands white and red compileth compileth, fields do re- ioice the frowning skie re- len- teth, Ioue to behold his dea-rest daughter smileth, ye aire, the water the earth to ioy cōsenteth, to ij. each creature now to loue, ij. him reconcileth, each creature now to loue, ij. him reconcileth, him reconcileth. ZEphirus brings ye time yt sweetly senteth, with flowres and hearbs & winters frost exi- leth, & winters frost exileth, ij. ij. that senteth with flowres & hearbs & winters frost exi- leth, and Philomel lamen- teth, ij. lamen-teth, Flora the garlands white and red compi- leth, fields do reioice the frowning skie relenteth, ij. Ioue to behold his deerest daughter smileth, ye ayre the water, the earth to ioy cōsen- teth, to ioy ij. ii. each creature now to loue him recōcileth, ij. each creature now to loue him reconcileth. ij.
CANTVS. MVch it delighted to see Phil- lis smiling, But it was her beguiling, Ah she my faith new plighted, Ah she my faith new plighted, Scorn'd with disdain reuiling, But sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not false adew, false adew, ij. ij. for I lou'd not false adew, false adew, false adew false adew, false adew, false adew, for I lou'd not. QVINTVS. MVch it delighted to see Phillis smiling, but it was, but it was her beguiling, Much it de- lighted to see Phil- lis smiling, but it was, but it was her be- guiling, Ah she my faith new plighted, Ah she my faith new plighted, Ah she my faith new plighted, new plighted, Scorn'd with disdain reuiling, But sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not, false adue, ij. ij. false adue, (oh) for I lou'd not, but sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not, false adue, ij. ij. false adue, for I lou'd not.
TENOR. MVch it delighted to see, to see Phil- lis smiling, but it was, ij her be- guiling, Much it delighted to see Phillis smi- ling, but it was, but it was, but it was her beguiling, Ah she my faith, ah, ah she my faith newe plighted, Ah she my faith, Ah she my faith new plighted, Skorn'd with disdaine reuiling, But sith thy fained looks faithfull I prou'd not false adew, false adew, false adew, ij. ij. false adew for I lou'd not, But sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not, false adew, false adew, false adew, adew, false adew, ij. for I lou'd not. BASSVS. MVch it delighted to see Phillis smiling, but it was, but it was her beguiling, Ah she my faith new plighted, ah she my faith, my faith new plighted, Skornd with disdaine reuiling, But sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not false adew, false adew, false adew, ij false a- dew for I lou'd not. ALTVS. MVch it delighted to see, to see Phillis smiling, but it was, but it was her beguiling, but it was, but it was her beguiling, Ah she my faith new plighted, ij. Ah she my faith new plighted, Skorn'd with disdaine reui- ling, But sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not, false adew, ij. ij. ij. false adew, for I lou'd not, but sith thy fained lookes faithfull I prou'd not, false adew adew, false adew adew, ij. false adew, false adew for I lou'd not.
CANTVS. COme gentle swains & shepherds dainty daughters, dain-ty daughters adorned, dainty daughters adorn'd, dainty daughters adorn'd with curtesie, adorn'd with curtesie, & (with) comly duties, with curtesie & duties. Come sing & ioy & grace with louely laughters, ii. Come sing & grace with louely laughters the birth day of ye beautist of beauties, ii. then sang ye shepherds & nimphs of Diana, thē ii. ii. & nimphs and nimphs of Di- ana, Long liue faire Oriana, Long liue, long &c. long liue, long, &c ii. ii. ii. ii. ii. ii. Long, &c. QVINTVS. COme gentle swains & shepheards dainty daughters, dainty daughters, ij. adorned, dainty daughters adorn'd with curtesie, adorn'd with curtesie, ij. and comly duties. Come sing & ioy & grace with louely laughters, ij. and grace with loue with louely laughters ye birth day of the beautist of beauties, ij. then sang the shepherds, ii. ii. & nimphs of Dia-na, ii. & nimphs of Dia- na, Long liue faire Oria- na, ii. Lōg liue faire Ori- ana, Long, &c. Long, &c. Long, &c. Long, &c. Long, &c. Long liue Long liue faire O- ri-a-na, Long, &c.
ENOR COme gent. Come sing & ioy, & come sing and ioy & grace with louely laughters, come sing, come sing and ioy, & grace, & grace with louely laughters, the birth day of the beautist of beauties, Then sang ye shepherds then sang the shepherds, ij. & nimphs, then sang ye shepherds & nimphs of Diana, Long liue faire Oria- na Long liue faire Oria- na, Long liue faire O- ri-ana, Long &c. Long &c. Long liue faire O- ri- ana, long &c. Long &c. Long &c. Long liue faire Oria- na. BASSVS. COome gentle Come sing and ioy and grace with louely laughters, Come sing and ioy & grace with louely laughters, the birth day of the beautist of beauties. Then sang the shepherds & nimphs of Dia- na, Then sang the shepherds and nimphs of Dia-na, and nimphs of Dia-na, Long liue faire Oria- na, Long liue faire Oria- na, ij. Long liue faire O-ria- na, Long &c. Long, &c. ALT COme gentle swains and shepherds dainty daughters adorn'd with curtesie, dainty daughters, ij. adorn'd with curtesie and comlines, adorn'd with curtesie, ij. & com- ly duties, Come sing & ioy & grace with louely laughters ij. Come sing & ioy & grace with loue- ly, with louely laughters, the birth day of the beautist of beauties, ij. Then sang the shepherds, ij. then sang the shepherds, ij. and nimphs of Dia- na, Long liue faire Oria- na, Long liue faire Oria- na, Long, &c. Long Long liue, Long, &c. Long, &c. Long, &c. Long liue Long, &c. Long, &c. Long liue faire Oria- na.
CANTVS. TO former ioy now turnes ye groue, now turnes the groue the fountain, the iolly fresh Aprill ij. now lodē, now loden wt flowres, To former ioy now turnes the groue the fountain, the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. the iolly fresh Aprill now loden with flowres, the seas are calme, ii. hore frost fals from the mountain, The seas, &c. shepherds & nimphs, ii. they walke, they walke to their wanton, wanton bowres, But I all night in teares my pillow steeping soone as the sonne appeares renue my weeping QVINTVS. TO former ioy, now turnes, now turnes the groue the fountain, now ij. the iolly fresh April, ij. ye iolly fresh April now loden wt flowres, To former ioy now turnes now turnes the groue the fountain, now ij. the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. the iolly fresh Aprill now loden with flowres, The seas are calme, ij. hore frost fals from the mountain, The seas are calme hore frost fals hore frost fals from the mountain, shepherds and nimphs they walke to their wanton, wanton bowres, walke ij. But I all night in teares my pil- low steeping soone as the sunne appeares renues renues my weeping.
TENOR. TO former ioy now turnes the groue the fountaine, To former, &c. the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. now loden with flowres, To former ioy now turnes the groue the fountaine, To ij. the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. now loden with flowres, the seas are calme, hore frost fals from the mountain, the seas, &c. hore frost fals frō the mountain, shepherds and nimphs, ij. walke to their wanton bowres, ij. but I all night in tears my pillow steeping, soone as the sunne appeares renue my weeping. BASSVS. TO former ioy now turnes the groue, ij. the fountain. The iolly fresh Aprill, ij now loden with flowres to former ioy now turnes the groue, ij. the fountain, the iolly fresh April, ij. now loden with flowres, the seas are calme, hore frost fals fm he mountain, shepherds and nimphs, ij. walke to ther wanton, wanton bowres, But I all night in tears my pillow, steeping, soone as the sunne appeares, renue my weeping. ALTVS. TO former ioy now turnes the groue the fountain, the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. ij. now loden with flowres, To former ioy now turnes the groue, now turnes the groue the fountain, the iolly fresh Aprill, ij. now loden, now loden with flowres, the seas are calme, hore frost fals frō the mountain shepherds and nimphs, ij. walke to their wanton bowres, they walke to their wanton, wanton bowres, But I al night in teares my pillow steeping, soone as the sunne appeares, re- nue re- nue my weeping.
CANTVS. FAustina hath the fairer face, and Phillida, and Phillida, & Phillida (hath) ye feater grace both haue mine eie, mine eie en-riched, This sings full sweetly with her voice, her fingers make as sweet a noise, her fingers make as sweet a noise, both haue mine eare bewtiched, Ay me, Ay me sith fates haue so prouided my hart alas, my hart alas, Alas my hart must be, must be deuided. Ay me QVINTVS. FAustina hath the fai- rer face, and Phillida & Phillida ij. the feater grace both haue mine eie inriched, This sings full sweetly with her voice, her fingers make, her fingers make as sweet a noise, as sweet a noise both haue mine eare, mine eare bewitched, Ay me, Ay me sith fates haue so prouided, my hart alas my hart alas, Alas my hart must be must be deuided Ay me
TENOR. FAustina hath the fairer face, & Phil, &c. both haue mine eie, mine eie inriched, this sings ful sweetly with her voice, her sing. &c. both haue mine eare ij. bewitched, Ay me, Ay me sith fates, sith fates haue so prouided, my hart alas, Alas my hart must be deuided, must be de- uided. Ay me BASSVS. FAustina hath the fairer face, & Phillida,, &c. both haue mie eie inriched, This sings full sweetly with her voice, her fingers &c. both haue mine eare bewitched, Ay me sith fa haue so prouided, my hart alas, my hart alas  Ay me ALTVS. FAustina hath the fairer face, and Phillida, ii. and Phillida the fea- ter grace, both haue mine eie inriched, this sings full sweetly with her voice, her fingers make as sweet a noise, her fingers make as sweet, as sweet a noise (Oh) both haue mine eie be- witched, Ay me, Ay me sith fates haue so prouided, my hart alas, my hart alas my hart must be, my hart alas must be deuided. Ay me
CANTVS. EVerie bush new springing, eue- rie bird now singing, merily sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo lo li lo li lo, Euerie bush new springing, euery bird now singing chaunting tro li lo lo li lo li lo (and) merely sate poore Nicho, till her he had espide on whom his hope relide, down a down with a frown she puld him, with a frown she puld him down, d.d.d. d.d. down a, d.d. till her he had espide on whom his hope relide down a down a down down with a frown (Oh) she puld him down, d. d.d.d. d.d. d.d. QVINTVS. now singing, Merely sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo li lo, Euerie  uerie bird now singing, merely sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo li lo, till her he had espide, on whom his hope relide down a d, d, down with a frown she puld him she puld him down d.d.d. down a d. down, till her he had espide, on whom his hope relide, down a, d.d. down with a frown she puld him she puld him down, d. d.d. down a, down down.
TENOR. EVerie bush new springing, euery bird now singing, merely sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo lo li lo, Euery bush new springing, euery bird now singing, merely sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo lo li lo, till her he had espide on whom his hope re- lide, down down a, down a down d. down with a frown she puld him down d. d.d.d. down, till her he had espide on whom his hope re- lide, down down a, down a, down down down with a frown she puld him down d. d. d.d. down. BASSVS. EVerie bush new springing, euery bird now singing Merely, &c. chanting tro li lo li lo, Euerie bush new springing euerie bird now singing, merily, &c chaūting tro li lo li lo, til, &c. on whom his hope relide down a d, a, d, d, down a, down with a frown she puld him down a, d. d.d. down, til her, &c. on whom his hope relide, down a, d.a, d. a, d.a, down with a frown she puld him down a, d. d d. down. ALTVS. EVerie bush new springing, euerie bird now singing chaunting tro li lo, lo li lo li lo, (and meri- ly sate poore Nicho, Euerie bush new springing, eue- rie bird now singing, Merely sate poore Nicho chaunting tro li lo lo li lo li lo, till her he had espide on whom his hope relide, down a, d.a, d. down with a frown (oh) she puld him down, d. d.d.d. d.d.d. d, down, till her he had espide on whom his hope relide, down a down with a frown she puld him, with a frown she puld him down, d.d.d. d.d. down a, down, down
CANTVS. WAndring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wildernes, as in a wilder- nes, no com- fort haue I nor yet assurance, Wandring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wildernes, as in a wil- der- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, deso-late of ioy, desolate of ioy, desolate of ioy, de- solate of ioy repleat with sadnes, wherfore I may say, O deus deus, non est dolor si- cut dolor meus, non est dolor si- cut dolor, non est dolor si- cut dolor me- us. QVINTVS. WAndring in this place as in a wildernes, a wil- dernes, as in a wilder- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, Wandring in this place as in a wildernes, a wil- dernes, as in a wilder- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, deso-late, desolate of ioy, deso-late of ioy, de-solate of ioy, repleat with sad- nes, wherfore I may say, O de- us, de- us, non est do- lor sicut do- lor meus, non est dolor si- cut dolor, non est dolor si- cut dolor, si-cut dolor me- us.
TENOR. WAndring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wildernes, no cōfort haue I nor yet assurance Wandring in this place as in a wildernes, as in a wilder- nes, no comfort haue I nor yet as- su- rance, deso- late, deso- late of ioy, repleat with sadnes, desolate of ioy repleat with sadnes, wherfore I may say, O deus deus, non est dolor si- cut dolor, non est dolor si- cut dolor, non est dolor si- cut dolor meus. BASSVS. WAndring, &c. No comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, wādring, &c. No comfort haue I nor yet assurance desolate of ioy, deso- late of ioy, deso- late of ioy, de- so late of ioy, repleat with sadnes, with sadnes. Non est do- lor si- cut dolor me- us, non est do-lor si, cut dolor me- us meus. TENOR. WAndring, &c. No comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, wādring, &c. No comfort haue I nor yet assu- rance, desolate of ioy repleat with sad- nes, desolate, desolate deso- late of ioy repleat with sadnes repleat with sad- nes, wherfore I may say, O deus de- us, non est dolor si- cut dolor meus, non est dolor si- cut dolor me- us.
This is the Ditty of the second song. WHy should my muse thus restles in her woes, Summon records of neuer dying feares? And still reuiue fresh springing in my thoughts, The true memoriall of my sad dispaires? Who forst to loue to those faire eyes am thrall, Where eyes nor thoughts grant one respect at all? Endles my grieues since endles is her course, Still to inflict more torments on my grieues, Without remorse of poore harts scalding sighes, When heauen in teares bewailes my no relieues, A hard regard, where true deuoted loue Conflict it naught but still these crosses proue. Cease worlds bright sun, from henceforth once to shine, But in my death now suffer springs to perish, Forbeare to grace earths glory with thy beames, her richest treasure now forbid to florish; Since that her eies the sun-shine of my life. Affords no grace but torments death and strife. This is the ditty of the third song. HAue I vow'd and must not breake it? Fondly vow dis wisely broken, Do i loue and dare not speake it? Silence doth no loue betoken: Thus I bind in this my breaking, And I am in silence speaking. Loue is bound though I seeme free, Wrapt in deepe affections snare, Loue I must how so ere it be, Too late men say doth come beware. Then vowe no more sith vowes are vaine, Wrapt in deepe affections chayne. This is the Ditty of the fift song. LOue is not blind, but I my selfe am so, With free consent blindfolded by desire, That guides my will along the paths of woe, To seeke refreshing for a needeles fire. Loue is no boy as fooles in fancies faine, It is my selfe that play the child so right, I hope and feare, I weepe and laugh againe, And vse no fence against so weake a might. Loue hath no fire yet is mine only lust, Doth raise the flame which makes my thoughts to fry, Vaine hope and fond conceipts in which I trust, Are th'only wings that beare him vp so hie. Loue hath no bow nor shafts to shoote withall, He hath no bands wherewith to tie vs fast, He hath no powre, those that be free to thrall, More than we giue nor can no longer last. Loue is a Poets Lie, a beggars store, A mad mans dreame, an ignorants idoll great, In breefe this God whom we so much adore, Of maners strange doth find as strange a seat. This is the ditty of the sixt song. LOue the delight of all well thinking minds, Delight the fruit of vertue dearely lou'd, Vertue the highest good that reason finds, Reason the forge on which mens thoughts are prou'd: Are from the world by natures power bereft, And in one creature (for her glory) left. Beauty hir couer is, the eyes true pleasure, In hons fame she liues, the eares true musicke, Excesse of wonder growes from her lust measure, Her inward parts are passions only phisicke: From her cleere hart the springs of virtue flow, Which (imag'd in her words and deeds) men know. Time faine would stay that he might neuer leaue her, Place doth reioice that he must needs containe her, Death craues of heauen that he may not bereaue her, The heauens know their own and do maintaine her: Delight, Loue, Reason, Vertue, let it be, To hold all women light but only she. This is the ditty of the seuenth song. THe hart to rue the pleasure of the eye, The eie to wound the hart with his delight, What may be said that owe them both hereby, But both tow serue vnto his own despite: O saue and win them both by one desert, Please still the eye but pitty on the hart. The eie beholds as much as much may be, In beauty grace and honour to require, The hart conceaues more then the eye can see, And slaies himselfe to feed his wouds desire: O saue and wine them both by one desart, Please still the eie but pitty on the hart. This is the ditty of the ninth song. CVrst be the time when first mine eies beheld Those rare perfections all mens thoughts admire, And iustly may a shepherds swaine bewaile Those fatall howres which caus'd him first desire; Loues sweet consent that makes so deepe impression, As hart and soule will witnesse in confession. Why should these eies borne traitors to my rest, Command my thoughts to yeeld to this presumption, To loue a nimph whose beauty all surpassing, In all mens thoughts breeds still a strange confusion; Heauens forbid that I should dare to moue, A face that gods solicite still in loue. Phillis sweet Phillis the shepheards only Queene, Skornes to admit a swaine into her loue, He pipes and sings and pleades to her for grace, His sons and Sonnets her can nothing moue: He sighes and vowes and praies with true deuotion, But vowes and prayers worke in her no motion. Then Coridon must yeeld to this his curse, Sith that his loue cannot her loue importune, For feare dispaires conuert this ill to worse, And by disgrace adde more plagues to fortune, Poore man sit down powre out thy plaints amaine, Phillis thee skornes and holds in high disdaine. FINIS.
A TABLE OF ALL the Ayres and Madrigals in this booke. STay Glicia stay. I Why should my muse. I Mourne Marcus mourne. II Haue I vow'd & must not break it III Finetta faire and feate. IIII Loue is not blind, but. V Loue the delight of al wel thinking. VI The hart to rue the pleasure of the eye. VII Siluia is faire, yet scorning loue vnseemly VIII Curst be the time when first mine eyes beheld IX Faire are those eyes. X Wandring in this place as in a wildernes XI Euery bush now springing. XII Downe in a valley. XIII VVanton wanton come hether wanton. XIIII Say shepherd say. XV Faire are those eyes whose shine &c. XVI Faire well dispaire. XVII She theefe if so you will beleeue. XVIII VVhat thing more cruell can you doe. XIX In flower of Aprill springing. XX phirus brings the time that &c. XXI Much at delighted to see Phillis smiling. XXII Come gentle Swaines & shepherds. XXIII To former ioye now turnes. XXIIII Faustina hath the fairer face. XXV Euery bush now springing. XXVI VVandring in this place. XXVII FINIS.
