712 99836051 294
A TRVE RELATION of the right Christianly depar∣ture, or Death, of the most Noble Earle Philippus Lodouicus, Earle of Hanaw and Rieneck, Lord of Muntzenbergk, &c. Vncle to the Count Palatine. Who blessedly deceased, in the Lord, on Sunday the ninth of August 1612. betwixt eight and nine of the clocke in the Morning, being returned from his great Ambassage for England. Faithfully penned by IOANN APPELIVS Preacher at Alten-Hasell. Translated out of the Germane tongue by S. R. PSALME 146. 4. 5. Mans breath departeth, and hee returneth to his earth: then his thoughts perish. Blessed is hee that hath the God of IACOB for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. LONDON: Printed for NICHOLAS BOVRNE, and are to be sould at the entring in of the Royall Exchange, and at the signe of the Angell in Paules Church-yard. 1612.
To the Christian Reader. WHereas other men haue lau∣dably described the Art of well liuing and well dying; I hope it will not be miscon∣strued if wee doe verifie the same, by the examples of those, whom wee haue seene depart Christian∣ly. Know you therefore (louing Reader) that the departure of my noble and gracious Lord (of blessed memory) is described by vs, to the end that it might serue vnto my Noble and Gracious Lady and her deare Children (as vn∣to a distressed VVidow and Orphans) for a godly Instruction and Consolation vnto Pati∣ence: considering also, that particular exam∣ples moue the heart more effectually, then ge∣nerall Precepts or Rules; and because the de∣parture of my gracious Lord is full of Com∣fort and Edification, we thought it not amisse
(being induced by many religiously-affected mindes) to communicate the same also vnto others, which (no doubt) will be taken in good part by all religious Christians, as it is meant by vs. Farewell. TITVS 1. 15. Vnto the pure are all things pure: but vnto them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing, is nothing pure, but euen their mindes and consciences are defiled.
A TRVE RELATION of the Christianly departure of the Noble Earle Philippus Lodouicus, &c. Vncle of the Count Palatine. THE Noble Earle of Hanaw and Rei∣neck, hauing happely ended aiourncy of great waight, and being by Gods grace returned vnto his Dominions, did take againc in hand the carefull go∣uernment of the same. The Ayre being very hot, his Ex∣cellencie, towards the euening, went diuers times, in his Coach, into the Woods to recreate himselfe. It happened the 29. day of Iuly last past, that his Excellencie went with some of his Conc and Seruants from his Court to a Pond (called Krebsbach) where Lobstars are fedde, and féeling himsclfe some what ill did take his rest a little in the fields. The next day notwithstanding hée went to the accustomed Wéeke-Sermon, and vnto publicke Prayers at the Church in the old Cittie: but the Sermon being ended, hée felt himselfe not well, and went to rest on his bedde. The 31. of Iuly and first of August, the weather being very hot, and hée féeling great heate in his body, was led into diuers roomes for to rest and take the fresh ayre.
The 2. of August, by the counsell of Phisitians, hée was let bloud, and tooke Phisicke, whereby hée found himselfe so resto∣red that he put on his garments, and went to visite his louing Wife, lying in Childe-bed, who some few dayes before was deliuered of a goodly Sonne. On the same day his Excellencie called to him one of his Counsellours, and reasoned with him about diuers matters, but chiefly concerning the Church of Hanaw. The third day of August being Munday, his Excellencie fell sicke againe, and began to prepare himselfe for a blessed and Christian departure, with a wonderfull constancy and courage, giuing an account of his faith with a singular zeale in the pre∣sence of his Wife and Children, who were called to him for that purpose. And although hée had comforted his wife in very good sort, admonishing her also vnto Christian patience, yet notwithstanding (shée being retyred) hée tooke his leaue of his Children, and others that were about him, in the presence of diuers of his Counsellours and Courtiers, in a very religious manner he spake vnto euery Childe in particular, praying ouer them, and giuing his blessing vnto them, adding thereunto his fatherly admonitions vnto true pietie and vertue, thus com∣mitted them vnto the protection of Almightie God through Iesus Christ: Euen as wée read Genesis 49. of the holy Pa∣triarch Iacob. All this hée did with such comfortable words, and resolute minde, that the whole roome was filled with the sighes and teares of the beholders, who wondred at the same, and thankhd God for that rich measure of his spirit bestowed on him. The heauinesse of our sorrow made that wee could not re∣member the very words of his prayers and admonitions, but the Christian Reader may partly vnderstand what they were, by that which followeth, and happened the Thursday fol∣lowing. The spéech vnto his Children being ended, hée spake vnto his Councill in generall, and vnto euery one in particula, of those things that concerned the Church and Schoole, the Country and Subiects, and so tooke his leaue of them.
The Councill being retyred, diuers Gentlemen, Courti∣ers, came vnto him at his request, and with many teares and sighes, taking their deare Lords hand, went with a sorrowfull heart from him. Diuers Citizens dwelling in the old and new Towne, came at his citation also before his bed, hée spake very com∣fortably vnto them, and stretching his hand out vnto them, with much sorrow, they tooke their leaues of him: this being done, his Excellencie asked whether there were any body else to take leaue of him. The Preachers of both the Cities were likewise called for, and hée declared in their presence, that his singular desire was, to receiue yet once before his end (with his house) the holy Supper of our Lord Iesus Christ, euen as the Lord Ie∣sus had ordained the same shortly before his death and Passion. Hée added hereunto a farther exposition of his demaund: that his request was not grounded on Superstition, or on that error, that ex opere operato, the same were meritorious: but whereas hée had béene a certaine time in forraine Coun∣tries, and had not found the fit occasion to receiue the same in the Church and Congregation of the faithfull, his request was to receiue, for the strengthening of his weake Faith, and to testifie his Profession yet once againe before God and the World. The Preachers had nothing to reply vnto such a reasona∣ble and religious request, and therefore performed the same out of hand. The Confession which his Excellencie at that time vtte∣red with Christian attention, was after this manner: viz. I Thanke my GOD from the bottome of my heart, in the Name of my Lord Iesus Christ, that I haue liued vnto this day: in which I am able to receiue, yet once againe before my departure out of this world, the holy Supper of my Lord Ie∣sus Christ. I neuer had a more ioyfull banquet then this: I haue sitten at the Table of great Kings and Princes, where all things were costly, and pompously prepared, but the cheare of
the Crosse of Christ, as now it is set before the eyes of my Soule, appeares more glorious vnto m O my deare Preacher, I protest before thee, as the ordained Minister of Iesus Christ, that I doe speake these wordes without hypocrisie, from a true ioy, and desire which I haue to enioy the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in Faith, through the operation of the holy Spirit. Afterward he continued his spéech thus: I Praise and thanke my God, that he hath created mee a man, with reason and vnderstanding, that hee hath preserued my body, Soule and limmes vntill this houre, deliuered me from many sorrowes and dangers, bestowed on mee very much good, exalted mee vnto great honour; and chiefely, that hee hath so directed the going out and in of my late Voyage, that I am returned vnto mine in good health and disposition. And whereas now a dayes many and diuers Religions are found in Europe, I thanke my God, that hee hath let me come vnto this Religion, where I doe seeke my saluation onely in his mercy declared vnto vs in Iesus Christ. For I know by expe∣rience, and doe also testifie the same openly, that I haue found in all my griefes and temtations, a firme comfort in the con∣fession of this my Faith, being grounded onely on the Wri∣tings of the holy Prophets and Apostles of the old and new Testament I am therefore assured in my heart that this is the true Religion and Confession of God, whereby sure saluation is to be found, and hoped for. I thanke likewise all those good men, whom God hath im∣ployed as meanes and instruments, by whosecare, seruice and diligence I was brought vnto this profession. I will also that my Children be brought vp and perseuere therein. Besides this I admonish you Pastors to be faithfull and diligent in your charge as hitherto you haue beene, that so you may giue a good ac∣count vnto God. And now I place my selfe before Gods face, as a poore sinner that hath deserued Hell and eternall death: but I beleeue firmely that Iesus Christ, true God and Man, is my Sa∣uiour: (who as the Lambe of God, hath boren my sinnes vpon
the Crosse, and deliuered me out of the power of Sathan) and that he will, before my end, strengthen my weake faith with his holy Supper. I testifie also before God and you his Ministers, that I haue forgiuen, and doe forgiue with my hart all those that haue offended me: and I pray likewise for pardon, for wee are men, and the righteous man falleth seauen times a day. And because many men haue thought that I beare an euill hart against my deere brother Count Albrecht, &c. I protest that I alwayes was truely and brotherly affected, and my Con∣science doth witnesse vnto me, that concerning our controuer∣sie (vvhich I haue submitted vnto the Law) I am not altered a∣gainst him: and I doe not in that regard feare the iudgement seate of GOD: Haue you therefore a care to tell him thus much from me: Pray and admonish him also to let the Law haue his course, and to deale faithfully with my Widdow and Orphanes, the Lord will reward him for it, and he shall keepe a good con∣science. Finally, I testifie by this holy Supper, that if it please the Lord to restore vnto me my health, (vvhich I doe fully leaue to his good pleasure) I will to his praise and honour amend my life, endeauouring that which is good, and shunning all wicked∣nesse; yet all this onely by his help, grace and assistance. Thus did his Excellencie giue a true and constant profes∣sion of his Faith, not with one breath, but at diuers times as his strength would permit. The dutch Preacher of the old Citie, before the Commu∣nion made a short Sermon: some fouretéene did communi∣cate: the action was concluded with the accustomed thankes∣giuing and prayers. Munday about the Euening, his Excellencies Steward came vnto him, and conferred with him about matters that belonged to the Court, and the education of his children: but that night he could not sléepe, therfore he caused godly psalmes to be sung, and he himselfe sung also. Tuesday the .4. of August, hauing passed a heauy night, he found himselfe reasonable well, so that hee cloathed himselfe, intending to visit his wife, but being ouer-wearied hée left it.
He caused diuers letters to be brought before him, which hée sealed with his owne hand, and went to take the ayre at the window: toward night he felt himselfe againe weake. The 5. of August, hee caused his last Will and Testament, which was sealed vp, to be brought vnto him, and did reade the same, and willed something to be added thereunto, concer∣ning his Chamberlaine, which being done, he gaue the same vnto his Chamberlaine, charging him to deliuer the same vn∣to his Counsell. Next morning there came vnto his Excellencie the Noble Lady Emilia of Orange, Sister of his wife, from Heydelberg, whom hée receaued with teares, and said: Many haue stood weeping about my bedde, but none could breake my heart, and prouoke my teares but your Ladyship. About the same time came diuers of his seruants home from the Sermon made on the monthly prayer-day, and his Excellencie would heare of euery one of them some good doctrine, or comfortable sentence brought from thence, which being performed by them, hée heard it with great contentment. His wife came also the same day againe to visite him, whom hée receaued with kinde and comfortable words, and shortly after she went from him. The euening and night approaching his Excellencie be∣came very heauy, so that not onely the Phisitians with their Art, but also the Diuines with their consolations had enough to doe: at his Excellencies request diuers penitenciall Psalmes were sung, namely, the sixt, thirty-eight, and others. I tooke occasion at the same time to comfort his Excellencie with the hope which yet wee had that God would prolong his life, and make him ouer-goe, by patience, the smarting paines and weaknesses of his body, but when as I perceiued by his words and countenance that such comfort was not acceptable vnto him, I went on, and said that his Excellencie had not onely to looke what were good for himselfe, but also for his Country and poore people, affirming, we doe not enuie heauen and life euer∣lasting vnto your Excellencie, but what if the Lord God would preserue you to be a comfort and protection of this Country and Church yet certaine yéeres, as it happened in Ezechia,
would not you follow this will of God? The King Ezechia himselfe required such prolongation chiefely, for the Church and Countries sake. The same night I propounded vnto him the words of our Sauiour Math. 11. 28. Come vnto mee all ye that are wearie and laden, and I will ease you. The Doctor rehearsed the sen∣tence Ioh. 6. 37. Him that commeth to mee I cast not away. Whereupon his Excellencie repeated often these words, Come, and Not cast away, resisting therewithall his tentations, and said finally, Ah my Lord Iesu, I come vnto thee, thou wilt not cast me away. Besides this, hée said vnto the Preacher of the old Citie, Now I seele your comfort, the vertue of Christs blood doeth now refresh my heart, I feele now the forgiuenesse of my sinnes, and that I am a childe of God and heyre of life eternall. The next Morning his Excellencie desired to be remoued into a large roome newly built, because (as he had told vnto his Chamberlaine) the dead body might the easier be prepared by the Phisitians for the buriall. In this new roome, came vnto him his wife, with the afore∣said Lady of Orange, and there he subscribed and sealed diuers Letters. The sixt of August, before the breaking of the day, came vnto him at his request the Lady of Orange, and he spake with her about the Prince Palatins widow at Herdelberg, the Duchesse of Bouillon, and other friends, telling her what he would haue said and written vntothem: hereupon he said vnto her in french Ah my louing and vertuous Lady, I am a sicke man! Rehearse vnto me some comfortable sentence. She answered: My déere Lord and Brother, I sée you so richly furnished with the com∣fort of Gods holy spirit, that I cannot comfort you any further. His Excellencie vrging to haue from her, out of Gods word, some sentence, she aleadged the words of our Sauiour, Iohn 3 16. God so loued the world, that hee hath giuen his onely be∣gotten Sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not pe∣rish but haue euerlasting life: and added, comfort your selfe héerewithall my déere brother: his Excellencie answered, well
sayd my Lady; This is the greatest and surest comfort of the faithfull: with this comfort will I dye happily: I beseech my lo∣uing God from my hart for such a blessed departure, through the vertue of the satisfaction of my Lord Iesus Christ. Whatso∣euer you shall aske the Father in my name, hee will giue it vnto you. O Lord Iesus Christ I commit my Soule into thy hands, now and at all times. His Excellencie caused the Germane Bible to be giuen to me, and desired to heare some obseruations on the 91. Psalme, but the french Preacher entring, drew him some comforts out of the 90. and 91. Psalme: Then his Excellencie said vnto the Preacher, Ah, I am a very sicke man! I haue had a heauy night, but I confesse that my sinnes haue deserued this and more then this; yet I comfort my selfe with the mercy of my Lord Iesus Christ, by whose vertue and intercession, no heauier crosse shall be layd on me then I shall be able to beare; hee knowes what is best for vs, hee dissembleth not with vs, I relye on him. The Preacher answered, your Excellencie be comforted and be patient: Christ is that good shepheard that giueth vnto his shéepe euerlasting life; hée hath receiued them into his hands from his Father, and kéepeth them faithfully, that none of them be taken out of his hands: your Excellencie hath heard, beléeued and followed the voyce of the said Shepheard. That is it (said his Excellencie) which now the diuell set∣teth before mée, and troubleth me, because I haue not heard and followed the voyce of my Shepheard. The Minister answered: The Diuell alwayes followeth his old custome, from whence hée is called a Lyar and a Mur∣therer: for hée lyeth accusing your Excellencie not to haue heard nor followed at all, the voyce of Christ your shepheard. It is plaine that your Excellencie neuer despised the same, but heard and followed it, though it may be not alwayes with such earnnesse and zeale as was required. And what if your Excellencie had not yet heard nor followed the voyce of that good shepheard? it is not yet too late to doe the same: you read in the 95. Psalme, 7. 8. To day if you will heare his voyce, har∣den not your hart: This present howre and moment is promi∣sed
in the holy Scriptures. Pray yet in Christ Iesus his name for the pardon of your sinnes, and this day they shall be pardo∣ned vnto you, for so speaketh and promiseth God: As true as I liue, I desire not the death of sinners, but that they repent & liue. The Lady Emilia being present, his Excellencie said vnto her, this night I could not vnderstand nor receiue consolation, but now I vnderstand and receiue it very well. Héerevpon I answered, The Lord be praysed, that now your Excellencie receiueth the same, Confirmet Deus quod operatus est. Psal. 68. This day his Excellencie caused certaine little Prayer bookes (with which hee often had vsed to exercise himselfe) to be brought to his bedde, and ordayned for euery Childe one, for a remembrance, writing therein their sundry names, and ad∣ding there vnto his Christian vow and fatherly admonition. The eldest Sonne Philippus Mauritius, receiued from his Father the Germane Bible, which his Excellencie had taken along with him in Bohemia, France, England, and other Coun∣tries, and in the which hée did reade, or caused to be read euery Morning and Euening certaine Chapters, whereof hée noted with blacke, greene, or red Incke, the chiefe heads, and on the Margine wrote the true vses thereof in short words, as a faith∣full Minister should doe in his calling. Hence it appeareth that his Excellencie hath sought the Lord Iesus his Sauiour (ac∣cording to his commandement Iohn 5.) in the Scriptures only, and hath found him, and in him life eternall and true saluation. The words written for his eldest Sonne were these: MY Sonne PHILIPPVS MAVRITIVS, Count of Hanaw: Feare GOD, and keepe his Commaundements. I haue beene this night in great anguish, I haue thought on ma∣ny things, which I wish you could know, my Childe; yet this I tell you: Keepe thy selfe all thy life time close vnto thy God, his helpe and assistance is necessary vnto thee, would to God that I could write, the great richesse of his mercy, goodnesse and faithfulnesse, experimented by mee these former dayes. I haue the foretaste of the eternall glory: The Lord helpe thee vnto mee in due time. Amen. In these pangs of death I doe desire to
be deliuered, and to be with my Lord Iesus Christ. O Iesus Christ thou faithfull Sauiour, how doe I loue thee? thy promises are true, thy loue is great, thy heart is faithfull towards me; I com∣mend my Spirit into thy hands, thou faithfull God, thou hast deliuered and sanctified mee. Lord, I waite on thy saluation. Thy faithfull Father PHILIPPVS LODOVICVS. The second Sonne Willelmus Reynhart receiued his booke with these wordes: MY deare Sonne, serue thy God with thy whole hart, in spi∣rit and truth; I haue destinated thee therevnto: Esteeme it not to be a shame for thee to serue GOD and his Church. GOD is the greatest Lord, thy Creator: Keepe in honour the true seruice of God: Obay and serue thy deare Mother, vnder whose hart thou hast line: Honour and serue thy eldest Brother as thy Lord, for such is the ordinance, and also my will: Beare with him; if thou be in the right then art thou happier then he: if thou dost not walke vprightly in thy wayes, then art thou not happy. Loue thy Brother and Sisters from thy hart: Loue thy house, doe good vnto the poore according to thy abilitie, then shall the Lord blesse thee: Beware of drinking, dissolutenes and vncleane speaches, as of fire: Honour thy state: Be industrious in all things: Reade and practise continually the 119. Psalme: Let thy Astrologians be the 28. Chapter of Deutronomium. PHILIPPVS LODOVICVS Thy faithfull Father vnto death. The eldest Daughter, Lady Charlotte Loisa, receiued her booke, with these words:
FEare, Honour and loue thy GOD from thy hart: haue his Commaundements continually before thine eyes; take thy delight therein: Honour with a filiall obedience thy louing Mother: Keepe thy mouth close with a locke: Esteeme honesty and modesty aboue all the treasures of the world. God blesse thee my louing Childe. Thy faithfull Father vnto death. The second Daughter, Lady Amalia Elisabetha, receiued her booke, with these words: HAue GOD before thine eyes: Honour thy Mother with obedience: Keepe honesty and modesty, that will be thy best iewell and riches. Thy faithfull Father vnto death. The youngest Daughter, Lady Catharina Iuliana, receiued her booke with these wordes: DEare Childe, be vertuous; Haue thy Creator before thine eyes; Feare thy God all the dayes of thy life; Loue thy Sa∣uiour, who shed his precious blood for thee; Breake thy euill will; Be humble and obedient: Humilitie, Honestie, and Silence doe more adorne a Lady, then either Pearles or other costly iewels. Thy faithfull Father vnto death.
His Excellencie caused also the lately borne Lord to be brought before his bedde, he sighed heartely ouer him, touched him with his hand, and prayed, that the Lord would also blesse that Childe, and giue it grace to be well and Christianly brought vp. These Children being thus blessed by his Excellencie, and committed vnto God, I doe not doubt but that these sighes and prayers are pierced through the clouds and come vnto God, yea are written in his booke, and that we shall see in due time the effects thereof abundantly, according to the true pro∣mise of God, Esa. 65. 23. My elect shall not labour in vaine, nor bring forth in feare, for they are the seede of the blessed of the Lord, and their buds with them. Also Psal. 145. 19. The Lord will fulfill the desire of them that feare him, he also will heare their cry, and will saue them. The Lord, according vnto his great mercie, grant vnto these blessed Children, euen the same spirit, by whom they must be blessed, that they may alwayes haue before their eyes, the zealous prayers and sighes of their father, for to stirre them vp vnto true pietie and vertue, not despising and leesing (as wicked Esau did) the blessing, but kéeping it on them, according to the promise: I shew mercie on thousands that loue me and keepe my commandements. His Excellencie being risen a while, that his bedde might be made, looked on his new Chamber-clarke, stretched his hand out vnto him, and said, I haue not yet taken leaue of you, I will doe it now. Thinke on your Oath, and calling; hold God before your eyes, be faithfull vnto him, and you shall keepe a good conscience, and, no doubt, be faithfull vnto me and mine. The Lord giue thee grace therevnto. Due of his Counselors comming into the Chamber as his Excellencie was to lye downe againe, his Excellencie stretch∣ed his armes out, and said, with great affection. Ecce Diuinum Miraculum, Hominem iam mortuum, viribus tamen adhuc inte∣grum. Loe a diuine miracle, a man already dead, yet hauing his full strength: for his Excellencie did féele himselfe yet strong, thence he feared a heauie departure.
His Excellencie caused diuers things to be read vnto him, out of a little Song-booke Printed in Lubeck, Anno 1607. which beginneth thus: Ach Gott wenn sol ichs klagen. Mein Angst vnnd Ellend schwer Ich mocht wol gar verzaghen Wann Herr dein trost nicht wer, &c. And tooke the same vnto him, and in the margant wrote these words, This song haue I vsed many yeeres: and com∣manded as soone as hée should be departed, to lay the same (the booke being opened) vpon his hart. On the said day did his Excellencie call before him all the Ministers of the old and new Citie, wherevnto were ioyned some Country Ministers, with whom his Excel∣lencie did discourse of the true faith and christian departure, and told vnto them, that he would not be in this his weak∣nesse without a Preacher. His Excellencie did often sigh, and pray from his hart, for mitigation of his paines and shortning of the pangs of death, as also for an vnderstanding end, besides this, vtter∣ed many excellent and comfortable speaches, to the ioy and admiration of the assistants, which were not remembred, nor noted, because no body did thinke that death was at hand, yet whereas many of them were repeated by him the Friday ensuing, I haue set them downe in writing. On Friday the 7. of August, when his Excellencie no doubt did féele that the houre of death did approach, and that his hart was full of Godly comfort, his Excellencie began againe to speake with a singular zeale, of the miserie of this life, of the death of a Christian, and of eternall saluation: I was present at that time, and did admit no other then my selfe: from that time forward, the chiefest speaches which I noted were these. Should I not kéepe that which I haue promised vnto my
God? I haue promised to follow him, when and whether so∣euer hee doe call me. He calleth mée now, I am now vpon the way, should I turne backe againe? Should I thrust my selfe againe into such vnquietnesse? I thanke God that I am thus farre deliuered thereof. Should I polute my selfe a∣gaine with sinne, from the which my Lord Iesus Christ hath fréed me? Ah my deare friends (thus he spake vnto vs the assistants) how well should your matters stand, if they stood, as mine doe? Ah louing Sirs, I haue seene the glorie of God, what care I for this world? I haue kissed the hem of the garment of my Lord Iesus Christ, I doe now clime on the Ladder of Iacob vnto heauen, toward my God and Sauiour, should I be so sottish as to take a péece of wood for a péece of Gold? What if many millions of Gold were giuen vnto mee to spend, I would account it nothing: worldly things doe perish. Whilest his Excellencie was speaking these things, hée cast his armes from him, and said, all things doe now stincke vnto mee: tell this vnto my Children, and chiefely vnto their Steward, that they doe not endeauour for worldly matters, but that they put their trust on God. Ah my deare people, how much trouble haue you with mee miserable creature? I will thanke you all in heauen, some of you will shortly follow mée. My wife gaue mée leaue to trauaile into England, why should shée not giue me leaue to goe vnto my louing God, yea, said I: into that Celestiall Engelland where the holy Angels praise God, as they did at Bethlem? And when I would comfort his Excellencie with the hope of recouerie of his health, hee answered very earnestly these words. My louing Minister, can you counsell me with a good con∣science, that I should thrust my selfe againe into this wicked and troublesome world? On Friday Morning his Excellencie charged to shut all the doores and to admit no man vnto him, that hée might not be séene vncouered because of the excéeding great heat. But
about the Euening, beginning againe to speake very com∣fortably of eternall life, hée cryed twise with a loude voyce, Open all the doores, let all my people come in, that they may sée how ioyfully I dye, that they all, may be comforted by my example. Hee thought also on his Wife in Childe∣bed, and said: How well and wisely doth the Lord ordaine all things? hee hath deliuered my Wife from the pangs and labour of Childe-birth, that shée should not haue two griefes at once: shée will the sooner passe ouer the griefe of my departure. The Phisitians counselled his Excellencie not to ouer∣weary himselfe by too much speaking, wherevnto he answe∣red, Should I not speake of my louing God? he hath giuen mée a tongue to that end. They did likewise disswade him from taking the fresh Ayre, by opening of a window: his Excellencie answered, Should I not behold the faire heauens, whether I shal come anone? When his Excellencie did sée, through the window, his new built Turret, and spake of it: I said, This is a fayre Turret, but your Excellencie knoweth well which is the spirituall Turret of our soules, from thence shall you receiue helpe and consolation: his Excellencie said héerevpon, Good∣night, and caused the window to be shut, and looking on his bed, said, Christ hath suffered for me at the fearefull Crosse, I am not worthy of this ease: I answered, your Excellencie is worthy of it, and seeing God hath giuen you the same re∣ceiue it thankfully. Lying on his bed he stretched his right legge on the side, stoke his hand on it, and said, O you deere legge, you haue had a long time no rest, your rest draweth néere. One of his Exceilencies seruing-men going out of the Chamber, his Excellencie commended vnto me his diligence and faithful∣nesse. His Excellencie did lift vp to heauen his hands and eyes very often, and said, O thou great and strong God, Thou
almightie God, Thou holy God, Thou good and true God, and added alwaies therevnto some short and feruent prayer. Docter Luther calleth such prayers Stossgebete, that is, thrusting, or thronging prayers, because they come from the zealous heart with force, and are cast out before the mercie seate of God, according vnto the speach of the 55. Psalme, Cast thy burthen vpon the Lord. His Excellencie did also often repeate these sentences, Psalme 50. verse 15. Call vpon mee in the day of trouble, so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee. Psalme 91. 15. Hee shall call vpon mee, and I will heare him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliuer him, and shew him my saluation. Philip. 1. 23. I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ. Psalme 27. 14. Hope in the Lord, be strong, comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lord. I depart in peace and in ioy, should not I be glad? I haue obtayned of my God what I demaunded, yea, more then I requested. His Excellencie could not be satisfied with the 23. Psalm The Lord is my shepherd: hée caused mée to reade the same thrée times: and as once I read these words, yea, though I should walke through the darke valley, his Excellencie said, that darke valley is now vnto me reasonable light. O Lord stay (thine anger) from me, that I may be refreshed before I goe hence. Hée made likewise very good vse with the two last verses of the 38. Psalme. Forsake mee not O Lord, bee not thou farre from me my God. Haste thee to helpe me, O Lord of my saluation. Hence it appeareth that man consisteth of flesh and spirit, that the old and new Adam dwelleth in him, and that these two are alwayes in combat one against another, as long as man liueth héere. And when man is cast, by the Counsell of God, into the Ouen of misery, and is tempted by the heate of the Crosse, then Soule and Body, Flesh and Spirit fight one against the other. The worldlings haue no féeling of
such a Spirituall combat, but Gods children féele the same euery day, and pray, O Lord, Leade vs not into temptation▪ yet leade vs according vnto thy will, but deliuer vs soone from the Euill-one, and from all that might hinder our sal∣uation. Hence it commeth that the true beléeuers when they féele such a combat betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh, or sée and heare it in others, that they hould it for a good token, accor∣ding vnto the saying of Saint Iames, Cap. 1. 2. My Brethren, count it exceeding ioy when you fall into diuers tentations. Also verse 12. Blessed is the man that endureth tentation. The vnbeléeuing worldlings, and Hipocrites, who know not how wonderfully God dealeth with his Saints, hold it for an euill signe or token, and speake with derision of it, which they would not doe if they vnderstood the example of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who was tempted thrée times by the Diuell. Also, if they knew that all things doe turne good vnto those that loue God. Also, that they must be made like vnto the Image of his Sonne, Rom. 8. Hence it fell out, that his Excellencie, besides these excel∣lent speaches of consolation (feeling in his heart the testimo∣nie of Gods holy Spirit) did vtter sometimes words of com∣plaint and sorrow, by the frailtie of his sinnefull siesh, and of old Adam, yet sought finally the victorie. Hée complayned sometimes of the miserie of this life, of the manifold sinnes wherevnto the corrupt nature is subiect, of the fearefulnesse of death, of the paines of hell, and said: Ah I miserable sin∣full man: O Lord hast thou forgotten mée, wilt thou shew no more mercy? Is thy mercy turned to anger? &c. euen as Dauid speaketh in the 77. and 88. Psalmes, Also my paines are too great, I can suffer them no longer. And whereas these words did séeme to come from vnpa∣tience against the gracious helpe of God, his Excellencie was comforted and admonished by me and other assistants, with many good and holy sentences, vnto Christian pati∣ence: it is not néede to set them downe here. His Excellencie
did receiue this comfort, and did correct his former vnpati∣ence with these words. Ah, I doe prouoke my God vnto anger by my vnpatience, I will doe it no more. If I haue receiued from God good things, I will beare patiently the euill: hée will not forsake me, he hath not forsaken me yet, I will prescribe vnto him no measure: forsake me not O Lord, that I forsake not thée. Besides went on thus: Ah what a heauy battell is before me? wherevpon I told him, your Excellencie is now in the estate, wherein your Lord Iesus Christ was when hee was in the agonie Luke 22. 44. the said Lord Christ hath ouer-wonne, he calleth now vnto himselfe, all those that are wearie and laden, Mat. 11. 28. hee is the Captaine in this combat, follow you him with patience and faith, and no eni∣my shall be able to hurt you. His Excellencie did not feare death, for he was ready and willing to die, but onely the terror of it, setting death before his eyes (by the weakenes of the flesh) as a fearefull Tyrant, and as the Gyant Goliah, who terrified the Israelites. But I comforted him immediately, as followeth. Death indéed was terrible because of our sinnes, but she is no more hor∣rible vnto those that are in Iesus Christ, for he (as the true Dauid) hath vanquished death. Did not your Excellencie hetherto pray for a blessed end? Hath not Christ promised, that he will giue whatsoeuer we doe pray for vnto the Fa∣ther in his name? Ioh. 16. Doeth not the 145. Psalme say, that God doth what the good demaund? and the 12. God heareth the sighes of the faithfull? and the 34. God deliuereth the righteous out of all feare. Your Excellencie will not tread vnder féete your prayers and déepe sighes, for they are pierced through the cloudes. I will saith the Lord, vp, and set him at liberty, Psal. 12. Besides I propounded vnto his Excellencie the comfort of the 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? Hence I tooke occasion to shew to compare the death of the faith∣full, vnto a bold and proud Souldiour who hath no weapons,
and whose threatnings are in vaine. These words tooke away that feare of his Excellencie, & after diuers gronings, kéeping himselfe quiet, he said: One combat is now past: which words I heard with great ioy, and thanked God for it. The Satterday drawing neare, his Excellencie was de∣sirous to speake againe with his wife, and the Lady of Orange. They came presently, and with them the Lady Charlotte Loyse, hee spake with them in order, and they with comfortable speaches and aboundance of teares tooke their leaue againe of him: he said vnto his daughter Char∣lotte, Well, my deare daughter, remember mee thy father, who alwayes intended to doe thée good, feare the Lord: be vertuous and honest, and no good shall faile thée. On Satterday the 8. of August, did some of his Coun∣cill aske what they should say vnto his louing Brother Count Albrecht, if it would please God to take his Excel∣lencie vnto himselfe, hée answered: Tell him good night, and let him know that I haue alwayes meant well and bro∣therly, though he and some others could or would not al∣wayes acknowledge the same. It néedes not to write of this matter any further. His Excellencie charged them also to say farewell, in his name, vnto the Archbishop and Prince Elector of Ments, the Abbot of Fulda, the Count Wolffgang Eest of Hen∣burgk, &c. and told his Chamberlaine, by whom, and on what occasion this should be performed. On this Satterday his Excellencie caused, for a time, all the assistants to void the chamber, and I remained alone with him, hée beganne to enter with mée into an holy dis∣course of the estate of the soules of the righteous in heauen, and how farre wée are bound, and able, as long as wée are in the militant Church, to pray for our selues and our bre∣thren; yea, for all men: I made along discourse hereof vn∣to his Excellencie, wherein hée had a very good liking. The greatnesse of his paines made him to complaine,
yet by my comfort did gather courage, and said in Latine, Mors mea gloriosa erit, my death shall be glorious, as if hée would haue said; What doe I trouble my selfe? all will be well and glorious. On Satterday night, the Sunday approaching, and the houre of death drawing néere, a very great conflict was séene in him, and said in his lamentations: Ah, God hath forgotten mée! it is vnpossible that I should be succoured, I cannot hold fast your consolations: thus turned himselfe from mée, & complained of an vnspeakable heate and cold, & how hée stood with one foote onely, vpon a high mountaine, and was to leape ouer a water that sprung out of the moun∣taine. These wordes did much moue the hearts of the as∣sistants, and of mée likewise; chiefely because his Excel∣lencie said that hée could not receiue my consolations. Héerevpon I tolde him that hée was to beare those suf∣frances, that made him complaine, as our Sauiour did vpon the Crosse, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken mee? and the Prophet Dauid, Psalme 18. The sorrowes of death compassed mee about, &c. And whereas his Excellencie had turned himselfe from me, and could not receiue comfort, I went to the bed, fell about his necke, and spake in great earnest these words. My gracious Lord, I beséech and admonish your Excel∣lencie to take to your heart my consolations (which I shall draw out of Gods holy word) as from the Minister of Christ. It is now Satterday, the Sunday is at hand, then doe wée speake in the Church, in the exposition of the Catechisme of the crucified Lord Iesus Christ: let vs now also speake of him. These words moued his Excellencie to turne him∣selfe againe towards me, and to giue eare vnto those com∣fortable grounds and sentences which I did alledge out of Gods holy word, as the Lord at that time did put into my heart: and I did chiefely draw some meditations from the 23. Psalme, (in which Psalme his Excellencie did much de∣light, as wée said before) saying, your Excellencie shall now
bée brought vnto those gréene Pastures, and swéet waters, that refresh the soule, whereby your soule, to the praise of God, shall also be quickned. It is true that the way vnto those blessed Pastures and springs, is a darke valley of death, full of thornes, the doore also is very narrow. But your Excellencie be of good chéere, for you haue hetherto courage∣ously ouercome the thornes of sinne, and the darknesse of the terible death, through Iesus Christ, who is the light, the way, the truth and the life. Goe on fight on, in Iesus Christs name, you are almost at the end, there remaineth but two steps, and two blowes, then all is woone. Your Excellency setteth now his right foote out of the darke and thornie valley, into the pleasant pastures of God. Ie∣sus Christ our Sauiour (who also went this way, yea, a farre painefuller) standeth in the middest of these pastures and the holy Angels with him, they wincke at you, and call you vnto them, and doe long to receiue you into their com∣panie. There is prepared a Table for your Excellencie to sit at, with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: you shall drinke there the ouer-flowing Cuppe of Heauenly Ioy, your head shall be annointed with the true oyle of gladnesse, sée∣ing you haue fought and ouer-come so valiantly in Iesus Christ. By these zealous spéeches, and other, was taken away the tentation and feare of Hell, through the grace of our Lord Christ, who permitteth vs not to be tempted aboue our abilitie and power. His Excellencie laid both his hands in my right hand, and I laid my left hand on his head, and thus gaue a very good attention vnto those things which were alledged by mée. The Physitians did admonish his Excellency to sléepe, whereupon I said, in the name of the Lord Christ doe I lay my hand on your head, I beséech him to strengthen and refresh you. Thus hée tooke a little sléepe, and I went out of the roome: but being awaked againe, I was called for, and his Excellencie said vnto mée, that I should lay againe my hand
on his head in the name of the Lord Christ, I did it, and hée fell in sléepe againe. On Sunday about nine of the clocke in the morning, (which was the day of his deliuerance) something was brought vnto him for to eate, and to get rest, the Physiti∣ans said, that then all would be well. His Excellencie an∣swered, if it should be better after my sléepe, then I desire no more of this, onely I wish for so much strength, that I may commit my soule vnto my Sauiour, and speake yet once with my wife. Thus did wée voyde the roome in hope of rest, leauing onely his Steward with him. When wée thought that his Excellencie tooke rest, Loe, his Steward knéeled before his bedde, and sayd with his Ex∣cellencie the Lords Prayer. Wée being entred his Excel∣lencie lift vp his head and eyes, and cryed out with a ioyfull voyce, Now am I once deliuered, and stroke his breast with his hand, saying: O déere hart, how hast thou béene tormen∣ted and martyred? thou shalt now be comforted. Then cal∣led he for his Wife, but for certaine reasons, and for to decline those heauy lamentations, it was not done. Then sayd his Excellencie vnto his Steward, bid my Wife good-morrow, and tell her I leaue this world ioyfully and willingly. The Bell rung for the Sermon in the olde Citie: his Excellencie said, Neuer did that Bell sound so in my eares as now it doth: I answered, This Bell calleth your Ex∣cellencie now, to the song of Angels, of which you told mée before yesterday. Then said his Excellencie, Well, Let vs sing: thus layd downe his head, and began to sing the song of the Angels, Luke 2. (which is vsed in the Germane Churches) Glory be to God in the high heauens, &c. Wée followed after him. Then began his Excellencie to sing the 118. Psalme, verse 24. This is the ioyfull day indeed, Which God himselfe hath wrought, Let vs be glad and ioy therein, In hart, in minde and thought.
Wée followed againe, with a low and weare voyce. Then came his Excellencie to the 116. Psalme: I loue the Lord because my voyce, And prayer heard hath hee, &c. Thus was to be séene the Spirit of Adoption in the hart of his Excellencie. And when wée spake together for to prepare our selues to prayer, His Excellencie noted the same, and commanded vs to knéele downe, and to pray: hee repeated euery word zealously, but chiefely the Lords Prayer, and the Articles of Christian faith: and when those that were about him did comfort his Excellencie with some good sentence, he repeated the same after them, as long as his tongue could doe it. I feared that too much speach might haue hindered his Excellencie, therefore I brake of, and after a while rehear∣sed vnto him the words of our Sauiour, Ioh. 3. God so loued the world that he hath giuen his onely begotten sonne, &c. And I asked whether his Excellencie vnderstood them: then hée turned his eyes on mée and sayd the word, I haue told it. These short words did I report vnto the assistants, and ad∣ded, that his Excellencie had aboundantly declared which was his Faith, Hope, and Comfort, wherein hée liued and now was to dye, namely, the onely begotten Sonne of God. Besides this, I cryed often vnto his Ercellencie these words. O Lord Iesus Christ, I commit my Spirit into thy hands, thou hast deliuered mée, thou true and faithfull God. Whilest this was repeated vnto his Excellencie he rendred his spirit quietly, and blessedly. The words of our Sauiour, wherewithall I comforted him at his last houre, were before (without my knowledge) propounded vnto him by the La∣dy of Orange, and by himselfe written in his Germane Bi∣ble, so that by Gods prouidence the same were alleadged by mée: for he entended to dye therein both willingly and happily.
Thus departed his Excellencie, after the ending of the Sermon in the old Church, and the Prayer conceined for his Excellencie and other Christian Maiestrates. And this is the plaine and true relation of the blessed de∣parture of his Excellencie, out of this wicked world, from whence wée haue to take instruction and example to liue ac∣cording vnto Gods holy will, preparing our selues, as he did, tunely, with true Faith, Hope, and Loue, that when the howre of death comes, wée may in Christian patience depart well comforted, both willingly and blessedly. This graunt vnto mée and all beléeuers, the father of mercy by his holy Spirit, for the onely propitiatorie Sacrifice of his deare Sonne, and our Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen. MATTHEVV 10. 22. Hee that endureth to the end, hee shall be saued. APOCCALIPSE 2. 7. To him that ouercommeth will I giue to eate of the tree of life, which is in the middest of the Paradise of God. FINIS.
