7748 20212952 23821
IAMENT. and Temporall exactly delineated. manner of propounding, discussing, and enacting of Lawes in both Houses. ation-House of the Clergie. Coppe and explained with an historicall Discourse thereupon. light to understand these state and gravitie used in the Parliamentary proceedings. spoken in a Bil, & is confuted straight, aine; no not though hee change his  an speaks but once in one day to the  oyd altercation betweene parties, and  s to speake, without which order two or  whole time. If any man reply with bitter  tings against another, or speake unreverently  Privy Counsell, the whole House will cry, It is  or a Barre a Barre, sometimes sending him to  Thus are the arguments made pithy, strong and  not violent. Bill hath been sufficiently discussed, amended and  (as before in the Vpper-house) then the Speaker askes  go to the Question? If they agree, he holdeth up the Bill in  and saith, As many as will have this Bill go forward (naming  yea; And as many as will not, say, No. They that allow it  and as many as will not, cry No: and as the Cry of No or  eater, so is the Bill passed or dashed. If the Cryes be , then they divide the House, the Speaker saying, As  doe allow the Bill, goe downe with the Bill, and as many as doe not, sit still: Thus dividing the s they are num∣bred, and the most voyces carries it. If some art of the Bill be allowed, and some part disliked, then cuse they certaine Com∣mittees, of those who have spoken both for and against it, to alter or amend it amongst themselves: yet the resolution of the Committees takes not away the liberty from the rest of the house, who at the last Question have f wer againe, either to passe or dash it by pluralitie of voyces. Here is to be understood that the Speaker ha no voyce in the House; neither will they suffer him o disswade or perswade, with or against any thing. Neither hath any member of the Commons-house the libertie of Proxie as in the Vpper-house; but each man answers for himselfe, and for no : Each house hath equall power of propounding lawes  g themselves: and what the Commons-house hath pass  to the Vpper∣house; and there the Lords canvasse the Bi  severall times, as the Commons had done theirs: the same er being used, by sending from one house to another, and by giving Meetings and Conferences to one another, as was before mentioned. If the Lords agree, then they send the  to the Speaker presentative of the Clergie. All those of the Province of Canter∣burie, meete every Wednesday and Friday after dinner in West∣minster Abbey; and those of the Province of Yorke, meete in that Cathedrall on the same dayes. Their meeting is to pray for the good successe of the Parliament; to be neere at hand to give their Iudgement concerning such Controversies in Religion as arise in the Houses. And when speciall Command is directed to them by the King, to consult about the making of new Canons and Orders of the Church. They give Subsidies and Aydes to the King for the whole Clergy: in which commonly they are more exemplary then the Laitie. Their Prolocutor is commonly some Deane of more eminent note, learning, and language. But though the times have beene, that the Parliament thought nothing sure enough ratified by them, until it were solemnly blessed by the Church-men: yet now plainly the Convocation-house hath not much to doe in Par∣liament. Printed at London for Nicolas Bourne at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1640.
