8800 33150401 28587
BY THE KING. A Proclamation for the adjournament of part of Michaelmas Tearme. THE King our Soueraigne Lord considering the great and generall infection of the Plague which at this present is in the Cities of London and Westminster, and other places neare adjoyning, and how perilous it might be to His louing Subjects, if they should be enforced to repaire thither for their suites and causes before such time as it shall please Almighty God of his goodnes & mercy to remoue or ease that heavy visitation. His Majesty therefore of His especiall grace and fauor to His people and for their bet∣ter safety & preseruation, is pleased to adjourne part of the Tearme of Saint Michael now next comming. That is to say, from the Vtas thereof vnto the fourth Returne of the same Tearme called Mense Michaelis, which His Majestie signifieth to all and singular His louing Subjects of this His Realme, to the intent that they and euery of them which hath cause or commandement to appeare in any of His Highnesse Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time, from and after the said Vtas of Saint Michael, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their businesse otherwise shall lye, without resorting to any of the said Courts for that cause, before the said Mense Michaelis next comming, and that without danger of for∣feiture penalty, or contempt to incurre towards His Highnes in that behalfe. And neuerthelesse His Maje∣sties pleasure is, that two of His Iustices, That is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmaas Tearme next, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order of the Lawes, keepe the Essoines of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which Vtas of Saint Michael, Writs of adjournament (which His Majestie hereby commandeth the Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England to make forth, shalbe directed to the said Iu∣stices, giuing them authority to adjourne the said Tearme of Saint Michael, (That is to say) from the Vtas thereof, vntill the fourth Returne, as before is said: And the said adjournament shall be made in the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of Essoines. And further His Maiesties pleasure is, That all mat∣ters, causes, and suits depending in any of His other Courts betweene party and party, as in his Highnesse Courts of Chauncery, Star-chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liveries, Dutchie of Lancaster, and Court of Requests shall haue continuance, and the parties shall haue day from the date of these presents, vn∣till the said fourth Returne as before is said. Prouided alwayes and His Maiesties pleasure and commande∣ment is, That all Collectours, Receiuers, Sheriffes, and other Accomptants, and all other persons that should, or ought to accompt, or pay any summe, or summes of mony in any of His Maiesties Courts of Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liveries, and of His Dut hie of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to entr into any ac∣compt in any of the said Courts, shall repaire vnto His Maiesties House of Richmond, where His Highnesse hath appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose His Maiesty hath thought expedient, and there to pay and doe in euery behalfe, as though no such Proclamation of adjournment had beene had or made. And His Majesties further pleasure and commandement is, that all Sheriffes shall returne their Writs and Proce against all such Accomptants and Debtors at the dayes therein appointed. And if any person or persons, who ought to accompt, or pay any summe or summe of mony to His Majesty in any of the Courts and places aforesaid doe make default therein, that then His Highnes Writs and Proces shall be a∣warded and sent forth against euery such person and persons, and the same to be duly and orderly serued, and returned by the Sheriffes and Officers thereunto appointed in such like manner and forme as the same should haue beene if this present Proclamation had not beene made. And if any Sheriffe or other Officer shall make default, or be negligent in seruing executing, or returning of any the Writs and Proces aforesaid, that then euery such Sheriffe and other Officer shall incurre such paines and penalties as by the said Courts or any of them shalbe taxed and assessed, willing and commanding all and euery His Majesties Sheriffes, Of∣ficers, Ministers and Subjects, to whom it doth, or shall appertaine to obserue and keepe their assemblies and apparances with all their Returnes and Cer ificats in His Highnes said Courts at Westminster in Mense Micha∣elis next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there to doe their Offices and duties in euery behalfe in like manner and forme as they should, or ought to haue done if this present Proclamation had not beene had or made, as they will answere to the contrary at their perils. Giuen at the Court at Tichfeld, the fourth day of September, and in the first yeare of His Maiesties Raigne of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland. God saue the King. Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1625.
